A COMMENTARY UPON THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH. By Mr. JOHN CALVIN.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADDED FOUR TABLES: The first touching places of Scripture
alleged: The second, of the principal matters handled: The third, of Authors
and diverse names mentioned: The fourth, of certain texts cited out of Isaiah
in the new Testament, which by the Author in the Commentary are compared and
reconciled.

TRANSLATED OVT OF FRENCH INTO ENGLISH: BY C. C.

Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. John 1.29.

To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. Act. 10.43.

Lord, who will believe our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Isai. 53.1. John 12.37.38.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, and are to b^ (...) by William Cotton,
dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign of the golden Lion. 1609.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN, SON AND
HEIR APPARENT TO our Sovereign Lord, JAMES King of Great Britain, etc. AND
TO THE MOST NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS PRINCESS, THE LADY ELIZABETH'S GRACE, his
Highness most dear Sister; all honor and happiness, with eternal glory
through Christ JESUS.
MOst gracious and renowned Princes, having translated out of French into our
English tongue, the book of the prophecy of Jsaiah, interpreted and expounded
by Master John Calvin, of reverend memory: I humbly crave that it may be
published under your most Princely names and protection. The reason of this my
humble petition is, that the honor of so noble a work may not be imbased by
the means of my endeavors. This Prophet by birth was the son of Amos,
esteemed by many to have been brother to Azarias King of Judah, and Father in
law to King Manasses: which being so, this Prophet was by birth of the blood
Royal, and descended of the house of David, which for the promise of Christ to
come of him, was the most noble house of all the Kings of the earth. Being so
borne, his education could not be but Princely, and his bringing up in all good
learning, wisdom, virtue and honor. His spiritual graces, not attained unto
by ordinary means, but inspired into him immediately by the Spirit of God,
were excellent. This appears particularly in the sixth Chapter of this
Prophecy, declaring that an Angel of God with a burning coal taken from the
Lords Altar, and laid to the mouth of the Prophet, refined his lips and his
tongue, that they became pure and precious as the finest Gold. The same is
manifest in all the book of his Prophecy; wherein both the light and the
heat of that heavenly fire appears. For he not only declared the will of
God sincerely, according to the law and testimony delivered to Moses, but
also foreshewed the future events of the Kingdom of Judah, and of all the
flourishing states and Kingdoms of his time.

He Prophecieth also of the birth of Jesus Christ, as if he had been taught by
the Angel Gabriel; who brought the annunciation and message of it to the
blessed Virgin his mother. Of his passion and death he spoke, as if with the
Apostle John he had stood by when he was crucified. His resurrection he
described, as if with all the Apostles he had stood upon Mount Oliuet, where
the Lord took the cloud of glory as his heavenly Chariot to ascend and go
up to his Father. His zeal and indignation against sin is evident every
where, in his sharp reproves of the offenses of all estates.

Finally, the book of his Prophecy bears written in the head of it the
names of four Kings, in whose time he prophesied; and before whom as a vessel
of gold he bare the name of God with great honor. All which things being
royal, it seemed to me most convenient that his book should still bear in
the front of it the names of Princes. And as he foreshewed that Kings should
be Fosterfathers, and Queens Nurces of the Church of Christ, so my desire was
that his book might be published under the names and protection of Christian
Princes.

Moreover, I was led hereunto by the example of this Interpreter, whose
exposition upon Jsaias prophecy I translate; namely, of M. John Calvin, a man
in his time of excellent piety and learning; and one of the great lights,
whereby it has pleased God both to chase away the errors of popery, as the
darkness of the shadow of death; and to cause his marvelous and comfortable
light of the Gospel to shine unto this present age. For he dedicated his
first exposition of this book to the young Prince, King Edward the sixth, of
famous memory, for the princely graces, for the zealous love of true
religion, and of al heroical virtues; wherewith in his young years he raised
an admirable expectation of future glory, if his precious life had long
continued. He was also most worthily renowned with highest glory, for that
gracious reformation in religion, which was established by his regal authority,
and which our English Church at this day with great comfort does enjoy, under
the happy government of our Sovereign Lord the King, your most noble and
renowned Father.

Furthermore, the same Author setting out again this Commentary, amplified
and enlarged, he dedicated this second edition to our late most gracious Queen
Elizabeth, worthy of eternal memory in this Kingdom, for the reestablishing
(after a few years alteration) of the zealous reformation of her most virtuous
brother. Which example has led me in most humble manner to seek for the same
work, the high patronage and protection of such Princes, like those to whom
he presented this his service.

To whom I know none so like as your selves, both in regard of your high
estate, and also in like most noble descent from the united houses of York and
Lancaster. Besides which resemblance, your Highness also is of like years to
the young Prince King Edward, and in the eyes of all the kingdom, of like hope
of excellent virtue and zealous proceedings in the advancement of Christian
religion.

In like manner your Grace resembles the most gracious late Queen Elizabeth,
both in her royal name, and also in the constant expectation of all men, to
express in time all the princely virtues and graces that shined in that most
renowned Princess, from this Western part of the world, to the furthest East,
and to the rising of the Sun.

In which respects, esteeming such a dedication, most like that which my author
made of his own work, I have most humbly craved that this my translation of
it might be vouchsafed the honor to have your Princely names written in the
beginning of it. For notwithstanding the great difference that is between a
reverend learned writer and expounder of the holy Scriptures, and the
translator of such an exposition, yet this mean service has also his good use
in the Church of God; and is of long and tedious labor to such as take pains
therein; which being graciously accepted, may encourage others to travel in
this kind, and cause many to give thanks to God for you both, by whose most
princely favors and protection, they are made partakers of such worthy
writings. And I shall always pray Almighty God, with this new year, to
multiply many more upon you, and daily replenish your hearts with all princely
and heroical graces, that may enable and adorn Princes of so hie estates,
amongst this people.

Your Highness, and Graces most humbly devoted, in all loyal and dutiful
affection, CLEMENT COTTON.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND RENOWNED PRINCESS, ELIZABETH, Queen of England, etc. A
most gracious defender of the true Christian Faith.
JOHN CALVIN.

ALthough in correcting and polishing of this Comme^tary, most noble Queen, I
have traveled with such diligence, that it may well be esteemed a new book:
yet because in the first edition it was dedicated to your brother King Edward,
who in his infancy far surpassed the men of his time; whose memory also I
wish ever to flourish, as worthily it deserves: I was determined to alter
nothing touching the inscription. But because in this miserable and woeful
scattering of the Church, and the abolishing of the sincere doctrine which has
happened in so short a space, with an incredible violence; this book, with the
whole word of God, was banished England for a time: and that now as I hope it
shall be received (as before) at your happy entrance into that kingdom; I
have committed no absurdity, as I think, if together with the name of so
worthy and excellent a King, I also join yours; which all good men do both
love and honor. Yea, besides this occasion which thus offers it self;
necessity also may seem to require that I should entreat your favor
touching this Commentary in particular; the banishment whereof has (I am well
assured) been much lamented by very many of the faithful, your loving subjects.

Although I confess my meaning is not so much to obtain^ your favor only in
respect of my labors, as humbly to beseech, yea and by the sacred name of
Christ to adjure you, that not only all good books may again find
intertainement, and be freely used in your kingdom under your allowance: but
also that you be careful in the first place, of that true religion which has
been shamefully corrupted. If Jesus Christ, the only son of God does justly
challenge this of all the Kings of the earth, then has he bound you, most
noble Queen, with a more holy band to put your sacred hand to such a work.
For in that time wherein your self, the daughter of a King, were not free from
that dreadful tempest rushing down so furiously upon the heads of all the
faithful; (this Lord Jesus I say) plucking you safe thereout, albeit you had
your part with them in the fear of this danger; he has obliged you to vow
your self and all your designs to his service. And so far is it off that
you have any cause to blush in respect of such a deliverance, that contrariwise
God has therein given you ample and plentiful matter of rejoicing, in
vouchsafing thus to conform you to the Image of his son; unto whom our
Prophet among other glorious titles gives him this, namely, That out of prison,
and from judgment was he taken, and exalted unto a sovereign degree of
celestial rule and dominion. As it is not a common honor then to resemble
such a Patron: so as often as you shall call the same to mind (which you should
never forget) out of what perplexed and woeful fears you are escaped through
Gods providence, who has in a visible manner as it were, reached forth his
hand from heaven unto you. Know ye, that he sets this mark before you;
namely, that with a fearelesse constancy, and an invincible magnanimity of
mind, you should interchangeablie reserve unto your Protector and Redeemer,
that right which unto him appertains; and setting all other businesses aside
(with which on all sides you shall be environed in these beginnings of your
reign) you will (which I nothing doubt of) give such order that his service
unworthily corrupted for a time in your country, may be there reestablished
in its first glory.

And if Satan endeavor to terrify, or weaken you in proposing many and great
impediments; you know of whom you ought to crave courage, cheerfully to go
on, and to overcome all obstacles. God also for his part, who approoues of men's
particular actions, will crown in you his work, with an happy and wished end.

Moreover, your duty to religion, most excellent Queen, should the rather
provoke you; seeing our Isaiah requires, that Queens should be no less
nurcing mothers to his Church, then Kings the nurcing fathers thereof. Neither
are you only bound to purge out the filth of popery again; and that the
flock lately affrighted and dispersed, be again gathered together and
fostered: but that you also call home the banished exiles, who chose rather to
lose the present profits of their native country, then there to continue,
whilst piety was chased thence. Here is the sum of your thankfulness
toward God, and a sacrifice of a most sweet savor, namely, that the faithful
servants of God, who were constrained to wander to and fro in far countries
for the profession of the Gospel, may now return home to their houses by your
favor.

As for us, who for good cause have bitterly bewailed so lamentable a spectacle
(we, I say) have just occasion given us now to be glad, and to gratify you,
when by the clemency of your eye, we presently see the way made open to our
brethren, not only to serve God with freedom in your Majesty's dominions;
but also to be a means whereby others may enjoy the like benefit there with
them.

To conclude, most noble Queen, if of your favor you accept (as I hope you
will) this testimony of the reverence which I owe to your Greatness; though
many may esteem the same small and contemptible: yet shall I think my self
abundantly recompensed, and will all my life endeavor by all means possible to
manifest my thankfulness to your Highness for the same.

The Lord guide and govern you, most noble Queen, by his Spirit of wisdom;
strengthen you with invincible fortitude; defend and enrich your Highness with
all sorts of blessings. From Geneua, the year 1559. January the 15. which, as
they say, is appointed for the day of your Coronation; for which cause I did
the more willingly set pen to paper, having obtained some release from a
quartan Ague.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND RENOWNED, EDWARD THE sixth, King of England, etc. A
true Christian Prince.
JOHN CALVIN.

ALbeit I acknowledge (most noble Prince) this Commentary to be faithfully and
aptly gathered from my ordinary readings: yet in regard it was polished by
another hand; at the first I feared, lest being published under the title of
your name, it might seem I had not furnished my self with a present worthy
of your Majesty. But one special reason among others, in the end freed me
from this fear; namely, that as this Princely Prophet descended of the blood
Royal; and a most honorable Ambassador of Christ the Sovereign King, suited
well with your person: so I hoped that my labors which I have taken in
expounding his prophecies, would be accepted and esteemed of you.

Moreover, seeing he had good experience of the disposition of five Kings, far
unlike each other, to whom he continually preached: yet I need not advertise
you, which of these you ought to follow, neither yet to exhort you to the
performance of such duties, unto which you show your self already most
willing.

Vzziah and Iotham favored him; and yet they wanted sufficient courage in
erecting Gods pure worship: the greatest conflicts he sustained was with Ahaz:
not that he was an open enemy; but a false hypocrite, full of dissimulation,
and treachery. And what enemies (I pray you) gaul Gods servants more then
such? His successor Hezechiah not only reverenced this holy personage, but also
modestly, as one of the common sort, submitted himself to his doctrine; obeyed
his counsels, and suffered himself to be governed by his admonitions. Nay which
is more, he willingly yielded to be sharply reproved by the Prophet when need
required. The last, which was Manasses, who, as all the Jews with one consent
affirm, was his father in law, wickedly slew him by cruel torments. Yea, even
during the time that good Kings aided him, and also under Hezechias; who showed
himself so godly a protector of piety and godliness, yet then, was he
continually vexed with sharp and tedious travels, and made to undergo very
grievous conflicts: so difficult and rare a thing is it to see men consent to
wholesome doctrine. I say more; such as will faithfully and uprightly discharge
their duties in this prophetical function, must needs make account to be at
continual odds with the world. So much the more therefore ought faithful
Kings, by their defense, to succor the Ministers of Christ, that they be not
molested nor pressed above measure, by the insolency of the wicked.

But by how much the more as this virtue is excellent, and truly heroical; so
if we shall call to mind what has past in all the ages from the first (till
now;) how rarely has it been found; or how few have given themselves to the
practice of it? Many being remiss and fainthearted, have through mere
negligence suffered Gods truth to be suppressed, as if the matter had not at
all concerned them. The greater part showing themselves adversaries, have with
fury and violence rushed against it. And would to God all those who at this
day profess themselves Christians, had but so much heart to advance the
doctrine of salvation, as they are proud in glorying of this name.

But to be silent touching others, we may yet at the last worthily esteem
this comfort not as a common favor, in the miseries wherein the Church now is,
that you, most noble King, have been raised up of God, with this spirit, and
excellent magnanimity of mind, to maintain the pure religion; and as
effectually to offer unto God your service in this behalf, as you know he
receives and approoues the same at your Majesty's hands. For howsoever the
affairs of the Kingdom be yet managed by your honorable Counsel: and that
as well the most noble Duke of Sommerset, your Majesty's Uncle, as also many
others, have taken the cause of religion so to heart, that they labor
diligently (as it is very fit they should) to establish the same: yet do you
in such sort outgoe them all; that it well appears, the zeal which they see
in you prouokes them not a little to follow you. For you have the same, not
only to be of such a princely disposition as promises much, and to have some
seeds of virtues also, (which yet nevertheless seems great in so young
years) but more then that, such a ripeness of these virtues already grown
beyond your age; which to the most aged, gets not only rare praise, but also
ma^es them much to be admired. And above al, so greatly is your piety
commended, that I am very well assured our Prophet shall have one, that will with
like respect reverence him being dead, as Hezekias did whilst he was living.

As concerning the fruit which may happily redound unto you thereby, it is
best your self should learn it by your own experience in reading of him: and
yet I have touched that also a little in the preface. There is only one thing
which I have determined to say unto your Majesty, (and this it is:) After the
Prophet has laid forth Gods just complaints against this so unthankful a
people, and has threatened the Jews with such chastisements as their disloyal
revolt, and desperate obstinacy deserved; namely, that the time approached,
wherein they should be brought to an horrible ruin: forthwith coming to set
forth the new and incredible restoration of the Church, he promises that
God will so respect the same, that in despite of all her enemies, she shall
always flourish in beauty, and happiness. Those which returned from the
captivity of Babylon felt this joyous and blessed estate, when the sacrifices
being again newly erected, they might conceive some good hope of greater
benefits, then those which they then enjoyed: as when we behold the break of
day, we expect the Sunne-rising soon after. But when Christ the sun of
righteousness appeared with his glory in his Gospel, the thing it self
greatly surpassed all that which had been highly praised by the Prophets
revelations.

Within short space the knowledge of the true God was dispersed almost
throughout the whole world. The pure religion which before was despised and
shut up within the bounds of Iudeah (as in a narrow corner) now began ^o be
spread into al nations and provinces, yea, so honored, that God was called
upon with one consent of faith by infinite multitudes. The son of God having
here and there gathered the Churches, set up his royal throne, and advanced
the same into the highest degree to be seen of all from the East unto the
West. The Churches adorned with admirable graces of the holy Ghost, not only
tasted of the incomparable fruit of the divine goodness, but were also fair
and shining theaters to manifest the wonderful power of God, even to such as
were blind. And albeit, Christ reigned under the cross, yet amiddest the
fiery conflicts and persecutions, his glory shined more gloriously, and his
triumphs more stately, then if the Church had always enjoyed tranquillity.

In the end it came to pass, that that hautie pride of the Roman Empire
submitting it self also unto Christ, was a singular ornament to the house of
God. But the malice and ingratitude of men was the cause why this happiness
lasted not successively. And so the spouse of Christ as one stripped of so
precious a robe, spoiled of her dignity, and deprived of her honorable
attire, was brought back again to a miserable deformity: yet God always
preserved some remainders, as it were in secret corners; but as touching the
outward face of the Church, for the space of many years, nothing appeared any
where, but scatterings and confused wastes. And we at this day behold how the
Roman Antichrist, usurping far and near over the sanctuary of the Lord, by
a sacrilegious tyranny holds it under his feet rent and oppressed. For seeing
the purity of doctrine is there corrupted by monstrous errors, and that Gods
service being ouerturned, idolatries reign there without number; that in stead
of a government rightly instituted, a cruel torture has been brought in,
that the Sacraments be in part by gross and absurd abuses corrupted, and
partly shamefully set to sale: what remain there (I pray you) but woeful
ruins of that natural beauty of the spiritual building?

Notwithstanding the Lord in our times has begun again to set up that which
was fallen down, that at least there might be some image of the true Temple
where he was purely served according as he has ordained in the Gospel. To
which end he has selected out as it were from among the least of the common
people, his chief builders, to advance this work by sincere doctrine. I
grant, it is of it self a difficult work, and of great weight, though Satan
should let us alone in quiet. But if even now whilst some part of this
building is raised up, he does his utmost to break it down, is it any marvel
if we labor much, and with great care, and yet see little or no fruit for the
present to come of our labors? Therefore these mighty Giants proudly scorn us:
as if whilst we studying how to practice the ruin of the tyrannous Roman
sea; we should strive to overthrow the mount Olympus.

These great wits also, w^^o (as they think) know somewhat, deride our
diligence; in regard we are so earnestly busied in restoring the Church to her
first estate: as if in the same any certain or settled estate were to be
expected. For these (forsooth) imagine that they are so well founded, and on
all sides so furnished, that it is no less easy to abolish popery, then to
mingle heaven and earth together. But the conceit of these wise men differs
somewhat. For in regard the peruersitie of the world is so great, that it
cannot be held in awe, they think we travel in vain, and against the stream
to seek in correcting vices, to have a pure and sincere administration of a
Church. The flout of Erasmus is well enough known; What hopes Capito of the
tenth which shall come after him? It cannot be denied but Wolfangus Capito was
an holy man, who with a most sincere affection endeavored to purge the Church.
But because he was persuaded that the Ministers of Christ should no less lose
their labor in correcting the stubbornenesse of the world, then if they should
have taken upon them to have forced the stream the contrary way (for thus
they are wont to think who talk of things in the shade) he taxes us all of
inconsiderate zeal in the person of one. But both the one and the other are
much deceived, in that they consider not, that we so employ our selves in the
Lords service, as he has commanded, that in the mean while the restoration
of the Church is merely the work of his own hands. Neither is it without
cause that the whole Scripture commonly testifies, and that our Prophet again
and again so carefully repeates it. Wherefore being mindful of this doctrine,
let us no way be discouraged from undertaking under Go^^ guidance, a business
which far surmounts our own abilities; that so no encumbrances may either
break off our purpose, or so weaken us, that we should d^^^st from our
enterprise.

And here I do expressly summon you, most excellent King, or rather God by the
mouth of his Prophet Isaiah calls you, namely, to go on in employing
whatsoever power and force God has endued you withal; and with new increases
to set forward the restoration of the Church, which is now so happily begun in
your kingdom. First, you daily hear and read that this charge is committed
unto you in that Kingdom over which God has placed you. Yea, and Isaiah, as I
have said, calling Kings nurcing fathers of the Church, permits not that the
help which she in this behalf requires of you in her affliction, should now
be wanting unto her. Neither ought your heart to be lightly touched with that,
where the Prophet denounces an heavy curse to fall upon all Kings and
nations, which shall defraud her of their aid.

Again, your Majesty also evidently knows, that even the necessity of these
times requires it. And albeit by your endeavors, it may be you shall gain
little; yet knowing how acceptable a service this is unto God, and that it is a
sweet smelling savor in his nostrils, no dangers whatsoever ought to turn
you from this enterprise.

Seeing then that God thus exhorts you to behave your self valiantly, and
therewithal promises you an happy issue: why should you not cheerfully follow
him when he calls you? In another place our Prophet cries; Prepare, prepare the
way for my people. It is well enough known, how there was no hope that the
poor captives could be restored home to their country again, neither was
this presently performed. But in regard the Prophet by the spirit of prophecy,
then foresaw what the posterity should effectually feel, lest by so
lamentable a spectacle, the faithful might be discouraged, he preuents them
betimes; telling them that there are no obstacles or impediments, whatsoever
(be they as firm and as close as they may be) through which God will not make a
way to deliver his Church. Neither do we stand in less need of consolation to
quicken us up at this day. And as for you, most noble King, it is very requisite
that you be ready and watchful, in respect of the charge which is committed
unto you, seeing Isaiah exhorts all Kings and Magistrates, in the person of
Cyrus, to reach forth their hand to the Church in her travel, to the end she
may be restored to her former estate. Although in this regard your condition
differs much from that of Cyrus, in that he being but a stranger over the Lords
flock was never taught expreslie, willingly, and with a frank courage to offer
himself to restore and maintain the Church: but you, whom the Lord has not
only vouchsafed to receive by adoption, but has also placed you in highest
rank among his children; the Prophet calls you to this office, as if he
reached you out his hand. So much the more confidently therefore, and with the
more ardent affection ought you to proceed on in this race. The matter (as I
have said) is in it self full of great difficulties, entangled with much
tediousness, and mingled with dangers; because Satan cease not to broch his
cunning shifts and devices (if by any mean he might) either to overthrow, or
destroy the holy temple of God; sometimes also God by such trials will prove
our constancy. But if you be resolved, that hitherto you have enterprised
nothing by your most grave Counsel but by divine authority from Gods word,
and that for the present you so continue in restoring the estate of ye Church,
no doubt but you shall find by experience how wonderfully God will effect that
which he has given his Ministers in charge: England shall receive an
incomparable fruit from this so happy a going forward: and we shall have cause
too, with you and your whole kingdom to rejoice. In the mean while I will not
cease to further your holy endeavors, as there is good cause, by my poor
prayers, in regard they are the best means I am able to afford you. Farewell
most noble King. The Lord long preserve your flourishing estate, assist and
guide you by his holy spirit, and in all things bless and prosper you. So be
it. From Geneua this five and twentieth of December. 1551.

To the Reader.
OF such precious esteem (Christian Reader) were the expositions of this
reverend author in the Church of Geneua, that albeit some of them were by
himself To wit, his ordinary Lectures upon the Prophets, which being read in
the Schools, were by approved Notaries there, taken from his mouth v^rb^tim,
and afterward under the title of his lessons, or readings, imprinted.
spoken, and others of them Namely, his Commentaries, which were written by him
at spare times in the house.
written in Latin; and that in favor of the learned especially: yet because
with his more then ordinary depth of judgment he always matched a singular
simplicity and plainness, so that he therein stoopes to the capacity, even
of the simplest; it was thought fit, that by some of good note in the said
Church, they should all be translated into the vulgar French, for the benefit
of all such as understood the same.

Which commendable zeal and godly care of theirs, as it worthily provoked many
of this our Church for the common good, (at the happy entrance of our late
dear and dread Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth into this kingdom) to
translate diverse of his Commentaries upon the books both of the Genesis,
Joshua, and Psalms.
old, and All the Evangelists, Acts, Romans etc.
new Testament into English; so if their good beginnings had been seconded by
answerable proceedings, thousands might, I doubt not, have reaped the like
fruit by those that are yet Namely, his lessons upon the prophecy of Jeremiah,
the Lamentations, Ezechiel, etc.
untranslated, which they have done by the former. Wherefore, this service to
the Church of God having been a long time neglected, and not hearing of any
that purposed to set his helping hand to this so necessary a business, I
thought it might happily prove a labor not altogether unseasonable nor
unprofitable, if according to my poor ability I endeavored either to continue
forth those former good beginnings, or at least thereby to quicken up the care
of such as are much more able then my self, to prosecute the same.

To which purpose (good Reader) some few years since, for the first assay, I
selected out of this learned Authors works in French, his Commentary upon the
Hebrews, not before translated; which being authorized, I was bold soon after
to present thee therewith. Now because, as I suppose, it has not passed abroad
without some good fruit, it has the rather encouraged me once more, whilst I
profited my self in reading this Commentary upon the princely Prophet
Isaiah, to have some respect of thy profiting also. For which cause thou have
the same now, as the former; translated, allowed, and also published (if thou will) for thy particular use and profit.

As touching the fruit that is thence to be reaped, it would be much better
that thy self from thine own experience might be able to report, then for
me here at large to dilate. Only this I think I may not omit: if in reading
this prophecy thou would have the difficulties therein cleared; thy
judgment in other things not obscure, either rectified, or confirmed; thy
meditations concer-cerning diverse sorts of instructions, menaces,
reprehensions, promises, and consolations enlarged; Act. 8.27. to 35.
lo here a Philip ready at hand in any of these things to satisfy thy
desires. To conclude, if thou entrest upon the reading of this book, and
would indeed benefit thy self thereby, then give me leave to use the
Apostles exhortation (though by him used to another purpose) Be not weary in
weldoing, Gal. 6.9.
but proceed on constantly, so shall thou (I doubt not) in due season reap,
if thou faint not.

Farewell, and profit more and more in the study of Gods word, never giving
the Lord rest day nor night, till in the truth of thy heart, thou can in some
good measure profess with these three Worthies following, that thou likewise
have made the same thy chief repast, delight and treasure.

Job.
I have not departed from the commandments of his lips, and I have esteemed
the words of his mouth more then mine appointed food: Job 23.12.

Jeremiah.
Thy words are found by me, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the
joy and rejoicing of mine heart: Ier. 15.16.

David.
The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver:
Psalm. 119.72.


Thine in Christ, C. C.

THE FRENCH TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
IT is twenty years since and more, good Reader, that the lessons of M. John
Calvin upon the Prophet Isaiah (which being collected by M. Nicolas Gallars)
were printed under the title of a Commentary; and dedicated to that noble
Prince of blessed memory, Edward the sixth, King of England. A long time
after, the Author himself reuiewing this collection, imprinted both in Latin,
and in French: satisfied not himself only to reuiew it, thereby to explane
that, which otherwise seemed obscure, by reason of the brevity of it; and to
set that in order, which was somewhat confused: but he labored therein with
such diligence and good success, that he augmented it in Latin with excellent
and necessary matters for the understanding of the text; more then the third
part: bringing all things into so exact a form, that if any be pleased to
take so much pains, as to confer the first Commentary or collection of
those lessons, with this second; he shall find that which we have said to be
very true. Neither was this gathered in the schools the second time, as at the
first; but was written in the house, even word for word by the Authors own
direction: who has so aptly disposed and couched the whole together, that in
perusing of it, you shall perceive in this book, as well as in others which
have already passed his hands, that he has done great service to the Church
of God, and has also faithfully chalked out the way unto such as desire to
profit in divine studies. But especially by these his Commentaries, which being
carefully read, will serve no less to the explaning of many texts that are
contained in other books of the holy Scripture, as they will also be most
helpefull to give the true sense of the Prophet Isaiah; which has moved me
(good Reader) to bestow my pains in translating the whole anew into French:
lest such among you as understand not the Latin tongue, should be deprived of
so great a benefit. Read, and profit thereby in the fear of God.

A PREFACE TO THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH:
BY Mr. JOHN CALVIN.
THey have been wont to spend many words in setting forth the office of the
Prophets. The Prophets ground their doctrine upon the law.
But I see no readier way then to refer them to the law; whence their
doctrine is drawn, as the rivers from the fountains. For they set the law
before them for their imitation, so as by good right we may affirm and hold
them to be the expositors thereof, in whom there is nothing separate from it.
Whereof they are the Expositors. The law contains three points:
Now the Law contains three points. First, the doctrine of life: secondly, the
threatenings and promises: thirdly, the covenant of grace, which is founded in
Christ.

For as touching the Ceremonies, they were exercises, by which the people were
held in the service of God, and in godliness; according to the Contents of the
first Table.

The Prophets then expound the doctrine thereof more at large; and lay that
forth in more plain terms, which is briefly contained in the two tables;
teaching that which the Lord principally requires.

As touching the threatenings Threatenings:
and promises Promises:
which Moses touched in general; they apply them to their own times, and
describe them particularly. Lastly, that which is said obscurely in Moses,
touching Christ and his grace; they set it forth more perspicuouslie, and
allege more ample and abundant testimonies of the free covenant.

But that the thing may be more clear, we must fetch the matter further off;
namely, from the Law it self, which God ordained as a perpetual rule for his
Church, that it might always be in men's hands: and that all their successors
should follow it.

Now because this doctrine of the law sufficed not this obstinate and unruly
people; the Lord also foreseeing that they would never be held in, unless it
were by some bridle: he adds a prohibition, Prohibitions.
not to seek to Magitians, Southsayers, Inchanters, Sorcerers, nor to such as
regard the times, or the flying of birds, Deuteronomy. 18.9.10.11.12.
to such as asked counsel of familiar spirits, or at the dead; because such
things were an abomination to the Lord.

And to prevent the replies which they might make, namely, that their condition
should be worse, then that of the infidels, who had their Southsayers,
Astrologers, Sacrificers, and such like, of whom they might ask advice and
counsel; but they should be destituted of any that might be able to give them
satisfaction in doubtful and intricat causes: herein, to take away al pretext,
and that they might not defile themselves in these execrable customs of the
Gentiles, God promises to raise them up Prophets, Deuteronomy. 18.
by whom he will manifest his will, who also shall faithfully teach them
whatsoever he shall give them in charge; that they might have no cause to
complain for the time to come, as if any thing were wanting unto them.

I grant, that in that place Moses mentions a Prophet, and not Prophets.
Notwithstanding it is a change of the number, to wit, the singular for the
plural, a thing common in the Scriptures. And howsoever the place ought
properly and principally to be understood of Christ (as S. Peter expounds it
Act. 3.) in regard he is the Prince of the Prophets, and that all of them, with
their doctrine also depend upon him, and with one consent aim at him: yet by
this name, which is collectiue, it also comprehends the rest of the Prophets.

The Lord then having promised them Prophets, by whom he would declare unto
them his counsel and will, he commanded the people to rest in their exposition
and doctrine. Not that the Prophets should add any thing to the law, but that
they should faithfully expound the same, and conserve the authority thereof.

Whence also it is, that Malachi exhorting the people to persist in that
doctrine, Mal. 4.4.
says, or rather God by him: Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I
gave him in Horeb for all Israel. Thus bringing them back to Gods law only;
and commanding them to be content therewith. But would Malachi have them to
despise the Prophets then? No. But forasmuch as the prophesies are dependances
of the law, and that the law summarilie comprehends them all, this exhortation
sufficed. For such as are well acquainted with the sum of the doctrine, and
principal heads of it, having their wills well inclined thereto; it is
certain that they will not contemn the prophesies: for it were a thing too
fond to boast of having affection to the law, and yet in the mean while not to
make any account of the divine interpretation thereof: such as are some at this
day, who are so shameless, Note.
that they dare brag of loving Gods law, and the whilst cannot endure to be
admonished or reprehended by the doctrine which is drawn and collected from
the same.

Thus when the Prophets deal with men's manners, they bring in no new thing,
The first table.
but explane those things which were misunderstood in the law. As for example,
the people thought they had done their duties to the utmost, when they had
offered sacrifices, and observed the ceremonies: for the world is wont always
to measure God according to their own ell, and to botch him up a carnal
service. This corruption the Prophets reprove sharply, showing that all
ceremonies are nothing where the integrity of the heart is wanting; and that
God will be worshipped by faith, and a right inuocating of his name. This was
manifested to them plainly enough in the law, but it was needful it should
take a deeper impression, and that they should be put again in mind of it. The
hypocrisy, The second t^ble.
wherewith men mask themselves under the veil of ceremonies, was to be
discovered.

As touching the second table, the Prophets thence drew their exhortations,
showing how all wrong, fraud and violence was to be abandoned. The Prophets
office then was nothing else, but to hold the people in obedience to Gods law.

In the threatenings Threatenings.
and promises they have something more special. For what Moses propounded in
general, they describe in particular. Besides, they had visions, Visions.
which were proper to them: by which the Lord revealed things to come, that so
they might apply the promise and threatenings to the peoples use, and might
further assure them of Gods will.

Moses Moses.
threatens, God will pursue thee with the sword, the enemies shall vex thee
without, and within, domestical contentions shall annoy thee. Thy life shall
hang as by a thread; thou shall tremble at the shaking of a leaf; and such
other things.

But the Prophets The Prophets
say: Behold, God has raised against thee the sword of the Chaldeans, and of
the Egyptians: also, God has armed these to the battle. This city shall be
destroyed at such a time. The like is to be said of the promises.

Moses Moses.
says, If thou obseruest the commandments, God will bless thee. And then he
goes on in recounting blessings in general.

But the Prophets The Prophets
in particular affirm, The Lord will bless thee in such a thing.

Also the Lord promises by Moses Moses.
in these words, Although thou were scattered and driven to the utmost parts of
the earth, yet from thence will I gather thee.

But the Prophets The Prophets
promise, that albeit the Lord has scattered them as far as Babylon, yet
within 70. years he will cause their captivity to return.

And as touching the free covenant which God made with man through Christ, the
Prophets are much more evident; Covenant of grace.
and do much more confirm the people in it. For they set Christ before their
eyes, when they would comfort the faithful, and raise up their minds to the
hope of his coming, even as it were to the foundation, and to the place of the
covenant, unto whom the effect of the promises was to be referred.

Whosoever shall ponder these things, shall easily perceive what he is to
seek in the Prophets, and whereunto their writtings tend. But for the present,
it suffices that we have pointed it forth as with the finger.

Hence we may soon gather how we ought to handle the doctrine of the word,
and how we ought to imitate the Prophets; who so much admired it, that thence
they collected the admonitions, reprehensions, threatenings and consolations, to
apply them to the peoples use. Note.
For though it be not daily revealed unto us what we ought to do, yet are we
to compare the conversation of the people of our times, with that of the people
of old; and by histories and examples to denounce the judgments of God.
Namely, that from the vengeance he took upon such sins in that time, God
always like himself.
he will likewise be revenged upon those that reign every where in our time.
Why so? Because he is always like himself.

The faithful teachers then must come furnished with the like wisdom, if they
mean to handle the doctrine of the Prophets profitablie. Thus much as touching
the prophesies in general.

To come to our Prophet Isaiah: the inscription The inscription.
sufficiently shows both what he was, and in what time he published his
prophesies. For his father is here named, to wit, Amos brother of AZarias king
of Judah. Isaiah descended of the blood Royal.
Whence it appears he was of the blood royal: and of this opinion are all
the ancients. And yet neither his stock, nor near affinity to the King (for
the Jews affirm he was father in law of Manasseh) could hinder him from being
put to death in hatred of his doctrine, neither was he respected any more, then
if he had been of some base estate or condition.

The names of the Kings here mentioned, set forth the time, The time when
Isaiah Prophesied.
in which he prophesied. There are some who think that he began about the end
of VZiahs reign. And they take their conjecture from the vision which is
recorded in the sixth chapter, by which he testifies he was confirmed. But
this conjecture is too weak; as shall be showed in place convenient. It rather
appears by the inscription, that he prophesied in the days of Vziah; of which
I see nothing to the contrary. How ever it be, it plainly appears that he
prophesied above 64. years. For Iothan reigned 16. years: Ahaz as much;
Hezekias 29. This makes 61. Ad those in which he prophesied under Vziah; and
afterward under Manasses, Isaiah put to death by Manasses.
who put him to death: These at the least will make up 64. years; in which
Isaiah ceased not to perform the office of a Prophet. And it may well be that
he prophesied longer: but of this we can gather no certentie from the history.

Isaiah a pa^erne for all Pastors.
This then ought to be seriously marked of all the Ministers of the word, that
from his example, they may learn patiently to bear the burden of their
office, though it be cumbersome and painful: not thinking it any disgrace to
suffer many sore and tedious travels, seeing they have so many worthy paternes
set before them. I grant it must needs discourage them exceedingly, when they
see that things go not forward; and that their labors take not such good
success as they desire: thinking it better to leave all, rather then to bestow
so much labor in vain. They have need therefore often to remember, and to set
before their eyes such examples. (Why so?) Because Isaiah fainted not, although
he gained little by so many painful travels.

Jeremiah Jeremiah.
also ceased not by the space of 50. years to call upon this people, who in
the mean while hardened their hearts the more: and yet we see they forsook
not their charge, whatsoever difficulties came between. Even so must we
follow our vocation, and constantly bear all sorts of encumbrances.

Note also the circumstance of the change of Kings The change of Kings.
which are here numbered up, chap. 1.1. For it is impossible that in so great
diversity, the State should always continue alike. No doubt but many troubles
fell out. And yet our Prophet perseuered with an invincible constancy; and
never suffered his heart to be overcome of fears.

Isaiah himself put this title to his prophecy, or some other.

How the Prophecies were collected.
After the Prophets had preached to the people, they gathered a compendious
sum of their sermon; which they affixed to the gate of the Temple, that the
prophecy might the better be viewed and learned of all. And after it had
remained there a sufficient time for some certain days; the Ministers of the
Temple took it down, and put it into the treasury of the Temple, that the
memory thereof might continue for ever. Very likely it is (I say) that the
books of the Prophets were thus gathered, as may appear by the second Chapter
of Habacuk; Haba. 2.2. See chap. 30.8. and chap. 8.1.2. The Prophecies
preserved by the singular providence of God.
whosoever be disposed to consider the same well: as also from the eight of
this prophecy.

Now this was done no doubt by the special providence of God, that by the
Priests themselves, whose office it was to conserve the prophesies for such as
should succeed, it is come to pass that we at this day enjoy these treasures;
which they for the most part lightly esteemed. For the Priests were the
greatest enemies, that the Prophets had to deal withal.

An Epigram upon the Translation of M. Caluins Commentary upon the Prophecy
of Isaiah.
THrice happy (England) if thou knew'st thy bliss,
Since Christ's eternal Gospel in thee shined
Thou art, H'is beetle-blind that sees not this,
Brutishly ingrate that with a thankful mind
Does not acknowledge Gods great Grace herein,
And learn thereby for to forsake his sin.
Gods word has long in thee been soundly taught,
The sound thereof has rung throughout the Land,
And many a Soul by Fishers net been caught,
Which erst lay thrall in Satan's cruel band:
This favor great by none can be expressed,
But such as have it felt in their own breast.
Thy native sons in thine own bowels bred,
Like faithful Shepherds have done worthily,
And thee with store of heavenly Manna fed,
Forcing the Wolves to leave their cruelty,
To slinke aside, and hide themselves in holes,
In caves and dens, like pur-blind Backs and Moles.
Tyndall, Frith, Philpot, father Latimer,
The Gospel preached by word, by life, by death:
Iuel, Fox, Reynolds, Fulk and Whitaker
To second them have spent their vital breath
In hot pursuit of that great Romish Bore,
Who spoiled quite this English vine before.
I spare to speak of Deerings silver voice,
Of Greenhams zeal, of Perkins labors sound,
Of hundreds more of Zion-builders choice,
The like whereof can scarce elsewhere be found:
Such groundwork they of Gods Truth here have placed
As never shall by Hels whole force beraZ't.
Besides all these, of foreign Lights the chief,
Beza, and Vrsinus, many other more,
Martyr, Musculus, for thy more relief
Are seen in English weed abroad to go,
From place to place in every Shire and Town,
To teach the Truth and throw all Errors down.
And here pr^^^nted is unto thy sight
The Royal Prophet Esais Euangel:
For so me thinks I may it term aright,
That Prince of holy Prophets does so well,
So lively Christ's whole history presage,
As if he had lived in that same very Age.
Whose Oracles great Calvin does unfold
In thine own native Tongue for thy Souls health.
Here may thou gather precious Stones and Gold,
And store up heaps of Heavenly lasting wealth;
Here may thou find with very little pain
Which would not lose for thousand Worlds again.
Here may thou see the black-mouthed Atheists
Confounded quite by Demonstration clear;
The cunning Papist put unto his shifts,
And made in his right Colors to appear;
Here Is Christ, his Truth, and Life, thee set before,
Heavens Gates set open wide: what would thou more?
By Francis Hering, Doctor in Physic.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH, WRITTEN BY THAT REVEREND AND
PAINEFVLL Pastor, in the Church of Christ, Master JOHN CALVIN.
Verse. 1. A vision of Isaiah the Son of Amos, which he saw concerning Judah
and Jerusalem; in the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of
Judah.
ALthough the Hebrew word Chazon which the Prophet uses be derived of seeing,
and does properly signify vision: yet notwithstanding for the most part it
imports as much as Revelation. For as often as the Scripture makes mention of
special visions which appeared to the Prophets, whereby the Lord meant the
better to confirm them when he would have some excellent thing come to light,
it uses the word Mareah, which properly signifies vision. But to the end I
heap not up many testimonies, in the third chapter of the first book of
Samuel (where mention is made in general of prophesies) the author of that
book says, 1. Sam. 3.1.15.
that the word of the Lord was precious in those days, because there was no
manifest vision (where he uses the word Chazon) and a little after, the vision
by which God manifests himself to Samuel, is expressed by the word Mareah.
Also in the twelfth chapter of the book of Numbers, Numb. 12.6
where Moses distinguishes the two ordinary means of Revelation, he there
with dreams conioyneth vision as the special. And yet by the ninth chapter of
the same book of Samuel, 1. Sam. 9 9.
it appears that the name of Seer was imposed in old time upon the Prophets:
but by way of excellency; because God discovered his counsel familiarly unto
them.

Now as touching this present place, it is out of doubt that the certainty of
doctrine is deciphered out unto us by this very word; as if it had been said;
There is nothing contained in this book which was not manifested to Jsaiah by
God himself. Wherefore the true sense of the word is to be observed; for
thereby we learn, that the Prophets spoke not of themselves, neither yet
preferred their own imaginations: but that they were enlightened by God, and
had their eyes opened to see those things which otherwise of themselves they
had not been able to have comprehended. The doctrine of Jsaiah then, even in
the very inscription, is recommended unto us; to wit, because it contains
nothing of man's invention, but the revelations of God: to the end we might be
assured that whatsoever is contained in this book, was revealed unto him by
the holy Ghost.

Concerning Judah.] It were not amiss if it were translated Against Judah. For
the particle Al signifies both the one and the other; and the sense will be all
one: for whatsoever this book contains, it does properly appertain to Judah
and Jerusalem. Oiection.
But if any shall object that there are many things mingled in this book which
concern Egypt, Tyrus, Babylon, with other cities and countries: the answer
Judah and Jerusalem. For whatsoever his prophesies contain beside, it is
accidentally as they say: neither yet was it any digressing from the scope of
his office to preach to others also what calamities approached near upon them:
for Amos, though he were specially sent to them of Israel, yet passed he not
the bounds of his vocation when he prophesied also against Judah: Gal. 2.8.
Act. 10.17. and 13.5 and 14.1. and 17.2.10. and. 18.4.19.
yea we have yet a more familiar example hereof in S. P^ter and S. Paul; Peter
was appointed over the Jews, and Paul over the Gentiles, and yet Saint Peter
passed not beyond the bounds of his office in preaching to the Gentiles, as
when he went in to Cornelius: neither S. Paul, when he offered the preaching of
the Gospel to the Jews, to whom he resorted as soon as he entered into any
city. And thus was it lawful for Isaiah to do, in like manner. Nor whilst
he endeavored to discharge his duty to the uttermost in teaching of the Jews,
and purposely bent all his studies that way: did he yet go beyond his calling
when he speaks (as it were by the way) of other nations?

He takes Judah here for the whole nation, and Jerusalem for the chief seat
of the kingdom: for he separates not the city from the kingdom; but names
it by way of excellency, as being the mother city. Even as if a Prophet at
this day should be sent to speak unto the whole kingdom of France, should
name the city of Paris, as the chief of the kingdom. And it was needful
that this should be done; Jerusalem should not exempt themselves, as though
they were guiltless: or rather, as being dispensed withal, from being under
any check, in respect of the greatness of their dignity. Jerusalem to be
named a part, because it was situated in the tribe of Ben^^min, seeing the one
half thereof, which was subject to the successors of David, is comprehended
under this name of Judah.

Verse. 2. Hear O heavens, and thou earth hearken: for the Lord has said, I
have nourished, and brought up children, but they have Or, have done wickedly
against me.
rebelled against me.
ISaiah has here imitated Moses: for so it is the custom of all the Prophets
to do; neither is it to be doubted but he alludes to that excellent song of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.1. in the very entrance whereof he calls heaven and earth to
witness against the people. I grant that it is a terrible protestation: for
it is as much as if both of them should turn themselves to the dumb elements
void of sense, because men had no ears to hear, but were become utterly
benumbed in all their senses. Isaiah then speaks here as of a rare and
prodigious thing, which were even enough to smite the very elements with
astonishment (though otherwise senseless in themselves.) For what could be
more horrible then to see the Israelites reject the Lord, from whom they had
received so many benefits? Those who by heaven, understand the Angels, and by
earth, men, do too much lessen the force of these words: and do also take
away that wherein the chiefest weight of the Prophets vehemency lies. Now all
the expositors almost do finish the clause, For the Lord has spoken, here: As
if the Prophet meant to say, Seeing God has opened his sacred mouth, it stands
all men in hand attentively to receive his word. And thus the sentence in
appearance indeed is more full: but the circumstance of the place requires
another knitting together of the words; namely, t^^t this word hearken be
referred, not generally to what purpose one will; but solely and only to the
next complaint. And so, the sense is thus; Hear the complaint which God
commenceth against you: I have nourished, etc. For he recounts such a monstrous
thing, as he is almost cast into a swound at the sight of it: so as he is feign
to call in all the insensible creatures (contrary to all order) to be
witnesses thereof. I had rather then take these things in their proper
signification, because they do better set forth the Prophets meaning.

And to the end that no man should wonder why he speaks thus to things without
sense or reason, experience it self not obscurely teaches us that the voice
of God is heard even of the dumb creatures: yea, and the very order of nature
is nothing else but an obedience, which is yielded unto him thorowout all the
parts of the world, to the end his sovereign authority might shine in all
places. For the elements, the heavens and the earth, do their duties, and
yield obedience to the commandment which is prescribed them, and that at the
least beck which God makes to them: The earth brings forth her fruits; The
Sun, the Moon and the Stars do finish their courses; The Sea passes not
beyong the limits which God has appointed unto it; The heavens also do turn
about to their certain spaces: Finally, in all things we may observe a
wonderful distinction, although all these creatures be destitute of reason and
understanding. But man, who is endued therewith, in whose ears and heart the
voice of the Lord so often sounds, as if he were wholly senseless, moves
not, neither boweth he his neck to submit himself to the obedience of his
God. The dumb and insensible creatures then shall bear witness against such
obstinate and rebellious persons, to the end they may one day feel that this
obtestation was not used in vain.

I have nourished.] Word for word it is, I have made them great. But because he
speaks of children, we cannot turn it better then that, I have nourished,
or brought up. For the Latins, in stead of nourishing; say, to bring up
children. Yet he by and by adds other benefits wherewithal he had
wonderfully enriched them: as if he should say, I have not only performed the
office of a good father in nourishing, and sustaining you in this life: but I
have also taken pains to exalt you to honor and dignity. For there was no
kind of favor or mercy which the Lord withheld from the^, even as if he meant
wholly to empty himself. As hereafter in the fifth chapter he reprocheth them
saying, What could I have done any more to my vineyard that I have not done
unto it? Why? the Lord might very well have said as much to all nations, seeing
he nourished, and bestowed many blessings upon them: but the Israelites were
his special chosen people, whom he had adopted before the rest of the world to
himself, and entreated them as his most dear children, embracing and
cherishing them with a special care, even as in his very bosom. In a word, he
adorned and beautified them with all manner of good things.

Now to apply this to our time; let us consider whether our condition be not
like, or rather much better than that of the Jews in ancient times. The
adoption of God obliged them to the purity of his service: our bond or
obligation is double: namely, because he has not only redeemed us by the
blood of Christ, but because he who has once vouchsafed to deliver us, does
still call us also to himself by the preaching of the Gospel, and therein
prefers us far before all those whom he has yet left blinded in their
ignorance. If we acknowledge not these things, of how much greater punishment
shall we be worthy? for by how much the more the grace of God has been
abundantly powered forth upon us, of so much the more ingratitude shall we be
convinced before him.

But they ^aue r^belled] S. I^^ome translates it, They have despised me. But it
appears sufficiently by other places, that the Hebrew word Pash^ng, expresses
yet somewhat more; namely, that they revolted. G^d testifies then that he could
not hold them under his obedience; no not by all the benefits he could bestow
upon them. But that they turned away more and more, and estranged themselves,
no otherwise then the son, who by leaving his fathers house, shows that he
is become altogether incorrigible. It is a monstrous thing for children not to
be obedient to their fathers; especially to such a one as never cease to do
them good, bestows his whole care as it were upon them. Licurgus would not
make any law against the unthankful (because it was a thing against nature not
to acknowledge a benefit received. A child then that is vn^hankfull to his
father is a double monster, yea rather a threefold monster against a liberal
father, who cease not to do him good. For albeit the Prophet calls them
child^en, it is not given them here as a title of honor, but the more to
aggrauate this their revolt, and to make it the more odious.

Verse. 3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib, but Israel
has not known: my people has not understood.
THis comparison does further exemplify the crime of their revolt. For the
Lord might well have compared his people to the Heathen, and Infidels: but he
touches them nearer, in comparing them to brute beasts, and in showing that
they are yet more foolish then they. For albeit these beasts be void of reason
and understanding, yet are they teachable, at the least wise in this respect,
that they acknowledge those who feeds them. Seeing then that the Lord had not
only fed this people as in a staule or Crib, but had fed them largely and
abundantly, no otherwise then the father does his children whom he tendreth;
and had not only pampered their bellies, but did always replenish them with
spiritual food: had he not good cause, think you, to esteem them worthy
rather to be sent to school to learn of Oxen and Asses then of men;
especially when he saw they were become so beastly? he sends his people then
to these brute beasts to learn their duties of them. And no marvel; for it
often falls out that the unreasonable creatures do better follow the order of
nature, and do in their kind show more humanity then men thems^lues. And not
to allege many examples, this ^ne which Isaiah here propounds shall s^ffice:
namely, that these beasts being altogether senseless and blockish, do yet
notwithst^nding obey their masters and those who have the government of them.
And if in other things we shall consider wherein the beasts do surpass men,
how many particulars shall we find out?

But the Papists (whose custom it is to overthrow the native sense of the
Scriptures and by their dreams do corrupt all the mysteries of God) have here
found out a notable fable: for they make men believe that the Oxen and the
Asses did worship our Lord Jesus Christ lying in the cratch after he was borne:
wherein they show themselves to be excellent asses. And yet would to God they
themselves would but follow the poor Ass which they have forged! namely, that
they were Asses worshipping the Lord Jesus Christ, and not rather wincing and
kicking against his Majesty with their heels. For the Prophet speaks not
here of a miracle, but of the order of nature: dec^aring that whosoever they be
that do overthrow the order thereof by a bad conversation, are become
monsters. We need not forge new miracles then to give authority to Jesus
Christ: for so, by mingling the false with the true, this inconvenience would
follow upon it, yt none would believe either the one or the other. Neither
need we doubt, if there had been any such miracle, but the Evangelists would
have put it in writing.

The name Israel which here he opposes against these beasts, has a very great
emphasis in it. We know what honor it was to the posterity of J^^ob to bear
this name, which God himself had imposed upon this holy Pat^iark, Gen 32.28.
because he overcame the Angel in wrestling. Which name was so much the more
dishonored, by how much the more these bastard and degenerate children durst
notwithstanding make their bragges of that title. And first not only because
they usurped the name of this holy personage (whose virtues they imitated
nothing at all) but also because they were unthankful unto God from whom they
had received all manner of benefits. L^stly, we must supply an overthwart
comparison: for the greater their dignity was, in that they had been exalted
far above all other people, so much the more (to reproach them under this
honorable title) are they separate from other nations. The Greek Interpreters
have added this word me; but I had rather repeat that which the Prophet has
said, to wit, that Israel has not known his possesser or owner; that is to
say, God: nor his ^r^h; that is, his Church, wherein he was nourished, and to
which he ought to be gathered. Especially seeing these poor beasts do
acknowledge their master that feeds them; and do voluntarily return to the
place where they were wont to find pasture.

Verse. 4. Ah, sinful nation Or, sinful woman.
, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: They
have forsaken the Lord: they have Or, they have despised.
provoked the holy one of Israel to anger: they are gone backward.
AH.] Although he had reproved their fault sharply enough, yet notwithstanding
the more to amplify it, he yet further adds this exclamatio^: by which he
shows his detestation against so horrible and foul an ingratitude. Some
think this particle Ah, is put here in sign of lamenting. Saint Jerome has
interpreted it, Woe: but me thinks it should more fitly agree to an
exclamation, arising partly from astonishment, and partly from sorrow. For we
are wont to burst into outcries, when so vnwotthie a thing is committed, that
words cannot express it; or rather when words answerable to the greatness of
the grief fails us. In stead of sinful nation as we have translated it, the
Greeks have turned sinful woman, the vulgar translation also bearing the same.
But the Hebrew word signifies those who are given over to wickedness, and it is
not to be doubted, but the Prophet here accuses them of their desperate malice.

A people laden] etc. We must note the force of the similitude; for he not
only means that they were plunged in their iniquities, as in a deep mirie
pit; but also reprocheth them that they sinned not so much of ignorance or
infirmity (as the weak often do) but that they followed on and continued in
their rebellion of set purpose. As if he should have said, They are given up to
all injustice, and have wholly sold over themselves to commit evil. Where he
adds, Seed of the wicked; it is as much, as mischievous seed. Some
expounding it more wittily, say, that they declared themselves unworthy to
hold any place among the children of Abraham: because they were become
bastards, and degenerate. As in other places they are called a seed of Canaan;
yea they are reproched with the name of uncircumcised; even as though they had
bin begottten of profane or a strange people. But it is an usual manner of
speech among ye Hebrews; which the Greeks also observed in their speech, when
they say, sons of the good, for good children.

Corrupt children.] It is word for word, corrupting: and therefore the
expositors supply, Themselves, or, their ways. But me thinks bastard, or
degenerate agrees better. For his meaning is that they are so depraved, that
they resemble their fathers nothing at all. Moreover, he adornes his nation
here with four titles, which are not very seemly: And Such indeed as were
far remote from the good conceit which they had of themselves. But thus must
hypocrites be dealt withal, to awaken them: and the more they sooth up
themselves in casting off the fear of God, so much the more must they be
thundered against. For a milder and a more gentle doctrine would not have
prevailed with such a kind of people any thing at all: neither would a slight
manner of reprofe have moved them. The false persuasion therefore of their
righteousness and wisdom was to be plucked away from them; for therewith they
masked and disguised themselves, and often made their bragges thereof in vain.

For they have forsaken the Lord.] Now he adds the reason why he has so
sharply and bitterly reproved them: namely, lest they should complain as
they were wont to do; that they were too severely dealt withal. First then he
vpbraids them with that, which is the fountain of all evils: to wit, they had
forsoken the Lord. For even as it is the chief perfection of righteousness to
cleave unto God, as Moses teaches; What does the Lord thy God require of thee
but that thou cleave unto him? Deuteronomy. 10.12
so is it the greatest misery we can plunge our selves into, when we have
forsaken him. Now the Prophets meaning is, to let the Jews see, that they were
not only guilty of one fault: but to show them that they were become Apostats
altogether. No doubt, but that which follows serves for an amplification;
whether we read, To provoke, or, to dispose; yet I rather rest in the latter.
For it was too gross an ingratitude to make light account of him who had
adopted them for his own, from the rest of all nations. And for this cause he
calls himself the holy one of Israel, because in giving himself unto them he
had thereby adorned them with his holiness. For this name is so attributed unto
him every where, in regard of the effect. From how barbarous a pride then did
the despising of so great an honor proceed? If any had rather retain the word
provoke; the sense will be, that they had rejected the Lord: even as if they
meant to provoke him to anger of set purpose. Whence we may see how detestable
their Apostasy was.

They are gone backward.] The sense is that when the Lord did set a certain
way and form before them how he would have them to carry themselves, they on
the contrary were carried away with their lusts: and yet he confirms the
former sentence; to wit, that they had given the bridle so far to their
shameless malepertnes, that they were altogether revolted from God: yea, and
that wittingly and willingly, by erring from that mark unto which they ought
to have bent their course all their life long.

Verse. 5. Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for you fall away more and
more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy.
WHerefore should] etc. Some do turn it, upon what? or, in what part? And they
take it as if the Lord should say, There are no more plagues left to strike you
withal. For he had tried so many ways to bring them into the right way, that
there was no chastisement left. But I had rather interpret it, Wherefore, or,
to what purpose? As also the Hebrew word importes so much; and withal I take
it that the sense seems to agree best thereto. For so we are wont to say,
wherefore; to what purpose, etc. His meaning is then, that the Jews are grown
to such a pitch of wickedness and ungodliness, that it is impossible to make them
become any whit better. We know by experience that after desperate men have
once hardened their hearts, then they will rather be broken all to pieces then
receive any correction. Now he complains that there was such an obstinacy in
them, even as if the Physician having assaied all good remedies to cure his
diseased patient, should begin to say at the last, All the skill I have, will
do no good. And withal he accuses them of extreme malice: for when the
wicked are come to that pass that chastisements will not humble them, then are
they come to the very top of all wickedness. So then it is as much as if the
Lord had said, I see very well, that though I should correct you never so much,
yet I shall do you no good. For questionless things are then become wholly
desperate when the chastisements and calamities which God uses as remedies to
heal our vices, will profit us nothing. And yet for all that the Lord is so
far off from ceasing to punish such still, that (which more is) it stirs up
and inflames his wrath so much the more against us: For there is nothing more
burdensome to him, then such an obstinacy. Notwithstanding it is rightly
said, that he loses his labor, when he cannot thereby draw us to repentance:
and that all the remedies he applies to a people so utterly past cure are in
vain. So then he is so far off from sparing such, that he not only doubles
his blows and afflictions upon them, trying all means possible: but he is
constrained never to give over till he has utterly consumed them. But then
indeed he plays not the part of a Physician, but rather of the Surgion: which
is the cause why he so laments here, that his chastisements shall now become
unprofitable to the people.

You fall away.] This is a confirmation of the former sentence, so that I
distinguish this member from the former, which others notwithstanding do
conioyne together. As if he should say, You will be so far off from ceasing to
err, that (which worse is) you augment your wickednesses more and more, for I
see you are so carried away to do evil, as if ye had laid your heads
together, deliberately to conspire thereof in your minds: so that there is no
hope at al left of any moderation. Now God in this speech purposed to manifest
unto al men how incorrigible their spirit was, to the end they might pretend no
excuses afterward.

The whole head.] Others translate, Every head: and think that the princes and
great men among the people are here meant by these particular names. But for
mine own part, I rather agree to their opinion, who translate, all the head.
For me thinks it is a plain similitude, taken from the body of man; to wit,
when the body is so sore afflicted, that there is no hope of health left. Now
he names two principal parts whereupon the health of the whole body depends:
and hereby he declares the extremity of the diseases, wherewith this wretched
people was utterly spent. It was not some part or common member of the body
then, which was pained, but the heart was wounded; and the head very sore
diseased: in a word, that the vital parts (as they are called) were so
putrified and infected, that they were incurable. But the Interpreters do not
agree in this behalf: for some refer this sickness to sins: others, to
punishments. To sins thus; You are already become a rotten and stinking
body; wherein nothing that is whole and sound is left: wickedness and sin
has gotten the swinge amongst you, by the infection whereof all is defiled and
corrupt. But I had rather understand it of the punishments: for the Lord
doubtless still pursues this complaint: namely, that the people are so rooted in
obstinacy, that they cannot be brought to amendment of life for any plague
inflicted upon them; and that howsoever they had been smitten even to death (at
the least wise, rent and torn in pieces with sore blows in a fearful manner)
yet that they became never the wiser for all that.

Verse. 6. Even from the sole of the foot unto the head, there is nothing whole
therein, but wounds, and swelling, and sores full of corruption: they have not
been wrapped nor bound up, nor mollified with oil.
THese words also have affinity with the former, wherein he still prosecutes
the very same matter under the same similitude and manner of speech. Those who
refer the first part unto sins, do not sufficiently weigh the remainder of
ye text that follows. Let us grant that the people corrupted with vices are
compared to a sick body: what coherence will there be touching the things
which by and by follow, to wit, that their wounds were not wrapped nor
mollified with oil? It appears therefore that the Prophet speaks of the
afflictions wherewith the people were almost consumed. And he also sets forth
this continual languishing in them, as a testimony of their extreme
hardening. He calls the wound Corrupt, from whence flows a continual
infection, as if a spring (deep in the earth) should continually send forth
new streams of venom. So that by this similitude, he shows that the malady
is incurable, seeing the corrupt water which is in it runs without stay. The
amplification also is not small, when he says, there were no remedies applied
thereunto. For the three similitudes which he co^ioynes together, tend al to
one end, namely, that this people were in so miserable a plight, that they were
without any hope of comfort, without consolation and without remedy. So that
in such kinds of punishments, one might easily discern the extreme severity
of God.

Verse. 7. Your land is wast: your cities are burnt with fire: strangers devour
your land in your presence, and it is desolate like the overthrow of Or,
forr^ine enemies.
strangers.
WAst] Word for word it is, desolation. And thus Isa^ah prosecutes that more
largely, and more clearly, which he had said before figuratively touching the
wounds: To wit, that the land was afflicted with an horrible wast. For I had
rather refer the sentences to the time past: because the Prophet rather
recountes how many calamities have formerly h^ppened, before he denounces the
vengeance of God. For he casts their dotage and benummednes of heart in their
teeth, in that they continued so besotted in their miseries. As the overthrow
of strangers. This is added for amplification sake. For their sense is too
narrow and constrained, who would have the Hebrew word zarim, which signifies
destruction (which word the Prophet also here uses) to be put in the stead of
zerem, which signifies an ouerflowing of waters. True it is that the word may
be applied to enemies: but it is better to take it in his proper signification,
for strangers. For the calamity is then much more grievous when men unknown,
and those that come from a far country do make war in a kingdom; because
they are lightly far more cruel, and do more hurt then the nighbour
enemies. For they race the cities: they burn up houses, buildings, and
villages; destroying all things; and sparing nothing. In a word, they rush in
with barbarous inhumanitie, seeking nothing but to kill, sack, and burn: yea,
they study rather to do hurt, the^ to get their booty. But ye neighbor enemies
because they are able to hold that which they have won, use to leave garrisons
there; and as soon as any revolt is intended, or any trouble moved, they
forthwith send succors: and therefore are not so cruel, neither do they
spoil the country out of which they may fitly reap any commodity. He
therefore describes no ordinary destruction, but rather so bloody and fierce
an one, as exceeded all the rest.

From hence then we may note, that when God has once begun to chastise and
correct, he makes not an end with us by and by. But in striking us with many
wounds, he redoubles the blows, and cease not to visit us still with one
plague after another, if so be we cannot be brought to true repentance. Let
us then eschew and flee such an obstinacy, if we mean to escape the like
punishments: or if we mean this reproach which was justly cast upon the Jews,
should not by as good right light upon us: namely, that albeit we have been
diligently admonished, and have felt the hand of the Lord, yet for all that we
could not be corrected nor amended. What marvel is it then, I pray you, if
we are pressed with so many and so diverse calamities, whereof we can see
neither end or issue? Surely we even fight hand to hand as it were with God and
against all his rods by our rebellion. Is it not needful then that he
should take us in hand; and deal with us, as men do with restie and unruly
lades, who the more they wince and kick, the more they must be pummelled about
the head, and spurred upon the sides? There want not many at this day, I dare
say, who accuse God of cruelty as if he were too outrageous, and that he ought
to carry a more soft and gentle hand over us: But in the mean while they
consider not how horrible our wickednesses be. For if they would look well
into them, truly they should easily perceive an admirable mercy of God, even
in the midst of this his severity, which seems so great in their eyes. And to
the end we may not think the Lord was too rigorous toward this people, let
us consider the vices which he by and by reckons up.

But a question may here be demanded; to wit, why the Prophet should say that
the people were so many ways afflicted, seeing he began to prophecy (as we
said before) under the reign of Vzziah; in whose time the state of the
kingdom of Judah was very quiet, so that howsoever the kingdom of Israel
sustained some loss toward the end of Vzziah his days, yet that
notwithstanding appertained nothing at all to the kingdom of Judah. For which
cause the Jews indeed think this to appertain to the reign of Iotham, and
not to the reign of Vzz^ah. Now howsoever their opinion seems not to agree
very well at the first blush, yet is it not without some probability of
reason, if we shall examine the opinions of others. For we know that they
have not always kept the order of time in gathering together of the
prophesies. And it may be that this Sermon of Isaiah had obtained first place
here for no other cause, but for that it contains a sum of that doctrine
which shall be handled afterward. Others think they escape easily away when
they expound all these things of vices; and not of punishments: but they cannot
so easily avoid that which is spoken of the burning of cities, and wasting of
the land. If any think the Prophet speaks not of the present estate of the
kingdom, but of that which was to come; and that in the person of God, he
denounces the judgments which were at hand, howsoever they then saw them not
before their eyes; I do not greatly gainesay it. Although it be very likely
that the Prophet speaks of things which were known unto him. It is rather a
certain narration then of a thing done, than a prophecy: though in the verse
following I confess he shows what the issue is, which approaches.

Verse. 8. And the daughter of Zion shall remain like a cottage in a vineyard,
like a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, and like a besieged city.
HE alludes even to that custom which is now in use amongst us in France:
namely, to a little cottage which the Vinekeepers prepare when the grapes do
ripen. Also he uses another Similitude which is almost like unto the former;
drawn from the manner of that nation, when the servants watched to keep the
gardens of cucumbers. Afterward in verse. 9. he himself expounds what he
means both by the one and by the other. Now the exposition may be double; to
wit, that all the country should be wasted, and nothing left in safety, but
the city of Jerusalem, which should remain as a cottage: or, that the city
it self should be brought to naught. The Jews follow the first
interpretation, and understand this place of the siege of Senacherib: but I
think it reaches further off; namely, to the destructions which followed
afterward. We may al^o refer it to the neerenes of neighborhood, which
being ruinated and destroyed amongst them, it could not be avoided, but that
the city should feel great loss thereby. But as I take it, the true meaning
of the Prophet is, that the evils whereof he speaks, should come even to the
city it self, so as it being consumed, ruinated, and brought to nothing, and
into derision, should become like a cottage. Now he calls Jerusalem, the
daughter of Zion, by a phrase of speech usual in the Scriptures, which
intitleth some people by the name of daughter, as the daughter of Babylon, and
Tire, for the Babylonians, and Tyrians themselves. Also he rather mentions
Zion, then Jerusalem; because of the dignity of the Temple: and this manner of
speech also is very frequent thorowout the whole Scriptures.

Verse. 9. Except the Lord of hosts had reserved unto us, even a small remnant,
we should have been as Sodom, and should have been as Gomorah.
HEre he concludes that which he had pronounced before touching the scourges of
God: to wit, that there should be such a ruin; or rather, that it is already
present, so as by the beholding of it, it might be fitly resembled to the
destruction of Sodom: were it not that the Lord should pull out a few
remainders as out of the midst of the fire. This verse therefore confirms that
which I said erewhile: where the Prophet having spoken of the calamities which
were already happened, did in brief manner conioyne therewith the event which
should shortly ensue: as if he should have said, Suffer not your selves to be
beguiled with fair words: For look what destruction happened to Sodom and
Gomorah, the same should fall upon you, unless the Lord in having compassion
upon you, should reserve some few. And unto this agrees that which is said in
Jeremiah, It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, etc. Lament. 3.22.

Now from hence we are to note two things: small remnants) may be delivered
from the general destruction of the whole nation. Now if God has punished the
iniquities of the Jews by such horrible chastisements, do we think the like
w^ll not befall unto us if we partake with them in their rebellions? for the
Lord had consecrated this people to himself, and had exempted them from the
common condition of others. And wherefore should he rather spare us if we
continue hardened in our impiety and disloyalty? But which more is, what issue
can we expect in the midst of such an heap and puddle of vices whereinto men
plunge themselves every way thorowout the whole world? Truly even the same that
befell to Sodom and Gomorah: namely, yt we should be brought to nothing, did
not the respect which God has to his free covenant (wherein he has promised
that his Church shall never perish) withhold his vengeance from us. This
threatening also which is very terrible and fearful, appertains to all those
that are obstinate and desperate, whose manners cannot be reformed by any
strokes of God his rods.

Jeremiah; namely, that we ought to attribute it to the only mercy of God that
we are not al utterly consumed and brought to nothing. For if we shall behold
how great the iniquities are which do reign in every place, and amongst all
sorts of men, we ought to admire Gods mercy that we see so much as one man
alive, and that all have not been clean swept away from off the earth. Thus it
pleases the Lord to keep his hand in; to the end he may still continue a
Church in the world. And S. Paul also who is the best expositor of this place
yeeldes the same reason: for alleging it in the Epistle to the Romans, chap.
9.29. he beats down the insolency of the Jews, to the end they should not
brag of that naked title which they bare, as if it had been enough for them
that they were descended from the ancient fathers, in regard of the flesh. For
he admonishes them that God could deal with them as he had done in old time
with their fathers: but that he is still minded for his mercies sake to reserve
a Church to himself: and to what end? even that it should not utterly perish.
For it is for the love and favor which he bears toward it, that the Lord
reserueth some little seed, when in regard of our rebellion he is constrained
to exercise his rigorous judgments. Which sentence ought greatly to comfort us
in our extremest calamities; yea, even then when we shall think the Church as
good as forlorn: that when we see the state of things turned vpside down, so
as to our seeming heaven and earth goes together (as they say) yet that we
even then continue firm and invincible touching our trust in God his mercy
notwithstanding, resolving our selves that God will never cease to have care of
his Church howsoever the world go.

Even a small remnant.] This particle small, may be referred as well to that
which went before as to that which follows. And therefore some translate, We
had been almost as Sodom. Notwithstanding, I had rather refer it to the
former speech: to declare that the number which God reserved from the common
destruction, was very small. But some rather think that this is taken
affirmatively, and was therefore put to express the matter the more lively:
which I reject not; although it may be taken in his true and native sense, as
if it had been said, There shall but a small number of the people remain. Now
we are to note this sentence diligently: for, unless the Church have fair and
large dominions, men are wont to despise her. And from thence it comes that
hypocrites brag so much of their multitudes; and that the weak also stagger,
as being dazzled with their pomp and glory. It therefore appears by this
place, that we must not measure the Church by the hugenes of the multitude,
unless we mean to esteem more of the chafe, then of the wheat; because the
quantity thereof is greater. But it ought to suffice us that although the
number of the faithful be very small, yet that God notwithstanding
acknowledges them for his elect people. And with this also should that
consolation of Christ come into our minds: Fear not little flock, for it is
your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom, Luke 12.31.

Verse. 10. Hear the word of the Lord O princes of Sodom: hearken unto the law
of our God O people of Gomorah.
HE confirms that which he had said before; to wit, that God his vengeance is
not cruelty: why so? Because they had deserved a far greater punishment. And
howsoever there was some difference between them and the Sodomites, in regard
of the punishment; yet the fault was alike: so as if the Lord had not pardoned
them, he might even justly have plagued them with the like judgment. In a
word, he tells them, that if God do spare, it is not to the end they should
conclude with themselves, that their sins were less then those of the
Sodomites; but that they were to attribute it rather unto the mercy of God.
Now there is no great diversity in that he attributes the name of the city of
Sodom to the P^inces, and the name of Gomorah to the people: but it rather
shows their condition to be both alike. But whereas he repeates one thing
twice; this diversity of names has the greater elegancie. As if he shoud say,
The Princes and people differ no more one from another, then Sodom differed
from Gomorah. True it is that he alludes to the diverse degrees of men, when he
attributes two cities to them as it were apart: but in ^egard that Sodom equals
Gomorah in value, we see he binds them up both together as it were in one
fardle. The sum then is; If any man will judge of the Princes and people, he
shall find them agreeing as well together in one, even as Sodom and Gomorah
did. That is to say, there was never a barrel better hearing: but they were as
like, as one egg is to another. For there was no more vprightnes in the
princes, then in the people. The Prophet begins now therefore to unmask the
Jews, and that very justly: for as it is a common thing with all hypocrites to
shroud themselves under

The word of the Lord.] The Prophet takes the word of the Lord and the law, for
one and the same thing. And yet notwithstanding I doubt not but he used this
word law of set purpose, to the end he might tax their sottish opinion: For
whilst they imagined to appease God with sacrifices which they offered without
faith or repentance, they interpreted the law of God after their own
fantasies. By which words then he admonishes them, that in alleging the
authority of Moses, he brings in no new device of his own, neither adds he
any thing to the law; but that in hearing him, they should only hear the will
of God, whereof he faithfully enformeth them. Also that the law of God does in
no sort favor or allow of their dealings in this point: to the end they should
not think to beguile the Lord with a false persuasion of their own
righteousness.

Verse. 11. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the
Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts:
and I desire not the blood of Bullocks, nor of Lambs, nor of Goats.
NOw Isaiah brings in God speaking, who interprets his own meaning himself.
For it is not enough that the Lawgiuer do command only, but that he also
should add a native exposition to the laws, that they be not corrupted. Now
it is not to be doubted, but that the former sharp reprehension was very ill
taken: For what could one have spoken more boldly or roundly against them? They
gloried in the name of Abraham, bragging in the title of his children, and
proudly vaunting themselves thereof. For which cause the Prophet thus arms
himself with the authority of God against them. As if he should say, Know
you, that you have not so much to do with me, as with God himself. Next he
shows what it is that God respects, and what his meaning is in demanding
sacrifices of them: namely, not that he does so much esteem of the
sacrificing of brute beasts; but that they should serve, as outward props and
helps of godliness. And therefore that the Jews greatly deceived themselves,
who put their chiefest holiness in such outward ceremonies. For they thought
they had discharged their duties very well, when they sacrificed and offered
their offerings: and when the Prophets required any thing more of them, then
they complained as if they had been over hardly dealt withal. But the Lord
tells them that he abhors and reiects their offerings. Now it may seem that
this is too strict a course: for were they not the things which God himself
had instituted and commanded? But we must note that as touching the
commandments of God some ought to be obeyed simply, and others for another
end: as for example; The law commands, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
These things are of themselves pleasing ceremonies, Leuit. 19.18
for Romans 14.17.
but for another end. And the like we may say of fasting. For the Kingdom of
God stands not in abstinence from meats and drinks: fasting therefore has
respect to an higher end.

God therefore has not so instituted ceremonies as if he would be appeased
by the work wrought; but that the people should by them exercise themselves
unto godliness: and should thereby be the more stirred and trained up in faith,
and in his pure worship and service. But hypocrites are only forward and
careful in observing these, as if the principal matter of religion consisted
in them: and think themselves the most devout people in the world, whilst they
weary and tire themselves a long time in the observation thereof. And that
they might yet appear the more holy; they ever lightly ad something of their
own, and invent some novelty from day to day: but in the mean time they
wickedly abuse the holy ordinances of God, in that they refer them not to their
right ends. All their ceremonies therefore are nothing else in God his account,
but prophanations of his holy worship and service. For whilst they rest
fettered as it were in the bare and naked outward action only, what difference
is there between their sacrifices, and those of the Gentiles? which we know
are stuffed full of sacrilege, because they are not refer- to a right and
lawful end. This then is the reason why the Lord reiects all such ceremonies
notwithstanding himself had instituted them: to wit, because the people looked
not to the right end and use, for which they were ordained. Herein then stood
the continual conflict which the Prophets had with the people; namely, in
plucking off these vizzards from their faces: and in showing them that the Lord
did not content himself with outward services, neither could be appeased with
such fair shows.

And the faithful servants of the Lord have every where experience of the same
combats even at this day. For men do always measure God by their own ell;
and think to appease him with outward appearances, and will not be brought by
any means to offer up unto him a pure and upright heart. But Jeremiah will
easily dissolve all the difficulty of this place. Fer in the 7. chapter, he
says out of the mouth of the Lord: When I redeemed your fathers out of the
land of Egypt, I did not command them to sacrifice to me: only I commanded
them that they should hear my voice and keep my commandments. Wherein he
shows, that all the observation of the ceremonies did depend upon the word;
and that they are vain and unprofitable, if they be separated from it, even as
if one should divide the soul from the body. Hereunto also belongs the
argument of the fiftieth Psalm: Will I eat the flesh of fat Bulls, or will I
drink the blood of Goats? Offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows unto the
most high. Jeremiah also in another place says: Trust not in lying words
saying, The Temple of the Lord, This is the Temple of the Lord, but rather
amend your ways, etc. Also Micheah: Does the Lord delight in thousan^s of
Rams, or in ten thousands of fat beasts of the valleies? By and by after he
adds: I will show thee O man what is good: and what it is the Lord thy God
requires of thee, to wit, To do judgment, to love mercy, and to humble thy
self to walk with thy God: Mich. 6. By which places it appears, that God
reiects ceremonies, because they were separate from the word, as from their
soul or life. Whereby we may see how great the blindness of men is, who cannot
be persuaded that all the pains they take this way in the service of God is
unprofitable unless the integrity of the heart go before.

And this vice is not only rooted in the common people, but almost in all men;
yea, even in those who in their own opinion think they excel most. From
hence it is at this day that this goodly device of That is to say, a walk
which they esteem good in it self: albeit the he^^t of him which does it be
never fo bad.
the work wrought, connot be pulled out of the minds of many; which the
doctors of the Papists have found out. But it is not man which speaks here,
but God himsefe: who by an immutable decree, declares that men sacrifice unto
him in vain: and that whatsoever they do else, is without fruit, unless
they call upon him by a true faith.

Verse. 12. When ye come to appear before me, who required this of your hands
to tread in my courts?
BEhold here a most excellent refutation of counterfeit worship; when God
affirms they came not before him as he commanded them: pronouncing in
general that it is but lost labor when men offer him that which he requires
not: because he will be no otherwise served then according to his commandment.
Whence is it then that men do so please themselves in such inventions, but
because they understand not that all their serving of God is unprofitable and
odious in his eyes? For otherwise they would by and by think thus with
thems^lues, Surely, God requires obedience as the principal: 1. Sam. 15.22.
neither would they with such ouerweening extol the^r own works; which he
on the other si^e scorns and derides: not only for that he receives no profit
at all thereby; but because he would not have men to attribute that unto him,
which they have rashly invented of their own heads without his commandment:
and also because he cannot endure that men should establish their own
fantasies, in stead of his law. Although to the end he may yet touch them
nearer to the quick, he by and by adds, That it is a service falsely so
called; which he esteems to be but lost labor: namely, that in assembling
themselves in the Temple, they did nothing else but wear the pauements thereof
with their feet: as if he should say, You must needs think that I am much
bound to you, for beating mine ears thus with your feined prayers.

Verse. 13. Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me:
I cannot suffer your new moons nor sabbaths, nor solemn days (it is
iniquity) nor solemn assemblies.
THis is a very profitable admonition to repress ye inordinate appetite of
those who ceased not obstinately to follow their vain and fained services,
that at least being warned of God, they might repent, if at any hand they would
be admonished. But it appears by this place, how obstinate hypocrites are in
their false confidence, being once hardened therein, because they cannot
possibly hear the Lord, although he manifestly warn them that they should
cease to lose their labor as they do. Incense is an abomination] etc. That he
might prick them unto the quick indeed, he passes yet further, and tells
them that such service is not only unprofitable, but that he also detests it,
as abominable unto him: and very justly; for it is an high sacrilege to
profane the service of God; under which they falsely shrouded themselves. For
even as God esteems nothing more dear and precious unto him the^ his glory;
so is nothing less tolerable unto him, then to see it trodden under feet by
any corruption whatsoever: which yet is then done, when every vain thing is
set up in stead of his true worship. Some are deceived in understanding this
place, thinking that the Prophet speaks of the abolishing of the law; for that
is not his meaning; but he rather brings the people of his time to the true
observation of the ceremonies; and shows wherefore, and to what end they were
instituted. The service of God was spiritual even from the beginning of the
world. And whereas there were other exercises diverse from ours in the old
Testament, it was in regard of men, and not of God; for there is no changing
with him; James 1.17.
but he applied himself to the weakness of man. This government then was fit
for the Jews, as an Abce for children. Therefore he shows to what end this
government was established, and what was the true use of ceremonies.

Verse. 14. My soul hates your new moons and your appointed feasts: they are
a burden unto me: I am weary to bear them.
THe Prophet adds nothing different from the former doctrine, but in general
pronou^ceth of al ceremonies, Viz. In the performer; as after appears by M.
Caluins own words.
where there is not spiritual truth joined but only a false pretense
appears, that they are not only things unprofitable, 1. As he performs
them, that is, an hypocrite his actions is unprofitable to himself and impious.
but wicked. From hence we must observe, that we labor but in vain unless we
worship God aright as it is meet, and himself prescribes: For if truth be
it indeed which pleases God in all things, then much more does he look for
it in the worship which is done to his Majesty. Moreover our labor is not
only lost (as has been said heretofore) but the worship of God is hereby
perverted, which is the greatest villainy that can be committed. Now all
superstitions are so many corruptions of the pure worship of God: and therefore
it follows that they are wicked and detestable. Superstition then is to be
esteemed either by the thing it self, or by the affection of the heart from
whence it proceeds. By the thing there has superstition the full swinge. It
may also be in the affection of the heart, when men do use the ceremonies
(which God has allowed and commanded) in outward appearance: who in the mean
while stick fast there; never aiming at the mark, and truth of them. As for
example, the Jews hold the ceremonies ordained by Moses with tooth and nail,
but yet they leave that which is the principal behind them. For they regard a
good conscience nothing at all; a man shall not hear them speak of faith, or
of repentance; they have no knowledge of their spiritual misery: and (which
is worst of all) they separate Christ from their sacrifices, giving no place at
all to the truth. Wherein we clearly see the truth of that which we have
taught heretofore; to wit, that it was a bastardly and painted show which they
made: so as their sacrifices differed in nothing from the sacrifices of the
heathen. We need not wonder then if the Lord call them an abomination. I will
not stand to scan the phrases of speech which the Prophet here uses; they are
diverse: and yet notwithstanding they are not to be lightly passed over. For the
Lord well discernes how great the rage of man is to forge new services, and
therefore he uses amplifications to depresse this vice the more; and again
pronounces, that he hates them. Besides, for as much as men do flatter
themselves and are persuaded that the Lord will make some account of their
dreams and store of devices, he on the contrary says that he abhorres and
detests them.

Verse. 15. And when you shall stretch out your hands I will hide mine eyes from
you: and though you make many prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are
full of blood.
IT came not from any superstition that the people in old time used to stretch
out their hands in prayer: neither came this gesture of any vain or frivolous
lust, as many others have done: But in regard that nature her self thrusts
forth her hands to seek for that which she desires: testifying even by
outward signs that she has her recourse unto God. Therefore in as much as we
cannot fly up unto him, we lift up our selves as it were unto him by this
sign or gesture. True it is that the fathers had no commandment to do it:
notwithstanding they used it as being inspired of God. And by this very sign
are all idolaters convinced even of sottish blindness: for they protest by this
outward gesture that they have their refuge in God, and yet notwithstanding in
effect they withdraw their hearts from him to idols. Also to the end the
superstitious might be the more convinced, the Lord was pleased that this
custom should always continue in use amongst them. The Prophet then condemns
not the lifting up of the hands simply, but their hypocrisy, whereby in
appearance they made show to call upon God, but in their hearts they were far
from him, as in the 29. chapter he does more fully charge them. The Lord
confesses indeed that he is near; but it is to those that call upon him in
truth, Psalm. 145.18. For where hypocrisy reigns, there can be no true
invocation. That therefore which is said in another place is not contrary to
this; namely, when they shall stretch forth their hands unto me, I will hear
them. For the Lord there speaks of that invocation which proceeds of faith.
For faith is the mother of prayer: but if faith be absent, prayer is a mere
mocking of God. Romans 10.14.
This he yet amplifies further when he tells them that he will not hear their
cries, although they should multiply their prayers: As if he should say; Be
it that you never cease praying, yet this your diligence shall profit you
nothing: For hypocrites have this vice also peculiar unto them, that they
imagine the more they babble, ye more holy they are, and that they can the more
easily obtain the thing they ask. But he refels their babbling here, as we see.

For your hands.] Now he begins to declare more plainly why he abhors, yea,
reiects their prayers, as also their sacrifices with disdain; namely, because
they presented themselves before his face with a bravery full of
dissimulation: and in the mean while were cruel, bloody and given to every
kind of iniquity. Now howsoever he by and by adds other sorts of iniquities,
he yet speaks thus notwithstanding in regard that he had mentioned the lifting
up of the hands: and says, that even in them, they bare a sign and mark of
their impieties, so as they need not to marvel why they be so sharply beaten
back. 1. Tim. 2.8.
For otherwise this manner of speech, To lift up pure hands, was not only in
use among the Prophets and Apostles, but also even amongst profane authors,
who were pricked forward by the very instinct of nature, to exercise themselves
in reproouing the sottishnes of me^: or rather it may be the Lord plucked this
confession or ceremony from them, to the end that at the leas^wise there might
always be some appearance of true religion amongst the^.

Notwithstanding the Prophet meant not to charge the Jews to be such thieves
or murderers as rob and kill by the high ways side: but he strikes at their
privy deceits and opressions whereby they got other men's goods into their own
hands. For God judges otherwise then man does: man espieth not the privy
iuglings and wily practices of the wicked by which they are accustomed
smoothly and cunningly to beguile the simple ones; or if so be they chance to
come to light, they are extenuated, and not examined according to the weights
of the Sanctuary: But God pulling out these gallants by the poll into light,
who were wont to shroud their robberies under honest titles, pronounces before
all men that they are murderers. For if thou kill a man, be it after what
manner thou will, then art thou a murderer, whether thou cuttest his throat,
or take away his maintenance, and that which is convenient for him. He
speaks not of them then which were openly wicked, being detested of all for
their dishonest dealing: but of such as carried two faces under one hood;
professing themselves good men in outward show, and kept their credit with the
world. And this is a circumstance well worthy our observation. For thus must
we proceed at this day against those lanke and empty fellows who will
cloak their villainies under vizzards of honesty, and in the mean while, what
by deceit, violence, or some such other injury, they oppress the poor and
needy. Although then they impudently cry out that we do them wrong to
compare them to thieves and murderers, yet must they be reprehended with such
severity, as the Prophet used here to their fellows. For when we speak in
the name of God, we must not judge according to the reason and opinion of men:
but must with all boldness pronounce that which the Lord his judgment approves.

Verse. 16. Wash you, make you clean: take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes: cease to do evil.
NOw he exhortes the Jews to repentance, and shows the true way to come
thereto, if so be they meant yt their services should be allowed of God. Whence
we gather, that nothing can please God, unless it come from a pure
conscience. For God is not like a man, that he should esteem our works by the
outside of them. Men do many times praise the work which a wicked man has
done, but in God his sight (who chiefly respects the heart) the polluted
conscience defiles all the rest of the virtues. And that is it which the
Prophet Haggie teaches, setting an example of the ancient ceremony before
them: Hag. 1.14.15
namely, that whatsoever a polluted man had touched was unclean: whence he
concludes, that no clean thing can proceed from the wicked. Our Prophet has
already affirmed, that it is in vain to offer sacrifices unto God, in vain
to make vows, in vain to call upon him, if the integrity of the heart do not
sanctify the outward service. Wherefore to the end the Jews should not
labor any longer for nothing, he requires this cleannes: and begins with a
general reformation, to the end they should not think they had bleared the
eyes of God by doing their duties in some one or two things only. And thus must
they be handled who have estranged themselves from God. We must not touch a
disease or two of a sick infected body: but if care be had to heal it truly
and soundly, we must de forced to call them back, and to begin all anew: yea
the contagion of the disease must be purged wholly from within; that so they
may begin to please God, whereas before they were detestable and abominable in
his sight. And no doubt also by this Similitude of washing, he exhortes them
to purge themselves from their inward uncleannesses. But unto this he will by
and by ad outward works.

Now in that he commands them to wash themselves, it is not because men come to
repentance by their own proper moving, and free will; but he shows that no
other remedy will serve the turn, unless they appear pure and clean before
God. Now we know that the Spirit of God is wont to attribute that to men, which
himself works in them, who therefore is called clean water, Ezech. 36.25.
because repentance is a work proceeding from him.

Take away.] Now the Prophet descends to the fruits of repentance. For he not
only declares in plain terms that they ought to be cleansed and washed; but
he commands them to show a testimony of their change in their whole life, and
in all their actions. Notwithstanding he confirms the former sentence;
namely, that the filthiness of the people is before the Lord, which defiling and
stayning all their works takes away all the goodness which might seem to be in
them. He makes express mention of the eyes of God, to the end that whilst he
beholds them, they should not think to deprive him of seeing, and so make him
a companion with them of their blindness. Case from evil. He goes on still to
blame their life. Some expound this place, as if by evil doing, the Prophet
should understand evil living: But it ought properly to be understood of those
misdoings whereby a man's neighbor is offended. Seeing in the next verse
following, it is said, Learn to do well: where the clause, To your neighbor,
should be supplied. For he speaks of the injuries, and good turns which our
neighbor receives of us. Now because repentance has his seat in the heart,
therefore he sets it forth by these kinds, whereby men may come some what near
to the knowledge of it. For every man would be taken for a good man: but the
outward works show what every man is within. He brings them then to external
works, that by them they should show forth the truth of their repentance. Now
he comprehends the fruits of repentance under two members, to wit, a ceasing
to do evil; and a learning to do well. For first we must abstain from
doing all wrong: yet so, as we deal not like those prodigal ones who would
be esteemed liberal, when they take from one to give to another: neither yet
like those pinchpennies who think they have quit themselves well when they are
careful in keeping their own, doing others no harm; and yet in the mean
while will do good to none at all. His meaning is then, to comprehend both the
one and the other: for the observation of the second table consists in these
two points.

Verse. 17. Learn to do well: seek judgment, relieve the oppressed Or, him
who is trampled underfoot.
: judge the fatherless, and defend the widows.
EVen a^ immediately before, where he commanded them to abstain from evil, he
therein comprehended a continual exercise thereof: as if he should say,
Hitherto your whole life has been nothing but a committing of evil: now on
the otherside he teaches them to be meek and courteous; and draws them to
learn what it is: even as if he had had to do with new apprentises, and raw
scholars. And first he commands them to seek judgment: others translate,
Examine your selves; which I approve not. For by the word seek, he signifies
a further thing, namely, an actual study, as they call it. Also by the word
judgment he comprehends whatsoever is good and right, as if he should say,
Study to be upright.

Relieve the oppressed.] The Prophet after his accustomed manner comes to
particulars, after he has spoken of things in general: and howsoever he had
already exhorted them to weldoing and equity in special manner; yet now
willing to press them more nearly, he reckons up some particular kinds
thereof in plain words, by which he comes to a more ample and full
declaration of the general. For otherwise men would always go for just and
upright; and hardly should you stir or move them with general doctrine. But
when one comes once to particulars, even as if one should bring them out by the
polles into open view, then they are constrained to submit themselves; or at
the least to become more tractable: whereof we have daily experience.

Judge.] The Prophet makes choice here of two particulars, which do best of all
lay open and discover the wickedness of men. For they very seldom take the
causes of the widow and fatherless in hand, because they look not for the
reward. And hence it is then that poor creatures are exposed to infinite sorts
of injuries; namely, because no man is hasty to succor them: for who will
serve in the place of justice for nothing? nay are there not many who give
themselves to poll and pill the poor and needy? And does not this manifestly
show, how few make conscience of executing judgment? Indeed it is no wonder if
the rich and mighty have friends to maintain and uphold their causes, seeing
they are drawn and allured thereunto, not of conscience, but for hope of
gain. But the Lord here shows that he takes care for the fatherless and
widows; and that he will judge and revenge their cause, if any have offered
them violence. And as much he says of all other distressed, who being held
down by violence and tyrannical cruelty, do sigh and groan under the
oppression of them who are more mighty then they.

This ought to minister a sovereign consolation to all the children of God:
whose condition it is to possess their souls by patience. For how proudly
soever the wicked advance themselves, yet shall not that hinder the faithful
to triumph in their anguishes. Let this sentence therefore be always engraven
upon their hearts, The Lord will succor us: and, Although men despise us, yet
will he care for us: He will help the helpless, and will defend their cause.

Verse. 18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your
sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white at snow: though they were red
as skarlet, they shall be as woll.
COme now.] The Expositors have been wont to translate, I pray you, or Then:
but me thinks the assurance of a good cause is here noted; so as the Hebrew
particle now, serves for an exhortation. For he shows that the Jews should
be able to make no replies, and that they would remain stark dumb; although
long time should be given them to justify themselves. And surely so must
hypocrites be dealt withal: for they are skillful to plead boldly with God,
and will be seeking out starting holes. Therefore he says if they be minded
to plead, he is as ready as they.

lovingly toward his brethren. And this is the cause why Jesus Christ says,
that Mercy, Judgment, and Truth are the principal parts of the law, (when he
reprocheth the Pharisees for laying aside the care of true justice, in that
they pleased themselves only in petty things, tithing Mint, Anis, and Cumin,
Mat. 23.23. By faith in that place he understands fidelity, which we commonly
call loyalty: and by Judgment all vprightnes when we render to our neighbor
that which to him appertains: not suffering him to be wronged by others, but
helping him as far as we are able. But if these be the principal parts of
the law, mercy is a declaration and proof of true piety. Moreover because it
is a true demonstration of love, it pleases God of it self: but sacrifices,
please him for another end. Now it appears sufficiently, as I think, why
Isaiah rather mentions here the doing of good to our neighbors, then faith,
or calling upon God his name: as also why the Prophets do speak so diversely
when they mean to bring hypocrites back to the true service of God, and to
show it forth by the outward fruits.

Though your sinnes] etc. This is as much as if he should have said, I accuse
not innocent persons, neither take I pleasure to plead thus with you; but
know, that the cause is great that makes me thus urge and accuse you. For
hypocrites are wont to quarrel with God, as though he dealt too sharply with
them, or as though he were unappeasable. Yea in their obstinacy they find out
this excuse, That it is in vain for them to endeavor to return into favor
with God. And if all excuses fail them, yet notwithstanding they have this
shift, That they ought not to be pressed so near: and that men must be borne
withal in some things; yea even the best of all. Therefore the Prophet preuents
them, and brings in the Lord speaking thus; For my part if need require, I
refuse not to plead with you; for thereby it shall appear that your
obstinacy is the cause why we are not at unity together: bring with you
therefore cleannes of heart, and then all our strife shall cease. I would not
stand to plead with you, if you would offer me the sacrifices of an upright
heart. Now from hence we may gather a wonderful consolation, namely, that God
pleades not with us, as if he meant to pursue us with rigor. For if we would
earnestly convert and turn to him, he would by and by receive us into favor
and blot out the remembrance of all our offenses, so as he would not call one
of them into account. For he is not like men, of whom one cannot obtain pardon
for the least offense, that shall be committed against them. Nay, on the
contrary, he is ready to cleanse and pardon us: so far off is it that we
have any cause to complain of his over great rigorousnes. For he conte^ts
himself with the cleannes of the heart; and if there be any sin that breaks
out, besides our purpose, he forgiues it, by pardoning such as have provoked
him.

Verse. 19. If ye will consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the
land.
ISaiah still pleades the cause of God against the people: and in brief
affirms, that all the calamities which the people sustained ought to be
imputed to their own default: and that they were to blame themselves for not
recovering a more happy and comfortable estate. Why so? Because God for his
part is always ready to pardon their sins, if they harden not their own
hearts against him. But for as much as it seems, that the Prophet places
felicity here, in the will and power of man, if ye will consent, if so be it
were not in their power. I answer,

On the contrary, he adds a terrible and grievous threatening, to wit, that
the vengeance of God is ready to sease upon them, to the end they might feel
that the contemners of God shall not remain unpunished. We must also note that
there is but one only rule of well living; that is, the obedience which we
yield unto God, and to his word. Also in these words, there is a tra^sported
sentence by a figure which we call Hypallage, because the speech should be
resolved thus, If you be of a ready mind, and have full consent of will to
obey; or else thus, and yet in the same sense: If ye hearken and obey me, and
my word. Seeing then that God places the felicity of men in obedience, it
follows that our life is then well ordered when we hear God speak^ng, and
that we obey him in all things. Now we may see how great the wickedness of men
is when they vouchsafe not to lend their ear to God, but reject the felicity
which he offers and prepares for them. Truly their froward affections
ought to be timed, to the end that whilst these poor wretches draw the wrath
of God upon their own heads, they might not wittingly and willingly cast
themselves headlong upon the edge of the sword. We must note also, that in the
verse followin,g which is the conclusion, he threatens them with extreme
ruin, if so be they still continue to rebel obstinately against God.

The good things of the earth.] He means the fruits which the earth brings
forth for the necessity of our life. For the earth seems to be somewhat
unkind when it brings not forth her fruits, but keeps them as it were in her
bosom. Although I make no question but he alludes to the promises of the law,
where God promises that he will bless the ground of such as walk in his
commandments, that they may have abundance of all good things. And yet he
offers not the commodities of this life unto us to the end he would stay us
in an earthly felicity, which hypocrites indeed only gape after, wholly
employing all their wits thereabouts: but that by the contemplation thereof, we
should lift up our minds to the heavenly and spiritual felicity: as also that
by the taste of his so great goodness he might accustom us to relish the
estate of eternal happiness. Now the ancient people were inured rather to be
called by such shadows and resemblances to the heavenly inheritance, namely;
by the taste of earthly benefits. And this difference is well to be noted, that
we may apply this doctrine to our use according to that degree whereunto God
has been pleased to exalt us. Now the Prophet would teach us that true
felicity, with the complements thereof, consists in the obedience of God: also,
that the wicked, in rebelling against him, do draw upon themselves all manner
of calamities: and that we therefore ought to impute all the evils which we
endure, to our sins and rebellions, as to the proper cause thereof.

Verse. 20. But if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the
sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
TThe wicked always think the punishments which they suffer are far greater
then their fault, although God deal mercifully and favorably with them. And
howsoever they dare not wholly justify themselves; yet notwithstanding they
cease not (as we have said heretofore) to accuse him of too great severity.
But the Prophet shows how there shall be no end of their plagues which they
often suffer, till they be wholly consumed: as also that there are yet more
heavy chastisements prepared for them of God, that they should not imagine to
escape with those light fillips wherewith they were hitherto smitten. The
Papists wrest this place to establish their free will. And thus they reason: If
men be happy when they will obey God, then it follows that it is in their
own power to will. Behold a childish argument. For the Lord by the mouth of
his Prophet disputes not what or how great our power of will is to good or
evil: but admonishes, that it is by our own default that we enjoy not the
abundance of all good things: and further that the necessities wherewith we
be pinched, are the just rewards of our disobedience and rebellion. Now there
is great ods betwixt demanding, whether a man be able to make his will which
is evil, good; and, whether by his wicked will (which is his own by nature)
he draws upon himself all the plagues which he endures. These subtle and
crafty doctors therefore do unjustly and falselie ground their doctrine of free
choice of good and evil upon this place.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.] Because threatenings ordinarily do
not much move such as are carried away with their inordinate desires and lusts,
the Prophet to the end he might awaken them from out of their so great
drousines, admonishes them that this sentence proceeds not from the mouth of a
mortal man, but that it is come out of the mouth of the eternal God, who is
not mutable as men are, but is always as good as his word. He sets the
authority of God before them then to fear and terrify them; to the end that
such among them as were fallen into a dead sleep in their vices, might
earnestly give themselves to hearken to his threatenings.

Verse. 21. How is the faithful city become an harlot! It was full of
judgment and justice lodged therein, but now they are murderers.
TO the end the reprehension might be the more forcible, and that their
wickedness might be ye more detestable, in that this people were thus revolted
from God and from all integrity and vprightnes, he cries out as if he saw some
strange and unwonted thing. And surely it was an horrible change, that the
people whom the Lord had chosen and set apart to be a royal priesthood to
himself, should thus fall from so sovereign piety and godliness, into the
gulf and sincke of all sin and wickedness. But he speaks chiefly of the
city of Jerusalem, which was the royal seat of the Sanctuary of God: he
complains that she which heretofore was a faithful guardian of justice, is now
become a den of thieves: and that of an holy and chaste virgin, she is become
an harlot. To the end therefore he might make the bastard Jews (who were
far from the integrity of the holy Patriarks) the more ashamed, he takes
unto himself the person of a man astonished, who wondreth and reasons with
himself how such a thing could come to pass. Also in this word faithful, he
alludes, as I think, to the faith in marriage which the wife ought to keep to
her husband. I grant that the signification of the word reaches further: but
waying the circumstance narrowly, I think it not amiss to take the word
faithful, for chaste. For a little after he opposes the contrary member;
calling her harlot. So as being in times past a loyal wife keeping faith to
her husband, she is now become an harlot past shame, and blusheth not at her
villainy. Now it is an usual thing in the Scriptures to call the Church of God
by the name of his wife: which degree of honor Jerusalem kept whilst she
retained her spiritual shamefastnes and perseuered in the lawful and pure
worship of God: but as soon as she gave over that, then she became an harlot.

Now it is not to be doubted but this astonishment of the Prophet was joined
with great sorrow. For it ought to make our hair to stand an end, to see men
revolt and slide back from God; and forsake the faith and allegiance which
once they promised him. Neither can it be but men of any good heart, will be
deeply touched with extreme sorrow at ye beholding of such a woeful spectacle.
We read, Luke 15.10. how the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and
therefore they are much grieved at the perdition of any one of them. But how
much more heavy and sorrowful are they when they behold the ruin and
destruction of a whole city and Church?

Now this admiration carries with it a complaint: as if the Prophet should have
said to Jerusalem; From what an excellent and flourishing estate art thou
fallen? into what misery have thou plunged thy self? What shame and dishonor
have thou laid thy self open unto? For in making mention of her former estate,
in which she had flourished and had been honorably accounted of, he thereby
prouokes her to be so much the more moved; so as she who in times past had
been an honest mother of a family, should have much more care of her honor and
reputation, then such a one as has passed her whole life in all kind of wicked
and leude behavior.

She was full of Iudegment.] He shows what the fruits of this loyalty was in
times past. We may take judgment for vprightnes only, or, if any will, he may
take Justice for giving to every one that which to him belongs: and Judgment
for taking the cause of the innocent in hand; and revenging the poor and
needy: For so the Scripture indeed uses them, when these two words are
joined together. But because they are not wholly joined together in this place,
I take judgment simply for vprightnes; as being one, and the same thing twice
spoken, to manifest it the more clearly.

But now they are murtherers] Here he shows how Jerusalem is become an
harlot. For whereas justice and equity were in times past highly in estimation
in her eyes: now on the contrary she is full of murders. Now he means not
murderers and thieves only, as has been said: but those who under color of
justice drew other men's goods to themselves by deceit, and violence: and lastly
those who walked not plainly and simply with their neighbors, in what
estimation soever they were: as sometimes, nay very often it falls out, that
the most wicked are the most praised. Now from this estate whereunto Jerusalem
was come, let us consider after what manner Satan for the most part exercises
his tyranny over the Church of God, even as if the bridle were laid in his
neck. For if ever there were a Church, it was in Jerusalem; and yet
notwithstanding Isaiah says, that it was become a den of thieves, or as a
cave wherein men were devoured and swallowed up. But if Satan had his swinge so
there; let us not marvel if the case be now alike with us; but let us rather
give order that we be not corrupted by so wicked examples.

Verse. 22. Thy silver is become dross: thy wine is mixed with water.
THe Prophet speaks by a figure: and under two similitudes, shows here, how
that although things were not wholly ouerturned in appearance, yet that their
estate notwithstanding was changed and corrupted in such wise, as it was far
from that which it was wont to be. For he says, that dross shined in stead of
Silver: and that there was nothing in their wine but color, without any
savor: as if he should have said, Howsoever thou make a fair show of
goodness, yet there is nothing that is pure to be found in thee. Thy wine which
was wont to be of it self, is now mixed; and howsoever it deceiues them that
look upon it, yet by the taste one may know it is corrupted. Now all this is
to none other end, but that the Jews, having once purged themselves from all
dissimulation, should begin to confess their sins, and not to please
themselves any longer in them, as hypocrites are wont to do. To which purpose
these Similitudes which he here uses, are very apt and fitting: for the dross
of silver has some resemblance with silver; also the water that is mixed with
the wine, has some show of the color of the wine it self: and yet
notwithstanding they are far off from the purity of the things, which they
resemble. So the hypocrites paint themselves with the color of false silver,
although indeed they deserve no more commendations then dross: yea they are
more detestable therein, then if they were openly wicked. Yet notwithstanding,
they oppose themselves against God and men, and no less disloyally then
wickedlie paint over themselves with vanity and vain shows to cover their
malice withal.

Verse. 23. Thy Princes are rebellions and companions of thieves: every one
loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherles,
neither does (...) does the widows cause come before them.
THere is an allusion and meeting together of words in this place, which has
a very good grace; as if he should say, Thy Princes are pincers. Neither
speaks he so of the princes as if the people were holy and blameless, but he
touches the welspring of the mischief: for even as no evil is more hurtful,
then that which comes from the head, and disperseth it self into all the
members; so also is there nothing more pernicious in a commonwealth, then a
corrupt and wicked Prince, who spreads abroad his corruptions over all the
body, as well by example, as by giving liberty thereunto: Prou. 29.12. From
whence also came the proverb, Such a master such a man. It is all one then as
if the Prophet should have said, that it was no particular vice that reigned
among the common people, but that the Princes, and great Lords had let loose
the raines to al wickedness. Also there is a close amplificatio^ in the word
Princes; because it is a thing much to be lamented, that the evil should come
from thence, where remedy should be sought. He ioynes one particular, which
^s, that they are companions of thieves: by which words he signifies, that they
were so far off from endeavoring themselves to repress theeueries and wrongs,
that on the contrary, they drew gain and profit from thence: and he calls
them thieves justly, who in taking part of the pray, gave license to others to
steal. Neither can it be avoided when a Judge suffers himself to be
corrupted by bribes, that disorders should not reign: for it is all one, as if
he himself should consent with thieves.

Every one loves gifts.] He also shows the cause wherefore the Princes had
society with the thieves, and by a wicked conspiracy had coupled themselves
with them, to foster and maintain all injustice: to wit, covetousness. For
justice is gone when Judges are given to the love of money: for if accepting of
persons be such a corruption in judgment, that where it reigns, equity has
no place at all; truly, whosoever he be that is possessed with covetousness,
such a one has more respect to the person then to the cause. And therefore he
cannot see the right: but will practice that which one says, to wit, he will
make laws, and unmake them again.

By this we are advertised, what a virtue it is in a Magistrate to know how to
contemn gifts: for if he cannot curb his desires, his hands and eyes, he will
never judge justly. It is therefore but a tale when some say, they can keep a
good conscience, though they receive rewards, seeing that which the Lord says,
remains ever true; namely, that gifts do blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the just: Exodus 23.1.
Deuteronomy. 16.29. There is no man then so perfect, nor so wise and learned, whose
eyes and understanding may not be blinded with gifts. Whence it is that he
justly charge ye Judges to be companions with thieves, because being carried
away with a blind desire of money, there was no law neither of God nor of man
which they perverted not, and that there remained amongst them no respect
either of shame or equity.

We must also note, that for the conviction of hypocrites, the Prophet sets
their works, which were notorious, before them, which were also apparent to
all the world: because otherwise they would never be brought under. And yet no
doubt but there were many at that time which winced when they were thus termed
by ye name of thieves: as also at this day, many cry out impudently, and
obstinately that they are not thieves for taking those bribes and gifts which
are offered them, and that it will hinder them nothing at all from judging
justly. Now because such answers are frivolous, the Prophet having discovered
their wickedness, and contenting himself thus to have reproved them, he
pleades no more with them. And verily nature it self teaches us, that it is
vnp^ssible to give right judgment, when Judges are so greedy of recompense
and reward: for it cannot be but that thereby they must needs set both their
faithfulness and estimation to sale.

They judge not the fatherless.] Even as the Lord does specially recommend
unto us the causes of the widows and of the fatherless, because they are
destitute of men's succor and help; so also it is no marvel if he be
offended when he sees the Judges neglect them, in stead of being mouth, eyes,
ears and hands for them. For when no man puts forth himself to succor such
as are destitute of counsel, forecast, and means, they must of necessity be
laid open to injuries, and all manner of violences, without hope of redress.
Now when no man takes their cause to heart, it is a sign that covetousness and
briberie have the chiefest sway there, and not equity.

Verse. 24. Therefore says the Lord the God of hosts, the mighty one of
Israel, ah, I will Or, comfort me, etc.
ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me on mine enemies.
THe word Adon, which is put in the first place, signifies properly Lord, and
is to be referred to the word that is opposite, to wit, Servant. The name
Jehovah, by which the eternal essence and Majesty of God is expressed, is
added consequently. After then that the Prophet Isaiah had recited some
particular sins by the which he made it manifest to every one, that all
things were corrupted amongst this people, minding now to use some threatenings,
and to set God his judgment before them; he not only adornes the Lord with
the office, and power of a Judge, but also he admonishes them, that the
children of Abraham are a peculiar people unto him; and in this sense, the
mighty one of Israel, is added: although there may be here a privy and close
kind of deriding, wherewith he galleth the Jews; as if he should say, that
they did foolishly brag of the name of God, seeing they are such wretched and
wicked servants: and that they trust in his strength in vain: which strength
he is forthwith ready to display against them. Having thus then begun to
speak, he adds, Ah, I will comfort me. By which words he means that God will
not be appeased till first he has had his fill in chastising of them. He
takes the word comfort, after the manner of men. For even as wrath is nothing
else but a desire of revenge: so revenge it self also is a kind of
contentment: for when any is revenged, he is glad, and satisfied. Thus the Lord
says that he will satisfy himself in chastising his enemies, as if it were
a kind of recompense.

It is true that this place is diversely expounded, and I mean not to trouble
my self so far as to examine all interpretations, neither will I stand to
refute those which suit not with the text: it suffices for this time, that we
have the true sense of the Prophet. He speaks not here of the Chaldeans, or
Assiryans, as many think; but of the Jews; against whom he proclaims open
war in the name of God, whose herald he is: which threatening was very harsh
and unpleasant unto their ears, in regard they thought themselves so linked to
God, that he would be an enemy to their enemies. But God contrariwise shows
that he is become their enemy, because they have provoked him by their
naughtines. And after this manner must we awaken the hypocrites, who continually
fighting against God, notwithstanding blush not still to claim his protection
for their safeguard. Therefore let us not marvel, if the Prophet does sharply
term them the enemies of God, who having broken the covenant, were thus
combined together to make war against him.

And yet notwithstanding, to the end he may show that God is as it were
constrained and enforced to chastise his people, he threatens them, as it were,
with a kind of inward sorrowing. For as nothing is more agreeable to his
nature, then to do good: even so as often as his anger is stirred up against us,
and that he handles us severely, it is certain that our own frowardnes has
constrained him so to do, Note.
because we will not suffer him to bestow his benefits upon us; but especially
he is inclined to deal thus lovingly with his own children: and albeit he
sees that his loving kindness and gentleness can nothing prevail with them, yet
is it in sorrow of heart that he strikes them. But paraduenture some had rather
expound the particle Hoi, as if God should cry out as one being enflamed with
wrath. For mine own part I take it, that in this place there is a voice of
grief and sorrow: because the Lord in thinking often upon his covenant, would
willingly pardon his chosen people, were it not yt by their own obstinacy
they did altogether reject it. In the second member, and avenge me of mine
enemies, there is a figure very usual with the Hebrews, who repeat in one
and the same verse many times one selfsame thing: whence we also gather, that
this sentence has this drift, namely, that God could not quite himself,
until he were revenged upon this traitorous and disloyal people.

Verse. 25. Then I will turn mine hand upon thee, and burn out thy dross, till
it be pure, and take away al thy tin.
THis is a moderation of the former threatening. For howsoever he pursues that
which he has begun to speak of touching his severity, notwithstanding he
adds therwithall, that the Church shall remain safe still in the midst of all
calamities, wherewith the people should be smitten: nevertheless his
principal drift is to comfort the faithful, to the end they should not think
the Church should be brought to ruin, although God was constrained to deal
more sharply with it then he has been wont to do. For the holy Ghost
always prouides in the ministry of the Prophets for the upholding of the
faith of Gods children (who continually tremble at his words) that they should
not be discouraged, being humbled with fears and threatenings; because so much
the more as the wicked ouerflow the banks, and scoff at all threatenings, so
much the more do they which are touched with the true fear of God, tremble
thereat.

Moreover, the turning of the hand of God, generally signifies the witness of
his presence: as if he should say, I will lift up mine hand: which he is wont
to do after two sorts, either The turning of his hand, ought to be referred
here to the restoration of the Church. For although he pronounces in general
that they are all his enemies: yet now he moderates and restraines this speech,
in calling Jerusalem or Zion by his own name.

When he adds, I will burn out thy dross; although he notes the fruit of the
correction, to the end it should not be grievous and burdensome to the
faithful beyond measure: notwithstanding, we gather from thence that the
restoration of the Church, Gods outward corrections profit us nothing at all
unless he teach us inwardly by his holy spirit.
is a special work of God. He evermore lifts up his hands to the end he may
punish sin and bring those that err into the right way: but yet his rods
should avail little or nothing, if he himself did not make them profitable,
by touching their hearts inwardly. And because he here makes mention of a
special favor which he communicates to his chosen: from thence it follows
that repentance is a true and peculiar work of the holy Ghost: because
otherwise the sinner would harden himself more and more under the blows,
rather then profit thereby any thing at all. Further we are not to understand
this clean purging, in such wise, yt there should remain no dross, as if God
would wholly purge his Church in this world from all filthiness: but this manner
of speech is rather to be referred to the common fashion of men's actions, as if
he should say, The estate of the Church, shall be such, that the beauty
thereof shall shine like silver. The true purity then is signified by these
words, because the Jews had too much pleased themselves in their filthiness
before. Now this similitude is very fit, for by it the Prophet shows, that
although the Church of God was then so stuffed with multitudes of corruptions:
yet notwithstanding there should remain a remnant which should recover their
brightness, after that the dross and corruption should be consumed. And thus he
now ioynes both members together, because having spoken in ver. 22. of their
offenses, he said, that their silver was become dross.

Verse. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors
as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called a city of righteousness,
and a faithful city.
NOw he speaks plainly without any figure. And because he had said that the
spring and beginning of all evils was in the princes; thus he teaches, that
their offices and places shall be purged by the Lord, when he begins to restore
the perfect health and welfarre of the Church again unto her. And from thence
it is also that justice in the political government comes; to wit, when the
governors that rule are virtuous, and fearing God: because all thing go to
hauock, when those which govern, are wicked. It is plain enough, that by
Judges and Counselors he means all Magistrates of what sort soever. In that
he promises they shall be such as they were at the beginning, he puts them
in mind of the singular benefit of God, whereof they had been deprived. God by
his direction had exalted the throne of David, and commanded that in this
government there should shine an Image of his fatherly love. Now although they
had corrupted the same by wicked tyranny; yet notwithstanding, they ceased not
to make their bragges of false titles: for they boasted much of the kingdom of
David, even as the Papists glory at this day under a false pretense of the
Church. Therefore the people are justly admonished from what an happy estate
they were fallen by their own default, that so they should not be displeased
to have their multitudes of me^ diminished, but might rather be moved to
recover again the good order which God had ordained.

Afterward thou shall be called.] He extends the fruit of this reformation,
whereof he has spoken, to the whole body. For the Prophet having said that
Jerusalem was a faithful City, and full of judgment before she revolted from
God; now he says, that after she shall be chastised, these virtues here spoken
of shall be seen to shine in her. The sum also of true repentance is set
forth in this place: for by Justice, is understood integrity, wherein every
man obtaines of another that which to him belongs, and that one man lives
with another without oppression. The word faithful extends it self further:
because we call that a faithful City, not only where equity and mutual
Justice rules among men, but also where God is purely served. And thus under
this word, the purity and chastity of the understanding is comprehended. Yet
we must note that Justice descends from this faithfulness, because that when we
carry our selves uprightly one toward another; there Justice will easily
bear the sway. And surely by examining the whole a little more narrowly; it
seems the Prophet takes not the word fidelity in so ample a signification as
heretofore. Also that he so ioynes these two virtues together, as if they
tended both to one end: so as truth should be the first in order as being the
cause; then that Justice should be the effect of it.

Moreover Isaiah not only promises that she shall be just and faithful, but
also that by these badges and marks she shall become excellent and renoumed:
thereby further signifying, that her righteousness shall be such that the
knowledge and renoune thereof shall be spread abroad every where. We know also
that hypocrites obtain great and honorable titles: but because Isaiah brings in
the Lord speaking, he holds it as a sure conclusion that the city shall be
just according as he has foretold. In the mean while, as I have said, he
sets before us the fruit of a true conversion, as if he should say; When
Jerusalem shall be once brought to true godliness, then others shall see the
fruits of her renouation also.

Verse. 27. Zion shall be redeemed in judgment, and they that return in her,
in justice.
HE confirms the same doctrine: and because the restitution of the Church was
a thing hard to be believed, he shows that it hangs not upon the will of
men, but that it is grounded upon the Judgment and Justice of God: as if he
should say, God will by no means endure that the Church should wholly be
destroyed, because he is just. The meaning of the Prophet then is, to withdraw
the minds of the faithful, from all earthly cogitations, to the end, that when
the hope of the salvation of the Church is in question, they should depend upon
God, and not be discouraged, although in stead of help and succor they should
see lets and hindrances on all sides. For those that refer these words of
Judgment and Justice to men, are deceived; as if Isaiah should speak now of
the well ordered estate of a city: and therefore that sense which I have given
is according to the true meaning of the Prophet, to wit, that although no
succor appear unto them from men, yet that the justice of the Lord
notwithstanding is more then sufficient to redeem his Church. And truly
whilst we look into our own strength, what hope of help can we conceive?
Nay, how many rocks do there by and by rather appear, to dash our faith all
to pieces? It is in God only then that we shall find a perpetual firmenes of
trust. In the second member, and they that return, the means of the redemption
is expressed, to wit, that those which were banished and scattered far off,
shall be gathered together again.

Verse. 28. And the destruction of the transgressers, and of the sinners shall
be together, and they that forsake the Lord, shall be consumed.
TO the end hypocrites should not think that any fruit of these promises did
appertain unto them, and lest they should boast in vain, he threatens that
they shall perish, although God redeem his Church. For hypocrites are always
mingled amongst the faithful: and which more is, they thrust themselves into
the chiefest places, valuing the Church according to the outward form and show
thereof, audaciously drawing whatsoever God has promised, unto themselves. But
the Prophet pluckes this trust (if it may be so called) from them, because it
proceeds from nothing else but pride of heart, and a vain persuasion. Here
therefore is diligently to be considered, with what wisdom and discretion the
faithful Teachers have need to be endued withal, for the comfort of the
good, that they may refresh their minds with some consolation; and preserve
them from fainting, and from being discouraged, whilst they terrify the wicked
with the judgments of God. On the contrary also the faithful being stayed by
the promise of God, and that the wicked seek to wrest it to themselves, and
lift up their crests with a vain confidence, we must then keep this order and
mean, that we give the wicked no occasion to become proud and insolent: as
also that the faithful be no whit out of heart, nor discouraged: as Isaiah
does here in this place. For having spoken of the redemption of the Church, he
threatens the obstinate and wicked, and denounces their ruin, to the end they
might not think, these benefits of God did any thing at all belong unto them.
Now although he judges ye wicked to perdition, yet by this comparison he
amplifies the grace of God toward the faithful: the which should then be the
better perceived, when God should heal those that were his, whilst the wicked
in the mean while should perish, as it is said in the 91. Psalm, verse. 7.
Again, he also moderates the sorrow which might disquiet the hearts of the
faithful, for the wast of the Church; for he admonishes them that the whole
body could not otherwise be healed unless the corruption which was in it,
were cut off.

Verse. 29. Or, to wit.
For they shall be confounded for the Oaks which ye have desired, and ye
shall be ashamed of the gardens that ye have chosen.
THe particle, Ci, is put in the Hebrew, which shows the cause: but it is
often also used for an exposition. Now because the P^ophet adds no new matter
here, but only manifests unto them the cause of the ruin, which hung over the
heads of the wicked, the Hebrew word, which we have translated, to wit, has
seemed to agree very well; as if the Prophet should have said, There was no
plague more hurtful to them then superstition; the idols, says he, which you
do so heap together to procure your welfare, shall rather turn to your
ruin. Now whereas some have heretofore translated gods, for the word trees, is
refuted by the text it self: for he by and by makes mention of gardens.
Moreover he reprooues all false, and new found services under the names of
trees and gardens, by a figure called Synecdoche, when a part is taken for the
whole. For howsoever there were all sorts of Idolatry among the Jews, yet
this particular kind, namely, to choose woods and forests, to offer sacrifices,
was specially the most usual amongst others. Now be it that one would read
woods, or gardens in the second place, yet no doubt, but he meant to point at
their Altars, and Chapels, where they performed their devilish worships: and
although it was not their meaning, wholly to revolt from the true God, yet
notwithstanding they forged new services: and as if one place had been more
acceptable to God then another, they consecrated and dedicated them to their
devotions, as we see it is come to pass in the Papacy. But by and by there
follows a change of the person: for to the end the reproof might be the
more sharp, he speaks even to the wicked themselves, of whom he spoke before
in the third person.

Afterward by the word, to covet, he taxes the furious affection wherewith the
wicked are set on fire in their superstitions. God requires that the whole
heart be dedicated unto him: but they violently plunged themselves in a blind
pursuing of their new devised services, as if they were carried away with a
beastly and brutish affection And to say the truth, Note.
this sickness is rooted almost in the understandings of all men, that having
once forsaken the true God, they run a madding after their Idols. Therefore
it is, that the Scripture often compares this fury to ye loves of harlots, who
not only cast off al reason, but likewise all shame. Although it further
appears by the second member, that he not only taxes their intemperancie,
but also their boldness to violate the service of God, when he says they chose
gardens: which word is opposed to that which was commanded in the law. For with
what flourishes soever the unbelievers seek to shadow their superstitions
withal, yet notwithstanding this sentence remains sure, that obedience is
better then sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22. And therefore S. Paul Col. 2.23. under
the word superstition, comprehends all those corrupt worships, which men forge
to themselves without the commandment of God. God then complains, that the
Jews having despised his word, pleased themselves in their own inventions: as
if he should say, It was your duties to have obeyed me, but you have liked
better to follow your own fantasy, or rather a frantic liberty.

And this is sufficient to condemn all the inventions of men, to wit, that it
is not lawful in any sort, to choose a way how to serve God, because the right
of prescribing that appertains unto himself. God had then commanded that no
sacrifices should be offe- unto him but in Jerusalem; Deuteronomy. 12.13
the Jews thought to please him in other places: which false imagination also
deceived the profane nations. And I would to God that it had only rested
there; but we see how the Papists are wrapped even in the same error. Lastly,
experience it self teaches, that this disease is common to every age.

Obedience the mother of true religion. Men's fancies, the fountains of
superstition.
Notwithstanding seeing that obedience is the mother of true religion, it
follows thereupon, that the fantasies of men, on the contrary, are even
fountains of superstition.

This also must be added, that even as Isaiah did a little before reprove the
wickedness of the people, which reigned amongst them against the breach of the
second Table of the law, which is love; now also he makes his complaint, that
they have transgressed the first table. For in as much as all perfection of
righteousness consists in the obedience of the law, the Prophets when they would
reprove the sins of men, one while they speak of the first, and then of the
second ta-Table. We must also always observe this figurative manner of speech,
when under one kind the Prophets do comprehend the whole in general.

Verse. 30. For ye shall be as an Oak, whose leaf fades, and as a garden that
has no water.
THe Hebrew particle may be taken affi^matiuely, as I have turned it: and it
seems that the Prophet alludes to those gardens unto which they had falsely
tied the service of God; for because he had made mention of these gardens, he
threatens them with drought, casting in their teeth the confidence, which they
reposed in them. You please your selves very much, in yoour gardens, and in
your trees (says he) but you shall be as trees dried, and subject to fall. The
Lord then scorns the foolish bragging of the idolaters who please themselves
marvelously in their inventions: and think that heaven must needs be opened
to them, when they are in the midst of their ceremonies. As at this day when
the Papists have lighted up their lamps, and decked their temples; when they
shine with gold and precious stones; when they hear, the melody of their
Organes, and the sound of their bells, they think themselves the most happy
people under the sun, as if God being infinitely beholding unto them, and
satisfied with such baggage, they were freed from fear of any danger.

Verse. 31. And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker thereof as a spark:
and they shall burn both together, and none shall quench them.
THe Hebrew word Chason signifies strong; now it is here attributed to God: and
yet notwithstanding it retains still his signification, as if he should have
said, That god whom you made your strength, shall be turned into tow. And the
maker thereof: he means the caruer: but because mention is made of the idol,
it must be referred to the thing in question. Some think that the Prophet
does here note out the repentance of the idolaters, who should acknowledge
their folly, and with shame should burn their idols: but me thinks, the
Prophets meaning is otherwise. For even as fire is made of dry stuff, as tow
and such like: so says the Prophet, God shall gather you and your idols
together upon an heap (as when one pileth up a stacke of wood) to the end you
may be consumed together. So as the idols shall be as tow, and the men as the
fire; to the end the flame may consume them both together.

And there shall be none to quench them.] We must note that when the Prophets
speak of the wrath of God, they represent it by external signs, because it
cannot be perceived by our eyes, or other senses. Thus the wrath of the Lord,
by which the wicked are destroyed, is compared to fire, that consumes all
things. Now it sufficiently appears by this, what the Prophet meant to say
namely, that all the wicked shall perish, let their confidence be what it will;
yea which more is, their ruin shall be so much the greater, by how much they
shall have placed their trust in false and deceitful things: and that in the
place from whence they hoped and looked for salvation, even there shall
perdition fall upon them. For the idols and puppets are but matches to kindle
the wrath of God withal; and that in such wise, as it can never be quenched.

THE II. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The word that Isaiah the son of Amos saw upon Judah and Jerusalem.
THis prophecy is a confirmation of the doctrine which we have had a little
before, as touching the restoration of the Church. For in as much as it is a
very hard matter to expect the salvation of the Church in the midst of the
ruin of it, when as the wrath of God being once kindled does begin to consume
all things round about; then are the bare and naked promises very hardly
thought to be sufficient for us to rest and stay our selves upon. For this
cause the Lord would have this special vision conjoined in stead of a
confirmation with the consolation, which was proposed heretofore; the more
assuredly to confirm our faith, that the Church should not perish, no not in
all the calamities that could possibly befall it. Thus I doubt not but this
vision has affinity with that which we have seen in the 26. and 27. verses
of the former chapter. And by this we may know what was the use and end of
visions. For in as much as the bare doctrine is of no sufficient authority at
all with us; therefore the Lord adds visions, by which he seals up in us the
truth of his word. Seeing then that this vision is joined with the former
promise, from thence we gather a very profitable doctrine: to wit, that all the
visions which ye Lord revealed to his Prophets in times past, ought to be
joined with the promises, and to be as seals annexed unto them. Herein also we
have greatly to magnify, and extol from time to time the wonderful goodness
of God, who is not contented to give us his word alone, but does also vouchsafe
to set the view of the things promised even as it were before our eyes.

Now he adds a confirmation, because the restoration of the Church is a thing
of wonderful importance: which also ought necessarily to be known. For what
shall become of the truth of God; what shall become of faith, if there be no
Church? And if there be no Church, it would follow, that God were a lier, and
that all which his word contains, were false. But even as he shows by
memorable signs, that it is he alone, who without the aid of men, and by
means unknown, conserues his Church: so here now by an excellent prophecy,
he promises to do the like.

Isaiah and others after him were without ceasing to terrify and fear this
people (so full of obstinate malice) til such time as they should be carried
away captives; the Temple burnt, and the city destroyed: it was very needful
in regard of the faithful, that such rigor should be assuaged by some
consolation of hope. Moreover, in regard that they should languish long in
captivity, and that after their return many calamities would break in upon
them to shake their minds; and in the end should be wrapped, and as it were
overwhelmed with a sea of an horrible ruin, and almost a desperate confusion:
if they had not bin comforted against so many terrors, they would have perished
an hundred times. But the promise of the restoration of the Church did comfort
and strengthen those who were already fallen, to the end that at the least the
calling upon the name of God (which against al dangers is the only and chief
remedy) might have it force amongst them. The word, some translate, The thing;
because the signification of this word is general: but it is rather to be
taken for decree, or ordinance. Isaiah says then, that this was revealed to
him by a special vision.

Verse. 2. It shall be in the last days that the mountain of the house of the
Lord shall be prepared in the top^e of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.
WHen he makes mention of the term or full end of days, let us remember that
he speaks of the kingdom of Christ. We must also understand the reason why he
calls this kingdom so. Until this time all things did hang in suspense, to
the end the people should not rest in the estate of that time, which was but a
shadow; but in the Redeemer, who was to declare unto them the substance. After
Christ came then, if we will compare that time with ours, we are indeed, come
to the very term of those days. But it was needful that the fathers which
lived then, should with arms stretched forth endeavor to come unto Christ. And
because the restoration of all things depended upon his coming, it was for
good cause that they are commanded to enlarge their hope even unto that day.
For it was always profitable unto them, to know that the estate of the Church
should be more perfect under our Lord Jesus Christ: especially seeing they
were held under shadows and figures; and yet in the mean while were subject
to diverse changes. Also the Lord did terrify them many ways of set purpose,
that he might hold them in suspense. But the circumstance of this prophecy
had a particular respect: for they might have very well have fainted in the
space of four hundred years, or thereabouts, if this fulness of time should not
have come in their minds, wherein the Church should be restored to her
perfection. Therefore as the Church was ever and anon almost overwhelmed with
diverse tempests, so every one of the faithful laid fast hold in these dangers
upon this sentence as upon a board or planck to bring them saffe to the haven.
In the mean while we must note, that the perfection of days, did so begin at
ye first coming of Christ, that it runs on still with a continual course,
until he appears the second time again for our salvation.

Shall be prepared.] This vision in appearance might almost have seemed
rediculous: not only because Zion was a little hill of no great height: (as if
comparison had bin made of a heap of dust, with great mountains) but also in
regard that a little before he had foretold her ruin. How could one have then
believed, that Zion which had lost all her dignity, should again be thus
honored with so great an excellency, that she should turn the eyes of all
the Gentiles to the beholding of her beauty? yet is she so advanced
notwithstanding, as if she should be mounted higher then the Mount Olympus.
Let the Gentiles brag of their mountains, as long as they will; yet shall
they be nothing in comparison of this little hill (says the Prophet) although
it be low and small in appearance. To natural reason indeed this is very
unlike. What? shall Zion hang in the clouds? And therefore no question but the
wicked scorned this promise. We know well enough that impiety has always
ouerflowed her banks against God. Yea, the circumstance which I have touched
already, was enough at the first push to have overthrown this prophecy. How
is it then that this little hill could be so soon exalted, being fallen after
the des^ruction of the Temple into utter dishonor? But doubtless Isaiah
foretold not these things in vain. For in the end, this little hill was truly
exalted above the mountains: because that from thence the voice of the Lord
was heard; which sounded forth thorowout all the world even to lift us up into
the heavens; from thence the Majesty of God shined. Lastly, because it was the
sanctuary of God, it surmounted above all the world in height of excellency.

Now we must note the use of this prophecy, namely, that Isaiah meant to set
before them a consolation, whereupon they were to stay themselves in their
captivity: that howsoever the Temple should be destroyed, and that the
sacrifices should cease, yea and all things should fall to the ground: yet
notwithstanding this hope should encourage the faithful; and that in this
horrible confusion they should thus think: True it is that the mountain of
the Lord is now desolate; but yet shall she have her seat there again, so as
the glory of this mountain shall surpass the glory of all others. To the
end then that they should not doubt of the event hereof, the Prophet has
pictured it forth here as in a tablet, wherein they might behold the glory of
God. For although the mountain continued then safe, yet was it in a manner
detestable, because it was brought to a miserable desolation, having lost all
her glory, in regard that God himself had forsaken it. But the faithful were
to behold, not these ruins, but this vision. It also sufficiently appears by
that which follows, why he speaks so highly of the exaltation of this
mountain of Zion, because from thence came forth the Gospel, wherein the
Image of God shined. Other mountains might surmount it in height: but because
the glory of God did appear upon it in an higher degree, therefore it was also
necessary that the mountain in which he manifests himself, should be
exalted above others. He does not praise the mountain of Zion then in regard
of it self, but in respect of her ornament or glory, wherewith also all the
world was to be beautified.

Verse. 3. And many people shall go and say, Come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of
Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
IN the former verse he had briefly touched the cause from whence such an
excellency should come unto the mountain of Zion, to wit, because all nations
should flow unto it, as if the rivers should ouerflow with overmuch abundance
of waters: now he declares the same thing, adding also the reason of it. For
one might demand upon what occasion so many sorts of people should flow thither
by bands from countries so far off. He says then that they shall come
thither for no other end but to serve God. But in the word Many, there is an
antithesis, for he signifies that there should not be one nation only, as
before; which should yield obedience unto the true worship of God: but that
those which were altogether strangers, should come to consent with like
agreement in religion with the^: as if he should say, The Church which before
was shut up as in a corner, shall now be gathered out of all parts. He has
put many then, for diverse. For it is certain that he meant not to lessen yt
which he had said ere while of all nations. Further, although this was never
fulfilled, to wit, that all the people of the whole world having left their
country should assemble to Jerusalem; notwithstanding because the doctrine of
the Gospel (by which God did there gather to himself a Church indifferently
from out of all the world) came forth of this mountain of Zion; he well
affirms that those who embraced the covenant of salvation, with one consent of
faith, and joined themselves to one only Church, should come thither. The
agreement also which is between the figures of the law, and the spiritual
worship, is to be noted; such as it began to be after the coming of Christ.

And they shall come.] First he signifies by condition of the new Church is
above the old: because in it God appears to be King in the person of his
Son. Again, he also confirms the vocation of the Gentiles, for Christ was
not sent to the Jews only to reign amongst them, but also to have
jurisdiction over the whole world.

Rebuke the people.] The word Iacach does sometimes signify to expostulate,
sometimes to correct, also to prepare, or make ready. But in this place the
received interpretation does very well agree, whereas the Prophet does speak
concerning the reformation of the Church. For there is need of correction,
that we may learn to submit our selves unto God. For by reason of that
rebellious nature which is inbred in us, we shall never profit in the word of
God, unless we be brought under by violence. Therefore Christ also, Ioh. 16.8.
from hence takes the beginning of the Gospel: namely, that the world might be
reproved of sin. Now that the doctrine might not want increase, Isaiah shows,
that ye stubburnnes of our flesh must be broken: and therefore he assigns
unto God, the part of a Judge rebuking, that he might examine our life; and by
condemning our vices, might reform our manners for the better. And truly we
see that the Gospel is of small force, but where the jurisdiction of the holy
Spirit bears rule; which does bring men unto repentance.

They shall break their swords.] Now he adds the fruit which should come
from thence, when Christ shall gather the people and nations together under his
government. There is nothing more desirable, then peace: but although all
seem to desire it, yet every one troubles it by his foolish lust; pride,
covetousness, and ambition is the cause that some do cruelly rise up against
others. Because then that men are naturally carried away by their evil
affections, to trouble and overthrow all things, the Prophet promises here
that such a mischief should be redressed. The Gospel not only sets God and
man at peace together, but man with man also.
For as the Gospel is the doctrine of reconciliation, which takes away the
discord between God and man, so also it pacifies, and brings men to unity one
with another. The sum is, that Christ his people shall be meek, and having
trodden cruelty under their feet, shall study to live peaceably.

But they have done unfitly, which would restrain this to the time wherein
Christ was borne, because that after the battle Actiaque, the Temple of Ianus
was shut up: as it appears by the histories. I confess indeed that this peace
which was universal in the Roman Empire, was, as it were, a sign of that
eternal peace which we enjoy in Christ. But the Prophet meant to say more: to
wit, that Christ so reconcileth men to God, that all deadly wars being
thereby appeased, there should thereupon follow a healthful peace among them.
For if Jesus Christ be taken away, we are not only estranged from God, but
we have open war continually with him, which will justly return upon our
own heads: from whence it is, that all things are out of course in the world.

Furthermore, Isaiah promises, that when the Gospel shall be published, there
shall be an excellent remedy in the world to appease all dissensions: and not
only that, but all hatreds being abolished, men shall be inclined to help one
another. For he says not simply that the swords shall be broken; but that
they shall be converted into mattocks. In which he shows there shall be
such a change, that whereas they were wont before to vex one another, and did
commit many injuries to the hurt of their neighbors; afterward they should
entertain peace and love amongst themselves, and should lend one another the
hand, for the common profit of all: for mattocks and sithes, are instruments
fit for labor, and are necessary and profitable for the life of man. He shows
then, that when Jesus Christ shall reign, those who in former time were carried
away with a desire of doing hurt by all means whatsoever, should now be
helpful to others by all means possible.

Neither shall they learn to fight any more] The word which the Prophet uses,
signifies ei- to accustom, or to learn: but the sense is clear; namely, that
they should not exercise themselves any more in those Arts that should do
hurt, neither should they give themselves, to the doing of wrongs nor of wicked
practices, as they had been wont to do. From hence we gather, that they have
profited very little in the Gospel, whose hearts are not brought to meeknes:
amongst whom charity has taken so little place that they take no delight in
showing kindness one toward another. But this can never be brought about
unless the consciences of men be first appeased by God; for there we must
begin, to the end we may also have peace with men.

There are some brainsicke bedlems which turn this place to the maintaining of
a carnal liberty, thereby to take away wholly from the Church the use of the
sword: and from this place do exceedingly condemn all manner of war. For
example, If a prince defend the people committed to him, and see that none
offer them wrong; it is not lawful, say they, for Christians to use the sword.
But the answer is easy For the Prophet under a similitude speaks of the
kingdom of Christ, showing that it is a kingdom of peace to reconcile men one
with another through a mutual good will. And it is a similitude much used in
the Scripture, where the thing signified is showed by the sign: as in Luke
22.36. it is said, Let him that has no sword buy one. It was not the purpose
of Jesus Christ to provoke his servants to fighting: but he signified thereby,
that the time of war drew near. So on the other side it is said that swords
shall cease, or shall be applied to diverse ends, when hatreds and debates shall
cease: and that those who were enemies before, should be reconciled. us; as the
kingdom of Christ bears sway and does flourish: and that in these two things,
there is a mutual proportion. And would to God that Christ might reign wholly
amonst us; for then peace also should be in his full strength. But in regard
that we are yet far off from the perfection of this peaceable kingdom, we
must always think of the goings forward of it. They are therefore too fond,
which consider not that the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ has but his
beginning here. Moreover, God gathers not his Church together, that is to say,
a company of the faithful, to the end they should be separated from others,
but the good are always mingled with the bad, and which more is; the good are
not yet come to the mark, and are far off from the perfection which is
required of them. We must not seek then the full accomplishment of this
prophecy here on earth: it is enough if we taste the beginnings of it, and that
being reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, we keep amity together, and abstain
from all doing of wrong.

Verse. 5. O house of Jacob, come ye, and Or, we will.
let us walk in the light of the Lord.
HE sharply pricks forward the Jews by setting before them the example of
the Gentiles. For seeing that in publishing the Gospel God meant to judge all
nations from the mountain of Zion, that he might ingraft them into the body
of his chosen people, it was a very strange thing, that the house of Jacob
should revolt from him: and that whilst strangers should draw near, the
household servants should withdraw themselves, who of right ought to have held
the first place, and should have led others by their example. This exhortation
therefore is not only full of vehemency, but it is both a grave, and a biting
complaint. And therefore he calls them by an honorable name; O ye house of
Jacob, says he, come: which is the more to amplify their ingratitude, that
being the first borne in the Church of God, they should yet notwithstanding,
renounce the right of the heritage which was common to them.

Here is a close comparison then, as if he should have said, Behold the
nations which run to the mountain of Zion, every one exhorting, and pricking
forward his neighbor; and they subject themselves to the word of God, and
suffer it to judge them: and the whilst you Israelites that are the heritage
of God, what mean you to draw back? Shall the nations submit themselves unto
God, and do you refuse to have him reign over you? Yea is there so great a
light sprung up thorowout all the parts of the world, and will not you in the
mean while be enlightened? Are there so many sweet waters running forth; and
will not you drink? what a madness is this? do the Gentiles run to them with
such haste, and do you sit still? When he adds, and we will walk; he
signifies that the light is put before their feet, which with closed eyes they
reject; yea they quench it as much in them is: and yet the brightness thereof
notwithstanding should be such, as it should draw all nations unto it.

Verse. 6. Surely thou have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because
they are full of the Or, antiquity.
East-manners, and are sorcerers as the Philistines, and Or, took their
delight in.
abound with strange children.
HE openly accuses this people of the peruersitie of their nature; and not
only in plain terms, but as one carried away in an admiration, he suddenly
breaks off his speech, and turning himself to God he cries out; Wherefore then
should I speak to this so desperate a people, whom thou have justly forsaken?
For in giving themselves to idolatries, they have most disloyally turned away
from thy word. It may be also a prophecy of yt calamity which should come
upon them, which the Prophet foresaw by the Spirit: as if he should say,
Wonder not to see the mount of Zion laid wast and spoiled for so many sins of
the people. Yet is it not made such a lamentable spectacle that any should be
brought to despair, but that all those in whom there is any hope of health,
being touched with true repentance might convert unto God before such a
thunderclap come upon them.

For the Prophets were as Heralds to publish the judgment and vengeance of
God to the wicked, that so by all means they might endeavor, to bring all that
they possibly could to repentance. And the servants of God must never put off
this affection, namely, even to study how they may profit the very reprobate;
if by any means it could be brought to pass. This place therefore may bring
a merueilous consolation to all faithful Pastors: for when it seems to us
that we speak to deaf cares, we stagger and begin to forsake all; What shall
I do? I do nothing but beat the air. And yet notwithstanding, the Prophet
cease not, to exhort those in whom he saw no hope of amendment. An howsoever
he be as a man astonished at their ruin, yet does he not cease for all that
to admonish them still. Let us note also, that although the wicked be
obstinate, yet the judgments of God must be denounced against them; let them
recoyie, and gnaw the bit as much as they will, yet must they still be summoned
before the judgment seat of God, to the end they may be left without excuse.

I take the Hebrew word Ci, for surely: for this signification agrees best,
because it breaks off the exhortation which he had begun; and now speaks to
God. Also when he again calls them the house of Jacob, it is added for the
greater vehemency of speech, which men in a matter of great importance are
wont to do: as if he should say, This holy nation which God has chosen, is
now left and forsaken.

For they are filled.] Because the word Kedem signifies sometime the East, and
sometime antiquity, we may interpret it, that they were filled with the
manners of the ancient, because they had brought the superstitions in use
wherewithal the land of Canaan was in times past infected. For we know that
the Prophets did often reproach the children of Israel, that they were liker to
the Cananites, then to Abraham, and the other holy Patriarchs. And
questionless it was a double unthankfulness not to change their perverse
manners, seeing the old inhabitants being driven out, they were brought in to
possess this land, to the end it being purged from all their filthiness, it
might afterward be dedicated to holiness. Yet because the other sense is more
received, I had rather hold that; although the expositors themselves do not
here agree: For some take the letter Mem comparatively; as if the Prophet
should say, Before, or, Rather then them of the East: others take it more
simple, and better also in mine opinion; in saying, that they were full of the
East: that is to say, of the vices which they had drawn from thence; imitation
being a merueilous contagion: so as nothing is more usual then to see
corruptions glide from one land to another a far off.

That which by and by follows opens it yet more clearly, when he says, of
the sorceries of the Philistines. For under diuinations by a figure which they
call Senecdoche, he comprehends the deceits of Satan: to which the profane
nations were given. The Prophet then means that they differ in nothing from
the Philistines; from whom God notwithstanding had separated them by the
privilege of his adoption. And this was sufficient to condemn them utterly,
in that having forgotten their vocation, they defiled themselves in the corrupt
and wicked ways of the Gentiles. Whence it appears that to sin by the
example of another, does serve nothing at all to make the fault the less.

The latter part of the verse is diversely expounded: for some draw strange
children, by a similitude, to the laws and customs: others refer it to
marriages. Because that in taking of strange wives without discretion, they had
so mingled their seed that there were many children bastards. The exposition
of S. Jerome is more gross, who thinks that they defiled themselves in wicked
lusts contrary to nature. For mine own part, I doubt not, but by strange
children he means strange nations; and not by a figure, the laws. The Prophet
then accuses them, that in desiring to please the Gentiles, they wrapped
themselves together with them in their wickednesses: and thus had not only
mortal men but wicked men also in greater account, then God himself. Now he
says, that they took their delight: because the affection and delectation of
a wicked imitation, had raced the true love of God, and of his wholesome
doctrine out of their hearts.

Verse. 7. Their land also was full of silver and gold, and there was none end of
their treasure: and their land was full of horses, and their chariots were
infinite.
WE must take good heed to the order which the Prophet keeps here. For he now
shows the causes wherefore the Lord rejected his people. In the former verse
he

Some take the Hebrew particle by way of opposition, as if the sense were thus;
And yet they abounded in silver: thereby to make the ingratitude of this people
the greater; because having abundance of all things, yet they ran after their
idols and enchantments, as if al things had been in a desperate estate. Which
is much less excusable then if they had gone after them in adversity: whereas
they shook off the yoke of God from their necks, being fed with good things in
all abundance. Thus by this sense then he should amplify the wickedness of this
people running voluntarily and for no cause to idols, whilst they ouerflowed
in their delights: but yet I receive not this interpretation, because I think
it too much constrained. For he rather reckons up with one breath, as it were,
the vices, wherewith the people had spotted themselves: that is to say,
covetousness, false confidence, and idolatry. And howsoever their opinion be
true which expound it by way of opposition, yet notwithstanding it agrees not
with the sense of this place.

A little after Isaiah confirms the same also more clearly. For howsoever it
be not wicked, nor a thing to be condemned in it self (as I said before) for
a man to have gold or silver, if so be he use it as he ought: yet the Prophet
justly sets himself against that wicked desire and insatiable greedines in
heaping up silver; which indeed is a detestable vice. He says, there was no
end, because their lust was insatiable and without measure. As much is to be
said of horses, and chariots: for in this place he condemns their perverse
confidence. Deuteronomy. 17.16.
Now for to prevent this mischief, the Lord had forbidden their Kings to
gather great multitudes of chariots and horses together, lest by resting upon
such things, they might bring the people back again into Egypt. Because then
that it is hard for men who have means at command, not to be puffed up with
pride; the Lord would that his people should be destitute of them, or at least
should content themselves with a mediocritie.

Verse. 8. Their land also was full of idols: Or, bowed before.
they worshipped the works of their own hands, before that which their own
fingers had made.
HE repeates yt which he ear while touched concerning idolatry; but more
clearly. Beware of entertaining idols.
Because it is all one, as if a man should pile up wood, and another should put
fire to it: will there not be a fire by and by? it is impossible it should be
otherwise, the fire is not more ready to burn the wood, then we are inclined
to superstitions, and idolatry. Therefore the word Elilim, which the Prophet
here uses, is very fitly imposed upon the idols by the Hebrews: because they
are things of nothing; and but vanity. Neither is it to be doubted, but the
holy Ghost by this word would reprove the rage of men, who by means of such
vanities thought to draw the nearer unto God: as the Papists at this day; who
to the end they might the more easily snare men with their idols: brag that
they are lay men's books. But it is more safe for us to give credit to that
which the holy Ghost speaks. The trial it self also shows clearly what
fruit the people gather by these books. For being deceived by such gross
imaginations, they frame unto themselves earthly and fleshly gods: of whom
Jeremiah justly says, that the idol is not only a vain thing, but also a
teacher of falsehood and lies: Ier. 10.8.

We are further to note this description where the Prophet says, that the
people bowed down before the works of their own hands. For what a blockishnes
is it that men should not think it enough to worship wood and stone in stead
of God, but should also attribute divinity to that which they have framed;
which yet they cannot give to themselus! truly it is a monstrous thing that a
stock of base and contemptible wood should be by and by worshipped as soon as
a mortal man shall have put his hand thereto: as if he had made it a God. But
howsoever the Prophet speaks to the ancient people; we may notwithstanding
apply the same thing to the Papists, who acknowledge no majesty of God, but
in the works of their own hands.

The repetition he adds, Which their fingers have made: carries a great
signification with it: the more plainly to show their beastly lives. We are
also to mark the phrase of speech by which the outward gesture of adoration is
expressed, not that it is unlawful to bow the knee, or the head by way of
civility, or humility: but because he which bows himself before an idol,
makes profession thereby of the service of God: whence it appears how childish
a shift it is which the Papists have gotten of that adoration, which they call
dulia. Seeing here in the matter of Gods service; the Prophet generally
condemns all sign of reverence whatsoever.

Verse. 9. Or, as some read: The common sort: and, them of the better sort.
And a man bowed himself, and a man humbled himself: therefore Or, pardon
them not.
spare them not.
SOme of the expositors do read this sentence together with the former, as if
the Prophet should still go on in aggravating of their fault in many words. If
we receive this sense, we must understand by these words person and man, all
the Israelits: as if he should say, there is neither one nor other exempt, or
innocent from this filthiness. But others are of a better judgment, which
think the Prophet repeates that in other words, which he had said before; as
touching the chastisement: and that hereby he expresses what a destruction
should come upon this people forsaken of God. And thus the tenure of the speech
should agree very fitly: to wit, that the ruin of all both great and small,
which should consume the whole people, draws near: because that in such an
ouerflowing of ungodliness there was no hope of any release from Gods revenging
hand to be looked for. Moreover in these two verbes, To bow, and to humble,
there is an elegant alluding to the bowing of themselves, whereof he spoke in
the eight verse: as if he should say, They have bowed down themselves to
their idols: God will therefore cause them to be humbled and bowed down under
a very heavy and great burden of calamities and ruins. And withal, no
doubt but he also corrects their arrogancy: because it was hard for them to
believe that a people furnished in such sort with so much riches, could so
quickly be overwhelmed with miseries.

The latter part of the verse is expounded two ways, although in respect of
the substance there is no great choice which of them soever we take. For the
meaning of the Prophet is to teach, that God cannot be appeased toward so
obstinate a people. If we read it in the time to come, Thou will not pardon
them, the sense will be the more easy; yet notwithstanding, the imprecation
will always hold: to wit, pardon them not. For we know that as often as the
Prophets (who were inflamed with the zeal of God) did wish that some judgment
might come, they threatened the just punishment which the wicked were to
receive: as being the instruments of the holy Ghost; and no otherwise. And it
is no marvel, if the Prophet being offended with so many abominable crimes,
was in this manner kindled with zeal, that he appoints out his country to
destruction, because nothing was more precious unto him, then the sacred honor
of God.

But we must always understand that the remainder and remnant of the Elect is
to be excepted: for the Prophet speaks not here of all, one by one; but of the
body of this people, which was almost rotted in their vices, so as there was
no hope of health to be looked for: for otherwise it had been to no purpose to
have exhorted desperate and obstinate men to repentance, or to set the hope of
pardon before such. The sum then is, that the restoration of a new Church is
not to be looked for, till God have first executed his judgments, and
destroyed the Temple.

Verse. 10. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust from before the
fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his Majesty.
BEcause the wicked gave themselves too much liberty, and were too secure
under Gods threatenings, it is an usual custom with the Prophets when they
threaten obstinate sinners to add such lively descriptions, whereby to
terrify them: even as if they should set the thing in present view before
their eyes. This is the reason why the Prophet now commands the contemners of
God to enter into the rocks, and holes, to hide them under the earth. Wherein
he first shows them that the judgment of God is more terterrible then an
hundred deaths: seeing to escape the same, the grave is to be wished for. But
when he forces them thus into their holes, he does with the greater emphasis
manifest the heavy weight of the vengance of God. Although then that by the
fear of the Lord, he means the scourges wherewith God should smite this wicked
people; yet notwithstanding it is not in vain that he by and by speaks of the
glory of his Majesty: as if he should say, God is terrible to the wicked,
according to the measure of his glory, in whose destruction he will manifest
his infinite power. And moreover, although the wicked cannot be bowed nor
humbled by any chastisement whatsoever, yet are they constrained to fear, when
they feel Gods wrath to approach. But as touching the Elect, How Gods chosen
ought to fea^e his correcting hand.
they are taught of God to fear under his chastising hand after another sort:
for being smitten with the strokes of his rods, they willingly bend themselves
to bear the yoke. Isaiah then testifies, that the glory of Gods Majesty shall
shine most clearelie, after he has showed himself as a just Judge. For
whilst he lets men alone, it seems all is well, and men think that he has
hid himself.

Let the Pastors of the word then learn from hence how they ought to behave
themselves, when they have to deal with benumbed consciences; to wit, that
being well awakened by the judgments of God, they learn to fear this
judgment seat in good earnest. And howsoever it often seems that we lose our
labor in singing thus to deaf ears, yet will this terror of Gods judgment
pearce even into hearts of iron: at the least to leave them without excuse. And
often times also it comes to pass that some are healed, and the faithful in
like manner do profit by it, when they understand what shall befall the wicked
and reprobate by executing such horrible judgments upon them.

Verse. 11. The hie look of man shall be humbled, and the loftines of men shall
be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted in that day.
BEcause whilst the wicked are glutted with present riches, and rest, all
things falling out to their wish, they put these threatenings of the Prophet
far off from them, and by this means hardened their hearts against God: in
this place therefore he now sets down a course (as has been said) how to
pull down this pride of theirs: as if he should say, The time will come,
wherein your great arrogancy, which makes you thus in vain to set up your
bristles, yea, and that with an incredible rage against the most high, shall
cease. For howsoever the wicked seem to be religious, yet you shall perceive
by their pride notwithstanding, that they will not stick to iustle even
against the Lord himself, so as it seems they are greater then he. In that
God thus thundreth against them, it is to the end that he might pull down their
pride and hautines; and himself only might be known to be the chiefest. And
therefore, as we have said heretofore, the impunitie of sin is as it were a
cloud cast before our eyes, which hinders us that we cannot see the glory of
the Lord. For when he reuengeth himself upon the rebellions of men, his glory
does so much the more appear. Eccles. 8.11.
And that is the cause also why Solomon says, That the hearts of the children
of men are set in them to do evil, because in this world they see themselves
more happy then the godly, and so blinded more and more. But here he shows
that after the proud shall be brought under in spite of their teeth; then
nothing shall hinder, that God should not be known to be such a one as he is.
Surely there was great reason that the people should willingly have submitted
themselves under God, and have cast their eyes upon his greatness, in respect
that under his shadow they were in safety: and besides the stock of Abraham
was adorned so excellently with such variety of benefits, to the end they
should have bin as ye mirror of the holiness, and glory of the Lord. But
because the Jews are now risen up in rebellion against this so good a God,
Isaiah denounces against them, that God will devise a new way how to axalt his
glory; to wit, even in their destruction.

In naming, The hie looks and loftines, he notes the inward pride of the mind
and heart, by their outward countenance and behavior. For a wicked conscience
will discover it self in the contempt of God and man, even by the outward
gesture and look. It is in the same sense that David notes out lofty eyes,
and high looks: Psalm. 131.1. etc. 101.5. Isaiah also does better confirm
this, in the verse following. Now by heaping up of so many words with such
great vehemence, we may easily gather how notorious their rebellion was.
Moreover, we are not to marvel that he insists so much upon the taming of
men's arrogancy, if we do but consider how hard a thing it is to bow the
hearts of those who rest^ng upon their riches, are afraid of nothing: imagining
that they are advanced to none other end, but to do whatsoever they list
without check or controlement. For we our selves have experience at this day
how tender and delicate, yea and how easily such take pepper in the nose, who
attribute to themselves more then there is cause why, and in the end how
obstinately they reject all wholesome admonitions. For this cause it is that the
Prophet does thus sitly sharpen his style against such jolly fellows in
particular, rather then to threaten ye vengeance of God against the whole
people in general. And yet he sets not himself against the Princes only who
were placed in great dignity above others: for not only they, but those also
of baser condition are ready enough to burst with pride oftentimes; according
to the common proverb, Every one has the heart of a king: so as we see every
day, that if we touch the sores of wretched and beggarly fellows but even
with the tip of the finger, you shall see them vomit forth insupportable
poisoned speeches. Seeing then that this vice was very common, Isaiah touches
as well the small as the great that were tainted therewith, signifying, that by
how much the more the Lord had dealt gently with them, by so much the more
they were to look for a greater judgment: for their hearts were swollen with
rebellion, because of their too great abundance. Furthermore although the
letter Lamed, which is put in the dative case, be sometime superfluous, yet
notwithstanding in this place it holds his propriety: because it seems Isaiah
assigns out a certain day, as men are wont to do, when judgments or assizes
are held. I expound it then, that the day is appointed by God himself, wherein
the proud must make their appearance before his iudicall throne to receive
sentence of condemnation.

Moreover we may gather by these words, that God shows himself an enemy to
all the proud; and therefore this day of assignation is as much as if God had
said; I can no longer endure that men should thus wickedly exalt themselves
against me: and therefore all such as lift up themselves above measure, shall be
broken in pieces with my hand. Now if this were well rooted in our hearts, who
is it that would not abhor and detest pride, by which we thus provoke the
wrath of God against us? If any will read, Proud and lofty, in the Neuter
gender, it must be referred to the fortresses, bulwarks, and munitions: but
the rules of Grammar cannot bear it, that we should expound it otherwise then
of men's persons.

Verse. 12. For the day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and hauty,
and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low.
This verse is expounded together with the eleventh.

Verse. 13. Even upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and exalted, and
upon all the Oaks of Bashan,

14. And upon all the mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up,

15. And upon every hie tower, and upon every strong wall.


ALl these allegories which are here inserted of Libanus, and of the high
mountains, are so far off from darkning the matter, that they do rather give
light unto it. For let mortal man exalt himself as high as he will, yet shall
he never be able to match ye mountains, and highest trees in height: which the
Lord will as easily beat down, as it is easy for the wind with a puff to
scatter the light chafe here and there. Isaiah then shows the proud here, as
it were in a glass, how vain and foolish they were to think yt their hautines
could keep them that God should not ouertop them. There is also here an
excessive manner of speech, which was of great weight, in respect of amplifying
the threatening. For it is not like that God was angry with the mountains and
trees; or as if having changed his purpose he should now bring to naught, that
which himself had established and settled: but Isaiah sets the judgment of God
before their eyes in the guiltles creatures, to the end they might the more
assuredly pe^swade themselves that their presumptions and bold wickedness should
not remain unpunished. We see then wherefore he intermingles these figures of
Cedars, Oaks and mountains.

That which is added of the walls, is not spoken by way of allegory or
figure. We know that whilst men feel themselves well fortified they flatter
themselves as if they stood in no great need of Gods help. Isaiah then
mentions the matter of their false confidence under the names of towers and
walls. For if any place seem to be unable to be vanquished, there will the
profane ones build their nests; from which they despite both heaven and earth,
because they think they are there safe from all dangers. Isaiah threatens
then, that when it shall please the Lord to bring men down, he can quickly
overthrow their fortresses upon which they in a false confidence leaned. And
howsoever they are things, which in themselves are not to be misliked; yet
notwithstanding because they do too much occupy our brains, it is for very
just cause that the Prophet sharpeneth his style against them.

And hereunto belonged that which he spoke before as touching the Chariots and
horses, verse 7. For as it is said in Miche: Miche. 5.10
that because men do rest themselves beyond measure, upon the riches of this
world, therefore it is necessary that they be wholly bereft of them, that so
they may trust to be saved by the only hand of God, and not hang their hope
upon the sons of Adam. So having a little before reproved them for the
multitude of their horses, now he denounces the judgment of God; and withal
admonishes them that it is impossible to return into favor again with him,
till he has bereft them wholly of those things, to the end they should not
rest any more vpom the false succors of this world.

Verse. 16. And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.
BY Tarshish the Hebrews do surely mean Cilicia: and because the Jews had
great traffic with this nation, the Scripture often makes mention of the
ships of Tarshish; which were so called, because they frequented that sea.
Navigations certainly is not to be condemned, because it bringes great profit
and commodity to men: as well to carry forth as to bring home merchandise.
This kind of traffic also cannot be hurtful; seeing it is the will of God
that all mankind should be helpful one to another by mutual duties: but
because pride and cruelty is above al things engendered by abundance; therefore
Isaiah reproues this kind of merchandise, by which the land had been greatly
enriched. Add hereunto, that often times it comes to pass that the merchandise
and traffic which is used with nations far off; is full of deceit and
pillage, and there is no measure amongst men in this behalf touching excessive
gain.

The second part of the verse shows that the Prophet condemns that
navigations, by which the land was much infected with corruptions. It is a thing
too frequent and common, that delicacie, wantonness, and abundance of
voluptuousness, do easily follow great wealth and riches, which is very
often seen in wealthy countries, and cities of merchandise. For those that
trade into far countries, contenting themselves nothing at all with things
which are in their houses, do bring home with them new sumptuous and rich
stuffes; which in former time were utterly unknown. Now because wealth, is for
the most part the mother of superfluity and dissolution, Wealth the mother of
superfluity and dissolutions.
the Prophet makes mention here of rich furniture; as if he should have said,
The Jews have decked their houses so sumptuously, that they have drawn the
judgment of God upon them. For under the pleasant pictures, by a figure called
Synecdoche he comprehends as well rich hangings, as the work of Phrygia, and
the vessels made by exqusite Art.

Now it is certain that men's manners are corrupted when they give their lusts
the bridle thus to seek here and there for such unnecessary supefluities. And
we see that such deliciousnes was the ruin of the Empire of Rome. Note.
For before the Romans traveled into Greec^, they were very chaste, continent
and moderate. But in the end having overcome Asia, they began to wax delicate,
and to become more and more effeminate. But after their eyes were once dazelled
with golden pictures, vessels, precious stones and tapistry, and that their
nostrils were perfumed with ointments and odors, by the same means they became
besotted in all their senses; and in following the dissolutenes of the Eastern
parts as a more gentlemanlike fashion of living, they began to ouerflow more
and more in all disordered dissolutenes.

Verse. 17. And the hautines of men shall be brought low, and the loftimes of
man shall be abased, and the Lord shall be only exalted in that day.
THe Phophet in naming so many kinds of heights in the former verses, declares
that he spoke of men. For the high mountains and great Cedars displeased not
God, as they were his creatures: but he signifies that all the mischief rests
in the hearts and lives of men, who do too much trust in high and great things.
But some may object; Pharaoh, Exodus 8.15. and 9.34.
whose hardness could not be softened by any plagues whatsoever. Wherefore it
seems that that which the Prophet says here, comes not always to pass. I
answer, and the Lord only shall be exalted, has been expounded before.

Verse. 18. And the Idols will he utterly destroy.
AS heretofore in his reprehension he joined idolatry with superfluities,
covetousness and other vices; so he now ioynes them again together in
denouncing the punishment.

Verse. 19. They shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of
the earth from before the fear of the Lord and from the glory of his Majesty
when he shall arise to destroy the earth.
BEfore he used other words: to wit, in constraining and compelling them,
saying, Enter into the rocks; to the end he might the more lively prick their
consciences: but now he shows what they shall do: and tells them that they
must enter. And hereby it appears that that sentence was not an exhortation,
but a terrible denunciation of the heavy wrath of God, to fear the wicked,
and obstinate, who desperately despise all admonitions, and threatenings. That
which is added of the fear of the Lord, is to be understood, of the fear
which ye Chaldeans and Assyrians put them in; whose hand he called before (as
he does here again) the glory of God: because he served himself by them to
chastise his people. Although then that they were disloyal and wicked, yet
they served to the glory of God: seeing even the devil himself serves
somewhat to that end in despite of his teeth. Thus he speaks of the Chaldeans,
and Assyrians, because the glory of God might be perceived in the
chastisements which he executed upon the people by their hand.

He confirms the same thing by the word Arise, which signifies as much as to
go up into the judgment seat to give sentence. In the particle, which by and
by follows, to strike the earth, there is a goodly allusion or meeting of
words, which can scarcely be expressed in another language, as if he should
say, To smite down to the ground. Now he says that the Lord will arise,
because it seems that he sleeps, when he deferres his judgments: he arises
then, when he goes up as Judge, to inflict punishments upon the wicked: in such
sort, as men shall well perceive that nothing can escape his knowledge, nor be
hidden from his eyes: from him (I say) who leaves not any wickedness unpunished.

Verse. 20. And at that day shall man cast away his silver Idols, and his golden
Idols (which they had made themselves to worship them) to Or, into the holes of
the, etc.
the moules, and to the backs.
IDolaters do please themselves wonderfully in their superstitions and wicked
service. For although they be full of crimes, and naughtines, yet behold their
refuge, namely, they think to appease God by their goodly services. As if we
at this day should set forth the wickedness, and villainies wherewith the Papists
ouerflow, they were not able to deny them: but will flatter themselves under
this pretext forsooth, that they perform a goodly service unto God, and will
think that all their vices should be sufficiently covered under this cloak.
The Prophet therefore pluckes away this vizard from Idolaters, and denounces
against them that they shall no more have ought wherewith to cover their
filthiness. For the Lord will constrain them to cast away their idols, to the
end they may know it was in vain for them to have put their trust in them.
Lastly, they should be ashamed of their vanity. Because in prosperity they
thought that God was favorable unto them, as if he had taken delight in their
service: and could not otherwise persuade themselves, til such time as it was
manifested unto them by effect, that he abhorred them. It is in adversity then
that they began to acknowledge their filthiness as the Prophet Hoseas very well
teaches, when he compares them to harlots, Hos. 2.7.
who perceive not their uncleanness all the while they gain well; and enjoy
their pleasures. But when they have lost these things and are forsaken of their
lovers, then they begin to bethink themselves of their poverty and shame, and
to enter into the way of repentance; of the which they would never once have
thought, whilst they were lulled asleep in their wantonness. And so falls it
out with all idolaters who are never so ashamed of their beastlines as to cast
away their Idols from them, till being pressed with extreme calamity, they
think themselves somewhat low brought.

Which they had made themselves etc. That is to say, which they had made by the
help of the workman. Neither is this added for nothing; because he signifies
that the counterfeit and false gods are falsely worshipped. For what good can
gods framed by man's hands do, seeing God has his being of himself, and is
without beginning? It is a thing then that goes quite backward, and against all
reason, that men should worship that, which themselves have devised. By this
speech therefore he describes their wickedness; in that although their idols
were made of gold or silver, or of other corruptible matter, and that they were
framed by men; yet nevertheless that they were worshipped in stead of God:
withal, he expresses the cause why they are displeasing to God, to wit, for
that they were honored. With what pretext now I pray you, will the Papists
cover their impieties? For they cannot deny but they worship Images and
puppets. Now where such adoration and honor has place, there is a manifest and
plain sacrilege, which cannot be disguised. By the holes of the moules, he
here understands all filthy and unclean corners whatsoever, wherein they
should be hid with infamy.

Verse. 21. To go into the holes of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged
rocks, from before the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty,
when he shall rise to destroy the earth.
THis is no superfluous repetitio^, although Isaiah repeates the same things
whereof he spoke but erewhile. For is there any thing more difficult then to
prick, and wound men to the quick, and to provoke them to the true fear of
God? We perceive this, not only in hypocrites, but even in our selves, if we
look narrowly into it. For how many things are set before us, by which our
minds ought to be ravished; and yet notwithstanding we are scarce once moved
therewith? It was chiefly necessary that this judgment of God should be
repeated to the hypocrites, who pleased themselves in their wickedness. Now the
severity of Gods vengeance is therein manifested, namely, that the wicked
chose rather to be swallowed up into the deepest gulfes that may be, then to
come near into his sight. From this place it seems that Christ borrowed that
wherewith he threatens the Jews; in that day they shall say to the mountains
cover us, and to the hills, hide us. Luke 23.30.

Verse. 22. Cease you from the man whose breath is in his nostrilles: for
wherein is he to be esteemed?
THese things are conjoined with the former, and have bin ill divided from them
by some. For after he has with threatenings proclaimed the judgments of God, he
exhortes the wicked to cease from beguiling themselves by a vain confidence:
as if he should say, I see you are blinded and drunk with vain hope, so as
there is no reason at all which can prevail with you; which coms to pass,
because you ascribe too much to your selves; and yet man is nothing: for you
have to do with God, who with his only look is able to bring the whole world
to confusion. This place is expounded diversely: For some interpret it of
Christ, and take breath, for consuming; 1. King. 19.11.
as also the Scripture is wont elsewhere to use this similitude. They take
nostrill for wrath, because the sign of anger appears in the nostrils: and so
gather this sense; Take heed you move not Christ to wrath against you. But if
all be well waighed, we shall find this exposition to be far off from the scope
of the text. Others, although they expound it of men in general, yet
notwithstanding they refer it to this sentence; Fear not them that can kill
the body, Mat. 10.28. But this opinion is no more fitting with the text then
the other. For it should be from the purpose and would not agree to the time:
because there was then no occasion to dissuade them from the fear of men. But
as I have said, the coherence of the text, cleares us easily from all doubts.
For the beginning of the chapter following expounds this plainly, and confirms
it: and he which divided these things did ill to separate that which should
have been joined together: for he will there add; The Lord will take from you
the things which so much puffes up your hearts, and begets such high spirits in
you: This confidence which you have is vain and foolish. And thereupon
depends that which he now says, Cease from man then

Chap. 3.1.
But it is necessary first to see what the breath of the nostrill signifies. He
thereby sets forth the fragilitie of mankind: namely, that the life of man is
but a breath which forthwith vanishes away; and as David says, If the Lord
withdraw the spirit, man returns to his dust: Also, His spirit departs, and he
returns to his earth. Psalm. 104.29. Again, They are flesh, a breath which
passes away and returns not. Psalm. 146.4. and 78.39. Seeing then there is
nothing so feeble and weak as our life, what means this confidence, forsooth,
as if the roots of our stabilitie were profound and strong? We must then cease
from man; that is to say, we must leave this vain confidence: for man has his
breath in his nostrils: for if his soul once depart, he vanishes forthwith
away as water. Now we speak here, of that breath by which man lives, which is
the weakest of all things.

Moreover, when the Lord forbids us to put our trust in man, let us begin at
our selves; that is to wit, let us not in any case trust in our wisdom, or
industry. In the second place, let us depend neither upon the help of men,
nor upon any creature else: but let us place our whole trust in the Lord.
Cursed is he, says Jeremiah, which trusts in man, and puts his strength in
the arm of flesh, that is to say, in outward means and helps. Ier. 17.5.

For wherein is he to be esteemed?] Behold here the right way how to beat
down all pride, namely when nothing is left to men wherein they may please
themselves. For this is as much as if the Prophet had said, All the glory of
the flesh is nothing worth. We must also observe, that this is said by
comparison, to the end we may learn, that if so be there be any excellency
in us, it comes not by nature, but we hold it all by borrowing the same from
without us. We know that mankind was adorned of God with gifts which ought not
to be despised; we know also that some are more excellent then others: but
because the most part having rejected the Lord, do please themselves in their
own form and shape beyond measure; yea even profane men esteem so much of
themselves, as if they were gods: Isaiah therefore wisely separates man from
God, as also the Holy ghost does thorowout ye whole Scripture. For when men are
considered in themselves, it better appears how frail their condition is, yea
how transitory, and inconstant. As soon therefore as men shall once begin
to attribute unto themselves but the least strength whatsoever, then must their
vanity be made known, and discovered unto them, to the end they may
acknowledge themselves to be nothing.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. For lo, the Lord God of hosts will take away from Jerusalem and from
Judah the stay and the strength, even all the stay of bread and all the stay of
water.
WE have said a little before that the Prophet goes on still with the same
matter which he began in the end of the former chapter. For he admonishes
the Jews, that how great riches soever they possess; yet notwithstanding they
shall not be able by any means whatsoever to hinder the wrath of God (being
once inflamed against them) to consume all their preparations. Whence it
appears, that they too much ouershoote themselves, who, to put far away from
them all fears, do heap and gather together weapons, power, strength of
war, counsels, great store of victuals, and such like. The particle
demonstratiue Hinneh, which we have translated, Behold, or Lo, is not put
here for the more certentie of the matter; but to set forth the shortness of the
time, as if Isaiah should even set the thing it self before the eyes of the
wicked. For it often comes to pass, that those who dare not openly contemn
the judgments of God, do yet notwithstanding reject them, as if they touched
them never a whit; or else as if they were far off from them. What is that to
us, say they? or, if afflictions come, wherefore should we make our selves
miserable before the time? when the calamity comes upon us, will it not then
be time enough to think upon it? Because then the wicked dig themselves such
hiding places, and securely take their ease in despising the judgments of God,
the Prophet does the more nearly press them home, to the end they should not
imagine that the hand of God should be far off; also that all their stays,
which they promised to themselves, should be but in vain. To this appertains
that where he calls God, the Lord God of hosts, that so his Majesty might the
more daunt their sleepie and benumbed consciences. For God has no need of
titles: but it is necessary that our blockishnes and drousines should be
awakened by the sense and feeling of his glory. Now the Prophet in the first
place threatens, that the Jews shall be stripped of all abundance of victuals,
so as they shall be forced to die for want. And by and by he will add the same
thing as touching their succors of war, and all helps of politic order and
government. From hence we may gather, that the Jews were so lifted up with the
prosperous success which their affairs then had, that they foolishly secured
themselves, as if they had been utterly exempt from all damage or decay. But
Isaiah lets them know, that not only all the region shall be smitten with the
rods of God, but that Jerusalem in like manner, which was as it were the
invincible fortress of the whole nation, should be smitten also: as if he
should say, The wrath of God shall not one- be scattered upon the body; but it
shall pearce also even unto the very heart. As touching the words, Mashen and
Mashenah, which he has put in the masculin, and in the feminine gender, I
doubt not but by this diversity, he would more certainly express, that all
kinds of stays should be broken: and therefore I have translated, strength and
say. For I approve not of their expositions who refer this to men: because
it is rather to be understood of all helps, of all kinds.

Notwithstanding some doubt whether the Prophet restraines this to victuals, or
rather whether he referres it to the other helps and stays which do follow a
little after. But it is very likely that under these two words he generally
comprehends all things whatsoever, which are necessary for the sustentation of
the estate of a city, or people: and also, that by way of explication, he
names some specials.



Now the Lord takes the strength of bread and of water away two ways: God
takes away strength from bread after two sorts.
For if God inspires not a secret virtue into the^, they can profit us nothing
at all, though we should have them in never so great abundance: and that is the
reason why it is said elsewhere, that he breaks the staff of bread: Ezech.
4.16. That is to say, Though the Bakers give out bread by weight, Leuit. 26.26.
and though it be eaten, yet it shall not satisfy them any thing at all. This
similitude ought to be diligently observed, to the end we may know, that
although the belly be filled never so full, yet we shall always be hungry,
It is not bread, but God his secret blessing which nourishes.
because the secret blessing of God, which nourishes and gives strength, is
wanting.

But although the want wherewith the Prophet threatens the people in this place
may be understood of famine, because God will deprive the Jews of all kind of
relief; notwithstanding, because the Prophets are wont for the most part to
take these manners of speech out of the law; this interpretation agrees very
well. For he might simply have said, I will take away from you bread and
win^: but he expresses a thing more secret, in speaking of the stay and
strength of bread and water: as if he should say, Although the people be not
brought to poverty for want of meat and drink, yet God can so use the
matter, that they shall famish for hunger, even whilst they swallow down
their morsels: because his blessing being taken away, all nourishment shall
pass away as smoke. To be short, his meaning is, that the people shall have no
food that shall strengthen them, either because they shall have no bread nor
water; or if they have them, yet they shall be able to get no nourishment out
of them.

Verse. 2. The strong man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, the
prudent, and the aged,

3. The Captain of fifty, and the Honorable, and the Counselor, and the
cunning artificer, and the eloquent man.


HE mentions other helps, by which the state of nations or cities are vpheld
in their perfection. He threatens that the Jews men of war, by whose hand
the country was defended. Sometimes God takes them away by death; and
sometimes he makes them become faint hearted and effeminate. This last is the
most usual, so that the successors do degenerate from the valor of their
ancestors: and those who before were stout hearted, in process of time become
fearful, and are disabled for the war. We see also that the first often
falls out, to wit, that the most valiant have their courage by and by quailed.

He adds the Judge, and the Prophet. We know that amongst the Hebrews,
Judges are taken for all governors whatsoever. Also it is not to be doubted but
that all Teachers whatsoever, are to be understood by the Prophet. He threatens
the Jews then, The Magistr^cie and the Ministry that to the Commonwealth
which the two eyes are to the body.
and teaching extinct, that then they shall be cut off. And to speak the
truth, the Magistrates and Teachers have the same place in the Commonwealth,
that the eyes have in a man's head. To the same rank also I refer the word
ancients, who are the fittest to govern: because age obtaines prudence,
counsel and gravity. As touching the name divine, although it be taken in the
evil part in the Scriptures, yet it should seem to be taken in the good part
here; seeing Isaiah reckons up those things which are necessary to defend, or
conserve the estate of a kingdom or city. We may well call this man then, one
that knows wisely how to forecast matters, and who has a deep^ insight into
dark and obscure things, which are necessary; not by diuinations or
superstitious Arts, but with a quick and prompt judgment, and with great
dexterity of wit. Also in regard that God had forbidden them to go to ask
counsel of Magicians, Inchaunters, Diuiners; and that Balaam himself
testifies that there was no soothsaying in Israel; Numb. 23.23. if any had
rather understand this place of diuinations made by Enchantments, I do not
gainsaie it: neither will there any absurdity follow, to reckon it among the
number of their chastisements, to wit, that this people so full of wickedness
shall be also deprived even of all unlawful succors: as in Hosea, Hosea 3.4.
the Idols are joined with the Altar and the sacrifices.

He calls him the Duke or Captain of fifty, according to the manner of
speech then in use. For the Captains of fifty were among the Jews, as they
of hundreds were among the Romans. The Greeks do call them by a name which
signifies Princes of hundreds. And because such manner of principality was not
in use among the Latins, therefore the name also was unknown unto them. The
Hebrew word Ioets, which I have translated Senator, may be applied to
particular persons, who are excellent in knowledge. But because they attribute
it to Counselors who exercise a public charge, I would not depart from the
common opinion.

Moreover, because handicrafts men have their good use in the conservation of
the common good, and for supporting of an estate, as well as other Arts, Isaiah
says, that they also being abolished, the downfall of the Jews approaches
upon them. The expositours expound that which is said in the last place
diversely; word for word it is, He which vnde^standeth low words, spoken
between the teeth. Now because the pythonicall spirits do give their answers
by mumblings and low voices, some think that he should speak here of
Enchantments. Others expound it better; who by the word Lachas understand
secret counsels. But for as much as by this word, we may understand a grave
oration as well as of things secret; I have not been afraid to translate it
Orators. Notwithstanding if any had rather understand it of those men who are
prudent and learned, who being unfit for oratorie in public, do yet give
counsel in secret, which also is a good thing; I do not say against it.

To conclude, we are to observe this summarie description of a well ordered
estate. For Isaiah has placed corn and other things necessary for the
maintenance of life in the forefront: do not deprive our selves of so
excellent gifts of God.

Verse. 4. And I will appoint children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule
over them.
TO the end the vengeance of God might be the more apparent, he now tells us how
woeful and miserable this change should be, to wit, when the faithful and wise
governors should be cut off; and that God should put dastards and mecoks in
their stead. By Children we must not only understand them that are so in age;
but also in understanding, and manners: such as are delicate and effeminate
persons, who have no strength in them; neither are able to manage the sword
that is put into their hand. He has not opposed all the members one against an
other: he thought it enough to show ye mean by which a Commonwealth might
soon be brought to ruin; namely, if so be that fools and ignorant ones do
bear rule, who are as children, in whom there is no wisdom nor gravity to be
found. We may therefore hold it for a sure principle, that he is unfit to
govern a Commonwealth, that is not called thereunto of God, nor furnished
with singular virtues: which thing Plato also did well perceive; for howsoever
he were a profane man, Plato.
having no true knowledge of God, yet he well discerned that none was capable
nor fit to sway public affairs, but he which was endued with divine virtues.
And as the administration of Commonwealths is of God only; so also is it
necessary that it be vpheld by himself in every respect; and there remains
no more to those whom the Lord gouerns not, but that they be like to children,
yea that they be twice children, to wit, destitute of all counsel, and wisdom.

Now the Lord exercises his vengeance

Moreover, we have to observe (as I touched not long since) that the estate of
a Commonwealth well ordered, The estate of a commonwealth well ordered is an
excellent gift of God.
is an excellent gift of God: seeing all the orders of Judges, Senators,
Soldiers, Captains, Teachers, and Handicrafts men, do all of them help one
another by mutual community: and do knit themselves together for the common
safety of the people. For seeing the Prophet threatens and denounces that
these things shall be abolished as a most heavy judgment of God, he
sufficiently shows, that these are rare and excellent gifts, which are
necessary for the conservation of the people.

The office of Magistrates, Captains, 1 Magistrates.
and Soldiers is here commended unto us then; as also the office of Teachers.
Which we are well to note, against those frantic fellows, who strive to cut
off from the world, the power of the sword; and all other good politic
orders. Now the Prophet shows that these things are not taken away but when
God is displeased. It follows thereupon then, that such folk who fight
against such benefits of God, rejecting and quenching all that in them lies the
same, are wicked ones and enemies to the public good. 2 Ministers.
Also the Ministry of the word does here receive his commendation, without
which a Commonwealth cannot long endure. For where no prophecy is (as Solomon
says) there the people perish: Prou. 29.18. Moreover, handicrafts, tillage, 3
Handicrafts men.
all occupations of what sort soever they be, as Carpenters, Laborers, and
such like, which serve for the necessities and commodities of men, are here
praised, as the ministers and servants of the Lord, and have the same end, as
the others before mentioned; to wit, to preserve mankind. 4 Soldiers. A
lawful war, is nothing else but a manner of peace.
We may also say the same as touching them that profess the art military;
for although a lawful war ought to be nothing else but a means of peace,
yet notwithstanding, it is necessary sometimes to come to strokes: so as they
who have the administration of the sword, do use it in defending themselves
and theirs. War therefore must not be condemned in it self, because it is a
means to conserve a Commonwealth. Eloquence also is a thing not to be
despised: 5 Rethoricians.
because there is often need of it, as well in public, as in private, fully
and plainly to show a thing, and to make a truth clear and evident. For that
also is reckoned amongst the gifts and special blessings of God, when a city
abounds with prudent and eloquent personages, Psalm. 128.5.
who can debate with the adversaries, in the gate, or in the place where need
shall require to defend it self by counsel and reason.

Now the sum of this place is, that when the Lord takes away his gifts from a
people, and changes their estate, Note.
be it any way howsoever, either by altering the form of government, or that
good governors be taken away; the wrath of God is to be acknowledged, who
takes away Kings in his wrath, as Hosea says, and gives others in his anger:
Hosea 13.11. We must not therefore attribute such changes to fortune, or to
other causes.

Verse. 5. The people shall be oppressed one of another, and every one by his
neighbor: the children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile
against the honorable.
HE here describes an exceeding great perturbation which approached to fall upon
the Jews; all good order being broken and fallen to the ground, as it happens
to all people as soon as good government is overthrown.

But this confusion which the Prophet here describes is most odious, to wit,
that the child shall presume against the ancient, that the people of vile, and
those of base condition, shall rise up against those that are honorable, and
men of reputation. For there is nothing more strange then to see them
shamefully entreated, who are worthy to be honored. And yet notwithstanding
these unseemly and odious examples happen, when the politic order is
overthrown. Whereas I have translated the verb Niggsh. To endeavor, or to do
their utmost, it was by constraint: for otherwise the meaning of the Prophet
had been imperfect.

Verse. 6. When every one shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father, and say, thou have clothing: thou shall be our Prince, and let this Or,
scattering.
fall be under thine hand.
FOr as much as this sentence is of affinity with the former, and still
continues to the words following, He shall swear; it is certain that the
particle Ci. is taken as signifying a certain time. For the Prophet intending
to set forth an extreme misery into which this people should fall, he says,
There shall be no man which will take the charge of government upon him,
although he shall be entreated so to do. Surely ambition has the swinge so
for the most part amongst men, that the greater part do always thirst and
long for headship (and that with envy) one over another, yea they aspire many
times to get it with hazard of their lives: For even in all times we shall see
that the greedy lust to reign and rule has shaken the whole world: and there
is not the meanest village in which some are not to be found who would be
right glad to have power and authority given them to command the rest: so much
is flesh and blood prone by nature to be covetous of honor. Things are come to
a very low ebb, when men refuse to bear rule.
Whence we may perceive, that all things are brought to an extreme exigent,
when such a dignity is not only contemned, but also rejected with a
disdainefull refusal. For the calamity is extreme, and past cure, when men
begin to flee and avoid that which they were wont naturally to covet.

But for the fuller amplification of the matter, the Prophet sets other
circumstances before us; to wit, that the Jews shall rather cast off all sense
and feeling of mercy and humanity, then to take upon them the charge of
government. If any should refuse to rule in a strange country, it may be it
would not seem strange at all: but when we speak of the preserving of our
brethren, it is too discourteous a dealing to refuse so honorable a charge. It is
a sign then of an extreme desperatenes, when he upon whose faithfulness his
brethren do rest themselves, and whose aid and succor they wait for, and
desire, reiects and casts all desire of rule and authority from him.

And therefore also they have been wont to choose those for Princes who are
rich; or at the least, it is very seldom that government is committed to any,
but such as are of a competent sufficiency, lest their poverty should expose
them to contempt and disdain, or else draw them to use unlawful shifts.

This circumstance is also added, to wit, that although they be sufficient to
bear the burden, yet they shall nor accept of it; as if he should say, that
not the mean and base people shall refuse the place of government only, but
even the greatest and best furnished also. Moreover, the verb, shall take,
has a great emphasis in it: for it is altogether as much in effect as to lay
hands upon him, to arrest him: as if Isaiah had said, Those who shall seek a
Prince, shall not proceed therein by allurements nor entreaties, but there
shall be a multitude full of tumult, where they shall endeavor to lay hands
upon some one or other by violence, and shall force him to take the charge of
government upon him. And there is no less weight in the last circumstance when
he adds, This scattering shall be under thy hand, that is to say, At the least
if there be left in thee any spark of mercy or humanity, put forth that
strength thou have to help us in this our extreme misery. For when a troup of
men are as a scattered flock, asking succor at the hands of one of their
brethren, as at their pastor and shepherd, yea, pitifully bewailing their
scattering, their hearts are harder then iron or flint, who will not then lend
their helping hand for their help. Some translate, Let thy hand be under this
scattering; to wit, to sustain it: as if there were therein some amplification
in the Prophets words.

Verse. 7. In that day he shall swear, saying, I cannot be an helper: for there
is no bread in mine house, nor clothing: therefore make me no Prince of the
people.
BY the word, To swear, he expresses a vehement refusal, and a resolute
denial. For often it falls out, that he, who in the beginning excused
himself, and made show to be unable to do any thing, yet at the last being
entreated, does yield to that which is requested of him: but he who refuses
any thing, and that by way of an oath, gives them that have sought his help no
hope, that he will ever fulfill their desires: for he has resolved to
continue his purpose. And it may be also that the particle, in that day,
signifies as much as incontinently, that, is without pausing any thing at all,
or making any longer co^sultation about the matter. But because it may also be
taken to signify a time full of calamity, I do not gainesay this latter.
There is no difficulty as touching the Prophets meaning, only he purposed to
say thus much in effect, that there shall be no refuge nor fit remedy to
restore this woeful dissipation.

Although the expositors do interpret this hebrew word chobes^h diversely, yet
I agree willingly with them, who think it should be a similitude taken from
Surgeons: because there is nothing more fitting thereunto. And it is all one as
if some body being called to heal a sick man, he should answer, I am no
Physician; or, the nature of the disease is so incurable, that it is impossible
to heal it. The conjunction copulative Vau, which follows afterward, is put
to note out the cause of such a denial, as if he should say, I assure you I
have no power to do it. His meaning is then, that the estate of this people
shall be so desperate, that there shall not a man be found, who dares give
order to redress their wants; no not when things shall be driven to a narrow
pinch.

Verse. 8. Doubtless Jerusalem is fallen, and Judah is fallen down, because
their tongue and works, are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his
glory.
HEre the Prophet shows the cause of this ruin; lest it might seem that God
were cruel in chastising his people thus sharply. Now it is as much as if he
had said, This people do perish most justly, seeing they have so many ways
hardened their hearts against the wrath of the Lord. And hereby he cuts off all
complaints. For we know how audaciouslie the world rages when it is chastised
more then ordinarily it is wont to be. Now he says, they were ready both in
words and deeds, to commit all sorts of evils. He speaks also of the
destruction of the city as of a thing presently acted; albeit the time past,
may be taken for the time to come, as oftentimes it is.

To provoke to wrath.] This manner of speech amplifies the fault: showing that
of set purpose they meant to provoke the Lord. For the things that are done
before our eyes do very much offend us, especially if they be displeasing unto
us. Wicked men mock with God, as if they could beguile him. But because
nothing can be hidden from him, be it never so secret, Isaiah reprocheth them
that in his presence without blushing they ouerflowed in committing their
wickednesses. The epithet glory, is also to be marked: for it is a sign of
more then a furious brutishnes, not to be touched with any fear or reverence,
when the Majesty of God is present. Now God had wonderfully manifested his
glory to the people of Israel, so as they ought to have been humbled in good
ear-earnest, if they had had any drop of shame or modesty in them. Let the
wicked then murmr against God as they will, and accuse him of cruelty, yet
shall the cause of all their calamities be found in their own hands.

Verse. 9. The trial of their countenance Or, shall answer for them.
testifies against them; yea, they declare their sins as Sodom, they hide
them not. Woe be unto their souls: for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves.
BEcause the Prophet had to deal with hypocrites, that were shameless and
impudent, who yet bragged that they were very holy men: he says, that their
very countenance testified against them, what they were, and that there was no
need to go seek out witnesses a far off to bear witness against them to
convince them of their wickedness. For he takes the word, to answer, to bear
witness, or to confess. Howsoever then that they disguised their faces and
their foreheads, so as they were able to deceive others, yet notwithstanding
God constraines them to discover themselves, and to manifest themselves to be
such as they were indeed: so as in despite of their teeth they bare the marks
of their frauds and dissimulations in their faces.

Others expound, that their wickednesses were so apparent that one might
perceive the vilanie which they would cover, as in a glass. But that which by
and by follows confirms the first sense, when he says they declared their
sins as the Sodomites. By which words he signifies, that they so let loose
the bridle to wickedness, yt they bragged of their filthiness without blushing;
as if it had been some excellent thing worthy of praise; first to have taken
away all difference between honest^e and vilanie, and then to give over
themselves to all profane licentiousness. And therefore he compares them to
the Sodomites, Genesis 18 20. and 19.5.
who were so far blinded with their voluptuousness that they cast themselves
headlong with a blockish brutishnes into all manner of leaudnes. You see then
what is meant by the testifying of their faces, whereof he has spoken before,
to wit, that they bare in their faces manifest tokens of impiety, which were
more then sufficient to witness their guiltines.

Woe be unto them.] He here expresses that which has been said heretofore
already: that all the cause of their evils remained in themselves: because
they had provoked the Lord by their vices and naughtines. And therefore they
had no way to wind themselves out; and if they did, yet it should be but in
vain, because the evil was so rooted in their bones; as if he should have
said, Seek what pretext you can to color your sins, yet you cannot accuse
God, as if he should smite you wrongfully. Know then, that your selves are the
cause of it; and therefore give glory to God, and lay the whole blame upon
your own heads.

Verse. 10. Say ye, Surely it shall be well with the just: for they shall eat
the fruits of their works.
BEfore I set down the opinion of others, I will touch ye true meaning of the
words. Because it is an usual thing that the threatenings of such heavy
vengeances of God have been wont to bring a marvelous bitter and sharp
temptation to the faithful; and withal because there is seldom any such
public calamities, but they are also wrapped up in the same with the wicked;
for this cause the Prophet, as I take it, brings them back to the providence of
God, which never so confounds things together, but that in the midst of such
confusions he has skill to discern between the evil and the good.

But this place is diversely expounded. For some translate, Say to the just,
because he is good, he shall eat the fruit of his hands: and after their
opinion, we should gather this sense; I will and command that the godly be of
good courage: for howsoever I do sharply punish the sins of the people, yet
notwithstanding it shall go well with them. But this sense seems to me more
agreeable, Say, that is, hold this for a sure principle. Because to say, is
often taken in the Scriptures to think, and to have been persuaded: Psalm. 39.1.
as in David, I said, I will take heed to my ways: and infinite other such
places. He commands not then that one should tell the just; but that every
godly man should rather be persuaded of this truth in his own heart: namely,
that his estate should be happy and blessed, howsoever it seemed miserable for
the time present. And so I take the word Tou; for an happy and prosperous
estate: as in the former verse he used the word Raah, which is of a contrary
signification, and against which he now opposes Tou. And thus I think that
Raah should not be taken for woeful; but for a troublous estate.

Also because word for word, it is, Say, Surely it shall be well with the just,
it seems that the particle C^ should either be affirmative, as in many other
places: or rather superfluous. Although it be very likely, it should be put by
way of confirmation, as if he had said, Surely it shall be well to the just,
let all occasion of doubting therefore betaken away, and let it be held for
certain, that his condition shall be most blessed and happy. Now forasmuch as
this is hard to persuade any of, he adds, that he shall eat the fruit of his
works, that is, he shall not be defrauded of the reward of his equity.
Whereas others take To say, to admonish, and translate these words It shall be
well, Admonish the just that he do well; I reject that exposition as being
drawn too far off.

Verse. 11. Woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him: for the reward of
his hands shall be given him.
HE opposes this as a contrary member to the former: from whence it is easy
to gather the Prophets meaning: to wit, that his purpose was to comfort the
good, and to terrify the wicked by setting forth the righteous judgment of
God. For when any great calamity falls out, by which all are alike afflicted
hand over head, we begin to call it into question whether the world be guided
by the providence of God or no, or rather by the turning of the wheel of blind
fortu^e. Thus the faithful fear to be wrapped up in the same ruin with ye
wicked. Others again think that it is all one whether a man be godly or
wicked, seeing as well the one as the other are alike afflicted with pestilence,
war, famine, and other such corrections. And so from thence, this perverse
imagination enters in the mind of man, that there is no difference between
the reward of the godly, and the ungodly. Amongst such an heap of dark
cogitations, many by the temptation of the flesh, are solicited to despair.
The Prophet therefore shows the upright judgment of God; to the end they
might persevere in his fear; and might also know, that those shall not escape
unpunished, who persuade themselves that he will not correct them, though they
provoke him daily to wrath and indignation.

Also he exhorts them to magnify and extol

Verse. 12. Children are extortioners of my people: and women have rule over
them: O my people, they that lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the
way of thy paths.
THe Prophet also reprooues the folly and blockishnesse of this people who
were stark blind, even at noone day. There is nothing which men bear more
impatiently, then to endure the yoke to be laid upon their shoulders: neither
do they very readily submit themselves to the government of any that have
more power then themselves. We must needs say that such as obey delicate and
effeminate persons, and suffer that such folk should oppress them, are become
sottish, impotent, and faint hearted. Neither is it to be doubted also, but
those who thus willingly did offer their shoulders like Asses to bear the
burden, were smitten from heaven with a spirit of amazednes. I grant that
those who are courageous ought to bear the rule of a tyrant: but Isaiah
reprooueth the Jews, who for that they had obstinately shaken off the sweet
yoke of God, were now ready to yield themselves under vilanous and base
subjection, and that with most servile conditions. They could not complain
that they were constrained to it by force, seeing they obeyed them freely; to
whom notwithstanding they needed not to have been subject unless they would.
Whereby it appears that they were stricken with the hand of God, and daunted
with fear, so as they had neither strength nor wit left in them.

And it is even that same vengeance wherewith God had threatened the people with
before by Moses. For as we said erewhile, the Prophets had still an eye to this
general doctrine of Moses in all their Sermons. For how can it be that men
having power to resist, should willingly put themselves into bondage (which
notwithstanding they naturally flee) unless that God having deprived them of
all counsel and understanding, should thus leave them to themselves to avenge
himself by this means of their rebellions? Wherefore as often as the like
befalls any of us, let us not think it is come to pass by chance: no, let us on
the contrary know, that when witless men, and more feeble then little
children, shall have dominion over us, that the wrath of God has then ceased
upon us: unless peradventure we mean to be reproved by the Prophet, of a much
greater blockishnesse.

They that lead thee.] He goes on still with the same doctrine, to wit, that God
is exceedingly angry with ye Jews, in that he has let loose the bridle to the
wicked to trouble all. From hence also we may conjecture, that the common
people foolishly suffered themselves to be led hoodwinked by the Governors; so
as they received their edicts and course of conversation as oracles. Now all
the corruptions which reigned every where, came from thence. To the end that ye
contagion therefore should not spread further by the ignorance of the people,
Isaiah cries to them that they should take heed of the Governors themselves
who were carrying them away headlong into destruction. Others expound; Those
which make thee happy. But because the participle which he uses may be derived
from the verb Iashar, which signifies to govern, I had rather follow this
interpretation, because me thinks it suits best with the scope of the text. I
confess indeed that the false Prophets flattered the people: yet I see no
reason why he should mention their flatteries in this place. But it agrees very
well to the heads and leaders: namely that they were the cause of ruin. For as
the Princes are ordained for the common safety, so also is there not a more
dangerous plague, then when they be men of no value; ruling all things as they
list. He says then, that those which govern are the cause of the evil, and
corrupt all; seeing they ought to correct others, and to show them the way by
their examples.

Verse. 13. The Lord stands up to plead, yea, he stands to judge the people.

14. The Lord shall enter into judgment with the ancient of his people, and
the Princes thereof: for ye have Or, consumed.
eaten up the vineyard? the spoil of the poor is in your houses.


Whilst impiety runs over the country with the raines in her neck, and that
the Lord sends no succor from above, we either think that he is idle, or that
he has forgotten his charge. Therefore after he has complained of the princes
which did not their office, he adds now that the Lord will do his; and that
he will not suffer such wicked ones to go unpunished. For there cannot be a
greater offense, nor a thing that troubles our minds more, then when
Magistrates in the open sight of all the people shall show all manner of leude
examples, and yet none must dare once to open his mouth: nay by your leave they
must be soothed and flattered. Then we begin to ask where is the Lord
become? from whom (by this over great licentiousnes) the chiefest thing wherein
his glory ought to shine, to wit, in good government, is taken away. Isaiah
meets with this difficulty. As if he should say, Albeit I confess indeed
that the common people are bad enough; yet because ye Princes themselves are
corrupt in the highest degree, yea so far as by their evil examples to
defile the whole body of the common wealth; know ye, that God is gone up into
his heavenly throne, as a just Judge, who at the last will call them to account,
and will give every one of them according to their works. And yet he exempts
not the common people as if they were faultlesse; but to ye end we might know
the fountain whence all the evils proceeded, he chiefly applies himself to
ye Governors in particular, and threatens them with that punishment which they
had deserved. He had set up a judgment seat for God before; from whence he
should plead: now he tells them again that he shall come: but how? with the
ancients. Now although it were not greatly from the purpose, that the Prophet
should allude to those lawful assemblies, where the ancients are set with God,
as being his leiutenants: yet notwithstanding I agree to the most received
opinion: to wit, that God will even plead against the Ancients of his people.
This place then answers to that of David; God sits in ye assembly of gods:
Psalm. 82.2. In a word, his meaning is to say, Although the Princes have
liberty now to do what they will without punishment, and that no man dares
reprove their disordered appetites; yet know ye that there is a day coming
wherein they shall feel that God has authority above them, wherein also they
shall render up an account to him of all their doings.

No doubt but the Judges of that time were very unwilling to hear such
reprehensions:

We must note also, that they are called honorable Princes of the people; but
it is in title only: for in respect of their great dignities they thought
themselves exempt and discharged from all laws, as by some special
privilege: and thought that howsoever profane Kings and Princes were indeed
subject to the judgment of God; yet that they notwithstanding were exempt from
it by means of their holiness. They persuaded themselves then that they had
nothing to do with reprehensions, as being a matter needles to proceed
against them by threats and terrors, as if they had been profane persons. And
therefore the Prophet expressly tells them, that the Lord will not only enter
into judgment with the Princes in general; but with these proud hypocrites,
to whom he had committed the charge of his people.

And you have consumed up.] The similitude of the vine is very common,
specially when mention is made of the children of Israel. And by this word the
Prophet redoubles their fault, because they had dealt no more favorable with
the people of God (whom he had loved with a singular affection) then if they
had been some profane nation over which they had ruled. This pronoune you, also
has great vehemency in it: because he speaks even to the husbandmen
themselves, who being set to dress the vine, did devour it like wild beasts.
And therefore he greatly amplifies their cruelty in this behalf. For what a
disloyalty was that to devour that which they should have conserved and kept?
Now the Lord shows by this similitude, what a care he has of his; and how
affectionately he loves them: not only in regard that the Church is his vine
and heritage; but also when he says, that he will not suffer the disloyalty
and wickedness of them that govern by tyranny.

When he ads, that the spoils of the poor were in their houses, he names one
particular, by which the other parts of their life might be known. Now the
Princes houses should rather have been as the Lords house, in regard they
supplied the place of God, which ought to have been holy to all. It was an
extreme sacrilege then, when of a sacred place they made it a theeuish den.
Also this word poor, augments their fault. For it is the most barbarous
cruelty of all others, to snatch from the poor and needy, who are not able
to defend themselves, and therefore ought rather in deed to be succored.

Verse. 15. What have you to do that you beat my people to pieces, and grind
the faces of the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of hosts?
HE reckons up some particulars, by which it appears that the poor were
proudly dealt withal by them; yea cruelly, and with all oppression and wrong.
It was not needful that the Prophet should recite by peecemeale al things
which were to be reproved in the Princes: because by this little, it
sufficiently appears how unjust and tyrannical their government was. But
where shall the poor find refuge, if not at the hands of the Magistrate, who
ought to be the father of the country, and to be an help to miserable
persons? Therefore he uses an interrogation with a kind of vehemency, What?
as if he should say, What boldness is this? What barbarism and cruelty is it
thus to abuse the wretched estate of the poor, and to spare them nothing at
all? So also by the two similitudes, he sets forth their pride, joined with
cruelty.

Says the Lord of hosts.] To the end this reprehension might have such
authority among them as was meet, he sets the person of God before them: for
here is a close opposition: as if he should say. You must not take these
things as from the mouth of man, but it is God himself, who is the author of
this accusation: it is he that pursues these injuries, who will also take
vengeance of you for them in the end. And therefore because those who are set
in any degree of honor do usually so ouerflow with pride, that they despise
the words and admonitions of all men, he opposes against the pride of such,
the Majesty of God, to the end they may not be so conceited as to despise the
sharp threatenings which he has charged them with in good earnest. And yet
let us remember that we take not this place as if the Prophet preached nothing
but the mercy of God only. For having denounced vengeance in general to all,
he touches the heads especially, to the end that neither the one nor the other
might think to escape the hand of God. Wherefore he here uses the argument,
which we call from the greater to the less: How can it be that the Lord should
pardon the common people, seeing he must even punish the Princes, because they
have destroyed the vine?

Verse. 16. The Lord also says, because the daughters of Zion are hautie, and
walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as
they go, and making a tinkling with their feet.
HEre follows another threatening against the ambition, dissolution, and pride
of women. And in this the Prophet has not followed any precise order, but
reprooues now one vice, then another, as the matter required: and then having
finished his sermon, he comprehends a brief sum of it in few words, as he
did in the first Chapter. He speaks then against sumptuous apparel, and
superfluous ornaments, which were evident signs of vain ostentation. For
where there is this excess in apparel and ornaments, there is always
ambition joined with it: and so by consequence, many other vices for the most
part, do go hand in hand with it. For, from whence comes the superfluity
both of men and women, but from pride? First then he justly taxes this vice
as the welspring of all the abuse, and shows it by the sign thereof, to wit,
by their going; because the women walked with stretched out necks. Now as it is
an evident sign of modesty to bow the head (as also profane authors do
witness) so to lift it up too much, is a sign of arrogancy. And for a woman's
head lifted up, what can it show else but pride? The Prophet therefore did
wisely, in beginning at the fountain it self: for if he had begun at the
outward signs; as at the garments, walking and such like things, they would
have had their replies at hand, to wit, that their hearts were upright and
innocent enough for all that: and that there was no such great necessity to
cry so bitterly against them, and to summon them before the judgment seat of
God for putting on a little brave or light apparel. To the end therefore that
he may meet with their vain objections, he first discouers ye inward
disease, which shows it self every way in all the outward attire.

That which he adds of wandering e^es, shows a shameless lust, which is
oftenest seen and espied (as certain witnesses thereof) in the eyes: for bold
and audacious eyes, are the true messengers of a dishonest heart. On the
contrary, chaste women have their eyes steadfast and drawn in as it were,
rather then rouing and wandering abroad. Tinkling. This gesture suits well with
an immodest and lascivious countenance. It is uncertain, whether the women had
little belles to their pantables, which tinckled as they went: or rather
whether in keeping measure they carried their countenances as women dansers do,
because the manner of attire is much changed since that time. Notwithstanding I
willingly receive this exposition; that in going they made their steps to
sound: for the very words do sufficiently show it.

Verse. 17. Therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Zion
bald, and the Lord shall discover their secret parts.

18. In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the slippers, and the
calls, and the round tires.

19. The sweet balls, and the bracelets, and the bonets,

20. The tires of the head, and the sloppes, and the head bands, and tablets,
and the earings,

21. The rings and the mufflers,

22. The costly apparel and the vailes, and the wimples, and the crisping
pinnes,

23. And the glasses and the fine linen, and the hoodes, and the launes.


HEre is a coupling of things together, in stead of a particle that renders the
cause. For he denounces, that seeing they cannot be amended neither by gentle
admonitions, nor by any words; that the Lord will proceed otherwise with them,
because he will no more use sharpenes and rigor of speech, but will come upon
them in great displeasure and with his arm out strethed to take vengeance upon
them. And therefore even as they had showed their rebellion from the head unto
the feet, so he also gives them to understand, that the Lord will show the
signs of his vengeance upon all the parts of their bodies. Wherefore he begins
with the head, where the principal decking is; and afterward descends to the
other parts. Now we are to observe that the Prophet reprooues not the excessive
pomp of these women with this sharpenes and vehemence without cause: for above
all other vices, What vice is most predominate in women.
wherewith they are stained, they naturally burn with a fond desire to deck
and trim themselves bravely. And although they are prone enough by nature to
covetousness; yet will they spare no cost to make themselves fine: yea, they will
pinch their bellies, and offer violence to nature it self, that they may have
wherewith to attire themselves the more costly and sumptuously: so greatly are
they corrupted with this vice, that it surmountes all others.

Histories do show what vprores women have raised at Rome, Women made an
uproar at Rome, because of a law made for restraint of fine apparel.
by reason of the law called Oppie, which was ordained concerning apparel,
because one side would establish it, and the other part would have it
abolished: so that there could be no conclusion made hereabout by any grave and
moderate course, because of their riots. But we need not go so far to seek
examples; for we may find infinite numbers almost thorowout all nations; so as
it is a vice too common in all ages.

Now because we are always sharp witted to devise excuses to cover our
excessive superfluities, therefore the Prophet points as it were with his
finger at the fountain of all the mischief: to wit, this furious pride,
before spoken of, wherewith women are carried away when they are to show
themselves, and appear before others. For to the end, they may be the better
seen and discerned they will shine with deckings of their garments, that so
the eyes of every one may be drawn unto them. The Prophet then having touched
the inward sore; he reckons up many particulars, that so he might bring the
sottishnes of women into the open view of all the world to receive disgrace.
And therefore he makes a long catalogue; because none are more curious then a
woman about this matter of piling up fashion upon fashion, and tire upon tire.
She will heap ornaments one upon another without number: and therefore it was
not without cause that the ancients in times past called a woman's cabinet, A
woman's cabinate called a world by the Anci^nts.
or chest, A world. For if all the pieces which are here mentioned, should be
gathered together, and laid upon an heap, a man should find as many fashions
as there are parts of the world. And therefore it seems the Prophet here
rifles the chests of women to bring forth their paltrie pack of jewels which
were laid up therein; to the end that by how much the more they gloried in
them, and took pleasure therein; by so much the more every one might be made
ye better acquainted with their follies. Therefore howsoever here be a long
catalogue, yet is nothing superfluous; seeing thereby their insatiable lusts
are the better discerned.

As touching the particulars, I mean not to stand dilating upon every thing
apart, seeing even the best learned of the Hebrews themselves are doubtful
concerning some of them, neither can they make any true difinition of the
sundry forms of these ornaments. It is sufficient for us to know ye sum of
the words, and to understand the Prophets drift; to wit, that he gathers
together and reckons up all these apish toys, to the end the ambition and
dissolution, with the great varieties thereof, might be so manifest; that there
might no excuse be brought for defending of them. Also it were too great an
impudency to affirm that whatsoever women devise in their foolish brain
beyond the bounds of common honesty, should be counted and esteemed as
necessary for covering the body. For how many things are they which he here
recites, which are neither required for nature, necessity, nor for honesty?
To what purpose serves these bracelets, earings, chains, and other jewels?
whence it appears, that such a superfluous heap, could not be excused with
any pretense whatsoever. It is therefore an immoderate superfluity which must
either be repressed, or restrained; for that often times they fall out to be
whorish intisements, whereby to weaken the heart, and to inflame it with wanton
lusts. No marvel therefore, if the Prophet be so earnest against this vice,
and denounces such fearful judgments against it.

Verse. 24. And in stead of sweet savor, there shall be stincke, and in stead
of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of a dressing of the hair, baldnes, and in
stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty.
IT is certain that this region abounded with sweet smells: and we need not
doubt, but they were very inordinate in the use of them, as in other things. We
see that even the nations very far off from the East, did not abstain from
excess herein: for there was no cost nor long distance of places which could
hinder them from it. How much more did the excess herein ouerflow then, think
we, in the place where such things were in abundance? whereby doubtless one
might see lust enflamed, and dissolutions augmented more and more. He
signifies then that they did many ways abuse these ointments and perfumes.
For men are ingenious in pursuing their lusts, and yet can never be satisfied.

In stead of a girdle, a rent.] Others translate, Ripping, or unloosing, that
is to say; the Lord will vngird them. Now he meant to oppose two things greatly
contrary one to another: to wit, that as the women walked being curiously girt
and adorned, so they shall now walk torn and naked. He also opposes to
dressing of the hair baldnes: because they did not wear their hear modestly,
but in all dissolutenes. Also against a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth: Now
whether it were a belt or some other kind of girdle, it is certain that the
Prophet meant to decipher out some ornament which was in great estimation. Also
he opposes burning, to beauty: For delicate and brave women are afraid to go
often into the sun, for fear of being sunburnt: and yet he says
notwithstanding that this shall happen unto them. In a word, as well men as
women are here admonished how soberly they are to use all the gifts of God, as
well in their diet, and apparel, as in all their other behavior. For the Lord
cannot away with excess, and it must needs be that he avenge himself upon it
by sore and grievous punishments, when men will not be brought into order by
light corrections.

Verse. 25. Thy men also shall fall by the sword, and thy strength in the
battle.

26. Then shall her gates mourn and lament, and she being desolate shall sit
upon the ground.


NOw he turns his speech toward Jerusalem, and to all the kingdom of Judah.
Having therefore showed, that the whole body is infected and corrupt, and that
there is no part free from contagion, and has not spared so much as the very
women, he returns unto a general doctrine. Now ye know it were not
convenient that there should be given to every woman many husbands. Besides,
that which follows in the next place did not appertain to this people only.
Now he sets before them the manner of their chastisement, in telling them that
all the strength of the people shall be brought down by wars. And from
thence follows the mourning of the gates, which he foretelles shall come to
pass when these discomfitures shall fall out. We know that in that time they
kept their assemblies in the gates. So then even as the gates did (as you would
say) rejoice in the multitude of the Citizens: so they are said also to mourn
when there should be such an horrible wast and consumption of them.
Notwithstanding, I deny not but that he compares Jerusalem to a desolate
woman bewailing her widowhood. For it was the manner of those that mourned, to
sit upon the ground: as also this people were addicted to many more ceremonies,
then our manner of life will bear. The sum notwithstanding of his speech is,
that the city shall remain without inhabitants.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And in that day shall seven women take hold of one man, saying, We
will eat our own bread, and we will wear our own garments: only let us be
called by thy name, and take away our reproach.
HE still follows the same matter; and no doubt but this Sermon was made
together with the former. And therefore we must not separate this verse in any
wise from it. By this circumstance he more fully expresses what that ruin
and destruction which he had before threatened against the Jews, should be.
For unless threatenings be redoubled against hypocrites, either they will play
the deaf men, or else they will extenuate them in such sort, as the severity
of God shall not touch them to the quick. He here shows then by the effect
what horror of imminent destruction shall come upon them, to the end they
should not promise an escaping from it at their pleasure: as if he should say,
Think not that a little skirmish shall lessen your number in some part: but it
is rather an extreme ruin which threatens you; so as there shall scarsely one
husband be found for seven women. And hereunto appertains the word, shall
take. It is a thing contrary to the modesty of a woman, to go and offer her
self of her own accord to a man. Now the Prophet says, that they shall not
only do so: but that there shall be seven women, which shall lay hands upon a
man to take hold of him; so small shall the number of men be.

That which immediately follows does yet amplify this extreme wast; when they
say, We will eat our own bread, etc. For seeing it is the proper office of
the husband to provide for his wife and family, the women do seek husbands
with unequal and base conditions, when they discharge them of all care of
getting their maintenance. There must needs be a very small number of men left
then, when many women having cast off all shamefastnes are not only
constrained to content themselves with one husband, but do also agree to get
their own living, and desire no more but that the husband will keep the faith
of marriage with them.

Let thy name be called upon us.] We may render it in another sense, Let us
bear thy name. For when the woman comes into the family of the husband, she
takes his name, and loses her own: 1. Cor. 11.3.
in as much as ye husband is her head: and therefore her veil is a sign of
her subjection. As Abimelech said to Sara, Abraham thy husband shall be the
covering of thine head: Genes. 20.16. But if the woman marry not, she
remains covered under the name of her family. Now it sufficiently appears by
the 48. chapter of Genesis, that this is the true sense of this manner of
speech: where Jacob blessing his nephews, says, Let my name, and the name of
my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, be called upon them: that is to say, Let them
be of our stock, and partakers of the covenant, and never shut out thereof, as
it came to pass in Esau and Ismael. Genesis 25.23. and 21.10. Cato and Martia.
The profane authors also speak after this manner: Martia desiring to return
again to Cato, (as it is in the second book of Lucanus) says, Give me only
the bare title of marriage: let it be lawful to write upon my Tomb; Martia
wife of Cato.

Now they say, Take away our reproach: because it seems that they bear some
reproach, when they find no husbands: not only in that it seems they are
despised as unworthy, but because it was a singular blessing of God among the
ancient people to have posterity: and therefore the Prophet says, they shall
not only have need with care to bethink them how to avoid this reproach; but
shall use all possible persuasions to attain thereunto. Lastly, he signifies
that the destruction shall be such, that almost all husbands shall die.

Verse. 2. And in that day shall the bud of the Lord be beautiful and glorious,
and the fruit of the earth shall be Or, in excellency, and renown.
excellent and pleasant for them that are escaped of Israel.
THis consolation is added in very good season, in regard that the faithful
might have been utterly discomforted with the news of such an horrible waste,
and might doubt in themselves how the covenant of God could stand fast in this
so great a ruin of the people. For there is great difference between these
two things, that the people shall be as the sand of the sea for multitude, and
yet notwithstanding that they shall be so rooted out by an horrible ruin, that
there shall be no dignity nor glory at all remaining in those that shall
escape, no, not so much as a glimpse of any name. Isaiah therefore according to
his custom, as also the rest of the Prophets, preuents the mischief in due
time, and moderates the terror by adding this consolation, to the end that the
faithful should assure themselves, that notwithstanding all these things, the
Church shall be saved, and that by this means they should fortify their
hearts in good hope. Even as then in the second Chapter he disputed touching
the restoring of mount Zion, so now also he promises, that a new Church shall
spring up, even as a bud or sprig shoots up in the field, which was undressed
before. They do commonly expound this place of Christ: and so much the rather
is this opinion received, as it seems to have some color by the sentence of
Zachary; Zach. 6.12.
Behold a man whose name is Branch. Which is also further confirmed, in that
our Prophet speaks not barely of this branch, but with addition, of honorable:
as if it had been the meaning of the Prophet to speak of the Divinity of
Christ. And after when the Prophet adds the fruit of the earth, they refer
that to his humane nature. But when we shall consider all things advisedly, I
doubt not but he takes the bud of the Lord, and the fruit of the earth, for an
abundance of most ample and unwonted grace, which abundance shall recreate the
affamished: for he speaks even as if the earth after a waste should be so
barren and dry, that it should never promise any bud to come out of it, thereby
to cause the grace of God to be the more longed for in so sudden a fruitfulnes,
as if seared and barren fields should bring forth grass beyond all hope.

This manner of speech also is much used in the scriptures, to wit, that the
gifts of God shall bud out of the earth, as the Psalmist says, Truth shall bud
out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven, Psalm. 85.12.
Also hereafter in the 45. Chap. The earth shall open, and salvation shall
fructify. It appears by the course of the text that this is the true meaning
of the place: for Isaiah adds in the words following, that the deliverance of
Israel, to wit, this handful yet remaining, which the Lord will save from this
destruction, shall be the glory and beauty of this bud. Also the word
Pheliath which they commonly turn Deliverance, is collectiue in this place as
in many others.

Those who draw and restrain this place unto the person of Christ, make
themselves a scorn to the Jews; as if for want of testimonies of scripture
they should pull in places by the ears to serve their turn. For there are
other places of scripture, by which we may more clearly prove that Christ is
true God and man, so as it is no need to coin proofs thereof from hence. But
yet I confess that the kingdom of Christ is here spoken of, upon which the
restoration of the Church is grounded. Nevertheless, let us observe yt this
consolation is not sent to all indifferently, but only to the remnant which
should be drawn out of death as it were by wonderful means. Again, lest the
consolation might seem to bring but cold comfort if it had been only said that
a small number should be delivered; he speaks of an exceeding glory, and
excellent brightness, to the end the faithful might assure themselves that they
should receive no hurt by this their deminishing, because the Church of God
takes not her dignity from the multitude, but from purity, which is, when God
shall gloriously and excellently beautify his faithful ones with the gifts of
his Spirit. Whence we ought to gather a most profitable doctrine; namely, that
howsoever the faithful be small in number, and that they be like brands taken
out of the fire, yet notwithstanding that God will be glorified in the midst of
them, and will no less show a proof of his excellent greatness amongst them,
then if he were in the midst of many.

Verse. 3. Then he that shall be left in Zion, and he that shall remain in
Jerusalem, shall be called holy, and every one shall be written Or, to life in
Jerusalem.
among the living in Jerusalem.
HE holds on his former speech still, showing, that when all the filth of the
people shall be purged out, then that which remains shall be called holy.
Whereas some think that those are called holy which shall be found written in
the book of life, it seems to me an ouerstrict sense. We should rather read
these two members a part: All those which shall be sound in Zion, shall be holy;
and all those which shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be written in the book
of life. And this repetition is very frequent, and much used among the Hebrews,
namely, Joel 2.32.
when the Prophet sets forth one benefit of God by many titles; as when it is
said, There shall be salvation in Jerusalem, and remission of sins in Zion;
both which are to be referred to one end: yet nevertheless the grace of God is
the better manifested, when the cause of salvation is placed in the free pardon.

There is the like reason in this place: for he says, that the Church being
washed from her filthiness, shall be clean; and that all those who have place
in her shall be truly the elect of God. But yet it is certain that this
appertains not to all the visible Church, in the which there are oftentimes
many mingled, which only carry the name of the faithful, and yet have not any
true mark of their profession: yea, these surmount the little flock in number
for the most part, even as the chafe does the good corn. And howsoever the
Lord had cleansed them from the chafe in their exile in Babylon, as if he had
taken the fan in his hand: yet we know that the Church was very far off from
her right hew notwithstanding. But in regard that the image of this purity
did then shine in some part, which truly appeared after the sheep were
separate from the goats, Isaiah according to his accustomed manner, in speaking
of these beginnings, comprehends the continual course of time even to the end,
when God should fully accomplish that which he had then begun.

We see the very same thing effected every day: for although the Church be not
wholly purged from her spots by being exercised under the rod and correction,
yet notwithstanding she recouers part of her purity when the spots are taken
away. So then she susteines no loss by her afflictions, The Church sustaines
no loss by her afflictions.
because that as she is diminished one way, so she is much more comforted
another way, by casting out from her many hypocrites. For example, the health
of a sick body can not be recovered unless you first purge the rotten and
corrupt humors away which is in it. From hence we gather a very fruitful
consolation, for we are wont to desire a multitude, and would by that judge of
the good estate of the Church: Note.
but we should rather desire to be a small number, that so the glory of God,
rather then of a multitude, might shine in the midst of us. But because our
own glory carries us away, from thence it comes to pass that we more regard
the number of men then the virtues of some few. We must also gather what the
true glory of the Church is, for it then truly florisheth, The true glory of
the Church defined.
when the Saints have place in her: and although they be few and despised of
the world, yet they nevertheless make the estate thereof flourishing and
desirable. But because it will never be in this world that the Saints should
occupy the place alone in the Church, Note.
we must patiently bear the mingling, and in the mean while hold it for a
singular benefit as often as it approaches any thing nie to this purity.

We have said already, that by those which are written in the book of life,
we must understand the elect of God, as if he should say, The profane
multitude shall be cut off, who only have their names written in the earth. Now
the Prophet alludes to the place in Moses in the 32. of Exodus where he desires
rather to be blotted out of the book of life, then that all the people should
perish. But although God have none other book but his eternal Counsel, by
which he has predestined us to salvation, in adopting us for his children,
yet this similitude agrees very well to our weakness, because our understanding
can not otherwise comprehend how God should know his flock, in such wise as
none of the elect should ever be deprived of eternal life. Seeing then that
God has his chosen written, the decree of adoption, by means whereof eternal
felicity is assured unto them, is called the book of life. As touching the
reprobate, although for a time it seems they be equal to the children of God,
yet notwithstanding they are not enrolled in this Catalogue, as we see how they
are driven away when he gathers together, and puts his own apart. Now the
accomplishment thereof shall not be, till the last day: notwithstanding unto
Gods children, because they are assured of their election, when they persevere
constantly, while the reprobate fall to reuolting, it is a great comfort in
calamities, when being shaken with temptations, we continue steadfast in our
vocation.

Verse. 4. When the Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughters of Zion,
and purge the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning.
HE still goes on with the same doctrine: for in as much as we commonly think
that the Church receives great hurt through the afflictions by which she is
diminished, the Prophet insists more and more upon the contrary sentence. And
now to beat back this error, he reasons by the contrary, to wit, that God
rather washes and purges out all the corruptions from his Church by means of
afflictions. By blood, I understand not only murders, and such other notorious
crimes, but all manner of filthiness and uncleanness whatsoever. Now there is
a redoubling in this similitude, by which he repeates one and the same thing
twice, because that which before he called filthiness in general, now he
calls it blood in particular, as the flux of blood, or some such like thing.
In sum, he shows the fruits which these corrections bring, to wit, that by
them our filthiness is cleansed. For whilst ungodliness spreades it self
hither and thither without punishment, then we grow as corrupt as others, for
which cause it is necessary that the Lord should awaken us by admonitions,
yea, as a good Physician, that he purge, lance, and sometimes that he sear,
and burn.

He takes judgment for purity, to wit, for the effect of judgment, when the
things which were declining are set again in their first estate. He adds, the
spirit of burning, by which their filthinesses are purged and consumed. Wherein
we are to note two things: First, that the purgation of the Church is wrought
by the spirit. Secondly, that the name is imposed upon the spirit by the
effects; now of Judgment, now of burning As if he should say, The judgment of
the spirit, and the burning of the spirit. As often then as these manners of
speech are met withal in the Scripture, to wit, The Lord will do these things
by the spirit of truth, power, and righteousness, etc. we may turn this phrase
of speech thus; In truth, in power, and in righteousness of the spirit. For the
spirit of God, from whom both the beginning and end of the work of our
salvation comes, works thus in us. From these epithites then we must observe
what the principal effects of the spirit are: the Lord purges out our dross
by his spirit, that he may amend and reform us. By the word judgment, he
shows what the chief virtue is in the restoration of the Church: to wit,
when those good things which were confused and overthrown are restored, and
set in their right order again. Burning also shows the manner and way which
the Lord uses to restore the Church to her first purity.

Verse. 5. And the Lord shall create upon every Or, habi^^tion.
place of mount Zion, and upon the assemblies thereof, a cloud and smoke by
day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall
be a defense.

6. And a covering shall be for a shadow in the day for the heat, and a place
of refuge, and a covert, for the storm and for the rain.


Upon every habitation.] As if he should say, There shall not be the least
corner in the mountain of Zion, where the grace and favor of God shall not
appear. I take habitation and assembly, for one and the same thing. For I
take not Assembly for congregation, but for the place where men meet. Now to
the end he might describe and set fo^th a full blessing, he alludes to that
which Moses recites; namely, that when the Lord would deliver his people from
the bondage of Egypt, he sent a pillar of a cloud by day, and a pillar of a
fire by night, Exodus 13.21. It is an usual thing with the Prophets, that when
they would set forth any excellent benefit, they then call to remembrance this
most glorious work of God, to wit, The deliverance out of Egypt. Because then
did the Lord wonderfully display the infinite treasures of his grace, to the
end he might establish his Church; not omitting in that work any testimony
of his bounty and goodness, that the felicity of his chosen people might be
famous thorowout the whole world. But above all things, this was most
memorable, that they should be preserved by day, by the covering of a cloud
from the annoyance of too much heat, and that the pillar of fire should go
before them in the night, to the end they should not wander or go astray. The
sum is this; that when God will gather home his Church from out of Babylon,
that the manner of it shall be no less admirable, then that by which the
people were in times past delivered out of Egypt. Not that they should be
accompanied in the midst of their journey between Babylon and Judea, with the
cloud and the pillar of fire, as in the wilderness: but because he showed
testimonies of his favor toward them by means no way less excellent then
they. As if any should say at this day, The Lord will illuminate us by the
light of his holy spirit; he will give cloven tongues, by which his Gospel
shall be spread thorowout the world: No man would take this literally, as if
the Holy Ghost should be sent down from heaven in a visible form: but this
miracle should be remembered only, to the end the faithful might learn to rest
at this day upon ye same power of God in the restoration of the Church, as the
Apostles had experience of in their time. And withal, that by this manner of
speech the Prophet mentions a continual succession of blessing; as if he
should say, God will not stretch forth his hand to deliver you for a moment
only, but even as he has always assisted our fathers in the desert; so after
he has delivered you, he will defend you unto the end.

That which he adds, upon All glory, depends upon that which he said before,
to wit, that the bud which should again sprout forth, should be glorious. It
is as much then as if he had said, Upon those which shall bear the signs and
marks of their deliverance. It may be also that he alludes to that place of
Exodus: where it is said, that the houses which the destroying Angel had
marked, were not hurt: Exodus 12.23. For as then the sprinkling of the blood was
a safekeeper of their salvation; so also Isaiah promises that the faithful
shall be in safety, when God shall have marked them. And this ought to be
diligently observed. For we are admonished, that we cannot otherwise be
partakers of the grace of God, unless we bear his image, and that his glory
do shine in us.

And a couering] etc. Although the Prophet confirms that which we have
touched already, to wit, that God will lead his chosen perpetually, until he
have brought us to our wished end: yet notwithstanding we are admonished that
the faithful shall be always subject to many troubles. For heat and cold,
and other sharper evils then those do still fiercely pursue them: so as when
they are delivered out of one danger, they fall again into another. But behold
here a most sweet consolation, to wit, that against all storms, the only
shadow of the Lord shall suffice us: because by it we shall be so covered, that
nothing shall hurt us, or bring us the least damage. Although then that diverse
afflictions and troubles do enuiron us on all sides, yet the Lord promises
that he will assist us: as it is spoken in the Psalm: The sun shall not
smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night: Psalm. 121.6. For the Lord shall
preserve thy going out, etc. It only remains that we follow our vocation,
and discharge our duties faithfully. It befalles alike to faithful and
unfaithful, to endure many troubles: but the wicked have no refuge nor covert
under which they may shroud themselves; they must of necessity be overwhelmed.
But the condition of the faithful is blessed. For although they be cumbred
with heat and cold, yet they have a sure refuge under the protection of God.
Only let us be mindful that that glory whereof we spoke before do shine in
us: otherwise these things do nothing at all appertain unto us. But if we
bear the mark of God, let us be assured that he will be our help as often as
any tempest shall fall upon us.

THE V. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Now will I sing Or, for.
to my beloved, a song of my beloved to his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard
in a Heb. Son of the oil, or of the fat.
very fruitful hill.
THe argument of this Chapter differs from the former. For the Prophets purpose
is to set forth the estate of the children of Israel as it then was: to the
end every one might take knowledge of his faults, and that by this means,
shame and displeasure in themselves for their sins might provoke them to come
to true and earnest repentance: as also that hereby they might behold their
miserable condition as in a glass. For otherwise they would have flattered
the^^elues too much in their vices, and would not have borne any admonitions at
all. It was needful therefore that their brutishnes should be painted out
before them as in lively colors. But to the end he might procure himself the
greater authority he uses this preface: for they were wont to write excellent
and memorable things in verse; to the end every one might have it in their
mouth, that so there might remain a perpetual remembrance of them. Exodus 15.
According as we see that song which Moses wrote, Deuteronomy. 32. and many others
after him who did the like; that as well in public as in private, one might
hear all things sounded forth by such voices. For the doctrine is thereby more
highly advanced, then if it should be taught only. For this cause Isaiah
composed this song, that so the people might take a more clear view of their
filthiness. Neither is it to be doubted, but these things were handled
excellently, both for art and voice, as the custom is, we know, to compose
verse with the most exquisite skill that may be.

To my beloved.] It is certain that he means God; as if he should say, I
will make a song on Gods behalf, by which he complains of the ingratitude of
the people: because there was much more vehemency in it to bring God in
speaking. But some may ask wherefore Isaiah calls him his beloved. Some do
answer; it was because he was of the kindred of Christ. And the truth is
indeed, that he descended from David: but this seems to be constrained. It
shall be more plain and agreeable, if according to the sentence of S. John, we
say, John 3.29.
that the Church is committed to the friend of the bridegroom: and that we put
the Prophets in this number. For no doubt but this title is fitting for them,
seeing the charge of the ancient people was committed unto them, to the end
they might be maintained under their head. It is no marvel then, if they were
jealous and displeased, when the people turned away their hearts from him.
Isaiah then puts himself in the person of the bridegroom; and as one grieved
and perplexed in regard of the Church committed to his charge, he complains
that she has broken the covenant of wedlock: 1. Cor. 11.2.
and withal laments and bewailes her disloyalty and ingratitude.

And hereby we may see that it was not S. Paul alone who was jealous over the
spouse of God, but also all the Prophets and Teachers; as much as in them lay,
had the like care; to wit, so many as were faithful to the Lord. And this
title of Spouse ought to touch all the servants of God to the heart; and to
quicken up their spirits. For what does a man hold more dear unto him then his
wife? Surely every honest man will prefer her before all treasures; and will
more readily hazard his goods to other men's custody, then his wife. And
therefore he must needs be esteemed very faithful to whose keeping a man
will commit his best beloved. Now the Lord commits this trust to the Pastors
and Ministers, and puts his Church which is as his dear wife into their hands.
What wickedness were it then to betray her by our sloth and negligence?
Wh^soeuer is not inflamed with the care of her preservation, he cannot cover
himself under any pretense whatsoever. Whereas in the second place, he adds
the word Dodi, which he used before; although he cha^geth the first syllable,
yet notwithstanding it is of the same signification with the first. Be it then
that some turn it; Uncle; others Cosine, I am rather of their opinion who take
it by way of allusion. For we must give more liberty to Poets then to other
writers. He has then thus garnished these words, and come over them (as you
would say) to the end that by ye rhythme, and tuning of the verse, he might
help their memory, and quicken their understandings.

My beloved had a vine.] The similitude of the vine is much used in the
Prophets: and there is no comparison more fitting his purpose then this. For he
shows by it two ways how much the Lord esteems his Church. There is no
possesion that a man holds more dear to him then his vine: neither is there
any thing that requires more daily and continual labor and di igence. The
Lord then not only teaches that we are as a precious heritage unto him; but
would also have us take knowledge of the continual care and

In a very fruitful.] In the entrance he shows that God had seated this
people in a happy dwelling place, as if a man should plant a vine in a
pleasant and fruitful hill. For by the word which he uses, I understand an
high place, which is exalted above the plain: we commonly call it a hill.
Whereas some refer it to Jerusalem, as if he should describe the situation
thereof, I think it to be far fetched and constrained. It seems to me
rather, that the Prophet pursues his allegory. And because God had vouchsafed
to take this people into his care and safeguard, he compares this grace to the
planting of a vine. For vines are more easily planted in hills and high places,
then in valleys. And as one says, The vine loves the high hills, the West, and
the side of a wood. He alluded then to the common custom of planting vines.
Afterward he follows the similitude, saying, that the seat of this place
was not common as others were. For in calling it, The son of the oil, or of
the fat, in his language; he means a fat and fruitful place. I approve not
of their exposition who restrain it to the fruitfulnes of Iudeah. For the
Prophet meant to describe the happy and blessed estate of the people by this
similitude.

Verse. 2. And he hedged it, and gathered out the stones of it, and he planted
it with the best plants, and he built a tower in the midst thereof, and made a
winepresse therein: then he looked that it should bring forth grapes: but it
brought forth wild grapes.
HE shows the continual care and diligence of the Lord in dressing his vine:
as if he should say, He omitted nothing of that which is required to be in a
good husbandman, who above all things watches upon his charge. Notwithstanding
we are not here curiously to examine the text, word by word as many do;
saying, That the Church was environed with hedges, to wit, with the protection
of the holy Ghost; to the end it might be secured against all the assaults of
the devil: that the press signifies the doctrine: and that the stones signify
all troublesome errors. The Prophets meaning, as I have showed, was more plain
and simple; to wit, that God diligently performed the office of an husbandman,
sparing nether pains nor cost. But in the mean while, the Jews had great
cause to consider in themselves with how many great and diverse sorts of
benefits the Lord had enriched them. When the Church at this day is set forth
unto us under the similitude of a vine, we ought to refer these figurative
speeches to the benefits of God, by which he assures us of his love toward us,
and also of the care he has for our salvation. It seems that in the word of
planting, order should not be observed: for a man should rather plant first,
and then close it with an hedge afterward. But thus I understand it, that he no
sooner planted his vine, but he forthwith provided all things belonging unto
it. And therefore he justly accuses them of ingratitude and disloyalty, that
they brought not forth fruit worthy the cost and pains bestowed upon them.

And we are greatly to fear lest the Lord take not up the like complaint
against us. For by how much the more the Lord shall have enriched us with
greater benefits then they; so much the more abominable shall our unthankfulness
be, if we abuse them. The Lord never beautifies and adornes his Church in
vain; or that she should only make outward unprofitable shows; but to the end
she might bring forth grapes, that is to say, good fruits. But if we disappoint
the Lord of his expectation, the punishment which the Prophet here foretelles,
will certainly follow. Wherefore the remembrance of his benefits ought to
move and prick us forward with all diligence to yield him thanks. Moreover,
there is here a close opposition in the word vine, thus greatly husbanded:
because that by so much the more we are bound to make precious account of God
his benefits, as they are more rare and excellent; as being pledges of his
particular love toward us. That he causes the sun to shine as well upon
the wicked as the good, and bestows all things necessary upon them for to
feed and cloth them; these are common gifts. But how much more ought we to
prise and esteem this covenant of grace, which he has contracted with us? by
means whereof he illuminates us by the light of his Gospel; which grace he
only bestows upon his beloved. We are therefore above all things to weigh and
consider of this care and diligence, which the Lord bestows, in working daily
upon our minds, and in framing us to his own Image.

Now he looked.] He here complains that the people who had been endued with
so great excellency of gifts, were wickedly and unthankfully become
degenerate; and accuses them for contempt of the loving kindness of God. For
he says, that in stead of good grapes, this Vine brought forth sour and wild
grapes. Now, we must not imagine yt God (before whose eyes all things are naked)
can be deceived of his hope, as a mortal man may be: for in the song of Moses
he publishes with a loud voice, what the peruersitie of this people would be,
and that it was apparent to him even from the beginning. My beloved, says he,
will kick with the heel against me, after she shall become fat and lusty,
Deuteronomy. 32.15. There is then no more uncertainty of hope in God, then of
repentance: neither does Isaiah subtillie dispute here what God waited for in
himself, but how the people ought to behave themselves, least they receive so
great favors in vain. And thus God commands that his Gospel should be
published for the obedience of faith; not that he looks that all should yield
their obedience thereunto; but because the unbelievers might be left without
excuse by the only hearing of it. To conclude, there is nothing which should
more provoke us to live holily and according to God, then when the Holy Ghost
compares the obedience which we yield unto God, to sweet and pleasant fruit.

Verse. 3. Now therefore O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I
pray you, between me, and my Vineyard.

4. What could I have done any more to my Vineyard, that I have not done unto
it? Why have I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth
wild grapes?


NOw he appoints even those to be Judges of his cause, with whom he pleades: as
men are wont to do in things so plain and apparent, that the adverse party
can have no evasion. It is a sign then that God has gotten the better end of
the staff, when he permits those who are guilty, to show whether the matter be
so or no. Now he first demands, What could be more desired of a husbandman or
good householder then that which he did to his Vine. From thence he concludes,
that they are utterly without excuse, in that he should be so wickedly
defrauded of the fruits of his labors: although it seems in the second
member, that he complains in himself that he waited for any pleasing or
desirable fruit of so wicked a people. As it will often come to pass that we
shall complain by our selves, when the event of a thing does not answer our
hope: and we are sorry to have bestowed our labor and cost upon so unthankful
persons, whose peruersitie should rather have kept back such benefits from
them. And we will confess that we were indeed justly deceived, because we were
too easy and light of belief. Yet notwithstanding, this sense will be more
plain; to wit, seeing I have fully discharged my duty, and have done above
all that could have been expected in husbanding my Vine, whence comes it that
it yields me so evil recompense? and that in stead of the fruit which I looked
for, it only brings forth bitter fruit?

If any shall object now, that the remedy was in God his hand, if he had but
only bowed the heart of the people; This is but a frivolous cavil to excuse
them: for their consciences pricked them in such wise, that they could not
escape by laying the fault upon an other. For although God do not pearce with
efficacy into the hearts of men by his holy spirit, to make them teachable;
yet shall it be in vain for any notwithstanding, to mutter that this was
wanting unto them, seeing that their external vocation does sufficiently cut
off all pretext and show of ignorance. Also, God speaks not here of his
power, but he denies that he was bound to do more for them then he did.

Verse. 5. And now I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: I will break the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

6. And I will lay it waste: it shall not be cut, nor dug; but briars and
thorns shall grow up: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain
upon it.


BEcause he holds the Jews as good as condemned persons by their own mouth,
he by and by adds that he will be the auenger of the contempt of this grace,
so as they shall not escape without punishment. For this reproach would not have
bin sufficient to have moved the^, unless he had forthwith threatened the^ with
correction. He gives them now to understand then, that so great wickedness
whereby they have disloyally mocked him, shall not escape scot-free. Now the
sum of the vengeance is, that they shall be deprived of the gifts which they
had abused; not only when God shall withdraw himself from them, but also that
they shall be laid open to the spoil of the enemies. In the mean while he
shows how miserable their condition shall be, when he shall once cease to
bestow his liberality upon them. Whence it follows, that it ought to be
attributed to the singular goodness of God, that this Vine continued safe and
sound till then: yea he admonishes by how many sundry ways it was preserved;
and also how many means God has in his hand to destroy and lay it waste, both
within and without. For his succor being withheld from it, it must needs lie
open to be devoured of all that should pass by, whether men or beasts. After
(says he) that I shall take away my hedge, the beasts shall tread it under
feet, and it shall be eaten up, and the robbers shall rob and spoil it, and
so it shall be laid fallow. And further, because the Lord shall cease to prune
and deck it, it shall bring forth no more fruit, in regard it wants husbanding:
but briars and thorns shall grow up, which will choke the plants; yea, God
will cause ye very roots to wither away by withholding rain.

Now we may perceive by this, with how many weapons God is furnished to revenge
himself upon our ingratitude, when he shall see that we despise his benefits.
True it is that the Prophet continues the similitude: and to the end he may win
the better audience, he enticheth his speech with figures; notwithstanding it
behoues us simply to gather, that even as God daily bestows infinite
blessings upon us, so we also give diligent heed, that by taking away now
this, and afterward that, he avenge not himself upon our contempt of them. And
as touching the government of ye Church, by how much the more it has need of
many helps, so much the more shall she be subject to many chastisements, if she
wickedly corrupt the things that God has ordained for her salvation. And
therefore it is no wonder if so many calamities threaten us at this day, with
wast and destruction. Note.
For we ought to attribute all the ends that shall befall us (whether the decay
of vision; or that the wicked have their swinge; or that wolves and foxes do
creep into the Church) to our own unthankfulness: because we have not yielded
such fruit as we should, but have been slothful and idle. Let us acknowledge
the wrath of God then as often as we are justly deprived of so many benefits as
he does willingly offer us.

Verse. 7. Surely the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah are his pleasant Or, branches.
plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression: for righteousness,
but behold a crying.
HItherto he has spoken figuratively: now he sets down the drift of his
song. Heretofore he has only charged the Jews with judgment: Now he shows
that they are not only guilty, but also that he holds them as convicted
persons. For they could not be ignorant of the benefits which they had
received from God. Thou (says the Psalmist) broughtest a vine out of Egypt,
and having driven out the nations, did plant them in, Psalm. 80.9. Isaiah
follows not all the parts of the similitude neither was it needful: It was
sufficient to have showed the scope and drift of it. The whole people were the
vine: the particular persons the branches: thus he first accuses the whole

It sufficiently appears wherefore the people is called a vine. Because God
had chosen them, and made the covenant of grace and of eternal salvation with
them, and had enriched them with infinite benefits. The beginning is the plant;
the labor afterward follows. This people was adopted of God, and husbanded
by him diverse ways. For their adoption had not been sufficient, if the Lord
had not wrought upon them and framed and enriched them with his graces from day
to day. We ought at this day to be much urged with this doctrine. Christ
affirms, that he is the vine, Ioh. 15.1.
and that being ingrafted into him, the father will purge us, for as much as
God vouchsafes to perform the office of a husband man in this behalf, and
carefully bestows all those things upon us which he (in reproach) says he,
bestowed upon the ancient people. Is it any marvel then if he be grievously
offended, when he bestows his labor in vain, and without profit? From hence
comes that threatening; Ioh. 15.2.
Every branch that bears not fruit in me, shall be hewn down and cast into
the fire.

He looked for judgment.] He begins plainly to show how wickedly the Jews
are degenerate, amongst whom all kind of violence and of injustice had place,
having rejected all equity and righteousness. In the words, he uses a meeting
together; which has great elegancie: and although they sound almost one of
them like another: yet they are of contrary signification. For Mischapt
signifies judgment: Mispach conspiracy, or oppression: Tsedaca Justice: and
Tseaca the cry and complaint of those which were oppressed by violence: which
things were not wont to be heard, when every man had his due. Moreover he makes
mention of two things which God requires principally of his people, as being
indeed the true fruits of the fear of God. Although notwithstanding the
service of God be first in order: yet it is not inconvenient that it should be
described by the duties of the second Table. They are rightly convinced to have
contemned God; because they exercised cruelty against men: for where
inhumanity bears sway; there religion is quenched.

Let us know that the same is now said unto us: for as this people was planted;
so also have we ben. We ought also to call to mind that which S. Paul says,
Romans 11.24.
that we were but wild Olives, and they were the true and natural Olive. We
then which were strangers are grafted into the true Olive, and are purged and
adorned with a continual care of the Lord. But what fruits bring we forth?
truly not only unprofitable, but also bitter. And therefore we are guilty of
greater ingratitude, in regard that we are enriched and abound in benefits,
much more excellent. And justly is this complaint commenced against us, seeing
that violence and wrongs do reign every where. But because the general
doctrine did not sufficiently prick their hearts; he describes two kinds
particularly: to the end he might show them as with the finger how far off
this people were from the fruit that a good vine should bring forth.

Verse. 8. Woe be unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field,
till there be no place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the midst of
the earth.
NOw he reprooues their insatiable avarice and covetousness; from whence frauds,
injuries, and violences do commonly arise. For it is not a thing unlawful in
it self to join one field to another, nor one house to another: but he aims
at the heart; which by no means whatsoever can be satisfied, when it is once
set on fire with desire of having. He describes the affection of those then
which think they have never enough: neither are content, how rich soever they
be. We may see that the covetous are possessed with such a greedy lusting, that
they desire to have all to themselves alone; and think that that which others
have, is their want, or is taken from them. Chrysostom.
And therefore Chrysostom has an elegant speech to this purpose: That the
covetous would gladly take away the sun from the poor; if it were in their
power. For they grutch their brethren, the very elements which yet are common,
and would gladly swal ow them up: not to enjoy them; but because their lust
depriues them of understanding in this behalf. In the mean while they
consider not that themselves are not able to do any thing without the help of
others, and that a man being alone by himself is unprofitable; they only
carke and care how to gather much together; and therefore they devour all by
their covetousness.

He charge the covetous and proud with such a fury, that they would have all
others cut off from the face of the earth, to the end themselves alone might
have it in possession: and therefore there is neither end nor measure in their
lust. What folly and madness is it to drive those from of the earth, whom God
has placed therein with us, and to whom he gives a dwelling place common with
us? The covetous d^si^e to dwell alone. But a worse thing could not befall
them, then to have their wish.
Questionless a worse thing could not befall them then to have their wish.
Neither could they alone till the ground, reap, and perform other necessary
duties of this life; nor yet could they administer things necessary to
themselves. Also God has so united men together; that one has need of the
help and industry of another: and there is no man, unless he be out of his
wits, who will reject his brethren; as though they were hurtful or
unprofitable. The proud also cannot enjoy their glory, if they should be left
alone. How blind are they then who would chase and drive men away to reign by
themselves.

Now as touching the length and greatness of houses: the like is to be said of
them; as was heretofore said of fields: because the ambition of those is also
reproved, who desire to dwell in goodly palaces and spacious houses. It is not
unlawful for him who has a great family to have also a large house: but when
men (puffed up with pride) will add to their houses without cause, only to be
at more liberty, and that one alone takes up the dwelling places which would
suffice a great many; then it is merely ambition and vain glory, which ought
worthily to be reproved. For it is all one, as if having contemned others;
they only should be lodged: and that their poor brethren were worthy of no
more but the covering of the firmament; or that they ought to go seek out
some other habitation.

Verse. 9. This is in mine ears says the Lord of hosts: Or, if there be not
many, etc.
surely many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without inhabitant.
SOmething must be here supplied; for his meaning is that the Lord is set
down as the Judge, having the knowledge of all these things. When the covetous
rappe and scrape their riches together, they are blinded by their lust, and
think not that they must one day be called to an account. True it is that men
are never so besotted, but they attribute some kind of judgment to God; but
they flatter themselves in such wise, as that they think surely God regards
not. So they acknowledge a judgment of God in general, but when it comes to
the particular, there they lay the raines in the neck, and suppose they should
not be kept so short. Also in this particle, if there be not, we see a form
and manner of oath often used in the scripture. For to the end he might the more
astonish them, he speaks doubtfully as it were by sentence broken off in the
mid way. He might have expressed this threatening by a full sentence; but being
imperfect, it holds the hearer more in suspense, and so it brings the greater
fear with it. Moreover, by this manner of oath (half pronounced as we say) the
Lord would teach us to accustom our selves to modesty, to the end we take not
liberty in using execrations.

What is it then that he threatens? That many houses shall be desolate. This
is a just punishment, whereby the Lord corrects the covetousness and ambition of
men, which would not be brought to consider their end, that they might have
contented themselves with a little. As he, who derided the insatiable
covetousness of Alexander, Alexander.
who because he understood by the philosophy of Anacharsis Anacharsis.
that there were many worlds, sighed in himself, Vnus pelle^ Iuneni non
sufficit orbis etc.
because with so much labor he had not yet conquered the government of one. A
world (says he) will not suffice Alexander, he is as discontented as if he
were pinnd up in a very narrow room; or as if he were bounded within some
certain Island; and yet when his time comes to be buried, he must content
himself with a coffin. For it is death only which teaches and constreineth us
to confess how vain a thing the body of man is.

We see every day examples thereof, and yet who is instructed by it? for ye Lord
shows us in a glass how ridiculous the vanity of men is, who lay out an
infinite mass of money to build palaces, which yet will one day be nests and
dens for nightcrowes, owls, mise, and such like beasts. These things are daily
before our eyes, and yet we take none of them to heart, to grow the wiser by
them. There fall out so many and sudden changes, so many houses desolate, so
many cities wasted and laid on heaps, lastly, so many other and so evident
signs of God his judgments, and yet notwithstanding men can not be
withdrawn nor weaned from this insatiable greediness of coveting. The Lord
threatens by the Prophet Amos, You have built you houses of hewn stone, but
you shall not dwell in them. Also, he shall smite the great house with
breaches, and the little house with clefts, Amos 5.11. and 6.11. This falls out
day by day, and yet the inordinate affections of men can not be aswaged.

Verse. 10. For ten acres of vines shall yield one bath, and the seed of an omer
shall yield an epha.
HE teaches, that the like shall befall to the fields and vines, namely, that
the covetous shall not enjoy their revenues which they desire, because their
lust is insatiable; yea so as by their ravening they shall destroy the fruits
of the earth, even as certain beasts do cause the buds of the vine, and ears
of corn to burn and moulder away by their breath. The fields therefore shall
be so barren, that they shall hardly yield again the tenth part of their seed.
The vines also shall yield very little wine. A bath, is a certain measure of
moist things, as Josephus witnesses; now it conteines 72. english half pints,
which measure is very little for ten acres, and principally in a fat soil. An
omer, is a certain measure of dry things, and also conteines (as the same
Author says) 31. bushels. Epha, is the tenth part thereof, whereby it appears
that it conteines a little more then three bushels. And yet notwithstanding in
good ground one does not only gather ten times as much, but thirty times more
then was sown, and in ordinary ground much more then it received; when it
comes otherwise to pass, no doubt it is a certain sign of the curse of God,
who auengeth himself of the insatiable covetousness of men, and they
notwithstanding lay the fault in the badnes of the soil, as if that were the
cause; but all in vain, because we shall not want overplus, if the Lord do not
curse the earth for the covetousness of them that dwell in it. When they gather
together, and heap up so carefully, what do they else but swallow up the
benefits of God by their greediness? And though this vice be not seen in all,
because they are not able; yet the affection thereof is not wanting, for the
world was never more set on fire with this coveting. Is it any wonder then if
it have experience of this punishment of God?

Verse. 11. Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunckenes, and to them
that continue until the night, til the wine do inflame them.
IT was not the Prophets meaning to reckon up all the sins here which then
reigned, but he only touches some perticulars unto the which they were most
addicted: and having handled the general doctrine, it was necessary to come
to application; yea and to touch those things which were chiefest, because
there would have been no end if he should have prosecuted them all, one after
another. After that he has reproved the vice of covetousness, he speaks
against gurmandizing, which was then a very common sin among them; for he
makes choice not only of such particular vices which were in one or two
personages, but of such as reigned commonly every where. And the truth is, that
these vices are so contagious that they infect the whole body. To rise betimes,
signifies as much as to do some thing carefully, as it is said in Solomon, Woe
to the people whose Princes eat in the morning, that is to say, who place
their chief care in feeding their belly, and in inioying their voluptuousnes,
Eccle. 10.16. now this is nothing else but to ouerturne the whole order of
nature. For as David says, Man ought to rise in the morning to go to his
work, and to wait upon his business till the evening, Psalm. 104.23. Men must
not rise in the morning to be idle, but to labor.
But if he rise to do nothing but to take his pleasures, and to give himself
to follow drunkenness, it is monstrous. He adds, that they continue till the
evening. As if he should say, from morning to night, they continued in their
drinkings, and were never weary in gouzelling in of wine. Now abundance and
excess are joined together, because where all things abound, there men abuse
them to excess and intemperancie.

Verse. 12. And the harp and the violl, timbrill and pipe, and wine are in their
feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the work
of his hands.
HE adds Instruments with voluptuousnes, by which, men given to gurmandise,
provoked their apppetit. It may be these Instruments were differing from ours,
yet notwithstanding they appertained to Music, which Isaiah condemns not; for
it is an art in no wise to be contemned; Music in it self not to be
condemned.
but he painteth forth a people ouerflowing in all sorts of superfluity, and
who gave themselves liberty to take all their delights: which sufficiently
appears by that which follows, But they regard not. As if he should say, they
so wallowed themselves in their delights, and were so giued to their pleasures,
that it seemed they were begotten and brought up in them; never thinking
wherefore God gave them things convenient. For men were not sent into the world
to eat and drink, We are not put into this world to plunge our selves in
delights, but rather that we should study how to please God.
and to plunge themselves in dissolutions; but to obey God, and to serve him in
reverence, to acknowledge his benefits, and to study how to please him in all
things; but when they ouerflow in excess, daunsing and singing, without any
other drift then to pass their life in iolitie, they are worse then brute
beasts; for they consider not to what end God created them, neither how he
gouernes the world by his providence, unto which mark all that we do in our
life ought to tend.

I think it enough that I have laid forth that sense which I take to be the
most plain: because I cannot receive other men's accute interpretations: Among
others, theirs who by the work of the Lord, understand the law. Neither am I
purposed to recite every man's opinion. It suffices to hold that the Prophet
lays this reproach upon such as gave themselves to surfeiting, so as they
willingly became brutish; when they withdrew their minds from God, who was the
author of life.

Verse. 13. Therefore my people is gone into captivity, because they had no
knowledge, and the glory thereof are men famished, and the multitude is dried
up with thirst.
I Allow not the exposition of some interpreters; namely, as if the people fell
into many vices through ignorance and error, because the teachers had their
mouths shut up: which in the end was the cause of their ruin. No, he rather
sets himself against a gross and voluntary ignorance: as if he should say,
They drew their destruction upon themselves by their own folly. The sense is
then, that the people shall perish because they had despised instruction;
whereas they might have been at their ease, if they would have believed good
counsel. And therefore the Prophet expresely says, My people: because they
were separate from other nations by a singular privilege; to the end they
being kept and guided under God, might hold a right manner of good life. As it
is said in Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation is so great that has ordinances and laws so
righteous, or to whom the gods come so near unto them, as the Lord thy God is
near (at this day) unto thee? This shall be your wisdom and understanding in
the sight of all the people to hear your God. Such profaneness therefore
greatly agrauates the crime; that this people should be stark blind in the
midst of so great light. And therefore this accusation, namely, That the people
which God had taken into his charge should be without knowledge, was very
grievous. For the law was every way sufficient for the direction of their whole
life: seeing it is a shining light amiddest the common darkness of this world.
And therefore it was a monstrous thing that the people would not give
themselves to walk in the way which was set before them, but rather wilfully
cast themselves headlong into destruction. The Prophet now to their reproach
tells them that they ought to impute all the calamities which they endured, to
their own default, because they refused to bend their ear to God, who would
so faithfully have taught them.

Whereas some expound the word Captivity by a metaphor, it seems too strict:
because the Prophet here describes the punishment, wherewith God did smite this
people in part, and wherewith he determined to smite them afterward: to the
end he might plainly show that the people was miserable by reason of their
sin; as if they had in a manner wished the curse of God to fall upon them. When
the Prophet made this Sermon, there were some of the tribes gone into
captivity already. Also the destructions of both kingdoms did approach. And
therefore the Prophet speaks as if they had been all now presently in Babylon.
Lastly, he adds another scourge, to wit, that not only the common people, but
also the most excellent among them should be dried up with famine and want:
wherein the vengeance of God would be the more apparent. For it was an horrible
spectacle to see the rich and chief men in whom consisted the credit of the
whole nation to wander up and down; dying for hunger. And yet God passed not
measure in executing so rigorous a judgment upon them: because we must
always have an eye to the root of their ignorance, to wit, that the Jews
were become wholly desperate, so as they obstinately rejected the light of the
heavenly doctrine. Yea, they stopped their ears against the Lord, when he was
ready to perform the office of a good master in teaching them. From hence we
gather a very profitable doctrine: namely, that the fountain from whence all
plagues do flow, is, because we cannot endure to be taught by the word of
God. And that is the principal thing which the Prophet would have us to mark.

But some may ask whether ignorance be the cause of all evils: A simple
ignorance: and affected ignorance.
and do wittingly blindfold themselves. That which is far off, is when men
reject the principles whereby they ought to take direction for the rule of
their life. For they ought to look directly unto God and his will. But when
they despise it, they are rebellious and obstinate: yet notwithstanding such
are ignorant, because they will not learn, but revolt from the foundation. And
yet that ignorance excuses them not, which they willingly embrace, in
rejecting such a teacher. Wherefore this sentence remains sure, that the
people are diverse ways afflicted; because they knew not God, neither would
suffer themselves to be taught by him.

Verse. 14. Therefore hell has enlarged Or, his soul.
it self, and has opened his mouth without measure, and their glory, and
their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices among them, shall
descend into it.
BY this verse the Prophet meant to press those with fear which were grown
too secure, and were nothing moved with any threatening whatsoever. For
although the captivity was an horrible thing, and the famine also; yet was the
stubbernnes and blockishnes of this people so great, that they laid not these
fearful signs of God his anger nigh their hearts in good earnest, as they
ought to have done. And therefore Isaiah threatens some thing yet more
fearful; to wit, that hell had opened his throat to devour them all. I said
erewhile, that this which is here said of the time present, ought partly to be
referred to the time to come. The Prophet also speaks not rashly, as of things
clear and manifest. And he would present the thing as it were before the sight
of the people, to the end they might behold that with their eyes, which they
could not be brought to believe. Moreover, as in comparing hell, or the grave
to an insatiable beast; so by the soul, he means the belly, whereinto the
meat descends. The sum is, that the grave is as a large and deep gulf,
which by the commandment of God, opens her throat to devour men adiugded to
death. You see then that this prosopopei, or faining of persons, has much
greater vehemency in it, then if he had said, that all were judged to die.

The multitude.] He joins the base and noble together, to the end none should
flatter himself with hope of escape: as if he should say; death shall consume
you, with all that you have, namely, pleasures, riches and pomp, together with
all things else, wherein you place your confidence. This then is a confirmation
of y^ former sentence. And this particle Therefore, Or, for this cause, is
always to be observed. For ye people imputed the cause of their calamities to
fortune; or rather howsoever it were, they were hardened under the corrections
of the Lord. Isaiah gives them to understand therefore that these things fell not
out by hap hazard. Moreover, men are wont to quarrel with God, yea, they are
so proud and shameless, that they fear not to make head against him.
Therefore to the end this pride might be beaten down, he shows that the
chastisements wherewith they are punished, are most just: and that they were
wholly to blame themselves, for being every way so miserable.

Verse. 15. And man shall be brought down, and man shall be humbled, even the
eyes of the proud shall be humbled.
THis is as it were in the shutting up of his speech; in which he shows to
what end and issue these scourges would come unto: to wit, Chap. 2, 11.17.
that all should be humbled; and that the Lord only should be exalted. We have
seen the like sentence heretofore, and have there declared the Prophets
meaning: to wit, the end why we are chastised of God. For adversities are so
odious unto us, that for the most part we can conceive no good thing to proceed
from them. When we hear of punishments, we have them in horror and
detestation, because we consider not that the Lord is just. But the Prophets
call us to another consideration, to wit, that whilst men sport themselves in
their sins, they smother as it were the justice of God, which shines not
clearly, unless when he takes vengeance upon our iniquities. Behold indeed
an excellent fruit, and such a one as is to be preferred before the salvation
of all men. For we ought to let all things give place to the glory of God,
which shines no less in his justice then in his mercy.

There is no cause then, why we should so much fear the rods of God
wherewithal we are corrected: but ought rather in all humility to embrace
whatsoever the Prophets pronounce against us. Although in this kind of speech
the Prophet has also touched the pride of the hypocrites to the quick; who
ever become the more wicked when they escape still unpunished: as if he should
say, do ye think it is possible that after God has forborne you so long, yet
at the last you should tread him under your feet? no, assure your selves he
will arise, and will be exalted in your destruction. Because the Prophet has
put the word Adam in the first place, and after Aisch; some think he meant to
comprehend as well noble as base; as if he should say, It shall not be the
common people only which shall perish, but also all those who are noted for
their honor, riches and dignity. And I willingly receive this sense, because
Aisch is derived from force; and Adam from earth. If any will expound it more
simply, I leave him to his own judgment. Howsoever it be, the Prophet has
here comprehended all mortal men; as well great as small.

Verse. 16. And the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy God
shall be sanctified in justice.
HE shows the manner of the excellency; or the formal cause, as they say, of
this exaltation, whereof he spoke before: and it is as much as if he had said,
That the Lord of hosts (whom the wicked do proudly tread under foot) shall
be exalted, when he shall show himself the judge of the world. And thus he
scorns the sottish confidence, wherewith the wicked were swollen. For if
judgment and justice must have the upper hand; there ruin must needs follow:
seeing their pride was nothing else but an ouerturning of the whole course of
nature. Now we must diligently note, that it is no more possible for the wicked
to remain always in an happy estate, then that God should suffer his glory
to be abolished. Although judgment and justice do differ in nothing one from
the other, yet the repetition is not superfluous. The vehemency also of the
speech is further enlarged, when he adds in the second member, and the holy
God shall be sanctified, to the end the wicked should not through a false
imagination promise a lasting felicity by force, or without cause; which they
cannot do, but that the holiness of God shall thereby be abolished. But seeing
God is holy of his own nature, it must needs be that he must be sanctified.
Whence it follows that ruin is prepared for the wicked, that so their
obstinacy and rebellion may be brought under, because God can not deny
himself.

Verse. 17. Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the strangers
shall eat the desolate places of the fat.
SOme translate, The lambs shall feed according to their manner; others,
according to their portion; but he means, according to their custom. This
verse is diversely expounded: but we are to note in the first place, that it is
the Prophets meaning to give consolation to the faithful which were terrified
by the hearing of such fearful judgments of God: for look how much the more
a man is of a good and tender conscience, so much the more feels he the
present hand of God, and the more nearly is he touched to the quick with his
judgments: lastly, the fear and reverence of God causes us to be touched in
good earnest with whatsoever it be that is set before us in his name; wherefore
they could not have been withheld from despair in hearing so terrible
threatenings, unless this consolation had bin added thereunto as a sweet sauce
to give them occasion to relish and take a sweet taste in the mercy of God.
And this is a thing much used in the Prophets, to wit, still to have an eye
always to the faithful, to furnish them with comfort. Although then says
Isaiah it seems God is minded to destroy all this people, yet notwithstanding
he will show himself a faithful shepherd toward his lambs, and will feed
them as he was wont to do; mark that for one point.

Also the meaning of the Prophet was to beat back the pride of the great ones,
who in oppressing the faithful and simple by an unjust tyrany, boasted
notwithstanding that they were the Church of God still; he tells them therefore
that this their boasting is full of lying and vanity, thus to adorn
themselves with the title of the flock or sheepfold of God, because they are
goats, and not lambs; and therefore when they shall be cut off, God will still
have means in his hand to feed his flock; but yet by the way, that the lambs
shall never thrive, nor be in good plight, till they be separated and delivered
from the goats.

The desolate places.] The expositors do yet again vary upon this place also:
but I think the true sense is, that after the children of God have been driven
away for a time as banished men, they shall be restored to their right, and
shall then recover that which was desert, or which was trampled and spoiled by
the fat beasts; that is to say, by the proud and cruel which had spoiled them
of their goods. By the deserts, he means the possessions which they had left,
and which others had occupied, in as much as he has regard to the custom
which was then well known and commonly used amongst them, to wit, that if any
possessed fields or houses, he had his hand (as it were) in such wise stretched
forth upon them, that no man durst touch so much as a clod of earth, but and if
he left them, an other occupied them. The people then had so left their
inheritances, out of which they had bin driven, that they had no hope ever to
recover the same again; so as in regard of them, they might well be called
deserts, yea, deserts of the fat, because the strong and men of power possessed
them. Now although it may simply be taken for fat deserts, yet notwithstanding
it is more probable that the tyrants are here called the fat.

Verse. 18. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as with cartropes.
Having inserted a brief consolation to aswage the sharpnes of the punishments
in regard of the faithful, he returns to the threatenings, and goes on to
strike them through with these thundering speeches, which at the least might
terrify them in some sort. By cords, he means nothing else but the
allureme^ts of sin, by which men suffer themselves to be deceived, and
thereby to become hardened in their hearts in wickedness, because lightly they
either contemn the judgments cords. For as often as men are led away to
sinning by the concupiscence of their flesh, in the beginning thereof they
consult in themselves, and feel some bridle which restraines them, and which
doubtless would hinder them from committing of evil, if that they were not
ouercaried by a contrary tempest, which shakes off and puts away all remorse
of conscience. When any man is entised or stirred up to evil, his conscience
by a secret instinct asks him, What do thou? And sin never creeps thus
upon us, but we feel some remorse. And God has thus in deed prevented men, to
the end all should not give over themselves with an unbridled licentiousnes to
commit evil. Whence comes it then that men are so obstinate in their
naughtiness? To say the truth, they suffer themselves to be beguiled by
allurements, and do so drench their minds with delighting themselves therein,
that they despise the judgments of God, and all to pursue their own sins
with greedines. They flatter themselves, in believing cords and wicked bands by
which they draw iniquity to them. Whence it appears, that God did not
threaten them in vain; for they not only sinned wittingly, but obstinatly and
rebelliously. To conclude, they so pulled and halled sin unto them, that they
were left without excuse.

Verse. 19. Which say, let him make speed: let him hasten his work that we may
see it: and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw near, and come,
that we may know it.
HE notes out one particular, by which he shows how they drew sin unto them
as with cart^opes. There is nothing so dangerous as to reject all thought of
God his judgment, and not only that, but also to contemn whatsoever he says
as a fable. Isaiah meant therefore to express an extreme contempt, when as men
having been forewarned of God his judgments, shall in scorn say, that they
would gladly see them, and deride at them, as at some bug-beare, which these
words so full of contempt and presumption do evidently show: Let him come: let
him hasten.

Work here (by a kind of excellency) is taken for judgment. For it seems
in deed that the Lord regards not when he deferres to take vengeance upon the
iniquities of the ungodly: but when he arises to give judgment, and to
execute punishment, then his work appears, and is manifest in deed (as they
say) because we perceive by the effects that the world is governed by his power
and authority. Work then in this place is specially taken for judgment,
because thereby it something appears unto us that God is not idle, but does
his office. Now the wicked speak of him in derision and scorn, and we have
experience of this frowardnes and obstinacy at this day more then is meet,
and we must wage the like war against them which the Prophets did. The
wicked think that God takes his ease in heaven, and cares not for men's
matters, as certain epicures, who placed God his chiefest happiness in this,
that he had nothing to do. And although they imagine that there is some God,
yet they acknowledge him not in his judgment, but in the mean while they make
good cheer, and never pine away themselves with such thoughts. Let the
Prophets and Ministers cry, and that with open mouth, let them threaten and
terrify us whilst they list, we will securely lie still, waiting till that
which they threaten come to pass, and in the whilst we will make merry. Thus
the Prophet recounts the speeches of the wicked, whereby they showed in what
contempt and disdain they had his word, not only saying let his work come: but
let it come quickly and let it draw near: for in regard it came not suddenly,
they concluded, that whatsoever he executes not as soon as he has spoken the
word, is but smoke.

In the second Epistle of S. Peter he brings in the wicked speaking thus and
saying, 2. Pet. 3.4.
that since the world was created all things have continued alike; there is
still one continual course of nature, and therefore it is but a mockery to
look for a day of judgment after so many ages. In the mean while they
provoke God and that of set purpose, to the end he should forthwith show his
power. They add Counsel, to his work: as if they should say, how long will
God deliberate upon it, ear he tell what he will do? let him rather show us by
effect what he has decreed. Their fault also is greatly amplified in that they
dare to mock so wickedly at the doctrine which was so familiarly taught them:
being herein more wicked then the very profane heathen; because they despised
that word whereby God had adopted them as a peculiar people unto himself.

That we may know it.] See here manifest signs of infidelity. For the wicked
will not acknowledge God, unless they presently feel him: neither will they
believe his words. But if the holy Ghost by this mark brandeth them for
abominable wicked ones, it behooves us by a contrary mark to let our faith and
godliness appear: to wit, that we rest in the bare and naked word of the Lord,
although the event do not by and by show it self, seeing it is the property
of faith to hold us fast glued to the mouth of God. The confirmation is added
indeed by the works, but we must not begin at them. For thus stands the
difference between the elect, and the reprobate: the elect rest simply upon
the word of God, and yet in the mean while despise it not: but the wicked
despise his word though he should speak a thousand times; and are importunate
upon him still to see his works; and when judgment is threatened, they ask,
where is it? and thus they can not endure that one should mention it unto them,
unless it do by and by appear by effects. Where there is so little
moderation, it follows that there is no faith, but rather a rebellious
obstinacy, which turns a man out of the way, and estrangeth him more and more
from God.

Verse. 20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; which
put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for sour.
ALthough many restrain this sentence to Judges, yet if we observe the words a
little more narowly, it shall be easy to gather from the whole context, that
this is a general sentence. For having before cried out against those who
could not endure any admonitions, he still goes on with the same reprehension.
Now it appears that such kind of people have always some pretense or other
wherewithal to deceive themselves. And therefore they never cease to make
replies as often as their vices are set before them: but he expressly reproues the
shameless impudency of those who of set purpose endeavored to overthrow all
difference between good and evil. And the letter Lamed placed before these
two words evil, and good, shows the sense to be thus; namely, those that make
evil of good, and of good evil: that is to say, who by craftiness full of
vanity cover, excuse, and disguise wicked matters, minding by their subtilties
to change the nature of every thing: but on the contrary by lies and slanders
they overthrow that which is good. For whosoever has the fear of God, he is
withheld by conscience and shamefastnes from excusing his sins, or
enterprising to condemn that which is just and right. But they who are void of
this fear, are also impudent to commend vices, and make no bones of it at all
to condemn virtues, the which in whomsoever it be, is an evident sign of
desperate wickedness.

We may also apply this sentence to diverse particulars. For if private persons
are here accursed when they say, evil is good, and good evil: much more is it
true of those, who are advanced into high place, and have public office; whose
duty is to uphold and maintain all that is lawful and right. But he rebukes
all such in general who flatter themselves in evil doing; and for hatred
which they bear to virtue, condemn that which is done uprightly: yea, who to
cover their filthiness, use cauilling shifts; and become altogether obdurate in
themselves. The Prophet says, that such folk do all one, as if they should
turn light into darkness, and sweet into sower: For thus they show themselves
to be possessed with a diabolical rage; when they so mingle and confound all
principles of nature.

Verse. 21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
own sight.
HE goes on still in rebuking such as could not be reclaimed by any persuasion
whatsoever, who shut the gate against all good counsel and holy admonitions
which are made unto them. Lastly, he pronounces a woe against all desperate
contemners, who oppose and set the lusts of their flesh, or the perverse
confidence of their own wisdom, against God his doctrine, and admonitions.
And not only reprooues those which are so puffed up with a false opinion of
their wit, that they are ashamed to learn of others: but he also condemns all
such in general, who being wise in their own conseit, refuse to hear God
speaking, and to obey his holy counsels. This vice has been too common in all
times, and is to be seen at this day in many: who although they make
conscience to reject all the doctrine of godliness openly, yet are so far off
from any true teachablenes and obedience, that they proudly reject whatsoever
likes them not. They grant there ought to be some bridle to hold them in: but
on the otherside, arrogancy so blinds them that they quickly murmr against
God, when he shows them but the way wherein they should walk. And not content
with that; but with furious indignation gnash their teeth when any reprooueth
that which they do. For where shall we find that man who renouncing all his
own reason, will be ready to learn, from God his mouth only? Now there is
not a more dangerous pestilence then this lying show of wisdom, seeing
teachablenes is the beginning of godliness; when renouncing our own wisdom,
we go thither where God calls us. But this false persuasion, is not condemned
only, for that it makes men disobedient to God, and so causes their ruin:
but also because it is intolerable in it self. 1. Cor. 3.18.
For we must become fools, if we will be the disciples of God. It is also
certain, that wheresoever this modesty and humility bears not sway, by
means whereof men do voluntarily yield their obedience; there reigns a
furious rebellion. In their own eyes, is as much as when we say in our French
tongue, In their own opinion, or conceit.

Verse. 22. Woe be to them which are mighty to drink wine, and to them that
are strong to power in strong drink.
Now the Prophet reprooues another vice: to wit, drunkenness and intemperancie
of life, whereof he had spoken before. And thus it is very likely this chapter
was gathered out of diverse sermons; and that the heads of them are summarily
touched only. For in regard the Prophet saw no repentance, he was constrained
to repeat and beat into their minds one and the same thing often. He returns
then to the same reprehensions which he had touched before: and preaches
again against drunkenness, excess, covetousness and other corruptions.
Whence we may gather, that when admonitions profit nothing, we ought to use the
greater vehemency against the stubberne and unteachable. Neither truly are
we to fear, lest this importunity should be wearisome; but often to repeat
the reprehensions till they bow under them; or else till they show an incurable
malice.

He taunteth them pleasantly, telling them that they are lusty and strong to
drink; because they spend and consume their strength in fighting with the pot
and glass. But what a brutishnes is this, for a man being of a good
constitution of body, to make show of his strength, in drinking excessiuely.
Also because the figure Synecdoche is used of the Prophets in all the
Scripture; he takes the special for the general, as if he should say, Woe to
drunkenness, woe to intemperance, etc. But he has of purpose set forth that
which was the most shameful, that so he might make this vice generally
abhorred and detested. For there is nothing more vile and base (as we have
said) then for a man to prove his force, in devouring and swallowing in meats
and drinks, and thus to wrestle against himself by cramming in as much meat as
his belly will hold. Such men hold no rules of sobriety, neither do they know
why God nourishes them. We eat and drink to uphold the body, and not to
overthrow it. We live to serve God, and to bestow our strength in the helping
of our neighbors turn: but when men endeavor not to preserve their strength by
these means, but rather ouerturne it by proving how much they can bear, it is
certain they are become worse then brute beasts.

Verse 23. Which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him.
HE reproues a corruption which was then rise in judgment seats, and shows
the cause why there was no justice kept in them, Exodus 23 8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.
to wit, for that gifts had place and were in account. For avarice blinds the
eyes of the wise, and peruerts all order of justice and right, yea eu^n in
those who otherwise bear some good affection thereunto.

Now this corruption whereof mention is made in this place, is the most
frequent of all others in judgment seats, and therefore the Judges which
would judge justly, ought to take diligent heed they avoid it. Neither must we
give ear to those Judges who deny that presents are given them to that end:
or who say, that although they receive them, yet notwithstanding they will give
upright judgment: Where gifts have place, there all love of justice must needs
be corrupted.
for where gifts have place, there needs must all affection of equity and
justice be corrupted, neither can it be possible that thine affection should
not be most inclined to him of whom thou have received thy reward. To conclude,
let us give ear unto the Lord, who says, that rewards blind the eyes of the
wise, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
and pervert the words of the just, lest in doing otherwise we will seem to be
wiser then God himself.

Verse. 24. Therefore as the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the
chafe is consumed of the flame, so their root shall be as rottennes, and
their bud shall rise up like dust, because they have cast off the law of the
Lord of hosts, and contemned the word of the holy one of Israel.
THat it might not seem he has cried out so often without cause, he shows
again how great and horrible punishment is near to this people, and
denounces an extreme ruin against the obstinate, because they would not be
brought into the way, but obstinately resisted against the heavenly doctrine:
now he uses such figures as were fit to express his meaning and also such as
touched them nearer to the quick, then if he had spoken plainly without them.
He begins with a similitude, and forthwith ends with a metaphor, in attributing
a root and bud to the people, as to a tree: for by these two words he
comprehends whatsoever force was in the people; were it open, or hid: and
says, that all of it should perish. For even as when the root which gives
strength unto the tree and susteineth it begins once to rot, then the tree
decays: so he threatens destruction to this people, and tells them that all
their strength is wasted and consumed. But he shows not now, as heretofore,
the particular kinds of wickednesses by which they had provoked the wrath of
God. He only adds the general cause, to wit, the contempt of the law of God,
because, as we all know, that is the fountain of all evils. He also amplifies
the fault greatly, that in as much as the will of God was manifested unto them
in the law, they could not say it was by ignorance or error, but of set malice,
that (in shaking off the yoke of God) they gave themselves the raines to all
licentious liberty, which was all one, as if in rejecting a most loving
father, they should give over themselves to be vassals and slaves to the
devil. Add withal that he accuses them of a general revolt, as if he
should say, they were not rebellious against God in one kind only, but they
wholly forsook the Lord as disloyal apostataes. Moreover, that they did not
only despise the word of God, but he complains of a thing more horrible, to
wit, that the word was become abominable unto them, or, that they rejected it
with a wicked despitefulnesse. If so be then that the contempt of the law of
God be the welspring, head, and perfection of all evils, there is nothing we
are more to fear, then that Satan should so prevail as to turn us aside from
the reverence of it. And if we be subject to some faults, yet let us suffer at
the least that the medicine may be applied unto them; unless in rejecting
thereof proudly and maliciously we mean to draw eternal perdition upon our
own heads.

Verse. 25. Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and
he has stretched out his hand upon them, and has smitten them that the
mountains did tremble, and their carkases were torn in the midst of the
streets: and for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.
IN this verse the Prophet repeates the former judgments whereof the Jews had
experience already; and shows, that they be not yet at an end, but that far
worse punishments are prepared for them, unless they return into the right
way. I confess indeed that the time past is often changed for that which is to
come, but the words of this text will best agree so; for he propounds two
distinct things concerning ye obstinat rebellion of this people: first, how God
had already chastised their iniquities. Secondly, seeing there was no sign of
repentance, that he has yet other scourges ready to correct their
wickednesses. Thirdly, he shows what these scourges are, and tells them that
the Assyrians shall come as soon as the Lord shall but hold up his finger, yea
that they shall come at his only hissing. As in verse the 26.
This is the Prophets meaning. Whence we may gather, that as soon as a people
has escaped one calamity, they forget their chastisements, and never think
more of the judgments of God: and although experience should also be the
mistress of fools, yet they harden their hearts under the blows. Isaiah
strikes at this senselesnes, as if he should say, Have you so soon forgotten
the calamities under which you groned not long since? Whence came it that the
dead bodie^ were cast here and there, but because the Lord had st^etched forth
his hand upon you? And if God dealt with you as a Judge, what is the cause that
the wounds which do yet bleed, do not work a reverent fear in you to preserve
you from heaping sin upon sin thus freshly again on all sides? And to this
end does he repeat the particle Therefore, wherein he yelds a reason of his
speech, as if he should say, These are not afflictions that come at adu^nture,
but are manifest signs of God his disp^easure. He also says expressly, that
God was angry with his people: for had not the Jews fallen from their
dignity, their condition had been more happy then that of all ye nations of
the world besides. When God therefore deals so sharply and severely with his
chosen people, no doubt but they had grievously provoked him by their
rebellions. And withal he refutes the false brag of the Jews wherewith they
were wont to advance and boast themselu^s, as if they forsooth ought to be
exempt from all corrections, because they were the peculiar people of God. Also
when he says that the mountains trembled: by this comparison he expresses
the weight of the punishments under which they hardened themselves, to the end
he might yet more sharply reprove their sens^lesnes, as being more bloekish
then things without feeling if they felt not the wrath of God, and the horrible
vengeance wherewith the kingdom of Israel had been chastised.

And for all these things.] He threatens more heavy plagues to come, as has
been said. For although the wicked know they are corrected of the Lord, yet
they think all is past, as soon as they have received but two or three
blows. And therefore they wrap themselves up as it were in a vain confidence,
as though the worst were past, and that the powers of the Almighty were spent.
This is the cause why he cries out, that the wrath of the Lord is not yet
appeased: and that although they have suffered many calamities, yet
notwithstanding he is furnished with variety of darts, from whence they were
to look for infinite wounds.

The Conjunction Copulative may be resolved into the Disjunctive, as if he
would say, Be sure that the hand of God is yet s^retched out. Now he has
regard to that which he had said before, Verse 25.
namely, that the hand of God was lifted up. He says now, that it is not
pulled in, but that he wi l yet pursue and smite them with wounds, yea, yet
more fearful and terrible. We ought to meditate upon these sentences
diligently, to awaken such men who fear not to lie snorting, and that after
they have been humbled and chastised of God.

Verse. 26. And I will lift up a sign unto the Nations a far, and will hiss
unto Or, a people
them from the ends of the earth: and behold, Or he.
they shall come hastily with speed.
IN this, and in the verses following, he shows what punishment the Lord would
inflict upon this people, to wit, that they shall be so spoiled by the
Assyrians, as the Israelites their brethren had been a little before them, yea
much more grievously: for howsoever the Assyrians in t^mes past had much wasted
them, the kingdom of Judah nevertheless was not yet brought to ruin. Add
hereunto, that the destruction of the kingdom of Is^ael was as a
looking-glass, wherein they might behold the wrath of God, and the just
judgment which he had brought upon them: and yet no question but this
prophecy seemed incredible to them of Judea, although there were many good
likelihoods of it, and all because the state was quiet; and they no sooner had
the least show of truce, but they forthwith grew careless: therefore he
says, that this destruction should come from far, whereof they did not so
much as dream. And thus he sounds the Alarm as if the enemies had bin
already at the gates. For he puts not these words from far, and from the
ends of the earth, to put them in any hope, but rather of set purpose he thus
speaks, so the end they should not judge of the wrath of God by things
apparent to the eye.

We are wont to esteem of dangers according to the outward appeara^ce of
things; when the enemies are far off, or that they be hindered by other
impediments to molest us; we think we are safe. Thus the people slept, as they
say, on both sides, no otherwis^ then as if they had been out of all danger.
But Isaiah declares, that all this shall not hinder the Lord from sending the
Assyrians with banners displayed to cut them in pieces. This lifting up a
sign, is a figurative kind of speech, because when the banner is displayed and
the Captain gives the sign, then the soldiers are wont to arm themselves
and to begin the fight.

He shall hiss.] Although the change of the number be a thing much used in the
Scripture, yet it is not without reason, I take it, that the Prophet of many
nations makes but one people, for he shows that when God should assemble many
peoples and join them to one body, that this shall be no confused multitude,
but should be as an entire body, having one head which should rule and have the
sovereignty over them. He rather used ye word of hissing then some other that
sounded more terriblie, as of sounding the Trumpet, or such like; to show, that
God had no need of any great noise to assemble the enemies together, and that
it is no hard matter for him to be revenged on them which have offended when
the time appointed is come, for he can finish all things by the least sign
that may be.

And behold he shall come.] He here yet further confirms that which I have
noted, to wit, that the wrath of the Lord must not be esteemed according to
outward objects: for although it seems that all things do promise peace, yet
shall war come notwithstanding suddenly from thence whence we looked not for
it: yea and although it may seem we be environed with friends round about us,
yet shall God raise up enemies from the ends of the earth, which shall come
easily upon us (all lets whatsoever to the contrary) as if a plain and smooth
way were prepared for them. Which we ought to bear well in mind, lest we
suffer our selves to be blinded by some false trust and confidence.

We are also to observe, that wars fall not out by chance, nor at men's
appointments, but by the commandment of God, even as if he sounded the Trumpet
to assemble the soldiers. Be it by war then, by famine, or pestilence that
we are afflicted, let us know that all of them do proceed from the hand of
God, because all things come at his voice, and readily obey him. And yet the
Chaldeans had not this zeal of obeying God, for they were carried away with
their covetous and insatiable lust and desire of dominion, or thought of some
such like end, but God served himself of them to execute his judgments. And
herein we clearly see an admirable witness of the power of God, which is not
tied to the will of men, neither depends it upon their fantasies, but it is
free for him to call whom he will to do him service, yea such as are utterly
ignorant of it. And yet the wicked are not hereby excused when they are thus
drawn against their purpose, because they serve not God freely, for they
propound some other thing unto themselves, as cruelty, spoil and violence,
and God by their cruelty corrects the sins and offenses of his people.

Verse. 27. None shall faint nor fall among them: none shall slumber nor sleep,
neither shall the girdle of his loins be loosed, nor the latchet of his shoes
be broken.
HIs meaning is, that all things shall be so fitted and prepared, that nothing
shall let or hinder them to march on forward: as if a Prince having enrolled
his soldiers, should by and by give order to prepare the ways to bring in
provision of victuals, and to administer al things necessary whatsoever. He
shows then that they shall be ready and nimble, and that there shall be no
impediment to cause them to prolong the time. He also shows their diligence,
affirming, that none of them should so much as slumber. Now in these words,
none shall slumber, nor sleep, the order is a little inuerted: for he should
rather have said, none shall sleep, nor slumber: because it is a less matter
to slumber then to sleep. But this manner of speech must be thus resolved, They
shall not slumber nor sleep: that is to say, they shall be so far off from
sleeping, that they shall not slumber at all. We have the like phrase of speech
in the 127. Psalm, He which keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. It
is an Hebraisme then, which agrees neither to the Greek, nor Latin.

Verse. 28. Whose arrows shall be sharp, and all his bows bent: his horse
hoofes shall be thought like flint, and his wheels like a whirlewind.
HIs meaning is, that they shall be furnished with fit weapons. Now he retains
the manner of fight used among the Assyrians and other Eastern people, who for
the most part were accustomed to arm themselves with bows and arrows for
war, as we see the Englishmen do at this day: but under these particulars he
comprehends all sorts of weapons. But because the way was long, and the voyage
difficult, the Jews might happily think there would be many impediments to
turn away the enterprise of the enemy, and that is the cause he says, why the
hoofes of the horses should be like flint, so as they should neither faint nor
be weary, but should easily come to Judea. Hereunto appertains the other
member, when he compares the wheel^^ to a whirlewinde: for the people of old
time were wont to go to war with Chariots, and therefore he not only
mentions horses, but also wheels. And all this is to be referred to this great
haste and diligence which they should use, to wit, that the Lord should not be
hindered by the long distance of the way to bring in deadly enemies against the
Jews to destroy them.

Verse. 29 His roaring shall be as a Lion, and he shall roar like Lions whelps:
they shall roar, and lay hold of the pray: they shall take it away, and none
shall deliver it.
THis appertains to cruelty. He compares the Chaldeans to Lions, whose sight
is fearful, and of nature cruel, as if he should say, They shall not be such
me^ as are touched with any sense of pity, mercy, or humanity, but shall
rather show themselves cruel, and like wild beasts. He also adds, that they
shall be of such strength, as none shall dare to come near them to pluck the
pray out of their teeth. Meaning thereby, that the Jews shall be utterly
unable to disappoint their assaults, because that for fear of their cruelty
none shall adventure to approach unto them; for in regard that God would use
them as his servants to punish the Jews, it was requisite they should be
furnished with a terrible power and majesty, that this sottish people might be
made to understand at the last that they had not to do with men, but with God,
Heb. 10.31.
into whose hands it is a terrible thing to fall.

Verse. 30. And in that day they shall roar upon them, as the roaring of the
sea: and if they look unto the earth, behold darkness, and sorrow, and the
light shall be darkened in their sky.
THe Prophet adds this, to let the Jews understand that the Chaldeans should
not come into the field at randon, but should be appointed thereunto by God,
and prepared by his hand. By the roaring of the sea, he means such a great
hurly burly, as should seem like unto a deluge, by which all Judea should be
drowned. He also cuts off all hopes, in foretelling that there should be
neither case nor end in these chastisements. The Jews (says he) shall look
up and down to find means to escape, as men are wont to do in any great
perplexity, but on which side soever they turn them, be it to heaven or to
the earth, they shall find no ease from either of them, because miseries and
calamities should utterly ouerwhelme them on all sides. This manner of speech is
very common, yea even among the rude people, at such time as destruction and
calamities do threaten on every side, when no issue or ease can be perceived.
It is necessary then that it should fare thus with us, when the Lord pursues
us, to the end his high hand may always appear in our eyes; and that on which
side soever we turn our selves, we might behold the creatures armed against us
for the execution of his judgments: for we may sometimes escape men's hands,
but which way shall we be able to flee from the hand of God?

THE VI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. In the year of the death of king Vzziah I saw also the Lord also
sitting upon an high throne and lifted up, and Or, with his lowe^ parts he
the lower parts thereof filled the Temple.
THey have been wont to begin the 6. Chapter here, but some think it is the
beginning of this book; and therefore that the Prophesies of Isaiah were not
well collected and gathered together, alleging this reason, that ye Prophet
refuses to take upon him ye office of teaching,

But why was not this vision given him in the beginning? I answer, Mat. 10.5.
John 20.22. Act. 2.3.
he establishes them anew in a solemn manner. He breaths on them, and tells
them that they should receive the holy Ghost; and contents not himself
therewith, but sending down the holy Ghost from heaven upon them in fiery
toongs, he put an extraordinary power upon them. So according to the diverse
mutations which happened in times and kingdoms, it was necessary that Isaiah
should be confirmed and approved again by a new vision: as well that he might
be encouraged to constancy, and might with the more cheerefulnes follow his
vocation in time to come, as also that his ministry might be authorized among
the Jews by the authority of God. This reason to me seems sufficient why he
had not this vision at the beginning, but had it rather sometime after he began
to teach.

Now that this book takes not his beginning Vzzias, who was dead as I think
before this prophecy was published. Lastly, the Prophet unto him after he had
already begun to execute his office.

Some by Death understand the Leprosy wherewith this king was smitten, 2.
King. 15.5
which was indeed a civil death, because the king was constrained to forsake
the company of men, and to leave the government of the kingdom: but I had
rather take death in his proper signification. Thus I think then, to wit, that
Isaiah prophesied the former things from the time of Vzziah, at that time when
he was stricken with Leprosy, and that Isaiah had this vision after his death,
at that time when Iothan should succeed him. For we know how the change of
kings do bring diverse sturres and hurly burlies, so as it is no wonder if
Isaiah were confirmed again in his calling. Also the prophecy it self which
follows will declare sufficiently that he had preached sometime before he had
seen the Lord. For the blinding of the people is here spoken of, whereof the
Prophet had such experience, yt their stubburnnes might have caused him to have
given over that which he had begun, seeing he lost all his labor. The Lord
then confirms him by this vision, to the end all discourageme^ts being set
apart, he should manfully continue to do his duty, and go on with that which
he had begun by the commandment of the Lord.

I saw the Lord.] Some ask how Isaiah could see the Lord, who is a spirit, and
therefore can not be seen with corporal eyes: and also because the
understandings of men are not able to mount up to his infinite greatness, how it
can be that he should comprehend him under a visible form? Isaiah, whereby he
tasted and saw the incomprehensible majesty of God as far as his weakness
could bear. And therefore he attributes a seat, a garment, and a bodily sight
unto him. Whence we may gather a very profitable doctrine, to wit, that as often
as God shows any sign of his presence, we are to know for certain that he is
present by us: for he deceiues not in giving vain representations, as men
wickedly disfigure him by their foolish inventions. Because this representation
then was a true testimony of God his presence, Isaiah rightly affirms that he
saw him. As when it is said that John saw the holy Ghost in the likeness of a
Dove, Matthew. 3.1.6
the name of the spirit is transferred to the sign, because he should not
doubt but it was the holy Ghost which rested upon Christ.

John in the twelfth of his Gospel teaches and that truly, Christ, because God
never showed himself to the fathers but in his eternal Word, and only Son.
And yet some notwithstanding do restrain this amiss to the person of Christ
in my judgment, seeing the Prophet gives him indefinitly the name of God. The
name Adonai, which seems best to appertain to Christ, favors their opinion
nothing at all, for it is often attributed unto God simply, and without
relation. Mention is made of God in this place then without determining of
either end: yet notwithstanding one may properly say, that Isaiah saw the glory
of Christ, Col. 1.15.
because he was the image of the invisible God from everlasting.

Sitting upon a seat.] He could not have better described the majesty of God
in regard of the circumstance of the place then under the person of a Judge, to
the end his majesty might the better awaken the Jews, and we shall see
hereafter the horrible judgment which the Lord pronounces from his seat. But
to the end we think not the Prophet should invent how he could paint out God,
we must note that he faithfully represents the same shape and form which was
exhibited and showed unto him.

And with his lower parts.] Almost all the expositors do understand this of the
fringes of the garment; although it may be referred to the verges of the
judgment seat: so as his meaning is to show that the greatness of God was
such, that it spread it self throughout all the parts of the Temple. He also
means to attribute a more excellent and glorious form unto God, then to any
humane creature whatsoever. And that he thus appeared in the Temple, it does
yet add greater authority to the vision, because he had promised his presence
to his people there, and there the people waited for answers, according as
Solomon had expressly declared at the dedication of the Temple, 1. King. 8.30.
To the end then the people might know that these things proceeded from God
(upon whom they called daily, and upon whom in a vain confidence they were
puffed up) this vision was showed to the Prophet in the Temple. Now this must
needs obtein great credit among them, when it was preached aloud that this was
no word of any mortal man, but a divine oracle coming down from God, whose
name they had wont boldly to vsurp as often as they would attribute unto
themselves any great matter. For this indeed was a very sharp and an odious
prophecy, and therefore had the greater need of sound confirmation. And it is
also a thing usual among the Prophets of God, namely, that he spoke unto them
from his Temple and from his Sanctuary.

Verse. 2. The Seraphims stood upon it, every one had six wings; with twain he
covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did
fly.
Having testified that God had appeared unto him full of majesty and glory;
he adds that the Angels were about him, which he calls Seraphims, in regard
of their feruencie. Now although the etymology of this word is well enough
known, yet diverse reasons are brought on both sides. Some affirm they are
called Seraphims, because they burn with the love of God: others, because they
are swift as fire: others, because of their brightness. Howsoever it be, the
incomprehensible majesty of God is set forth unto us in this description, as
by the sun beams, to the end in them we might learn to consider and adore
so admirable and excellent a glory. Many think there were two Seraphims,
Exodus 25.
even as there were two Cherubims, which compassed the Arc. I willingly
receive this opinion, and yet I dare not affirm any thing, where the scripture
is silent. Now in regard it is an usual thing in the scripture to appropriate
the descriptions which are made of God, to the signs, the use whereof was
ordinary, and the knowledge thereof familiar among the faithful; it may be
the Prophet saw such a figure. In the mean while I so continue to hold this as
a probable conjecture, that yet notwithstanding I hinder not any to receive a
contrary interpretation, if any can bring better warrant, for Daniel saw
thousands of Angels, and not two only. Dan. 7.10.

Six wings.] This figure is not without reason. fly, signify nothing else but
their readiness and nimblenesse to execute the commandments of God. And
seeing the analogy of this thing is certain and ^uident, I hope those which
are not contentious will covered their faces, sufficiently show, that the
Angels themselves can not bear the brightness of Gods majesty; yea, that they
are dazzled with his look, even as we are when we behold the sun in his
brightness. And if the Angels can not bear the majesty of God, how great shall
the rashness of men be if they strive to attain thereunto? Let us learn then
to enquire no further of God then is lawful and expedient, in such wise as our
knowledge may soberly and modestly taste that which yet is very far off from
our capacity. Yet notwithstanding the Angels do not so cover their faces as
that they should utterly deprive themselves of any sight of God, for they fly
not at randon. So we also may behold God, but yet so far forth as the
weakness of our understanding can endure. There is a little more difficulty
feet covered, lest they should touch the earth, and so get some soil from
thence, as we our selves and others have been wont to do. For even as in
walking we gather dust and filth, so whilst we remain upon the earth we are
infected, as with touching some contagious thing. Whence we may learn, that
the faithful shall have no acquaintance with the Angels, unless they fly
aloft, being no longer glued to the earth. This is the exposition which some
bring. But I am rather of their opinion who think these wings had a contrary
use to those which were above rehearsed: for even as they covered their faces
with wings above, lest they should be overwhelmed with the exceeding brightness
of God; so had they wings beneath, to cover themselves from our sight. Now if
it be so that we can not behold so small beams of the brightness of God which
glimmereth in the Angels but we be by and by dazzled; how can we behold that
most excellent and bright majesty of God which is able to swallow up a^ our
reason? Let men learn then that they are far remote from the perfect
knowledge of God, seeing they are unable to attain^ so far as to the Angels.
This exposition I take to be the best, and yet I reject not the first.

Verse. 3. And one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
hosts: the whole world is full of his glory.
IT was necessary all these things should be represented to the Prophet in a
vision, to the end that not only the people but even Isay himself should be
the more moved. For there was no less need in regard of him, then of all the
people, seeing he was to sustain very hard and difficult assaults; neither
could he have boldly denounced these things, unless he had been first
confirmed. The people also being ^dmonished by this vision how exceeding great
and fearful the majesty of God wa^, who pronounced this sentence against
them, should be terrified therewith in good earnest. This God (at whose only
look^ the Angels themselves tremble, and whos^ praises they continually sound
forth with full voice; lastly, whom they serve and obey) came forth upon his
throne: but men whom he had vouchsafed to adopt for his children, proudly with
obstinacy resisted him. Now when we hear that the Angels are continually
busied in sounding forth Gods glory, let us know that their example is set
before us for our imitation. To be occupied in celebrating Gods praises, is the
highest service we can do him.
For it is the highest service we can do unto him to be occupied in celebrating
his praises. In as much then as he herein makes us companions with his Angels,
it is to the end that whilst we wander here below, we should notwithstanding be
conjoined and made like to the heavenly inahbitants. Lastly, to the end the
harmony between us and the Angels may be perfect in all points, it behoues
that the praises of God do not only sound upon our tongues, but that all the
actions of our life be referred thereunto; which we shall then do when we
endeavor to do all things therein to the glory of God. The Ancients have used
this testimony against the Arians when they would prove the three persons in
the one essence of God. Holy, Holy, Holy.
I mislike not their judgment, although if I should have to deal with
heretics, I had rather use stronger arguments, for they triumph and become the
more hardened when we contend against them with such places as are not
sufficiently plain and evident, as here they might readily answer, that by
the number of Three in this place was showed a perfection (as in many other
places of the scripture besides.) Although I doubt not but the Angels do here
set forth one God in three persons (and to say the truth, we can not magnify
God, but we must by and by celebrate the praises of the Father, of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost) yet notwithstanding I take it we should rather use more
solid testimonies, to the end that whilst we go about to prove the chief
article of our faith, we expose not our selves to the scoffs of heretics. So
then by this repetition there should be rather showed an unweariable
continuance of praising, as if the Prophet had said, The Angels never ceased
their melody in singing the praises of God: as indeed his Holiness ministers
to us infinite matter thereof.

The whole world is full. Word for word it is, The fullness of whole earth:
which we may refer as well to the fruits, living things, as to all sorts of
riches wherewith God has furnished the earth; and so the sense should be, that
in this adorning of the earth, and the diverse furnitures which are in it, we
may see the glory of God to shine, because they are so many testimonies of his
fatherly love toward us. Notwithstanding the most simple and natural sense
is, that the glory of God filles the whole world, and is spread abroad
throughout all the quarters of the earth. And in mine opinion there is here a
close opposition, by which he beats back the foolish ouerweening of the Jews,
who imagined the glory of God was showed no where else but upon them, as if
they meant to shut it up in their Temple. Now Isaiah shows that it is so far
off from being shut up within so narrow bounds, that it fi^^es the whole
earth. And this agrees to the prophecy which will afterward follow touching
the blinding of the Jews, for thereby he has given entrance for the Gentiles
into the Church of God, in regard they supplied the empty and forsaken place
of the Jews.

Verse. 4. And the lintels of the door cheeks moved at the voice of him that
cried, and the house was filled with smoke.
THis noise of the posts sufficiently shows that it was no voice of man which
the Prophet heard; for there is no mortal man that is able to make the posts
and threshold of an house to shake with his voice. Now the Lord meant not only
to confirm his voice to the Prophet, but to men also, and that for ever, that
so it might be known throughout all ages. Let us know then that the voice of
God is confirmed to us at this day by this sound, to the end we also should
tremble as often as he speaks: for if the dumb and insensible creatures are
moved therewith, what ought we to do; we, I say, which feel, smell, taste, and
only understand it, to the end we should holily and reverently obey his holy
word?

The house was filled with smoke.] This was a common and an ordinary sign
which the Lord used among the ancient people: for as soon as Moses entered
into the Tabernacle we read that the smoke was spread, Exodus 33.6.9.
so as the people could neither see Moses nor the Tabernacle. The smoke then
which Isaiah describes was no new thing; but God according to his accustomed
manner meant thereby to t^stifie that he would manifest his power in executing
judgment upon this people.

But some may ask why the Lord would manifest his presence by this sign
rather then by an other? smoke, thereby to admonish men of their weakness. And
yet he would not have them to be either blind, or besotted with the blockishnes
and error of the Papists, who at this day cover ignorance under the name of
simplicity: but he forbids to search or pry further into the heavenly
mysteries then that which is manifested unto us by himself in his word: for
that (as S. Augustine Augustine.
says) is a very learned ignorance. Wherefore as often as mention is made of the
like smoke, let us know it is as a bridle by which we ought to be kept in awe,
that we should not be too curious in searching into the counsels of God.
Secondly, this smoke was to strike a fear into David describing God to be
terrible and angry, says, that clouds and darkness are round about him, Psalm.
97.2. which also agrees very well to this place, because he pronounces an
horrible judgment, to wit, the blinding of the Jews. Some would have this a
forerunner of ye fire which should burn the Temple: but that which I have set
down is more probable.

Verse. 5. Then I said, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of
polluted lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips: for mine
eyes have seen the King and Lord of hosts.
NOw the Prophet tells in what manner he was effectually touched with this
vision, to wit, that he was so terrified with the fear of Gods presence, that
he thought himself undone. And he adds the reason wherefore he thought thus
of himself: Because (says he) I am of polluted lips. I wonder why S. Jerome
has turned it, Because I held my peace, seeing there is no ambiguitie in the
word. It is true that the verb Damah signifies to hold ones peace, but in this
place there is a certain note of the verb passive which is added. It may also
be translated thus, Woe unto me for I am brought into silence: because silence
is often taken for death in the scripture, and it is said, that those which are
buried are in silence. But seeing it is all one as touching the sense, I will
not contend much about the translation. His meaning is then, that he was so
terrified with the sight of God, that he became as a dead man. And indeed
there is no cause why we should wonder at this; for man must be wholly brought
to nothing in regard of his flesh, to the end he may be renewed according to
God. Whence is it that men live, that is, that they think they live, being
puffed up with the knowledge of their own reason and power, but because they
are ignorant of God? And so before he reveal himself to us we think we are
gods rather then men, but when the Lord appeeres, then we begin to feel and
perceive what we are. From thence comes that true humility which consists in
this, that men attribute nothing to themselves, but depend wholly upon God.
Wherefore this and such like places upon this argument, ought to be diligently
observed. Now it was an ordinary thing with the holy fathers to cry, Judge.
13.22.
I shall die, I am undone, as often as they saw God. Wherefore before our minds be
well awakened by approaching to God in good earnest, our life is nothing else
but a vain imagination: we are in darkness, wherein it is very hard to discern
truth from error: but when we are come into the light, it is easy to discern
the one from the other. So when God comes to us he brings the light with him,
to the end we may see that we are nothing, which yet we can not perceive
whilst we are puffed up with a vain opinion of our selves before.

Yet mine eyes have seen.] Is it the sight of God which brings death to men?
For it seems strange that the look or presence of God should take away the
life, whereof he is the fountain. I answer, of polluted lips.

to the lips? Was he pure in his understanding, in his thoughts, and in the
other parts of his body? I answer, polluted, yea even in that part which is
the most holy in him. And this I take to be the simple and native sense of this
place, although the expositors have said nothing touching it hitherto.

In the mids.] This is added by way of exposition. For here he puts himself
among the people, no otherwise then as one who felt himself guilty of the
pollution of the whole body, and forgets the purity he had received of God,
because he was unable to stand before him. Hence it appeeres, how such err as
think the Prophet feigned as the common people are wont to do, who forge
diverse inventions of God. For as I have said, the presence of God is the
confounding of the flesh, because it shows us that we are nothing in our
selves. He which sees God, and is guilty of his own misery, what can he
feel but his own perdition? because God is the Judge, from whom nothing can
be hidden, or unknown; in whose presence all our purity becoms impuritie. And
if this befell the Prophet, what may we think of our selves? for what are we
in comparison of him? Although God has begun to purge us, yet must we always
acknowledge our uncleanness, the relics whereof we shall always feel in our
flesh. From this place also we are to gather a general doctrine, to wit, that
men's mouths are polluted and impure if they be not purged of God. All
doctrines of men smell of impuritie.
Whence it follows, that all humane doctrines do always smell of their
impuritie: for there is nothing pure, but that which proceeds from the Lord.

Verse. 6. Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me with an hot coal in his
hand, which he had taken from the altar with the tongs.
THe Prophet shows what remedy was given him after he had been thus
terrified, and as he thought to death: and this confirms that which I have
said already, to wit, that the purity of the lips comes from God only, for
men can bring nothing of their own which is not vain and impure. If any
object, it is absurd that the Lord should purge him now, as if his tongue had
been impure and profane before, which notwithstanding was the organ of the
holy Ghost: I have heretofore sufficiently answered this objection. True it is
that the Lord had purged him before, but according to his measure. The
purgation which is now added is greater, because it has his degrees and
increasings, which no man can wholly obtain at the first. Wherefore we must
not gather that the Prophets lips were impure before, because they are now
purged: but we are to regard to what end this was done, namely, because the
Lord would augment and increase his graces in him, and raise him up higher in
dignity, to the end he might have greater authority among the people; and
this was requisite by reason of the times, and of the mutation which was then
in the state. The fire is taken from the altar, as divine and heavenly, because
the law forbad to take any strange fire from thence: the reason is, in regard
that whatsoever men do mingle with sacred things, can not but be a mere
profanation. Wherefore Isaiah was taught by this figure, that all purity
flows from God only.

Verse. 7. And he touched my mouth, and said, lo, this has touched thy lips,
and thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sin shall be purged.
WE see how God stoopes down to the weakness of humane sense. He puts the
tongs in the hand of one of ye Seraphims; to the end he may take a cole from
the Altar and apply it to the Prophets mouth. This was done in a vision: yet
notwithstanding God raised up the understanding of the Prophet by the help of
this outward sign. But we must not think that the cole had any virtue in it
self, as superstitious people imagine hidden virtues in magical arts: there is
nothing of all this here; for it is one God and none other which can purge
uncleanness from any part whatsoever. The Angel was here the minister of the
purgation, but he was not the author of it; to the end we post not that over to
another which belongs to God alone. And this the Angel himself expresses
clearly, in that he attributes nothing to himself, but taking the holy pledge
which he had received of God, he applies it as a sacrament to the mouth of the
Prophet: not as if he could not have been cleansed without the cole, but because
this visible sign was profitable for a witness and confirmation of such a
thing. And this also is the use of Sacraments, The use of Sacraments.
namely, to confirm us according to our weakness. For we are not Angels to
behold the mysteries of God without any helps; and therefore he lifts us up to
him by little and little, and as it were by steps.

Behold he has touched.] He shows how the confirmation which was given by the
sign was not in vain, God gives us the thing signified in the Sacramen^s, and
feeds not our ^ies there with empty shadows.
but that the thing which was signified by it was forthwith granted, so as
Isaiah well perceived he was not deceived. Whence we may gather, that the thing
it self is given us in the Sacraments with the sign. For the Lord feeds not
our eyes in the Sacraments with bare and empty figures, but he ioynes the
truth it self with them, to testify that he works by the signs effectually.
And we must note this so much the more diligently, as there are few at this
day who are acquainted with the true use of the Sacraments; as also in regard
that commonly there are contentions among many holy and learned personages,
even about this matter. Now in the first place we must hold this article, The
truth never separated from the signs, yet they must be distinguished.
That ye truth can never be separate from the signs; although it ought to be
distinguished. For we see and feel the sign; as the bread which is given us
by the Minister in the Supper: and because Christ must be sought in heaven, it
behoues us that our thoughts be carried thither. Notwithstanding he offreth his
body by the hand of the Minister, to the end the faithful might truly enjoy
it; Faith.
provided that they aspire to heaven by faith where he is. He gives it then to
the faithful who raise up their minds to him by faith, because he can be no
deceiuer.

Now the unbelievers receive the sign indeed, but because they lie groueling
upon the earth, and ascend not up into the kingdom of Christ, they are not
partakers of the verity, because that he which has not faith, can not lift up
his thought to God, and therefore can not be partaker of Christ. It is faith
only which opens us the gate into the kingdom of God: wherefore whosoever will
live by the flesh of Christ, it is necessary that he be lifted up far above
all humane sense into heaven by faith. In a word, The Spirit.
there is nothing but the spirit of God only which can make us partakers of
this Communion: yet notwithstanding it follows not thereupon that the truth of
the Sacraments should be diminished by the unbelief of men, seeing God always
of^reth the spiritual thing, but the wicked leave it behind them; even as the
grace of God by the Gospel is offered to all, but all do not receive it,
although they hear it, and be constreined to consent to the truth of it.

Moreover we learn from this place, The Word and Sacraments must go together.
that the Sacraments are never separated from the word, for the Angel
rep^esents not a dumb person in this place; but after he has given the sign,
he by and by adds the word, to show the end of it: for it could have been no
Sacrament, unless the word had also been joined unto it, whereby Isaiah might
understand wherefore the cole was put to his mouth. And therefore let us know
that the principal part of the Sacraments consists in the word, which without
it are but mere corruptions; as we see at this day how the Sacraments in the
Papacy are commonly turned into mere may-games. Now the sum is, that there
should remain no impediment why Isaiah should not now sustain the person of
God, being perfectly cleansed, and pure from all spot.

Verse. 8. Or, after.
Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, whom shall I send? and who shall
go for us? Then I said, Here am I, send me.
THe Prophet begins now to declare the end of this vision, and why the Lord
appeared in so glorious a majesty to ordain him a Prophet again, to wit,
because he was to carry an incredible embassage touching the blinding of the
Jews: he is made more certain then of his vocation in so odious a matter, to
the end that treading all fear of man under his feet, he may obey the
commandment of God, for there is nothing that so secureth the minds of the
faithful, as when they know they serve God. He had also another testimony, to
wit, that he was purged of God, and this was sufficient to make him undertake
the hardest burden which could be imposed upon him.

Whom shall I send?] The Prophet brings in the Lord speaking, as if he could
find no man fit to do this message. Some think that the blockishnes of the
Priests and Prophets is here touched, because not one amongst them was able to
teach, although they were many in number. Now although this reason has some
color, yet I had rather refer it to the certentie of ye vocation of the
Prophet, to wit, that the Lord called him not forth at randon, but with choice.
This is then a grave deliberation which the Lord takes as touching him whom he
should send: not that he doubts but these manners of speech are in regard of
us, even as when he said, I will go down, and see, Genesis 28.21. For God, to
whom all things are manifest, needs no inquiry: but to the end that men may
not think he hastens too much in doing any thing, therefore he applies himself
to their common manner of speech. So when he asks, Whom he should send, he
signifies, that he needs not a common person, but an excellent Teacher in the
execution of so great a charge. Hence we are to gather that the authority of
Isaiah was confirmed, to the end he might not only be held for a Prophet, but
the chief among the Prophets. Who shall go for us? I am of opinion indeed
that this place notes out the three persons in the Deity, as elsewhere also,
Let us create man after our image, Genesis 1.26. For God deliberates with
himself, and that in the plural number. And no doubt but he here consults
with his eternal Wisdom and Power, that is to say, with the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

Here am I.] This so prompt an answer sets forth the greatness of that
readiness which proceeds of faith. For he who before was like a dead man, fears
now no difficulties at all. Whence we see, that this terror whereof we have
spoken heretofore, proceeded not from rebellion, as if he would flee the
presence of God, and refuse the charge which was enjoined him: but because he
had need of new grace, that so he might feel and know himself sufficient for
the susteining of this office. Whence it is to be observed, that we can never
rightly enterprise any thing, without certain testimony of our vocation: for
without that, He that doubts of his vocation, must needs stagger at every
step.
we shall stagger and doubt at every step.

Besides, it is a great prop to uphold our infirmity, when we feel that we
are not destitute of necessary gifts, but that God furnishes us, to the end
we may the more easily perform our charge. Moreover it behoues us to be
instructed by this excellent example of obedience, that as often as the Lord
calls us, we be ready and prepared to bear the burden which he shall lay
upon us, and that we refuse it not, notwithstanding all the difficulties which
may stand in our way. When the Prophet says, Here I am, it is as much as if
he should have said, I am ready to execute that which God shall command me;
for by this manner of speech, obedience is often noted forth in the Scripture.

Verse. 9. And he said, go, and say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed,
but ye shall not understand: ye shall plainly see, and not perceive.
IT appears again from hence more clearly, how necessary this vision was for
Isaiah, to the end he might not faint in his course even at the first push. For
this was a great offense of mind unto him, that he must be feign to have
experience of such an obstinacy and rebellion in the people of God; and not
for a year or two, but even for more then sixty years together. It was
necessary therefore that he should be well armed, and to becom^ even as a wall
of brass, that he might be enabled to stand against such a rebellion. The Lord
plainly testifies to Isaiah then, that he shall have to deal with obstinate
people, whom he shall do very little good upon; yet that he must not faint by
taking offense at so strange a thing, neither be discouraged by such a
stubburnnes; but yt he is to overcome all these temptations, and to pass
beyond them with an invincible courage. For the Lord admonishes him before
hand touching that which should come to pass: and it is as if he should have
said, Thou shall teach, but without fruit, but yet cease thou not for all that
to instruct still, because I command thee: Ministers are to yield obedience
unto God: and to commend the success of their labors to the blessing of God.
and though thou perceive no fruit, yet be not therefore weary: only obey me,
and leave all the issue of thy labor unto my will. I forewarne thee touching
these things betime, to the end thou should not faint nor turn aside by
reason of thy ill success, as though something unexpected were befalne thee.
Add withal, that he is commanded to detect their blind obstinacy openly, as
if of set purpose he should thunder out against them, and should say, I know it
very well that I shall lose my labor, but I care not, it is enough for me that
God approues of my actions, to whom my preaching shall be a sweet smelling
savor, although it bring death unto you, 2. Cor. 1.

Verse. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ear heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them.
HEre the former sentence is better expressed. For God not only admonishes
Isaiah that he shall lose his labor in teaching; but also that he will close
up the eyes of this people by his doctrine, thereby giving them occasion of
greater blindness and obstinacy, which in the end shall work their perdition.
He signifies that the people being deprived of reason and understanding, shall
perish, and that there shall be no remedy left: notwithstanding he
therewithal aduertiseth ye Prophet, that his labor shall be an acceptable
sacrifice unto him, howsoever it bring ruin and death to the Jews. And truly
this is an excellent sentence, not only because Isaiah foretelles the things
which were accomplished in the kingdom of Christ, but because it conteines a
very excellent doctrine, the use whereof is perpetual in the Church of God.
Also those who walk faithfully in the ministry of the word, shall be forced
to feel the experience, of it: and we learn it by effect more then were to be
wished: but this has been common to all the servants of Christ, and therefore
ought we to bear it with the greater courage, howsoever it be a great scandal
to those that serve God with a pure conscience, Besides, we are not only much
offended hereby, but Satan under this pretext pricks his instruments forwards
to bring their doctrine into the greater disgrace; namely, that is not only
without fruit, but also because it does hurt, so as it makes men more
obstinate, and works their confusion. For many at this day having nothing else
to reproach the doctrine of the Gospel withal, affirm, that the preaching
thereof brings no other fruit but this, that it makes men worse then they were
before. Now whatsoever the event be, yet notwithstanding God declares that our
ministry pleases him, because we do that which he has commanded.

Besides, albeit our labors seem unprofitable, and that men cast themselves
headlong into destruction, waxing more obstinate, yet must we go on still,
because we do nothing of our own will, and therefore to content our selves
that we are approved of God. We have cause to sigh indeed when the event
answers not our labor: and we ought to be much in prayer unto God that he
would give his word efficacy. Yea, we are to lay the fault in part upon our
selves, when we see so little fruit; yet are we not for all that to cast away
our weapons, or to forsake our charge. The truth must always found forth from
our mouths, although there be no cares to hear it, yea, although the world be
as blind and as senseles as stones. For it is more then sufficient that we
faithfully serve to the glory of God, and that our labors are pleasing to
him: neither is the sound of our voice in vain when it leaves the world
without excuse.

The faithful teachers ought here to receive a singular consolation, to
fortify themselves the better always against the offenses which fall out
every day by the rebellions of men, lest they be thereby cooled: no, let them
continue in their office with invincible constancy. Now farasmuch as this also
is a general offense, to wit, that the lively word of God (at the hearing
whereof all the world ought to tremble) strikes thus the ears of men without
fruit or profit; let the weak in faith learn also to strengthen themselves
with this sentence. We are wont to wonder how it can possibly come to pass
that the greatest part of the world should so furiously resist against God.
And from thence also arises this difficulty, to wit, whether that can be the
heavenly truth of God or no which is rejected without punishment; because it
is not likely that God would speak to men, to the end they should scorn him.
But to the end our faith wa^^er not, we must oppose this stay; namely, that the
office of teaching was committed to Isaiah, that in casting abroad the seed of
life, it should bring forth nothing but death: as also that mention is not made
here of that which befell once, but it is a prophecy of the kingdom of
Christ as shall be said anon. Furthermore the circumstance is to be noted, that
Isaiah was not sent to all, but only to the Jews: wherefore there is very
great vehemency in the particle demonstratiue Hinneh, as if he should say, The
people whom the Lord had specially chosen, heard me not; but shut their eyes
in so manifest a light.

Therefore let us not marvel, if whilst we speak to those who brag of the
name of God, it happens to us even as if we told a tale to deaf ears. True it
is this is a sharp message that the Prophet should say he is sent of God to
stop up their ears, to shut their eyes, and to make their hearts fat, because
it seems these things are nothing agreeable to the nature of God, and that
therefore they are contrary to his word. But we must not think it strange if
God avenge himself upon the malice of the people by such an extreme blinding
of them. In the mean while the Prophet has showed heretofore that the cause
of this blindness was in themselves. For in commanding them to hearken, he
testifies, that there is a doctrine fit for their instruction, if they would
show themselves teachable; and that the light is offered to enlighten and lead
them, if so be they would open their eyes.

All the fault then is imputed unto the people, because they rejected so
wonderful a blessing of God. Whence the solution of the difficulty which we
touched a little before, is more apparent. I grant it seems very hard at the
first blush, that the Prophets should make the hearts of men more hard; seeing
they bring the word of God in their mouth, by which as by a light men should
lighten and order their paths, Psalm. 119.105. And we know that David gives it
this title, Psalm. 19.9. It is not the office of the Prophets then to blind the
eyes, but rather to open them. And hereafter this word is called perfect
wisdom, Chap. 8. wickedness of men. For even as they who have sore eyes can
not accuse the Sun for hurting them with the light thereof: nor he which
has a weakness and fault in his hearing, a clear and very loud voice which he
can not bear: Similies.
lastly, as he that is of a weak capacity is not to be offended with high and
difficult things which he is unable to comprehend: So likewise the wicked can
not accuse the word of God that they become the worse after the hearing of it.
Seeing then that all ye fault is in themselves because they do not give it
access into their hearts, what wonder is it if that which was appointed for
their food, do become their bane? For it must needs be, that the disloyalty
and infidelity of men should be punished in this manner, The punishment of
infidelity.
to the end they should feel death from that, whence they might have received
life; and darkness from thence, whence they might have received light: lastly,
all noisome and hurtful things from thence, where they might have had the
fulness of all blessings to salvation. Which is diligently to be noted, because
there is nothing more common with men, then to abuse the gifts of God: and
whilst they make themselves believe they are very innocent, anon they deck
themselves with other men's feathers. But they are doubly wicked, in as much as
they apply not those things to their true use which the Lord has given them
in trust; but have also profanely and miserably corrupted them.

S. John alleges this place to set out more plainly the obstinacy of the
Jews. True it is that he recites it not word by word; but yet he explanes the
meaning thereof sufficiently. And therefore could they not believe (says he)
because Isaiah said, he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts.
Notwithstanding this prophecy was not ye cause of their unbelief, but the
Lord so foretold it, because he foresaw they would be such. Now the Evangelist
applies that to the Gospel which was practiced under the law: and teaches
therewithal, that the Jews of his time were deprived of reason and
understanding, because they were rebellious against God. Although if any should
ask the first cause, we must come to the predestination of God. But because
this counsel is hidden from us, we must not be curious in searching into it.
For the reason of God his eternal counsel apperteines not to us; but we must
look to the cause which is before our eyes, to wit, their rebellion, by which
they made themselves unworthy of so many and great benefits.

S. Paul also shows from this place not once but often, that all the cause of
their blindness remained in themselves, Act. 28.27. Romans 11.8. They, says he,
have made their ears heavy, and stopped their eyes. So, that which the
Prophet attributes here to doctrine; that the Apostle attributes to the wicked
affection of this people, who were the cause of their own blinding. Act. 28.
Ioh. 12.41.
S. Paul brings in the holy Ghost speaking in this place. S. John says, that
Isaiah spoke thus of Christ, after he saw his glory. Whence it appeeres, as we
have said heretofore, that this God which filled the whole earth with his
glory, was Christ. But Christ is not separate from his Spirit. It is to very
good purpose then that S. Paul has referred this place to the holy Ghost: for
although God did represent himself to the Prophet in the lively image of his
Son, yet is it also certain that whatsoever he represented unto him, was
wholly shed into him by the power of the holy Spirit. Now let the wicked
bark against us while they will with their blasphemies, and blame our
doctrine, because the world is made the worse by the preaching of it; yet shall
they gain nothing thereby, neither yet be able to diminish the least tittle of
the authority thereof, for they must forthwith condemn God himself when they
condemn his doctrine, but their slanders can not let that his justice should
not appear; or that he should not preserve that and us also blameles.

That they convert not.] He here clearly pronounces, that he sent not the
Prophet to save the people, but rather to destroy them.

But we are to note from the order and course of the words, that repentance is
the beginning of healing. First of all then let us see what he means by this
word healing. He referres it to the rods and scourges of God wherewith the
people had been humbled for their sins. Now the cause of all the evils which
we endure, is our rebellion against God; but when we repent, and that he shows
us the light of his countenance, then the rods wherewith he chastised us are
cast into the fire, and thus we are healed. This order ought to be diligently
observed of us, by which it very well appeeres whereat the Lord aims in
inuiting us to come unto him, as also what drift the holy doctrine has, to
wit, Mat. 3.2.
that we might be converted. Behold here then that part of the Gospel, Do
penance, or Repent. Afterward, by offering us reconciliation, he promises
remedies for all evils, not only against the body, but also against the soul.
But if we receive not so excellent a fruit of the word of God: if we be not
reconciled unto God as soon as the word sounds in our ears, we have cause to
blame none but our selves, because the fault wholly remains in us. And in
very truth that which the Prophet recites here is a strange thing, and as it
were against nature, to wit, that (...) she were utterly perished. As often
then as this falls out let us yet be fully resolved thar there is still a sap
hidden within, which howsoever it appear not by and by to our eyes, will yet
show forth his fruit in the end. Now this sap is hidden in the word of God, by
which only the Church is vpheld.

Holy seed.] Here he shows what this substance is, to wit, the small number
of the faithful, which he calls a holy seed. For he means the elect, which
should be saved by the free mercy of God, and should be reserved from this
captivity, because that this banishment was as it were the purgation of the
Church whereby the Lord took away the wicked, who being cut off, he gathered
unto himself a very small people, but yet truly sanctified. Some refer this
to Christ, but this exposition seems too far fetched; it will agree better
if we refer it to all the faithful, because the holy seed is the substance
of the Church.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And in the days of Ahaz the son of Iotham the son of Vzziah king
of Judah, Rezin the king of Or, Syria.
Aram came up, and Peka the son of Remaliah king of Israel, to Jerusalem to
fight against it, but he could not overcome it.
THere is here recited an excellent prophecy of the wonderful deliverance of
Jerusalem, even when it might have seemed wholly desolate. Now the Prophet
recounts all circumstances, to the end by them the miracle might be the more
admirable; that it might clearly appear how the City was preserved by the
mere goodness of God, and not by any policies or power of men. For this people
were so ungrateful, that unless after the deliverance, all these things had
been brought to their remembrance one after another; they could not understand
how they were delivered by the hand of God. And few there were who in the
present danger waited upon that which Isaiah had promised; because they judged
of the public state of the kingdom and of their own also, according to that
which they saw with their eyes. To the end then he might lay forth the
excellent benefit of God, he sets all circumstances before them, that so they
might acknowledge out of how great danger they were delivered when God freed
them out of their enemies hands. As touching our selves, let us know that this
mercy was showed to a people unthankful, to the end the Church might be
preserved; and that Christ at the last might appear.

We must note that the Prophet speaks of the second war which Rezin and
Pekah made: and this we shall more easily gather out of the holy history,
for in the first war Achaz was overcome, and a great multitude led into
captivity, who in the end were brought back by the Israelites, when the
Prophet had in the name of God commanded it should be so done. 2. King. 16.5
And again the kings of Syria and Israel raised an army and assailed Achaz,
because it was thought they had so spoiled them by the first war, that they
had left them no power to resist. Whereas then he makes mention of the second
war, it is to amplify the miracle: for Achaz had not a competent power to
resist so great a multitude, seeing all the flower of his soldiers were carried
away in the first war. And howsoever there were now many people remaining,
yet they were scattered; and besides, were much affrighted with the remembrance
of the discomforture which was very fresh in mind. And herein does the goodness
of God and his power appear to be so much the greater, that having compassion
upon so great a calamity, he gave succor to his people, and in a moment drew
them out from the gates of death, even then when they had no hope of salvation.
Came up. Here is the proposition and sum of ye whole matter. For he shows of
what affairs he was to speak: and in few words according to ye usual manner
of speech in the Hebrew tongue tells what he means to declare anon more at
large, and more clearly. For from the very entrance he propounds the issue, to
wit, that the enterprise of these two kings took none effect: but by and by
after he will show the reason why Jerusalem could not be taken; and yet before
he touches that, he will briefly show what counsel and courage Ahaz had.

Verse. 2. And it was told the house of David, saying, Or, Syria.
Aram is joined with Ephraim: therefore his heart was moved, and the heart of
his people, as the trees of the forest are moved by the wind.
His meaning is not that the news of this league was brought at that time when
the two kings were already near the city, for Ahaz could not safely have
issued forth if the army of the enemies had been already in the field: but it
is said, that king Ahaz trembled for fear before these kings had assembled
their me^ of war together. Whence it follows, that he was terrified more and
more as the danger grew nearer him. The house of David signifies the Palace and
Court of the king: as if the Prophet had said, Ahaz and his Counselors were
admonished of the co^spiracie made against ye country of Judah.

As touching the words; the verb Nachah is diversely translated by the
expositors; and because it signifies to lead, some draw this sense, that the
Syrian brought his soldiers to the succor of the army, and therefore they
think there should be some change of the letters in the word Al: others derive
it of Nuach, and translate, He is at rest. According to other some the letters
are misplaced, so as Nachah is put in stead of Chanah, which signifies to pitch
the camp, and therefore I have thought good to turn it, Syria is joined, or
combined: for ye Prophet meant nothing else but that the Israelites and Syrians
had made a league of war together, to conioine their forces for the assailing
of Jerusalem. Also in the word Ephraim there is a figure called Synecdoche,
must used in the Prophets. The whole kingdom of Israel is comprehended under
Ephraim, not only because that Tribe was the richest and more populous then the
rest; 1. King. 11.26.
but also because Jeroboam the first king came out of that Tribe.

His heart was moved.] Here we well discern that by the house of David, he
means nothing else but the Palace of the king, from whence soon after all the
rest of the people were terrified: neither could it otherwise be but the common
people must needs fear when they heard that the King and his Counsel were
also in that plight. As soon then as these news came, all were overtaken with
such an astonishment, that none could hold a joint still. He expresses this
quaking by a very apt similitude, which we also are commonly wont to use when
we say, He trembled like the leaf of a tree. And this appertains to the
setting forth of the miracle; for thence it appeeres that they were in a
desperate case, not only in other men's judgments, but even in their own also.
They had been all undone then if the Lord had not speedily prevented the
mischief. We have here a fair looking-glass, wherein we may behold the
strength which the wicked take unto themselves all the while they feel not the
hand of God; and contrariwise how they are suddenly overtaken with fear, when
the Lord shows them any danger; for they are so secure when all things fall
out to their wish, that the Lord can scarcely bring them in subjection under
his government, and then they think themselves also out of all danger. But if
affliction do but a little touch them, then they are by and by out of heart;
yea, are so possessed with terror in their minds, that they behave themselves
as blockish people, deprived of all sense. And this is the punishment by which
the Lord awakens them out of that deep slumber into which they had cast
themselves. For before, it seemed their estate was so firm and sure, that they
could never be put down from their greatness: but now at the least noise they
hear, they straight fall into a swound for fear.

Such a fear is a just vengeance of God, whom they would never have reverenced
unless it had been drawn from them by force. Let us learn then, that if we
have but the least dram of true faith, we must not thus distrust God when we
are in any danger. I grant it can not be that we should be free from trouble
and fear when we are in danger of enemies: but we must not so tremble and
fear as being perplexed we should move this way and that way, as though we
knew no haven, nor place where we may safely fix our footing. For this
difference will ever be between the faithful and the unbelievers, namely, the
latter sort feel no remedy to quiet their consciences, but the first do by
and by flee to God, where they repose themselves with great tranquillity of
mind, although they be vexed with disquietnes for a time, as knowing that they
have a most safe refuge and haven of rest in him.

Verse. 3. Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz (thou and
Shear-iashub thy son) at the end of the conduit of the upper poole, in the
path of the fullers field,
First, we see how the Lord remembering his covenant, preuents this wicked king,
by sending his Prophet to meet him. Shear-iashub the son of the Prophet is
joined with him, that he might be a witness of this prophecy. And it is a
probable conjecture that this name was not imposed upon him at randon, but by a
secret instinct of the holy Ghost, or by express commandment from God, to
declare the future deliverance of the people. He bare a seal then as it were
engraven in his name, as well of the near exile, as also of their return. It
is also credible, that this sign or witness of the prophecy was known among
the people, for he should not have been joined in commission with his father,
unless he had sustained some authority in his person. The place is specified
for certentie of the history: and it may well be that the king went carefully
to consider of the approaching of the enemy, to the end he might repulse him,
which appears more clearly by the holy history, 2. King. 16.5. It is
called, The path of the fullers field, for it may be the fullers were wont to
wash their clothes thereabouts; or rather it was some ancient place called by
this name: howsoever it be, it was a sign that this miserable hypocrite ran
hither and thither with fear and terror, when Isaiah was coming forth to
quiet and secure him.

Verse. 4. And say unto him, Or, be assured.
Take heed, and be still: fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two
tails of these smoking firebrands, for the furious wrath of Rezin and of Aram,
and of Remaliahs son.
THe verb Shamar, which signifies to keep, is here put in the conjugation of
Hiphil, and many expositors take it, to take heed; although they draw it
amiss, and to a sense both constrained and besides the purpose, as if the
Prophet had admonished Ahaz to take heed how he made war. The sentence is
more simple, to wit, that he should not wax faint-hearted, nor waver
doubtinglie, but that he should be quiet and secure, therefore I have
translated, Be assured. The sense is then, that Ahaz should take such heart
unto him, that at no hand he suffer himself to boil with impacience, neither
to torment his mind with restless thoughts. For when men are once stricken
with terror, their minds are tossed up and down and have no settled stay.

This exposition is confirmed by the words which follow, Be still: for these
two things are

These words then do express the virtue of a true faith. Now having showed
the remedy whereby to appease the troublesome passions of the heart, he also
forbids him to fear: because nothing is more contrary to faith (who commits
her salvation into the hands of God) then fear. But I confess indeed that it
is impossible for us to be void of fear, when dangers approach. For faith
makes us not senseless. Contrariwise, the children of God are touched with a
double A double fear.
the first proceeds from natural sense; which fear they could not avoid,
although fears. As if he should say, Take heed thou be not cast down: and if
thou meetest with strong and sharp assaults, be of an invincible courage, that
dangers ouerwhelme thee not? but rather manfully stay thy self upon the power
and goodness of thy God; to the end thou may be able to overcome all
calamities.

And hereunto he by and by adds, that he be not faint-hearted, which is as
much, as to melt away, or be dissolved. Also it is not without good cause that
the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 11.27.
that our hearts are stablished by faith. For when (in forgetting God) we
suffer our selves to moulter away any thing at all, through our own
infidelity; it proceeds first from a weak and sluggish cowardlinesse. But
he cannot be said to be delicate, or womanish, who resting himself upon the
spirit of God, valiantly resistes all adversities. Whence we gather, that the
Prophet meant nothing else, but that Ahaz should wait with an undaunted mind,
for that issue which God had promised him.

For the two Tails.] Isaiah uses a very elegant similitude here, to weaken
the opinion which the Jews had conceived concerning these mighty Kings, whose
greatness had smitten their hearts with such terror: for their cruelty and
fury was as it had been a flaming fire; sufficient to have consumed all Judea?
yea, and it seemed that this fire could never have been quenched. But Isaiah on
the contrary vouchsafes them not so much as the name of firebrands; because
that might have seemed somewhat: but only calls them I cannot tell what
fragments or ends of firebrands not kindled, but only smoking: as if a brand
being taken out of the fire, should begin to moulder away, and should cast
nothing else but a little light smoke. This similitude then contains a
singular consolation; by which we are admonished to esteem far otherwise of
the violence of the wicked, We must not esteem the violence of the wicked
according to outward appearances.
then according to the outward appearance. They seem to be so mighty, as if
they were able to set on fire, destroy, and consume all the world. Now the Lord
minding to prevent and take the fear which we have conceived from us,
pronounces that it is but a little weak smoke, of small continuance:
although to our seeming it should be such a fire as never could be quenched.

Verse. 5. Because Aram has taken wicked counsel against thee, and Ephraim and
Remaliahs son, saying:
ALthough he had said before, that the threats and endeavors of the enemies
against the people of God, should be vain and turned into smoke; yet he
dissembles not how many cruelties they had devised, if God withheld them not.
For by evil counsel, he means a destruction: because these two Kings had
both conspired to destroy the country of Iudeah. And to the end he might the
better express the same, and might also let them see it, as it were before
their eyes, he recites their counsel in the verse following.

Verse. 6. Let us go up against Judah, and let us waken them up, and make a Or,
an entrance into it.
breach therein for us, and set a King in the midst thereof, even the son
of Tabeal.
LEt us go up.] That is to say, let us make ready an army. Some turn the
verb Nekitsennah, let us trouble or afflict: the which indeed shows the
original of the word: but in this conjugation it signifies rather, To awaken.
And howsoever I reject not this first interpretation; yet notwithstanding I had
rather follow the second, because it agrees best with the Text. By Awakening, I
understand, To trouble; and to practice some new stratagem: as we commonly say,
raise up sturres, that this kingdom may no longer be in quiet. As touching
that which follows, many expound Nanquiennah: Let us enter into it by force:
others; Let us so handle the matter, that it shall not be able to stand before
us. I have translated, Let us make an entrance into it. For the verb Baqua
signifies that which we commonly say, let us make a breach, or entrance. Now
the mean to break into Judea, was either to stop the passages by force of
arms: or by fears to solicit those which should be timorous and wavering, to
revolt: for whilst subjects hold their obedience, all passage is shut up; but
when all is on a hurly burly, by seditions and factions; an easy entrance is
made to pass even to the strongest and best fortified places. Thus these two
Kings hoped as soon as they should be arrived in Judea, that they should
terrify all the hearts of the people with their great and mighty army, so as
they should have neither power nor will to resist. For it is not likely that
having so great a multitude of men, they meant to hold any long siege. True it
is, that Jerusalem was well fortified: but they thought the city would be
frighted and troubled with this great army; and therefore would by and by
yield it self to their mercy. Yet notwithstanding I leave it to the liberty
of every one, touching the interpretation of these words: seeing the Prophets
meaning is plain enough. But we cannot easily gather from the histories who
this Thabeal was. It is very likely that he was some Israelite; who being an
enemy to the house of David, these Kings would bind and oblige unto them.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord God, it shall not stand, neither shall it be.
THat which was said before, was to the magnifying of so rare and excellent a
decree of God, that his admirable work in their deliverance might the better
appear. The sacred anchor.
Behold then the sacred anchor which only holds us fast in the midst of all
tempestuous temptations: whereas on the contrary, if God should take away his
word from us, we were never able to hold out in adversities. Although the King
then was almost overwhelmed with despair already; Isaiah tells him that there
is nothing so terrible which he may not boldly despise, if so be that
fortifying himself strongly upon this promise of God, he patiently wait for
that which he sees not, which yet seems almost incredible to him. He affirms
then that howsoever these men have lifted up themselves as giants against God,
See verse 6.
yet they shall not bring their practices to perfection. And he uses the word,
To arise up, as also the Latins by this similitude signify a work with his
goings forward. Lastly, he affirms that such a boldness so full of
sacrilege, cannot stand. There is yet more vehemency in that which he adds,
It shall not stand: that is to say, it shall be so disanulled, as if it had
never been. We must note this manner of speech well, by which he opposes the
bare and naked word of God, against this great haste, and the deliberation of
these two Kings.

Verse. 8. For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin:
Or, ye^ 65 years, and
and within five and threescore year Ephraim shall be Or, broken.
destroyed Or, and shall be no more a people.
from being a people.
THe head of Syria.] As if he should say, These two kingdoms shall have their
limits, even as they have at this present. They aspire to thy kingdom, but I
have set them bounds which they shall not pass. Damascus was the chief city
of Syria, as Paris is of France. He says then that these two Kings must be
content with their own greatness, and that look what estate they were now
in, the same should they continue in hereafter. Now after he has told them it
is in vain for them to endeavor at this time to amplify their limits; he
foretells the calamity of the kingdom of Israel. For by the word, To break,
he signifies that this kingdom shall be brought to nothing; and s^all b^ no
more. For the Israelites were carried away indeed into exile, and brought to
another people: as part of Sauoy is now incorporated into the kingdom of
France, and has lost his name. This is it which the Prophet means, when he
says, that they shall be no more a people: because that Israel in this exile
should be mingled with strange nations, and should even lose his proper name.

Yet sixty five years.] Seeing that the Israelites were led into captivity
in the sixth year of King Hezekias, and that Achaz reigned but sixteen
years: it is certain that this reckoning of years should not begin from ye
day that Isaiah was sent to bring this message. For there was only twenty
years to the time that the ten Tribes were carried into captivity. Amos had
prophesied of it: Amos 3.11.
and no doubt but as this prophecy of Amos was known, so also the period of
time appointed was understood of all, every one knowing the number of years.
If we reckon, then from the time that Amos foretold these things, we shall
find it threescore and five years: for Iotham reigned sixteen years, Ahaz
as many. Add thereunto six of King Hezekias, wherein the ten Tribes were let
into exile: and then take twenty seven years wherein Vzziah reigned after
this prophecy, and it will make threescore and five. This conjecture is very
probable: neither need we doubt but Isaiah meant thus. For we have the
prophecy of Amos, by which the Lord admonished the people, lest they should
have complained they had been suddenly overwhelmed without warning. Isaiah
confirms this prophecy, and proposes the same time which was already known
of all. Besides, by these words he sharply galls the senselessness of the
people of Israel, in that being thus admonished of the destruction both of
their country and name; they not only despised (with all boldness) the name of
God, but burned with a desire to devour all Judea: as if they meant to scorn
this heavenly revelation of set purpose; thinking because a long time was
already past, that they therefore had now escaped. The Prophet derides this
their folly; namely, because they imagined the word of God would wax old and
wither away, in so small a number of years. But because the Israelites were
deaf, Isaiah gives them of Iudeah a set time wherein to look for the ruin of
their enemies. This place also teaches, that the Prophets were faithful
assisters one of another, to the end they might serve God with one heart and
affection.

Verse. 9. Or, In the mean while.
For the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliahs
son. If ye believe not, surely ye shall not be established.
BEcause this is a repetition by which he would confirm that which he said
before, namely, that God has limited the bounds of the kingdom of Israel for
a certain time; therefore I have translated, In the mean time: for otherwise
it would be absurd, that the chief city should remain in her perfection
after the kingdom (as he erewhile foretold) should be brought to naught. The
sense then is, whilst the threescore and five years are running on, and
coming to their end, Israel has some respite. His chief city shall be
Samaria: let him content himself with his bounds, and aspire no higher: for
such shall his estate be, till he be wholly cut off, and be no more reputed a
people.

Except ye believe it.] The particle Ci is put in the midst of the sentence,
as yielding the reason of it. And therefore some translate thus; If you believe
not: that is to say, because you are not believers. And so restrain the first
member to the prophecy of Isaiah: but the second, to the whole word of God, as
if he should say, If you give no credit to my words, then your infidelity
shall be known to all. But thus there should be no difference between the
verb Thaaminu, and the other verb Theamenu, which are of diverse coniugations.
But the Prophet has not changed the termination without cause: and it appears
by many testimonies of the holy Scriptures, that the verb Am^n, in the
conjugation of Niphal, is taken for to stand, or continue fast in his degree. I
think then that this is as much as if he had said, Behold your only stay;
wait quietly without being vexed in your selves for that which the Lord has
promised, to wit, deliverance: if you wait not for it, what remains, but that
you perish? The particle Ci signifies as much (it being also usually so taken
in many other places) as surely. He affirms then that they cannot stand,
unless they believe this promise: yea, his words sound somewhat more bitingly;
namely, that although they refused to give credit unto it, and should endeavor
to the uttermost to overthrow the steadfastness thereof; yet would God for his
part continue still to be firm and sure: as also, that themselves could not
stand, unless they rested upon the promise here offered them. Whence we have
to gather a general doctrine: to wit, that our destruction then approaches,
when we shall depart from the word of God; howsoever we imagine our selves to
be well and sufficiently grounded. For our salvation is enclosed in the word of
God: and when that is rejected, God justly auengeth the wrong that is done to
him therein: for he was near to have sustained men by his power, if they had
not voluntarily plunged themselves headlong into destruction: we must rest
confidently then upon the promises of God, or else it is in vain to look for
salvation.

Verse. 10. And the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz, saying:
BEcause the Lord knew very well that King Ahaz was so wicked, as he would not
rest upon his promise; he therefore sent Isaiah to confirm him by adding a
sign. For when God sees that his promises suffice us not, he adds fit and
convenient signs according to our weakness: to the end we should not only
hear him speak; but that also in seeing his hand reached forth unto us, we
might be further confirmed by evident testimonies. Whereupon we ought
diligently to note the use of signs; namely, to what end God shows miracles:
to wit, that we might be confirmed by them in the certainty of the word. For
when we see his power, if we make scruple to believe his word, he corrects our
doubting, by making us see even the thing it self: and miracles being added to
the word, do become seals thereof.

Verse. 11. Ask a sign for thee of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the
depth beneath, or in the height above.
I Understand these words hie, or low, simply. He puts it to his choice to
choose a miracle, whether he ask it in heaven, or in earth. It may be this
word in the depth, has some greater vehemency in this place, as if he should
say, Take thy choice, God will show thee by and by that his dominion is far
above all the world; yea, that it reaches even to the bottom of all depths,
so as at his will and pleasure he can raise the dead out of their graves. See
here then a singular goodness of God toward the King, and toward the people,
that not only patiently bears with their distrust for a time, but thus
graciously submits himself so far, as to be ready to give them even such a
sign as they themselves would desire for a pledge of his power. Indeed he had
not so much regard herein to the wicked alone, as rather to provide for the
weak which had some seed of godliness in them, to the end they might be the
more assured that Isaiah spoke not at adventure, seeing he could so readily
show a sign of the power of God for a confirmation of his speech. The same
goodness of God is now displayed toward such as he bears so much withal,
although he have just occasion to be angry with them. For how great injury do
they to him when they doubt of his truth? What is left to God, I pray you, when
he is dispoiled of that? Now although we doubt, yet he is not only contented
to pardon it, but also to underprop our distrust, not with words only, but
which is more, with miracles; and presents them not only to the faithful, but
even to the unfaithful likewise, of which we may take a view in this king.
Now if he be so gentle to strangers, what shall we think he will be to his
own household servants which wait upon him?

Verse. 12. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.
HE under a fair pretense refuses the sign which the Lord offered him,
saying, that he would not tempt him: for he seems as if he believed the words
of the Prophet, demanding nothing else but the word. And truly as impiety is
detestable before God, so doubtless he greatly priseth faith. Wherefore it
should seem that he who rests upon the only word of God, despising all things
else, is worthy of great praise, because there is no greater perfection then
to submit our selves to God. Ahaz lied then when he refused the sign which was
offered him, under pretense of not tempting God, for there is nothing better or
more excellent, then to obey God. It is a great virtue in deed to ask
no-nothing but the word; but if God be pleased to add somewhat more unto it,
it is then no virtue but a vice to reject such an help as a thing superfluous.
Yea, there is great injury offered unto God in despising his liberality; as if
that which he does for our sakes were unprofitable, or as if he were ignorant
what things were good and necessary for us. We know that faith receives her
chief praise, because she holds her self in obedience: but when we will be
wise in our own conceits, and despise the least thing which is of God, we are
abominable before him, what pretense soever we make before men. We must so
join faith to the word then, that we despise not the helps which he offreth
and gives us for the strengthening of our faith.

As for example, the Lord in the Gospel offreth us all things necessary for
our salvation: for seeing by it we be joined to Christ, the sum of all good
things is contained in it. But to what end serves Baptism and the holy Supper
then; should we esteem them as things superfluous? No surely, because whosoever
without flattering of himself shall take knowledge of his infirmity, which
all from the least to the greatest ought to feel, such an one will be willing
to strengthen his faith by these helps. True it is we ought to mourn and weep
that the holy truth of God (which can not lie) should have need of any prop for
the infirmities sake of our flesh. But in regard we can not cast off this
corruption from us at the first chop, whosoever according to his ability shall
add faith to the word, he shall forthwith render perfect obedience to God. The
signs and word must not be separated, where God has coupled them together.
Let us learn then to embrace the signs with the word, seeing it is not in
the power of man to separate them.

Now in that Ahaz refuses the sign which was offered him, he therein showed
his rebellion and unthankfulness; for he despises that which God had presented
him for his exceeding profit. Hereby also it appears after what manner we
ought to require signs, to wit, when they are offered us of God: he then which
refuses them, must needs reject the grace of God therewithal. Some frantic
ones there are at this day who make no reckning of Baptism, nor of the Lords
Supper, thinking them abces for little children: which yet they can not do, but
they must therewithal reject the whole Gospel: for those things must not be
separate which God has joined together. But some will ask notwithstanding,
Gedeon, who desired that his vocation might be confirmed with some sign: the
Lord granted his request, and disliked not such a desire: Judge. 6.17. To this I
answer, Gedeon had no express commandment of God to ask a sign, yet
notwithstanding he was stirred up to do it by the holy Ghost, and did it not
of his own proper motion. Wherefore we must not take the like liberty to our
selves by abusing his example, especially seeing the importunity of men is so
great, that they make no bones to ask signs of God without end or measure.
Such a boldness therefore is to be suppressed, to the end we may content our
selves with those which God offers us. Two sorts of signs.
Now there are two sorts of signs: some extraordinary; which we may call
supernatural: as that whereof Hezekiah, as we shall see God willing hereafter,
Isay 38.7. Others are ordinary, the miracle is visible to the eye.
Extraordinary miracles, visible.
Now all other signs have the same end and use, because that even as Gedeon
was confirmed by that marvelous sign, so also are we confirmed by Baptism and
the holy Supper, although we see no miracle before our eyes.

Verse. 13. Then he said, hear you now o house of David, is it a small thing
for you to grieve men, that ye will also grieve my God?
BEcause it was an intolerable wickedness to shut the gate against the power of
God which should confirm the truth of the promise under color of honesty and
modesty; the Prophet is justly offended, and sharply rebukes these wicked
hypocrites. Now howsoever it were an honorable thing for them to be held for
the race of David (which had been so indeed if they had walked in ye steps of
David) yet notwithstanding he now calls them ye successors of the house of
David rather by way of reproach, then otherwise. And in very deed, the
ingratitude was so much the more heinous, because this favor was rejected by
that house, out of which the salvation of the whole world should come. Their
original therefore from whom they had so shamefullie degenerated, was a great
dishonor unto them. And we must observe this order here: for we ought not to
begin with sharp reprehensions, but with doctrine, to the end men may be
gently drawn, rather then enforced by it. Confirmations.
but if they will profit by heither of these, then it is needful to use
greater vehemency: In this manner it is that Isaiah thundreth here,
Reprehentions.
for having offered doctrine and signs to the king without fruit, he now uses
the last remedy, sharply and grieuouslie chiding this obstinate man: and not
him alone, but also all the house royal, which was defiled with this impiety.

Is it a small thing?] He uses comparisons between God and men; not that
those of whom he speaks, to wit, the Prophets and faithful Teachers, can in
deed be separated from God, for they are nothing else but the instruments of
the Lord, having one common cause with him, as long as they discharge their
duties. And the Lord testifies of them, who so despises you, despises me: and
he that hears you, hears me, Math. 10.40. The Prophet then shapes his
speech according to the impiety of Ahaz and his fellows, because they thought
they had to do only with men. And no question but we may hear the like voice
which the wicked belch out even amongst us at this day: Are they not men that
speak unto us? and by this means they think to make void the doctrine of God.

It being then an ordinary thing amongst the profane contemners of holy
doctrine to speak thus, the Prophet acknowledges indeed that they were men
which had this charge committed unto them, to teach the word of God. As if he
should say, be it that I am a mortal man, as you say I am, and that you have
such an opinion of the Prophets of God; yet is it a small thing for you to
grieve us, but that you will also grieve God himself? But in rejecting the
sign of his admirable power which he is ready to give you, you reject him.
It is in vain then for you to brag that you make no account of it, because you
have to do with men, and not with him. This then is the cause why the Prophet
is so moved with anger: whence we perceive the thing which I touched erewhile,
to wit, that it is time to use severe reprehensions after we have used all the
good means which God has given us, and have omitted nothing of that which was
our duty: then we must rush upon them with greater vehemency, and lay open
that impiety which lay hid under these cloakes of hypocrisy.

My God.] He said before, Ask for thee a sign of the Lord thy God, to wit,
whilst his peruersitie and rebellion was hidden: now he takes it as proper to
himself, because Ahaz and those that were with him were unworthy of the
honor of so excellent a title. He shows then that God is of his side, and not
with these hypocrites, and thus testifies what his confidence is. For he shows
with what conscience he promised deliverance to the king, as if he should say,
I came not of my self, but was sent of God, and have told thee nothing but out
of the mouth of my God. All Ministers should have the same boldness, not in
appearance only, but effectually rooted in their hearts. The false Prophets
will brag too much of this; but it is only a vain and impudent iangling which
they keep, with a blind confidence proceeding from presumption.

Verse. 14. Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign, Behold the Virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, and she shall call his name Immanuel.
AHaz had already refused a sign which the Lord had offered him when the
Prophet protested against his obstinacy and unthankfulness. Isaiah
notwithstanding testifies that this shall not let nor hinder the Lord from
giving the Jews the sign which he had promised and appointed. But what sign?
That a Virgin should be with child. This place is obscure: but the Jews
themselves are partly the cause of it, who as much as in them is have depraved
the true exposition by diverse cauils. For this testimony touches them near,
in regard it conteines an excellent prophecy of the Messiah, who is here
called Immanuel: and therefore have they studied by all means to wrest the
Prophets meaning to another sense. Some of them pretend that mention is made
here of king Hezekias, others of the son of Isaiah. Those which draw this
Hezekias, are too shameless, seeing it must needs be that he was of years
when Jerusalem was besieged, showing thereby that they are altogether ignorant
of the history. But behold the just reward of the froward, namely, that God so
blinds them, they they are deprived of all judgment. The like befalles the
Papists at this day, who oftentimes make themselves laughingstocks when they
are carried away with the spirit of giddines to Isaiah, is altogether frivolous,
because we read not that a deliverer should be raised up of the seed of Isaiah
which might deserve the title of Immanuel: for this title is so high and
excellent, that it can appertain to no man.

Others think, or at the least confess (because they will not contend
overmuch with the Jews) that the Prophet speaks of some child which should be
borne then, by which Christ notwithstanding was figured darkely. But they bring
no reasons of any weight, neither do they show who this child should be, nor
yet prove it by any testimonies. Now it is certain (as has been said) that
this name of Immanuel can properly agree to none that is man only, and
therefore we need not doubt but the Prophet speaks here of Christ. But all
both Greeks and Latins which have written upon this text are too confident in
the expounding of it: for they simply affirm, that Christ is here promised
of the virgin Marie, as though there were no difficulty in this place. Now the
knot which the Jews would have us untie is not easily done, to wit, that
mention is made of Christ here without any cause. Thus they deal with us,
willing us to consider well the circumstance of the place. Jerusalem was
besieged, the Prophet was to give them a sign of their deliverance: to what
purpose is the Messiah promised them now, who should be borne five hundred
years after? By this argument they think they have won the gole, affirming,
that the promise touching Christ could stand Ahaz in no stead for assuring him
of the deliverance of Jerusalem. And here they cry victory, chiefly indeed
because none have answered them. And therefore I said that the expositors
hitherunto have been too confident in this respect, for it is not a thing of
small importance to show the cause why mention is made here of the redeemer.
Let us see then how we may resolve it.

King Ahaz refusing the sign which was offered him of God, is brought at the
last by the Prophet to the foundation of the covenant, which even the most
wicked durst not reject. The Messiah must be borne, and all looked for him,
because the salvation of all the people depended upon him. The Prophet then
having rebuked the king, proceeds with him again in this manner, Thou would
feign overthrow the decree of God in rejecting his promise; but this decree
notwithstanding shall remain inviolable: thy disloyalty and ingratitude shall
not hinder God from being the deliverer of his people, because at the last he
will raise up his anointed. And for the more full declaration of these things,
we must observe the custom of the Prophets, who in confirming particular
promises, do lay this foundation, to wit, that God will send the Redeemer. By
this general prop the Lord every where confirms that which he specially
promises to his people. And questionless it must needs be that he which
looks for help and succor from God, must therewithal be also persuaded of
his fatherly love. But how should he be favorable without Christ, in whom he
has freely adopted us for his chosen, and always receives us unto mercy?
According to which S. Paul says, That in Christ all the promises of God are
yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. As often then as God sent any succor to his people in
old time, he by and by reconciled them to himself in Christ. And therefore
when he threatens famine, pestilence, or sword, he sets the Messiah before
their eyes to give them hope of deliverance. Seeing this is so apparent, the
Jews have no cause to storm here as if the Prophet should speak without
cause of a thing so far remote. For whereupon did the deliverance of
Jerusalem depend? was it not upon the manifestation of Christ? upon which
foundation the salvation of the Church has evermore been builded and vpheld.

Isaiah then speaks properly, saying, Thou receiuest not the promises of God;
but yet will he fulfill them: yea, he will send his Christ, for whose sake it
is his pleasure to preserve this City: and howsoever thou be unworthy of
it, yet God will have regard of his own glory. King Ahaz then is shut out
from the sign which he had before rejected, and is deprived of the benefit of
which he made himself unworthy: yet is the inviolable promise of God offered
again unto him, which is sufficiently showed by the particle Laken, which
signifies Therefore, as if he should say, Because thou reiectest this
particular sign which God offered thee; the same God which was so liberal as
to offer thee a sign freely, will not cease to give it, although it be irksome
and cumbersome to thee. But whereas I have said, that the event of this promise
is made even to Ahaz, my meaning is not as if God did therein comprehend him
within the number of his chosen, for whose salvation God had ordained his
Son: but as in respect that the word was directed to the whole body of the
people. For they which expound the word Lakem, which signifies your sons, is
constreined. Moreover, the Prophet leaves this profane king in regard of the
accomplishment of the promise, and has respect to the people who were adopted
of God. He will give it you then, not to thee, o cursed king, nor to thy
companions, but to you whom he has adopted. For the covenant which God had
made with Abraham remains sure and immovable. And the Lord has always had
a remnant to whom the fruits of it do appertain, although hypocrites rule and
bear sway over the people who are partakers thereof. So then there is no
inconvenience to propound this promise to the visible Church, and to set it in
full view before their eyes.

Behold a virgin.] The word behold, has great weight, and it is put to set
forth the greatness of the matter. And so is the Scripture wont to speak of
excellent and memorable things, to the end men's minds may be lifted up above
all earthly things. The Prophet commands then yt those which hear him should
be attentive, and consider this extraordinary work of God; as if he should
say, Be not sluggish, but wey this great grace of God, which you ought
cheerefullie to receive; but it is hidden from you, because of your dulnes. Now
although the word Alma which signifies virgin, be derived from Alam, which
signifies to hide, because shamefast and modest virgins press not into public
meetings: and although the Jews contend very much about this word, denying
that it is taken for virgin, because Solomon uses it for a young maid which is
beloved; we need not stand long in deciding this question. Let us grant them
that Alma signifies a young Damsel betrothed, and that this word is to be
referred rather to the age as they will have it (which the scripture
notwithstanding uses often when it speaks of a virgin) the thing it self
sufficiently refutes all their slanders. For what matter of admiration had the
Prophet spoken of, if he had said, that a maid should conceive by the company
of man? Truly it had been a rediculous thing to set this forth for a matter of
wonder or miracle. But put the case it should be spoken of a woman which should
conceive by the help of man, yet all may see it to be a fond and senseless
thing, that the Prophet speaking to the Jews of a new and extraordinary
matter, should add that a betrothed maid should conceive. It appears
sufficiently then that he speaks of a virgin which should conceive by the
power of the holy Ghost, and not according to the common order of nature. And
this is that mystery which S. Paul so highly magnifies, to wit, that God was
manifested in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16.

And she shall call.] The verb is of the feminine gender among the Hebrews.
For I know not whence they have taken it which read it in the masculin, seeing
the copies which we use differ not one from another in this respect: so that
being referred to the mother, it is certain that some extraordinary thing is
expressed. We know that the charge is always given to the father to impose the
name upon the child, in regard it is a sign of that authority and power which
fathers have over their children, neither belongs it to the women. But here it
is transferred to the mother. Whence it follows then that he is so conceived of
his mother that he had no father on earth, for otherwise the Prophet should
pervert the common use of the Scripture, which attributes this office to me^
only. Although it is to be noted, that this name was not imposed upon Christ by
the will of his mother, neither had there been any weight therein; but the
Prophet means that the virgin shall be as it were the Herault which shall
publish this name, because there should be no earthly father to perform this
office.

Besides, this name was attributed to Jesus Christ even in regard of the
effect, because the only son of God clothed himself with our flesh, and
united himself unto us in taking one selfsame nature with us. He is called
then God with us, or conioined with us, which can not agree to the man that is
not God. The Jews in their cauillings say, A cavil of the Jews.
that this name was imposed upon Hezekias, because God delivered his people by
his hand. He (say they) who is Gods minister, Moses nor Joshua, which delivered
the people, were so called: it follows then that this name Immanuel, is
preferred far before that of Moses, Joshua, or any other; for by this name he
surmounts all those that either were before, or shall be after him: it being a
testimony of an high and excellent dignity and authority wherewith he is
adorned above all creatures. Wherefore it appears that not only the virtue of
God is here set forth unto us as it was wont to be by such ministers, but the
union of the person, in which Christ appeared God and man together. Whence we
still perceive, that Isaiah tells us no common matter, but shows an
incomparable secret, which the Jews labor with tooth and nail to obscure and
darken.

Verse. 15. Butter and honey shall he eat, till he have knowledge to refuse the
evil, and to choose the good.
HEre the Prophet confirms the true humanity of Christ; for it was a thing
altogether incredible, that he which was God, should be borne of a virgin. So
strange a thing agreed nothing at all to humane reason. To the end we should
not think then that he imagines some ghost, he declares the signs of this
humanity, by which he shows that Christ shall appear in the very true nature
or flesh of men, to wit, because he shall be nourished after the same manner
that other little children be. Now the Jews had another manner of nourishing
their children then we have, for they used honey, which we commonly use not,
and they retain this fashion among them yet to this day, so as they cause the
Infant newborn to taste of butter and honey before they give it suck.

Till he know.] That is to say, till he be come to those years wherein he can
discern evil from good, and as we commonly say, till he be of discretion:
for the letter Lamed, signifies the time and term, namely, how long he shall
be nourished after the manner of children: and this serves to prove his humane
nature so much the more. By knowledge he means that understanding and
judgment which comes after Infancy is past. Whereby we see how far it
pleased the son of God to abase himself for our sakes; that he would not
only be fed with ordinary food, but was also content to be deprived of
understanding for a time, and to sustain all our infirmities according to his
humane nature; Heb. 2.15.
for this can not appertain to the divine nature. S. Luke speaks of this time
of Christ's ignorance, when he says, he profited in wisdom, and in stature,
and in favor with God and men, Luke 3.35. If S. Luke had said simply that
Christ profited, one might have replied, that was in regard of men; but he
expressly adds toward God. It was needful that he should be like to all other
little children for a time, that he might be destitute of understanding as
touching his humanity.

Verse. 16. Or, Truly.
For before the Child shall have knowledge to eschew the evil and to choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest, shall be forsaken of both her kings.
MAny are here deceived when they will conioine this present sentence with the
former, as if it were spoken of the same child, and so make it an exposition of
the former, as if the particle Ci were rational. But if we more narrowly wey
the Prophets meaning it will sufficiently appear, that having left the
general doctrine, from which he had made some digression, he now returns to
the matter again; for having grounded the hope of Ierusalems deliverance upon
the promised Messiah, now he teaches how it shall be delivered. I expound not
this verse then of Christ, but of all children in general; and herein I differ
in opinion from all others which think it should be spoken here of some
certain child. But for mine own part I take the word Hannar generally, so as
the letter He should be added for the better understanding, rather to show the
age, then some special child, as we commonly say, The child, adding this
article The, for the clearer understanding of the matter; which also is very
usual in the Scripture. Now if the word the had marked out some particular
child, he would rather have said, this child, as in other places. Neither is it
likely that this promise touching the ruin of the kingdoms of Syria and
Samaria (which followed not long after) should be deferred five hundred years,
that is, to the coming of Christ: we know this were too great an absurdity.
The sense then is, Before the children which shall be borne hereafter shall
know to discern evil from good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken.

By land I understand the land of Israel and Syria: for although they were two
Countries, yet notwithstanding they were esteemed but one, by reason of ye
covenant which the two kings had made one with another. Some take the land for
Judea; but that can not agree, because of the relative that follows. Now it is
easy to gather from the holy history, that these things came so to pass
according as they are here written. For after Ahaz had called the Assyrians to
help him, Rezin was slain by them, 2. King. 16.9. Pekah king of Israel died
soon after, that is to wit, in the twelfth year of king Ahaz: and Hoshea the
son of Ela reigned in his stead, 2. King. 17.1. 2. King. 15.30.
Before the children then which should be borne soon after should come to
years of discretion, both the kingdoms were destitute of both their kings,
because Rezin and Pekah died before that time. The word indeed is directed to
Ahaz; and to the end he might be the more revived, God promises him to take
vengeance of his enemies; yet only to the end he might be left the more without
excuse. As touching the words, it is said, that king Ahaz abhorred or detested
the land of Syria and Israel, because from thence he was assailed. God
promises then that these kings shall quickly perish. Some turn the word
Mipne, Because; and I confess it is often taken in this sense: but I expound
it more simply here, as if he should say, the land shall be forsaken and left
destitute of the presence of her two kings, so as they shall appear therein no
more. And by these words of the Prophet it sufficie^tlie appears, that these
things are to be understood of both kingdoms.

Verse. 17. The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy
fathers house (the days that have not come from the day that Ephraim departed
from Judah) even the king of Ashur.
HEre the Prophet on the other side threatens this wicked hypocrite, who seemed
afraid (forsooth) to tempt God, and yet in the mean while sought help from
those whom God had forbidden him to meddle withal. Exodus 23.32.
To the end then he should not lift up his crest too high in regard of this
promise here made unto him, he denounces his destruction, and testifies, that
the help which he expected, to wit, from the Assyrians, See 2. King. 16.7. and
2. Chro. 28.16.
should be altogether for his overthrow. As if he should say, Thou promisest
thy self wonders from the king of Ashur, and think that he will stick close
to thee, because that (against the commandment of God) thou have made a league
and peace with him; but thou shall shortly feel what commodity will then
redound unto thee by tempting of the Lord. Thou might have rested quietly
at home, and so would God have been merciful unto thee; but thou louedst
rather to have help of Ashur: well, thou shall learn by experience, that their
cruelty shall far exceed the cruelty of all other enemies. This speech of
the Prophet then suits very well with the former; for he presses the
disloyalty and unthankfulness of the king the more near, who in rejecting both
the word of God and the sign, had made himself utterly unworthy of any
promise at all. Also because that as soon as hypocrites have escaped any fear
or danger they turn by and by to their old bias again, he affirms that the
Jews can by no means escape but they must be chastised, according as they had
well deserved. For this cause he says expressly, that the house of David (which
by a special privilege ought to be exempted) shall be wrapped even under the
like calamities. For God so moderates his judgments, that whilst he spares
his Church and prouides for the safety thereof, he yet in the end causes the
wicked (who are mingled with the good) to feel the rigor of his vengeance.

From the day that Ephraim. 1. Kin. 12.16
] The Scripture uses this phrase of speech when it notes out (...) say when a
thing is sold extremely underfoot. There is no field so barren and
unfruitful that is not worth more, if so be a man be able to husband it, as
they do when a land is well peopled. He adds the reason of the changing of
the price, whereby it appears that he speaks of a wast and destruction. There
shall be no laborers, says he, because of the bushes and briars, which we see
comes to pass in an extreme calamity. I think also that the letter Lamed,
which some have expressed by the word To, signifies Because. For the enemies
having pilled and made hauock of all, and no husbandmen nor vinedressers being
left, the best husbanded places must of necessity be covered with thick bushes
and brambles. His meaning is therefore, that there shall be so few inhabitants,
that scarcely one should be found that would bestow the least piece of silver
to buy the fairest Lordships.

Verse. 24. With arrows and with bow shall one come thither, because all the
land shall be briars and thorns.
THe verb is in the singular number, yet notwithstanding we may expound it by
the plural, to wit, that the Archers shall go through Judea. Some think
Isaiah speaks of Bows and arrows, because the enemies should be so fearful
to behold, that no man should dare to approach near his possessions without
armor. But I think it more probable that men shall go a hunting where the
land was well manured and dressed before, because there should be caves and
dens for wild beasts. Now this is a miserable change, to wit, when fields
which in times past were husbanded and fruitful, are converted into forests
and bushes. And therefore by bows and arrows in this place I understand
hunting; and the sense is, that the Farmers shall not come near their
Vineyards, but the hunters: and that they shall not meddle either with planting
or pruning of vines there, but others shall hunt wild beasts in those places.
So that for conclusion, he notes nothing else but an utter desolation, by
means whereof the whole land shall be turned topsie turuie.

Verse. 25. But on all the mountains which shall be dug with the mattock,
there Or, there shall be no fear.
shall not come thither the fear of briars and thorns: but they shall be for
the sending out of Bullocks, and for the treading of sheep.
IT seems here that the Prophet contradicts himself, for hitherunto he has
spoken of the consumption of the land: but now when he says that oxen shall
feed in the places where were thorns and briars, he describes as it were a new
estate. This has caused some to apply these words to ye consolation of the
people. But the Prophets meaning is nothing less, because he declares that
the mountains which were far remote from the places where men dwelt, and
whither men went with great difficulty, should be now fit pasture for Cattle
by reason of the multitude of folks which should retire thither. And because
every one would flee to ye mountains, which in former times were desert and
inaccessible, they should not fear to be scratched with thorns, because there
should be inhabitants enough to suppress them. Now this is a miserable thing,
when men can no otherwise escape from death, but by running amongst the thorns
and brambles. His meaning is then, that men shall seek shelter and habitation
in the mountains, which were desert and uninhabited: because there shall be no
room left for safety in the plain. And thus he portraites out the ruinous
and pitiful estate of all the country; namely, such an horrible destruction,
that the face of the land shall be utterly changed from that it was before.
When the Prophet foretold these things to King Ahaz, no doubt but he contemned
them. For this wicked King resting upon his forces, and upon the league with
the Assyrians; stayed himself thereupon, and settled himself again upon his
lees: as soon as the siege (which threatened the City) was raised and gone.
But Isaiah notwithstanding ceased not constantly to discharge his duty;
showing still, that there was no succor but in God; testifying to this wicked
hypocrite also, that his ruin would come from that place whence he looked for
safety and deliverance.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Moreover, the Lord said unto me; Take thee a great roll, and write
in it with a Or, a common style.
man's pen; Make speed to the spoil, haste to the pray.
THis Prophecy contains no new matter: but is a confirmation of the former;
wherein Isaiah had prophesied the destruction of ye two kingdoms of Israel and
Syria, which was at hand. He had also foretold, that both Countries should
lose their Kings, before the children which should be borne soon after, were
able to discern between good and evil; that is to say, before they should
be of discretion. But because the wicked take no warning by any threatenings,
it was needful that this prophecy should be repeated, and confirmed by some
sign: First, that he might awaken the people, God commands this Prophecy to
be published and written, to the end all might take knowledge of it. We have
said heretofore, See the end of the Preface before this Prophecy.
that the Prophets were wont after they had received commandment to publish
any thing to the people, to comprehend the sum of it in few words; and then
fixed it to the gates of the Temple: as we may gather from the book of
Habacuk; Hab. 2.2.
wherewith if we confer this place, the thing shall be manifest enough. But
here is a more particular thing: for he not only commands the prophecy to
be written; but he requires a great and large roll, to the end it might be
read a far off. For by how much smaller the letter is, so much the more
difficult and obscure it is to read. Heereunto appertains that which
immediately follows, touching the Style of a common person. The word Enosh,
is taken for a man of any trade; to the end all, yea the simplest idiots might
read that which should be written.

Make haste.] This short and cutted manner of speech has much more vehemency
in it, then if he had stood to dilate the matter at large. For every one was
able to carry home four words to his house; and in them to take knowledge of
the swiftness of Gods wrath; as also to be the more near, and in good
earnest touched with his judgment, no less then if he had felt it with his
finger. Lastly, the Lord would not strive with words, because it was now no
time to plead; but rather to represent the matter by an outward sign. By an
example then he sets the vengeance of God before their eyes; whereof the
Prophets had so often told them in vain before: to the end it should pierce
the more deeply into their hearts, and should remain engraven in their
memories. So that as often as one should but mention these words, haste to the
spoil; they should also call to mind the destruction of Israel and Syria,
Chap. 7.14.
and be further certified of it. Now because the Prophet prophesied in the
former chapter of the coming of Christ; many unaptly expound this of him: to
wit, that being furnished with an heavenly virtue, he came to dispoile the
prince of the world; and therefore hastneth to the pray. Although this has
some show of wit, yet it can by no means agree to the text. For the true and
plain sense declares, that the Prophet says not any new thing, but confirms
that which he had said before.

Verse. 2. Then I took unto me faithful witnesses, to record, Vriah the
Priest, and Zechariah the son of Ieberechiah.
THe Prophet uses a noune and verb derived from one root, and the meeting
together of the words has elegancie: as if we should say, I have witnessed my
self with witnesses. Now because this matter was of great importance, he took
witnesses with him, as men were wont to do in things of consequence. He
calls them faithful; that is to say, true and meet: and yet notwithstanding
one of them was a cursed and wicked apostata, who to flatter the King, 2. Kin.
16.11
built an Altar like unto that at Damascus; and openly consented to an horrible
impiety and abomination. I know there are others who are indeed of a contrary
opinion: but if we consider the circumstance of the time well, we shall find
it to be even that same Vriah, who like a trencher-chaplaine, conformed
himself to the ungodly humor of the King; as the holy history witnesses.
Whereas they think it was some other, because Isaiah calls him faithful: it
is too weak a reason; for the Prophet did not so much look to the man, as to
the office which he exercised; in regard whereof, he was sufficient to be a
witness in this case. He meant not to say then, that Vriah was a good man; but
that his person was not to be rejected, in regard of the authority of his
office; but was in respect thereof, a witness free from all exception; as they
say. Moreover, I think this prophecy was fixed to the doors of the Temple,
in the presence of Vriah and Zechariah, who were taken to be witnesses to it.
For he speaks of no vision, but of a commandment of God, which he indeed
did and performed: to the end these words might be as a common proverb in the
mouths of all the people.

Verse. 3. After I came unto the Prophetess, which conceived and bare a son:
Then said the Lord to me; call his name Maher-shalal-chash-baz.
I Make no question but this which follows happened to the Prophet in vision
to seal up the former prophecy. It seemed then to Isaiah, that he had the
company of his wife; and that by this copulation he begat a son upon whom this
name is imposed. There were no absurdity if we should confess that the
Prophet had the company of his wife; and that he did indeed beget a child, to
whom this name was given: neither would I much contend with him which should be
of such an opinion. But because it is not very likely that this name was
imposed upon any man, there being no testimony of it: I rather incline this
way, to think that this vision was offered to the Prophet, as a confirmation of
the former prophecy. He calls not his wife a Prophetess, as the wives of
Kings are called Queens, by way of honor: but because she was a public
person in this vision. Isaiah therefore out of doubt, does of set purpose turn
away the minds of the faithful from thought of any carnal copulation; that
they might so much the more attend to this sacred mystery. For howsoever it be
a thing lawful in it self to beget children in marriage; yet notwithstanding
nature it self teaches, that the act is a matter of blushing, or
shamefastnes, which seeks to do it secretly.

Verse. 4. For before the child shall have knowledge to cry My father, and my
mother, he shall take away the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria,
before the King of Ashur.
HEre follows both the exposition of the obscure words of Isaiah; as also of
the vision adjoined unto it. For seeing God meant to speak briefly, it was
needful it should be intelligible. I refer not the word child to the son
of the Prophet, but to all those that should be borne soon after; as I have
said heretofore. Chap. 7.14.
He threatens then, that the two kings of Israel and Samaria, shall be cut off
before those children shall be of any growth. Jn the presence of the King of
Ashur. That is to say, according to his desire and will. Wherein it may be he
meets with the ancient manner of those which triumphed: before whose chariot
they used to carry the spoils of the enemies. Thus the spoils of Damascus
and Samaria shall be borne before the King of Ashur. From hence it appears
yet better that the Prophet meant Israel and Syria: First, for the comfort of
the faithful, and secondly, to scorn at the foolish fear of this cursed
King, which could not endure that the Lord should succor him. He had not only
rejected the promises; but also the sign which was offered him. This is the
cause why the Prophet does so much the more reprove the impiety of this king,
and of all the people: as if he should say, I see that thou art resolved to
believe nothing: but yet is the Lord determined to assist his chosen. For thou
shall shortly see sudden and unexpected changes, by which God will deliver his
people. And yet it is certain that these things are not directed so much to
the King, as to the faithful. Whence we are to note, that the servants of God
do not always speak so that the hearers do by and by believe their sayings.
Isaiah speaks here to the wicked, whom he profited nothing at all. Why then
does he direct his speech unto them? To the end he may convince them more and
more, and to lay their infidelity in their dish: as also that the goodness of
God might be the better known. For who would not have thought but such an
impiety would have shut up the gate of all Gods mercies from them? yet
notwithstanding the Lord by his goodness ouercomes both the peruersitie of the
King, and of the people. Now ye see the Prophets drift, to wit, that whilst
he reprocheth the wicked with their pride, he shows them notwithstanding that
God is always like himself.

Verse. 5. And the Lord spoke yet again unto me, saying,

6. Because this people has refused the waters of Shiloah which run softly,
and rejoice with Rezin, and the son of Remaliah.


TO the end Achaz should not wax secure, nor rest himself upon a vain hope,
the Prophet suddenly breaks off his speech touching the common salvation of
the faithful, and does again set the threatenings and chastisements before the
unbelievers. Some think that he speaks here against those which only sought
after news: as indeed it comes to pass, that the common people for the most
part are not contented with the present state, but desire to hear of a new
King. And that often happens to many, which we see befall those that are
sick; namely, they hope to be better, when they have changed their place. The
wills of men are so perverse, that when things fall not out as they would, they
look after nothing but a change in the state, greedily pursuing after tidings
thereof, thinking to receive some relief by it. But I think the meaning of the
Prophet is to be stretched further, and is not to be referred only to those who
asked after a change: but that it is rather a general speech comprehending all
estates: for impiety, and the contempt of God had almost ouergrowne the whole
land.

He speaks not then of any small number or of a particular faction; but of the
whole assembly of the people: and seeing they were almost all of them
degenerate, he very justly reprooues them all. I confess indeed that he
excepts a little remnant of the faithful, of whom he will make mention by and
by. Now the offense is, that the people distrusting their own weakness,
desired greater riches and forces. He says then, that they despised the waters
of Shiloah, because the Jews made no reckoning thereof, and were discontented
with their own estate. He ads, that they delighted to look to Rezin. Others
translate, with Rezin: but the particle, to expresses their perverse desire
better. His meaning then is to say, that the Jews seeing themselves destitute
of great garrisons, looked unto others, and longed for the riches of the
kingdom of Israel. For when they considered their poverty and weak estate
they trembled, and trusted not in God at all; but only in outward helps. They
thought they should be in great safety, if they could obtain a Prince equal
in power to the King of Israel. Thus they rejoiced in other men's riches; and
desired them.

Verse. 7. Now therefore, behold the Lord brings upon them the waters of the
river, mighty and great; even the King of Ashur with all his glory, and he
shall come up upon all their Rivers, and go over all their banks.
HE speaks in the present tence, to the end all should lay it the nearer to
heart. Behold, the Lord brings upon you violent waters. We must note the
similitudes which the Prophet uses: for the speech is much more elegant, then
if he had spoken barely and nakedly without them: and it is as if he had said,
Because the people are not contented with their condition, but are ever lusting
after the riches and wealth of another, I will show them what it is to have a
mighty King. As for example, if some few people subject to a poor and obscure
Prince, having mighty neighbors that were subjects to a King of great renown
should say, Oh, what a goodly thing were it to be the subjects of such a
puissant King, to be under the government of the Emperor, or of ye King of
France, who have an invincible power! Should not God have just occasion to
chastise such a wicked desire? For by how much the more mighty Kings are; so
much the more do they oppress their people: they will be under no control,
but will do whatsoever they list: add also, yt they know not the measure of
their power, but according to their strength they give themselves license to
do what them likes. The Lord reprooues this unbridled desire of the Jews,
that in distrusting their own strength, they looked not to the Lord; but to
the riches of mighty Kings. Now this reprehension has much more grace under
these figures, then if he had spoken without them.

Shilo, as S. Ierom says, was a little fountain, whence proceeded a river
running softly through the midst of Jerusalem. And because this little river
was insufficient to defend them, they desired and asked after those great
rivers which environed, and greatly enriched the cities. For there is nothing
which brings more renown and riches to a country, then these great nauigable
rivers, by which one may fetch in and carry out all sorts of merchandise, the
more easily. He compares Euphrates then, (which is ye most renowned river in
the East) with Shilvah; and follows the same similitude: understanding by
violent waters, the Assyrians, which should waste Iudeah, and spoil it
wholely, 2. King. 18.
as it were with a deluge. I will show you, says the Lord, what it is to wish
for these mighty and violent waters.

And shall come up.] This place ought to be diligently observed. For we have
all of us a distrustfulnesse naturally rooted in us, so as when the help of
man fails, we are out of heart. Let God make what promise he will, we cannot
be resolved of the truth of it: but have our eyes fixed upon our own
feebleness, and being besotted, we lie like blocks in our fears. And
therefore have we need to seek a remedy for this vice. Shiloah then; that is
to say, the vocation or condition to which God has called us, with promise of
blessing; should be unto us a strong defense, although we see it not before our
eyes; and that we should prefer the same our estate before the power of the
greatest Kings of the world. For if we rely upon the succor of men, and
place our confidence in riches and abundance of silver; we must look for the
chastisement which the Prophet threatens in this place. The holy history
witnesses that these things came to pass; so as he which shall read therein,
shall have no great need of an exposition of this place. The Assyrians whom the
Jews called to their succor, destroyed them: and this was a just punishment
of their distrust. Wherein we have a fair looking glass to behold the end
of such lustful people, who could not content themselves with the promise of
Gods aid and succor. Let us then look to our selves, and let us be warned
by this destruction of the Jews.

The Church for the most part is in such case, that she is always destitute of
the help of men, lest whilst we be too well stablished in our outward estate,
we should have our eyes dazzled with our riches and strength, and so should
fall to forget God. We must learn to rejoice in our weakness, and to content
our selves therewith; to the end we may depend upon the Lord for succor: so as
the small and low waters be better pleasing unto us then all the great and
boisterous rivers of the Heathen: let us not therefore envy the greatness and
power of the wicked. To this purpose it is said in the 46. Psalm. The streams
of the river shall rejoice ye city of God; the sanctuary of the most high is in
the midst thereof, therefore it shall not move: God will help it right early,
the Heathen make a noise, the kingdoms shaked, and the earth trembled: The Lord
of hosts is with us, etc. Let this be well observed.
Now we must yield God this honor to content our selves with him alone,
although all things else should fail us; seeing we are assured that he is
always ready to relieve us. And then it is all one whether we have outward
helps, or whether we have them not. For if we have them, it is in our liberty
to use them; if we have them not, let us be content: and let one God only
suffice us for all necessities. For he is sufficiently able to fulfill his
promises of himself, and needs none of man's help: therefore we may boldly
commit our selves over into his only custody and safeguard.

The Verb Kalaq, which sometimes signifies to pass; is as much in this place,
as to spoil and cut off: as if the Prophet should have said; He shall not
only slightly pass through Iudeah, but shall also ouer-flow it; so as he will
drown and destroy it wholly. For he will spread himself all over the land in
all places. He adds,

Verse. 8. And shall break into Judah, and shall ouerflow and pass through, and
shall come up to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the
the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.
THis similitude is taken from a man, who entering into a river, goes forward
by degrees til at length he come up to the neck. So shall Judah be environed
with this boisterous flood; to wit, with the Assyrian: in such sort, as he
shall wade into it up to the neck. Now he speaks this of Jerusalem, which was
the chief and capital City in the kingdom: for when the Assyrian arrived
there, it was no hard matter to destroy all Judah. The breadth of thy land. That
is to say, over all the parts of it. The Prophet goes on still with the
similitude of his prophecy, and she^es how great the violence of the Assyrian
will be, and he amplifies his fiercenes and turbulencie by the same similitude,
to wit, of a raging stream, which having broken all ramparts that could be set
before it, ouerflowes and spreads every way, ouercaries and bears all down
before it. For he follows his denunciation against the Jews, as he began to
do in the two former verses. And as he had threatened the Israelites and Syrians
with destruction, so now he likewise threatens the Jews with the same. For the
better understanding whereof, we must consider the context which Isaiah
disposes very Ahaz was unworthy of it. The Lord shall give you a sign, and
this we have promises, signs, and benefits which were offered them in all
fulness and abundance.

Immanuel.] Some ask why the Prophet rather turns his speech to Christ, then
to call it Gods holy land: for no doubt but by the name of Immanuel he means
Christ. It should seem that this was said to express the indignity of the
offense so much the more: because Judah was not only consecrated unto God, but
also had the pledge of his salvation in the person of the Mediator; and
therefore should be a great indignity unto them to be destroyed by an Infidel
king. word, to give some hope again to the faithful, and to comfort them in
so great a calamity, for they might have been out of heart, seeing the
country so cruelly wasted and spoiled. His meaning is to say then, that this
destruction shall not hinder the coming of the Redeemer (of whom he had made
mention before.) As if he had said, The land shall be thine, O Immanuel, thou
must dwell and remain in it. This then is added in stead of a consolation,
giving them to understand that the land being pilled and destroyed, shall yet
notwithstanding be rather Gods then man's. And this turning and applying of the
speech to the second person, has great vehemency; because by this means he
has recourse to the promised redemption: to the end the Lord may moderate his
anger in the midst of these horrible calamities.

Verse. 9. Gather together on heaps o ye Or, peoples.
people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, and hearken all ye of far
countries: gird your selves, and you shall be broken in pieces: gird your
selves, and you shall be broken in pieces.
THe Verb Raaf signifies to bruise, or to break, whether it descends from the
word Roa, or from Raah. But because Raah signifies to conioyne or assemble,
some had rather take it in this sense; which also agrees best with the argument
and context of the Prophet. For whereas some translate, Break you, to wit,
either the kingdom of Judah, or the Assyrians; it seems too constrained, and
too far fetched. But it appeeres that ye Prophet describes the counsels and
enterprises by which they thought to cut off the Church of God, because he by
and by adds, Gird your selves. Also in the beginning of ye next verse, Take
counsel. The word then of Assembling, properly agrees to this place, unless
any had rather take the word to Break by a figure; to which I willingly
yield, and so the word amounts to as much as to heap up, or (as we commonly
say) to pack up hard together, because things which are pressed, are also
conseque^tlie pressed with violence and thrust together. He means then not
only an heap, but an heap well pressed together: as if he should say, Gather
your selves close together, as if you were some very thick heap. This
signification as it seems agrees very well to the circumstance of this place;
and that which is added afterward tends also heereunto, Arm you, Gird your
selves. But the Prophet incourageth himself with trust and confidence, after
he had made mention of Immanuel, that is to say, God, who was to assist his
people. And by the selfsame means conceived a new hope against the enemies,
who although they might seem to have obtained all their desires when they had
spoiled the country: yet should the Lord be conqueror, and would maintain his
own against the cruelty of their adversaries. And thus withdrawing his mind
from the contemplation of this calamity, he turns it to Christ, and in
beholding of him, he so fortifies himself, that he is bold to triumph over his
enemies, as if he had already overcome them. We are to place the Prophet then
as it were in the watchtower, from whence on the one side

O ye peoples.] Wherefore makes he mention of peoples, seeing the Assyrian
only should destroy the land of Judea? The ground of comforting our selves in
the days of trial. Prou. 21.30.
because the Lord is with us. For behold the foundation of our deliverance, to
wit, God with us. Let men conspire, let them plot, consult, and determine, all
shall be in vain, because there is no counsel against the Lord. Let us begin
then at this foundation, if we mean to be strong in deed.

But we are to examine whether it be lawful for all to rejoice on this manner;
the wicked brag in deed that God is with them: neither make they any bones to
triumph and glory in his name, and yet is their glory vain and to no
purpose. As touching the fathfull, their valiant mind is grounded upon the word
of God, and proceeds from a true faith, lively engraven in our hearts: by
means whereof we dare boldly triumph over all our adversaries. As also S. Paul
teaches, who incourageth all the faithful by this doctrine, If God be with
us, who shall be against us? Romans 8.30. Let us then in the first Lord with us;

Gird you etc.] The repetition is not superfluous, for it is much more hard to
look for the succor of God again after we have once been delivered; then to
embrace the promise of one only deliverance. And further, although the first
assaults of the enemies do not much astonish us, yet notwithstanding when we
see them obstinate in their malice; their hardness of heart weakens us, of the
which we have daily experience. For if any danger presents it self, we can
look for succor from God for a brunt, but if we fall thereinto the second
time, we quail: and such is our woeful unthankfulness, that we can hardly be
brought to believe that God will assist us once more. So then, we are out of
heart if happily we fall into danger often times, thinking surely that God will
be weary at the last, if he do us good and succor us every day. We must not
content our selves to have put our confidence in God for once or twice, but we
must hold out for ever, as it is in Chap. 26.4.
Isaiah therefore would prevent this weakness of men, that when we have been
assailed once or twice by enemies well provided and furnished: yet
notwithstanding to remain courageous and invincible still. And if it fall out
that being once circumuented they yet double their forces, never ceassing to
weary us, yet let us not therefore wax faint or out of heart, because God is
able to destroy and cut them off to day and to morrow, even as often as they
imagine our overthrow.

And in this place also we are advertised of our estate and condition, to the
end we might learn to be always upon our watch, and ready to sustain new
assaults: and not to think we are therefore discharged when we have resisted
once, 1. Pet. 5.8.
because Satan is never idle, but is ever busy in his charge, not ceassing day
nor night to procure our ruin. He solicits and stirs up his soldiers, and
sets them on fire with new lusts. But albeit we must of necessity enter into
the combat often, yet let us be assured to obtain the victory. Let us fight
then with cheerefulnes; and keep our standing firm in the battle.

Verse. 10. Take counsel together, yet it shall be brought to naught: pronounce
a decree, yet it shall not stand: for God is with us. Hebr. Immanuel.

Having spoken of the force of the enemies, he comes now to their counsels; as
if he should say, Howsoever the enemies are mighty not only in weapons and
strength, but also in counsel and wisdom, yet shall they lose all their
labor. This advertisement therefore was very necessary. For it often happens
that we contemn our enemies, how mighty or well armed soever they be, because
they want counsel, and are rather carried with blind fury, then led by reason:
he aduertiseth therefore that all the craft and subtilties whereby the enemies
shall endeavor to snare the people of God, shall in the end turn all into
smoke, and therefore that they shall bring nothing to pass, although they have
all means ready, and that nothing be wanting in their power, counsels, and
policies.

He adds, Pronounce a decree, that the sense might be the more clear. I have
translated Appoint, or Decree a decre. This appertains either to the insolency
of the enemies, or else it is the conclusion of their counsel: for after a
thing is determined, the Decree follows. He affirms, that all this shall
vanish into smoke. Thus it appears what the Prophet means, and what use we
are to mak^ ^f this place. Now this may serve us as a shield wherewith we may
beat back all the darts of the enemies, whether they be furnished with
weapons, riches, power, credit, authority: God with us, we are then most
strong, and very well appointed; and consequently, all that (...) and dread of
the people; to the end they might know that they should receive a just and due
recompense of their wickedness and contempt of his Majesty, when they
trembled like cowards, and were so amazed for the present dangers. Now,
although he join dread and sear together; yet his meaning is not that the
Jews should so tremble as the mention of Gods name, God would not have us so
to fear him, that we should flee his presence.
as to flee from his presence: but he places these two words together, only
because he requires a sonnelike reverence of his Majesty: as also to note a
constant perseverance therein. His meaning is then, that they shall be free and
dispatched from trouble of mind, if so be his fear be so lively engraven in
their hearrs, that they never depart from it. And truly, whosoever he be that
subiecteth himself willingly unto God, setting his fear only before his
eyes, to hold himself by means of this bridle, in his duty; such a one shall
feel by experience, that there is no place of refuge more safe, then under the
shadow of his wings. But in regard that the wicked cease not to provoke his
wrath against them by their outrageous liberty; he auengeth himself worthily
upon such a careless security, vexing their minds with a continual
unquietness.

Verse. 14. And he shall be as a sanctuary: but as a stumbling stone, and as a
rock to fall upon to both the houses of Israel; and as a snare and as a net to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
HE promises a secure and quiet conscience unto the true servants of God;
because the Lord will easily appease all terrors, in keeping them under the
shadow of his wings. Now he alludes to the word Sanctify, which he used
heretofore: for the word which signifies Sanctuary, Tower, or fortress, is
derived of that which signifies, to sanctify. He means to affirm then, that
God asks nothing whereof he offers not a like mutual recompense. For
whosoever they are that do sanctify him in their hearts; shall also prove by
experience, that he is a most certain Sanctuary, and haven of safety for
them. But howsoever there be some correspondencie between God and us in this
sanctification; yet notwithstanding it is in a diverse sanctify him, when we
attribute unto him all praise and sanctify us, when he delivers and keeps us
in all dangers. Now because very few are found who obey him, resting themselves
wholly upon his promises, the Prophet meant to arm the faithful against all
such temptations. For they were in danger to be carried away by such and so
wicked examples as by a kind of whirlewinde. Behold now the Prophets meaning;
as if he should say; The Lord will be a most safe and faithful guardian unto
you: and howsoever others spurn against him, yet be not you afraid; but
continue you constant in your places.

There is also in this place a secret opposition: because the Sanctuary is as
a Tower situated in an high place, for the defense of the faithful; and for
the destruction and ruin of the unfaithful, in regard they rashed upon God
with a foolehardinesse. But we shall hereafter see more clearly how this was
accomplished; partly under Hezekias, partly also from the time of the
captivity of Babylon: and yet notwithstanding, Christ was therewithal
prefigured, who was to be a rock of falling, and not a fortress of defense
to the Israelites. Isaiah aduertiseth the faithful of this fall; to the end
they should conform themselves to this warning.

To the two houses.] The Jews do fondly and senselesly rent this sentence,
instead of dividing it aright. For they say, that God shall be partly a
sanctification; and partly an offense to the Israelites: as if by the two
houses, he should distinguish between the faithful and the unfaithful. But
he rather commands the faithful not to be discouraged, although almost all
the multitude of both the kingdoms, do hinder them from following of God; but
that in forsaking all impediments, they should go on with cheerfulness
through the thickest of them. The Prophet might have said in a word, he shall
be a stumbling stone to Israel: but he meant to express it more fully: for
he comprehends the whole people, and says; that God shall be their
overthrow. The people were divided into two Kingdoms; to wit, Ephraim and
Judah; and therefore he names both the one and the other. I grant that some
were excepted out of this number: but he speaks here of the whole body in
general.

This is an excellent place, and cannot be too often called to mind; especially
in this time wherein we now live, wherein we see the estate of religion almost
quite abolished in Christendom. Many boast that they are Christians, who yet
are far off from God, and to whom also Christ is a stone of offense.

The Papists proudly brag of his name, although they profane his whole service
by their superstitions, and despightfully dishonor him. As touching those who
have the pure worship of God established in the midst of them, there are very
few who embrace the doctrine of the gospel with a sincere affection.

On which side then soever we turn our eyes, we can see nothing but woeful
temptations every where. And therefore let us set this most profitable
advertisement before us; to wit, that it is no new thing to see the greater
part, yea, almost all those who boast themselves to be the servants of the
Church, yet to spurn against God. And in the mean while, albeit we be but as
a little handful of people in respect of them; yet must we rest our selves
constantly notwithstanding upon the Lord.

To the inhabitants of Jerusalem.] This is the second amplification. For having
made mention of both the kingdoms, he names the principal or head place of
them both. Now howsoever the whole Country was degenerate; yet notwithstanding
it seemed that the Lord had his chief residence there. He shows then that
God is a stone of offense, and a rock to fall upon; not only to the common
people, who were dispersed abroad in the Country and villages; but also to the
greatest; as to the Magistrates and Ministers who were in Jerusalem: yea even
in this holy place (I say) where God intended that there remembrance of his
name should especially be honored. The which David also witnesses when he
says; that the master builders whom God had set on work, rejected the chief
corner stone: Plas. 118.22. Jesus Christ alleging this place against the
Jews, Mat. 21.42.
shows that these words were spoken of him. I deny not but this fell out in
Isaiah his time; but much more the time of Christ: for impiety and rebellion
increased by little and little, even till it came to the height. So then as well
the great, as the small, who had always obstinately resisted God, did yet more
licentiously ouerflow at that time; so as being come to the top, in the day of
their destruction, they were wholly forsaken of God, whose Son they had
wilfully rejected. A testimony proving the Godhead of Christ.
And from hence we gather a testimony of the eternal Godhead of Christ: Saint
Paul showing that it is God himself of whom the Prophet here speaks: Romans
9.33. Now he mentions no new God; but him who created heaven and earth, and
who manifested himself to Moses. It is God himself then, by whom the Church
has been always governed.

Verse. 15. And many among them shall stumble, and shall fall, and shall be
broken, and shall be snared, and shall be taken.
HE continues to threate^ the wicked as he did heretofore; and denounces, that
all those which would not rest upon God, should not escape unpunished. Now the
threatening is this; After they have stumbled, they shall fall; and in the end,
shall be broken. This agrees with the former Similitude, in which he compares
God unto a stone. Christ alludes thereunto, comprehending both the members:
Whosoever falls upon this stone, shall be broken; and upon whomsoever it
shall fall, it shall grind him to powder: Matthew 21.44. That which follows
afterward, They shall be snared and taken, agrees to the Similitude
following; wherein he compares God to a net and snare. Let not the wicked
think themselves then stronger then God, or wiser then he: for they shall
feel in the end, both to their cost and ruin, that he is the strongest and
wisest. Therefore it must needs follow, that they be brought to naught;
because they shall be broken to powder in an instant: or else so enwrapped,
that they shall never wind themselves out. Now these things are not proper
unto God otherwise the^ accidentally, if we may so speak: for his proper
office is rather to draw men unto him, and to to give them assured ground of
their salvation; which was very well known and seen most clearly in Christ.
In regard whereof, Saint Peter says, that howsoever many unbelievers stumble
at him, yet that their falls ought not to hinder our faith, that it should not
always march on; because to us Christ is a chosen and precious stone: 2. Pet.
2.4.

Verse. 16. Bind up the testimony, seal up the law among my Disciples.
THe Lord now turns his speech to the Prophet, and incourageth him against he
should fight against Apostataes and rebels; to the end he might execute his
office boldly and constantly; which was not a little needful. For Isaiah had
tried the great rebellion which was in the people: so as if he had looked only
upon the present estate, to wit, the infidelity of the people, and the labor
which he bestowed in vain, he might forthwith have been utterly out of
heart. For this cause the Lord purposed to confirm and ratify his vocation
afresh unto him: and not for his sake alone, but for all their sakes also which
should obey his doctrine. And howsoever few should give credit to the same; yet
does the Lord witness notwithstanding, that his doctrine is sealed up to those
few: and that for their sakes Isaiah was not to give over teaching, neither yet
that the others should cease their walking in the obedience of faith. Now he
compares the doctrine of the word to Sealed letters, which many might hold and
handle; but yet notwithstanding could not be read nor understood but of a
small number; that is to say, of those to whom they were directed. And thus
there are very few who understand the word of God, (for they are the elect
only) howsoever it be offered to all in general. The word of God then is
sealed up to those that profit not by it; and yet so sealed, as that the Lord
opens the same notwithstanding to his chosen by his holy Spirit.

Some derive the verb Tsur, which signifies to Bind, of the verb Natsar; and
translates, Keep. Now although this be of no great importance; yet
notwithstanding it appears by the other word Seal, that the exposition which
I have followed is the best: for the ancients were wont to bind a thread about
their letters, and then to set the seal upon it. Now from hence we gather a
most profitable doctrine: to wit, that the Pastors and Ministers of the word,
ought to continue constant in their office, although it seems that all revolt,
and that nothing is to be seen in men but outrage and rebellion: because the
Lord will ever reserve unto himself, some disciples which will profit in the
reading of his letters; howsoever they be closed and shut up to others. The
Prophet will use the same Similitude, Chap. 29.11. where he says, that the
word is like to a closed book: but there mentions the wicked only: but here
he speaks of the Disciples, amongst whom his doctrine should not be
unfruitful.

But some will demand; whether the Prophet should leave the people so,

Verse. 17. Or, So.
Therefore I will wait upon the Lord, that has hid his face from the house of
Iaakob; and I will look for him.
SO I will wait.] I had rather translate the Hebrew particle Van, in this
sense; because the Prophet retires himself apar^ as it were, having received
consolation! from the Lord: as we have seen heretofore. It is as much then as
if he had said; Seeing the Lord is pleased to have some Disciples, amongst
whom his doctrine should be sealed, I will wait, although he has hid his
face from Iaakob. That is to say, although he has rejected and cast off his
people. This place is worthy our observation; in the meditation whereof, we
ought continually to be much encouraged: yea, if so be the Lord proceed so
far, as that he has turned his face away from his people, and should reject
those who make profession of his name: yet for all this, must we wait upon him
with invincible patience. This is the only remedy we have. The word waiting,
has great emphasis in it, as if he should say; Yet notwithstanding will not I
turn away from the Lord; I will still persevere in faith. He yet augments the
matter when he adds, So I will wait. Seeing our faith is wont to stagger and
faint when offenses do happen. It is grievously shaken when we see our selves
forsaken of our companions, and that the sworn enemies of the Church do
proudly usurp the title of it: for offenses for the most part do cause us to
turn away from God, filling us with such perplexed thoughts, that we are ready
to call the truth of his word into question. This consolation then is very
necessary, as well in the calamities wherewith the Church is oppressed, as in
the troubles wherewith she is tossed by the disloyalty of others.

Verse. 18. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are as
signs and wonders in Israel, by the Lord of hosts which dwells in Mount
Zion.
Here the Prophet not only testifies, that he will wait in patience; but
also shows what his constancy is; proposing himself, with his disciples and
those which remained with him, to open view. As though he should say, Although
others recoile, yet Lord behold I am ready to do thee service; and I also
bring those with me, whom thou have vouchsafed to save miraculously by my
labors. He shows an invincible manfulnesse then, and protests that he will
continue in the faith and obedience of the Lord, although all should revolt.

By Children, he understands servants and ministers; following therein the
usual custom as well of the Hebrew tongue as of the Latin. Now he speaks of
the Disciples whom he mentioned before. Whence it appears, what their duty
is, who would be reputed the true disciples of the Lord; to wit, that they
protest with Isaiah, to be teachable, and ready to hearken, and that they be
ready to obey, as soon as the Lord shall speak. The teachers also ought to
bring their disciples with them, and not to send them alone before them: they
ought to march in the first rank, and to show them the way by their example;
as was said in the second Chapter, verse 3. otherwise they should have no
authority in teaching. The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 2.13.
applies this place to Jesus Christ; and from thence draws an admonition,
which ought to serve us as a sharp spur; to the end we should not think to
follow Isaiah alone for our leader and Doctor, but Christ himself; and to be
so much the more encouraged to run our course with greater alacrity.

Which the Lord has given me.] The Prophet shows here of whom it is that we
hold our faith; to wit, of God and of his free election. For Isaiah preached to
all publicly, admonishing every one, and soliciting all without exception, to
draw near unto the Lord: but the word profited those only which God had given
him. By the word Given, he means those whom God drew inwardly by the secret
instinct of his holy Spirit; for otherwise the external voice should have
sounded in the ears of the people in vain: and thus it is said that the elect
are given to Christ of God his Father: Ioh. 6.37. Whereby we perceive, that the
promptness of faith depends not upon the will of man; but that some few among
many do believe, because (as S. Luke says) they were ordained before unto
life: Act. 13.48. Now God is wont to call them whom he has predestinate; and
seals up the testimony of their adoption effectually in them, to the end
they may give themselves to teachablenesse and obedience. Such a thing is the
gift then whereof Isaiah speaks in this place. But this agrees fitly unto
Christ, to whom the Father offers and gives Disciples; as it is said in
John; No man comes unto me except my Father draw him: John 6.44. Whence it
follows, that he is appointed our guardian to preserve us under his protection
unto the end: and therefore he says; That none of those whom the Father has
given him, shall perish: Ioh. 17.12. Ioh. 10.20.


Signs and wonder^.] Some refer this to miracles amiss: for the sense is
far otherwise, namely; That all the faithful shall not only be hated, but
also be had in execration; so as they shall be esteemed monsters; and that not
amongst strangers and open enemies, but even in Israel it self; whereof we
have experience at this day. The Papists on the one side abhor us more then
Turks or Jews; nay, more then dogs and swine. Now although this be odious,
yet must we not be much astonished thereat; for this prophecy of

Now to the end he might show how vain and frivolous the conspiracy of the
wicked is he stoutly triumphs over the pride of the whole world, by placing
the Lord of hosts as opposite against them: as if he should say; I pass
nothing at all that men abhor and detest me, seeing I am assured that God is
on my side. When he also adds, that the Lord dwells in mount Zion; these
words carry great weight. For though the people were covered under an infinite
heap of vices and wickedness, yet they gloried as if they only were holy to
the Lord; and in abusing his promises, they condemned the true servants of God,
which reproved them. On the contrary, that the Prophets might pluck this pride
and vain confidence away from them, they testified that they were the Ministers
of the only true God; whom this people notwithstanding falsely bragged to
worship in Mount Zion. Now God did not so choose his dwelling place there, as if
being tied to that, he would therefore allow a bastard and newfound service:
but would be sought and served there, according to the rule of his word. And
therefore Isaiah taking the God which dwelled in Mount Zion, on his side,
taxes and sharply galleth the hypocrites, who foolishly and proudly bragged as
often as they cried, The Temple of the Lord: Ier. 7.4.
because it was rather an idol wherein they gloried; contrary to Gods word.
Now although they snatched the promises to themselves, yet they falsely
alleged them against the true servants of God; as the Papists at this day do
against us. The Prophet then adorneth God with this title, to the end he may
unmask those hypocrites, which made no conscience vainly to oppose the name of
the Temple against the express word of God. And in this regard Isaiah now
says; Take us for monsters as it pleases you, yet notwithstanding God will
approve of his own: you cannot abhor them, but you also therewithal reject
the God of Abraham and David, whose servants we are.

Verse. 19. And when they shall say unto you, Enquire at them that have a Spirit
of divination, and at the Soothsayers, which whisper and murmur; should not a
people enquire of their God, from the living to the dead?
But if they say.] The Prophet goes on with his speech; to wit, that all the
faithful being armed with the authority of God, should not only as with a
buckler, but as with a wall of brass, constantly resist all impiety. He
admonishes them then to continue steadfast, and not to be shaken, if any should
offer to solicit them to superstition and idolatry. He uses the plural
number, to show that it was a vice common among all estates, which had
ouerflowed every where: as if he should say, I see very well what will come to
pass, you shall be in great danger: for those which remain amongst you, will
endeavor to turn you aside from the true God, because themselves being wicked,
will also desire to have you become like them. There withal he shows how
wickedly they were revolted from the law and covenant of God, in that they were
not ashamed to solicit others to seek unto Sorcerers and Enchanters, whose
very names ought to have been abominable and accursed unto them.

A people.] Some read this altogether in the person of the wicked; as if under
pretense hereof, they would deceive the simple: to wit, that there is no nation
whatsoeuet, without oracles and revelations, but every one asks counsel at
his gods, or at least, of the Magicians and Soothsayers. Yet notwithstanding,
me thinks the opinion of others is more sound, who think that Isaiah teaches
his disciples how they should answer, if so be any should solicit them to
idolatry. And yet this does not sufficiently open the meaning of this place:
for commonly it is expounded as if it were a comparison, from the less to the
greater; What? do the Gentiles ask counsel at their gods, which
notwithstanding are falsely so called; and shall we not make more account of
him whom we know to be the true God, especially seeing he has manifested
himself so to be unto us, and that by so infinite testimonies? Is it not a
foul shame that the heathen should make more reckoning of their gods, then we
do of our God? But I rather expound this of the Jews themselves, who are
called People, by way of excellency; because they were adopted of God. Neither
is it material that the Prophet uses ye word Elohim, Gods, in the plural
number, for the same word is taken in the like sense in the singular.

This text is a buckler wherewith we ought to beat back all those
superstitions which glide so smoothly thorowout the world. And if others doubt
and stand in a mammering whether they should ask counsel at dead Idols, or at
Saints departed; yet let us always have this answer ready at hand; That we
ought to ask counsel of God only. Now the Prophet alludes to the place in
Deuteronomie; where the the Lord forbids that they should go to Enchanters or
Sorcerers: Deuteronomy. 18.10. And lest they should allege the examples of the
heathen, who had their Soothsayers and expounders of dreams, and observed the
flying of the fowls, he adds in 15. verse, that they should not want a
Prophet neither should they be left destitute of necessary doctrine. It was
the will and pleasure of God then, that they should wholly depend upon his
word, and only learn from thence whatsoever was expedient for them to know,
and so to yield him loyal obedience.

As touching that which follows, from the living to the dead, some expound it
otherwise, and interpret for in stead of from: and then the sense is this; Will
ye ask counsel at the dead for the matters of the living? But in regard this
sense is constrained, it should be more proper it may be, to expound it thus,
The Lord will be our master, and for this end has ordained his Prophets, that
we should learn his will of them: for the Prophet is the mouth of the Lord.
It is not lawful then to go unto the dead, to whom this office was not given:
and add hereunto also, that the Lord minds not to use the service of the dead
to teach us. But yet, when I have well considered the text somewhat more
narrowly, I had rather translate the Hebrew word Bead, From; to wit, from the
living to the dead: as if he should say; that one only God ought to suffice
us, as well for the living as for the dead. Whether thou considerest the
heaven, the earth, or the lowest parts thereof, thou shall find that one God
only suffices us. Me thinks this sense is most proper, and easy. The Prophet
then arms the faithful against the devises and plots of the wicked, which
otherwise might have caused them to revolt; to the end they might content
themselves to have God only for their Master; and that they should not do him
that injury, as in forsaking his doctrine, to give themselves to other
teachers; but rather casting off all other things, they should only depend
upon the truth; the which he repeates and confirms immediately.

Verse. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.
THis place is diversely expounded. For some take it to be a form of an oath,
as if the Prophet should Swear by the law, that those were apostataes, which
drew others to the like apostasy with them. But I take it otherwise; namely,
that we are rather brought to the Law, and to the Testimony; because the
particle Lamed, shows that this is the true sense. The Testimony is conjoined
with the Law; not as if they were diverse things, but for the plainer
understanding. As if he should say; To the Law, which contains the Testimony
of Gods will toward you. Lastly, we must take the word Testimony, for an
epithet; to the end we may know what the use of the Law is; namely, that God
manifests himself therein, and shows what a one he will be toward us: and
lastly, he there ordaines all things which are needful for us to know. This
then is an excellent commendation of the Law, which contains the doctrine of
salvation, and the rule of a right and happy life. And this is the reason why
he justly forbids us to turn from it in the least jot; as if he should say,
Forsake all your superstitions, after which these run so violently. They were
not content with God alone, but sought a thousand inventions: for what will
satisfy him that forsakes the Lord? Christ speaks also in this sort; They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hears them: Luke 16.29. For although
Abraham be brought in speaking there, yet is it a perpetual oracle which
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

We are enjoined then to hear the Law and the Prophets, to the end we should
not be carried up and down after the curiosities of man's brain; neither to
desire the knowledge of any thing by means of the dead. For if the Law and the
Prophets sufficed not, the Lord would not forbid us to use other means. And
hereby we learn, that whatsoever is added to the word of God, ought to be
condemned and rejected. Why so? All our wisdom should be limited within the
bounds of Gods word.
Because it is the Lords will that we should wholly depend upon his word, and
that all our wisdom should be limited within the bounds thereof. If we then
listen unto others, we snatch unto our selves a liberty which he has
forbidden us; and in so doing, we offer him great outrage. Now whatsoever it
is which men shall be bold to set up of themselves, will be found nothing
else but a corrupting of this word. Let us therefore reject all other teachers,
if we mind to obey God. And he also shows further, that we shall then be well
armed against all idolatries and superstitions, when we rely upon the Law of
the Lord. For as S. Paul calls the word, The sword of the Spirit: Ephesians. 6.17.
so also by it ought we to bring Satan and all his inventions to naught. Retire
we thither then, when the enemies shall assault us; that being armed therewith,
we may fight valiantly, and at the last, overcome and put them to flight.

If they speak not, etc.] I will not recite all the diverse expositions of this
place, because it would be too tedious. And indeed, the true exposition seems
to me so sure, that it may easily refute all others. The common
interpretation is, that the wicked do therefore advance their lies, and set
their wiles to sale, because there is no light in them: that is to say, because
they are deprived of common sense. But for mine own part, I expound it, that
the faithful are hereby exhorted to be of good encourage: so as if the
unfaithful agree not to the true doctrine, they do nothing else herein but
show their blindness. And therefore must we contemn their blockishnesse, to
the end it may be no let nor impediment unto us: as also Christ admonishes
that we should boldly let such blind guides alone, lest we be moved with their
blind obstinacy. They are blind, says he, and leaders of the blind. Will
you wittingly perish together with them? Matthew. 15.14. For this cause the
Prophet commands that such authority be given to the word of God, to the end
we may boldly despise the whole world, if they should gainsay it for by the
authority thereof, we may condemn the Angels themselves, if they should fall
into such a sin. If an Angel from heaven should preach any other doctrine,
let him be accursed; says Paul, Gal. 1.8. How much more boldly then may we
condemn men which resist God? And this manner of speech also which the Prophet
uses, has great weight, if they speak not according to this word: because
such a one is judged blind, who readily and without resistance imbraceth not
this sentence; namely, That we must not be wise beyond the Law of God. We
must not be wise beyond the law of God.


Verse. 21. Then he that is afflicted and famished, shall O^, shall pass by
this Country.
go to and fro in it: and when he shall be hungry, he shall even fret
himself, and curse his King and his gods, and shall look upward.
LEst the faithful should suffer themselves to be enwrapped in the common
errors, he adds how horrible the punishment is which threatens the wicked
when they shall be once revolted from God, and also shall enforce themselves to
draw others to the same revolt with them. The place is somewhat obscure, but
the cause thereof proceeds of this, that some have not weighed ye words as they
ought to have done. Now the verb Abar has great weight: for by this word To
pass, he signifies the giddiness which causes men to wander, so as they are
altogether disquieted, not being able to stay long in any place whatsoever. We
must supply a noune to the verb indefinit, to wit, The Jews shall pass. By
the pronoune in it, he understands the country of Judea, which the Lord had
preferred above all other regions: and therefore this may be well enough
understood, albeit the Prophet has not expressed it. As if he should say, I
have promised indeed that this region should be the perpetual heritage of my
people, Genesis 12.15. and 17.8.
but they shall be as restles vagabonds; and it shall fare with them as with
those who being driven out of their country, being afflicted with pestilence,
famine, and all manner of miseries, do seek every where for some place of abode
better then their own, but can no where find it. Thus these words are opposed
to that singular benefit of God, whereof Moses makes mention so often, to wit,
that they should dwell perpetually in Judea: for he foretelles here that they
shall be vvanderers and vagabonds not in their country, but in a strange
region, so as in whatsoever place they should ariue, they should be assailed
and vexed with infinite calamities.

Affamished.] It seems the Prophet speaks of the Jews conversion, as if he
should say, After they have bin thoroughly humbled with Gods judgments, they
will come to repentance: and questionless this is the true remedy whereby God
for the most part heales the o^stinacie of men. Notwithstanding if any t^inke
that by the word hunger the Prophet describes the wrath and stubborn yelling
of the wicked, it must be observed that he not only comprehends hunger and
thirst, but (by the figure called Synecdoche) all other calamities also. By the
word To provoke, he signifies that which we have in our common speech, they
fret, or chafe. The meaning is, that they shall begin to be displeased in
themselves, and shall also detest all those succors in which they trusted
before: and this in deed is the beginning of conversion; for in prosperity we
flatter our selves, but being oppressed, we abhor whatsoever is about us. Now
if any had rather refer this to the reprobate, then this word fret shall note
out that gall and bitterness which rather pricks them forward to a furious
raging, then to a calm and quiet humbling of themselves.

They shall curse their king.] By king, some understand God. And Zophonie takes
Malchom in this sense, Zoph. 1.5. that is to say, their king. But I here put a
distinction between king and God, for the wicked are first blinded with the
false trust which they put in Idols, and by and by after they ground and
establish their strength upon earthly things. The Jews having a king, were
puffed up with his glory and power: and when Isaiah preached, the wicked
exasperated the king against him, and they moved all the people to imitate
their king, who was as it were the standard bearer. In as much then as they
were puffed up as well in regard of their idols as of their king, he shows that
they shall be oppressed with so many calamities, that they shall be constreined
to curse their gods, and their king. And behold here the beginning of
repentance, namely, to detest and put far away all impediments which turn us
away from God.

Lifting up their face on high.] He here describes an affrighted and perplexed
conscience, which vexes the afflicted so long till they have learned to lift
up their eyes boldly on high. It is some beginning of repentance, as I have
touched a little before, to endeavor to seek true remedies, having been
instructed and awakened by calamities and chastisements. But we must go a step
further, to wit, that resting our selves upon God only we gaze not here and
there, neither yet be tossed to and fro with all winds. To be short, Isaiah
threatens the Jews with an utter ruin, because they were become so
desperate, that a light and easy stroke of Gods hand had not sufficiently
tamed their rebellion. Yet notwithstanding we may expound this in the good
part, to wit, that the Jews should lift up their eyes at the last unto heaven:

Verse. 22. And when he shall look to the earth, behold trouble, and darkness,
vexation and anguish, and he is driven into darkness.
But then we must read this 22. verse apart, and so the sense will be, that
the Jews shall convert unto God, because they shall be destitute of all means
on earth, and shall perceive nothing but horrible calamities on which side
soever they turn their eyes. Now these speeches are partly simple, and
partly figurative: for by darkness and obscurity he means nothing else but
adversity, after the manner of the scripture phrase: but he adds driven,
amplifying it greatly by this word affliction: for if one push him forwards
which is in darkness, he stumbleth and hurts himself very greatly. His meaning
is then, that to one sore affliction the Lord will add another more grievous,
to humble them more and more. For his intent is nothing else but to show that
the judgments of God shall be so horrible, that they shall be constreined in
despite of their teeth to cast up their eyes to heaven.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Yet the darkness shall not be according to the affliction that it had
when at the first he touched lightly the land of Zebulon, and the land of
Nepthaly; nor afterward when he was more grievous by the way of the sea beyond
Jordan in Galile of the Gentiles.
HE begins to comfort ye afflicted with hope of a mitigation of the
chastisements, least they should be swallowed up with so great an heap of
calamities. Many draw these words to a clean contrary sense, saying, that it
is a threatening which presageth a more heavy affliction to the Jews, 2. King.
15.29. and 17.6.
then that wherewith they were chastised by Tiglath-pelezer, or by Salmanazar.
The first did them much evil, and the second more then the former: for he
carried the ten tribes away captive, and abolished the name of Israel. Some
think then that the Prophet in this place foretells of a more heavy calamity
then ever they yet tasted of, which being compared to the two former, should
much surpass them. Although I am not minded to reject this exposition because
it is something probable; yet notwithstanding I am of a contrary opinion,
albeit this first has the fairer show: the Prophet meant to take all pleasures
from the hypocrites, lest they should imagine that this destruction which was
to ouerflow all, should be like some little spoil which might pass away by
and by as the former afflictions had done; and so shall we take the particle Ci
in his proper signification. But me thinks the natural sense of the place will
agree better if we say, that it is a consolation, wherein the Prophet begins to
moderate that which he had formerlie spoken of these horrible darkness, and
driuings forward: and in mitigating the bitterness of these chastisements, he
comforts and draws them to hope that God will show them mercy; as if he
should say, And yet, even in this cruel destruction which the Jews shall
undergo, the darkness shall not be such as it was when the land of Israel was
first afflicted by Tiglath-pelezer, and then a little more severely by
Salmanazer: for the faithful might have grown out of heart in such
distresses, if they had not had some consolations to have cheered and comforted
them. The Prophet then speaks unto them, to the end they should not think
themselves undone, and declares unto them that the rods wherewith God meant to
beat them should be more easy then the first. We shall easily discern
hereafter by the context how proper and natural this exposition is.

But why says the Prophet that this destruction which will lay all things
waste, grounded upon the word of God, we can escape and come forth out of an
extreme ruin safe and sound.

As touching the words, some take Muaph for an adjective, as if the Prophet
should say, It shall not be darkened: but the relative of the femenin gender
which follows a little after, hinders from referring this unto men. The
opinion of those who say it is a noune substantive is better, and therefore I
have thought good to translate word for word: There shall be no darkness in
Judea according to the time, etc. Whereas some expound the verb Hekal, as if
the earth had been oppressed and burdened with people led into captivity; this
is utterly wide from the Prophets meaning, neither agrees it to the scope of
the Text: for it is said, by and by after, that the neighbor region was
burdened with a second war: no doubt then but this verb answers to the
former, Harishon. Because then that Tiglath-pelezer assailed but a little
portion of the kingdom, it is said that the war which he made is but light
in comparison of that of Salmanazar. He also says by the way of the sea,
because Galile was near the river of the Mediterraneum sea, on the other side
it was environed with the flood Jordan. It is called Gallile of the Gentiles,
not only because it was neighbor to Tire and Sidon, but also in regard many
nations were mingled there amongst the Jews; for after David gave this
country to king Hiram, 1. King. 9.12.
it could never be so quiet but the Gentiles would always occupy some part of
it.

Verse. 2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that
dwelled in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined.
HE speaks of things to come, and yet notwithstanding uses the time present,
that in this destruction of the City, and in the captivity and ruin thereof,
the people might behold the light of God. The sum is then, that even in the
midst of darkness, yea of death it self, they were nevertheless to hope,
seeing God is able sufficiently to give life to his people when they shall be
thought as good as dead. It seems that S. Matthew in alleging this place
turns it to an other purpose: for he says this prophecy was fulfilled when
Jesus Christ preached by the sea side, Math. 4.15. But if we rightly consider
the Similitude, S. Matthew has justly applied this place unto Christ, and
has observed the true sense. Although it seems our expositors can not tell
how to make it hang together: for whereas they simply affirm, that this
appertains to the kingdom of Christ, they yield no sufficient reason of it,
neither do they show how this agrees to this place. If we will have the true
sense then, we must call to mind what has been said heretofore, namely, that
the Prophet in speaking of the return of this people from the captivity of
Babylon, presented not one age or season before his view, but comprehended all
others, even to the coming of Christ, who brought a full and perfect liberty
with him to his people. For the deliverance from Babylon was as an entrance and
beginning of the restoration of the Church, not to establish it for some few
years, but till such time as the Messiah should come, who brought salvation,
not to men's bodies only, but also to their souls. We shall find this manner of
speech to be very familiar with Isaiah, after we have proceeded further, and
shall be a little better exercised in reading of his prophecy.

The Prophet then having spoken of the captivity of Babylon, which showed a
very great calamity to come, declares that it shall yet be more light then
that which Israel had sustained at the first, because the Lord had moderated
and limited a certain end to this calamity, to wit, the space of 70. years,
Iere. 25.11.12. and 29.10.
which being past, the light of the Lord should shine again upon them. By this
hope of deliverance then he cheares up the hearts of such as were cast down
with fear, to the end they should not be discouraged. And thus he has put a
difference between the Jews and the Israelites, who had not any certain hope
of so near a deliverance. For howsoever the Prophets had given a certain
taste of the mercy of God to a small number of the faithful amongst the
people of Israel, yet notwithstanding because the deliverance of this people
was as an overplus, and depended upon the deliverance of Judah, the Prophet
justly affirms that a new light is offered, in as much as God has determined
to redeem his people. Saint Matthew also rightly spreads the beams of this
light over Galile, and the land of Zabulon.

Darkness and the shadow of death.] Here he compares their exile in Babylon to
darkness and death, because those which were detained therein were poor and
miserable, and were altogether like dead men: as also Ezechiel out of their
mouth declares, namely, that the dead should rise out of their graves, Ezech.
37.11.12. Their condition then was such, as if no brightness or sparkle of light
had shined upon them. Yet notwithstanding he shows that this shall be no
hinderance at all, that they should enjoy the light, and recover their first
liberty again: which liberty he stretches not to a little space, but even
unto Christ his time, as has been already said.

And hence we observe how ye Apostles were wont to allege ye testimonies of ye
Prophets, How the Apostles are wont to allege testimonies out of the Prophets.
and to show the end and true use of them. As S. Paul alleges the testimony
of Hosea, I will call them my people which were not my people, Romans 9.26. Hosea
1.10. Where he appropriates this to the calling of the Gentiles, although it be
properly spoken of the Jews: and shows that it was fulfilled when the Lord
did incorporate the Gentiles into his Church. Thus when this people were in
this banishment and enclosed therein as in a sepulcher, they differed nothing
from the heathen. And in regard they were in one and the same condition, it is
good reason that this testimony should appertain to the Gentiles as well as
to the Jews. Neither must it be referred to an external misery only, but to
the shadow of eternal death, until Christ shine upon us by the doctrine of
his word, which is the cause why Paul says, Awake thou that sleep and stand
up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. If then we
extend the beginning of the deliverance from the return out of Babylon until
the coming of Christ, from whom proceeds all bounty and liberty of good
things, we shall have the true sense of this place, which otherwise has not
been expounded clearly enough by the expositours.

Verse. 3. Thou have multiplied the nation and increased their joy: they have
reioiced before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when
they divide a spoil.
THis place is somewhat obscure, as well in regard of it self, as also because
of the diversities of interpretations: for it seems absurd to say that the joy
was not increased, seeing he by and by adds, They reioiced. For this cause the
Jews say that the particle Lo is not negative here, as if one letter were put
in stead of another, to wit Al^ph for Vau: as also that this is found in the
scripture, Exodus 21.8.
albeit very seldom: and this they publish, because they can not make the text
hang together as they would. 2. King. 19.35.
Some refer this to Sennacherib, because his so great an army brought him no
matter of joy, but rather of sorrow. Others not amiss expound it of the Church:
but they give no reason for it, for they think the Prophet speaks this
because the faithful are subject to many miseries and troubles through out
their whole life. Others draw out a sense further from the purpose, to wit,
that the Gentiles which should increase the Church, should not bring any joy to
the Jews, nor to the ancient Synagogue. But I cannot approve any one of these
interpretations. And therefore I expound it thus: that even as in the beginning
of the Chapter the Prophet said, the benefit of this redemption should be
greater then all the rest, although it seemed not so in regard of the small
number of those which should return home into their country: so now also he
repeates the same comparison again: or at the least, another every way like
unto it: namely, that the grace of God should shine much more then it did when
he multiplied the people. For if we compare the estate of the kingdom of
Judah, before the captivity of Babylon, with that which followed after the
return; we shall well perceive that it gained at that time more than it lost
before.

There returned but a small handful of people indeed, in comparison of the
great multitude which had been led captive thither. Moreover, they inhabited
not freely in their own country, but by way of lone: and they were to pay
tribute to the Persians, so as they held not any appearance in a manner of
their first dignity. Who would not then have preferred the flourishing estate
which was in the house of David before this? Yet notwithstanding the Prophet
affirms, that this last estate, howsoever it appeared much less, and more
miserable, is yet nevertheless to be preferred before the first flourishing
estate and glory of it. He shows also that there shall be greater joy then,
than when there was abundance of all sorts of riches and good things: which
Agge likewise witnessed, Hagga. 2.1^
to wit, that the beauty of the last Temple should be greater than the first;
although to outward view it should seem far otherwise. It is as much then as
if Isaiah should have said, There was never greater joy, no not when the
multitude of people was much more: for howsoever we be few, and a small number,
yet notwithstanding thou have so revived us by the light wherewith thou have
shined unto us, that there was no joy in the former ^state comparable to this.
For this deliverance was as an entrance of the true and perfect salvation,
which was at the last brought and offered by Christ.

Before thee.] His meaning is, that the joy shall not be light nor momentanie.
For men often rejoice; but it is with a vain and a false joy which brings
nothing in the end but sorrow and tears. Now he declares that the root of
this joy shall be so steadfast, as it shall never perish nor be moved. And
hereunto appertains the particle before thee, because there is nothing that
glads the hearts of the faithful more, then when God causes the light of his
countenance sweetly to shine upon them. The faithful are not carried away with
a blind joy, as the children of this world are.
They are not carried hither and thither with a frantic and blind joy, after
the manner of the children of this world, but their full and perfect joy is to
repose themselves in the loving favor of God. It may be also that the Prophet
alludes to that sentence which is so often found in the books of Mose^: Leuit.
23.40
Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 12.12. For although he
there speaks of the Tabernacle, yet may this manner of speech be fitly applied
to the present purpose, namely, that the joy of the godly shall not be
profane, but shall arise from hence that they know God, and by faith behold
him to be the author of their salvation.

Others expound it somewhat more strictly, as if the faithful should rejoice
before God in their consciences, because in the world they find nothing but
sorrow and continual cause of grief. Now although this be true, yet
notwithstanding we may gather a less constrained sense from the circumstance
of the place, to wit, that the faithful which should be miraculously
delivered, should rejoice with true gladness, because they were assured by
this deliverance that God was their father, and therefore might boldly rejoice,
as being for ever exempt from all evil, when they shall be received into his
protection. This sets forth a perpetually joy then, as I said ere while.

The similitudes which he adds of the harvest, and spoils, whereby he
amplifies the greatness of this joy, are clear enougn of themselves. To
conclude, it appears by this place, what profit Christ brings unto us; to wit,
Ioh. 16.20. What manner of joy it is which Christ brings us.
a steadfast and perfect joy, which can by no means whatsoever, be plucked
away from us; no, not although we be assailed with waves and storms, yea and
pressed with all manner of anguishes. For howsoever we be weak and feeble, yet
must we rejoice and be of good courage: for our joy consists not in multitudes,
neither in riches nor outward appearances; but in a spiritual felicity which
we obtain by the preaching of the Gospel.

Verse. 4. For the yoke of their burden, and the staff of their shoulder, and
the rod of their oppression have thou broken as in the day of Midian.
HE shows the cause of this joy; to wit, that the faithful being delivered
from an horrible and cruel tyranny, should esteem of this benefit even as
much as if they had been drawn out of the jaws of death. Now to the end this
favor might be the better illustrated, Isaiah sets forth the vile and
insupportable slavery wherewith the Jews were oppressed: and hereunto belongs
this heaping up of words, heavy yoke, rod of the shoulder, staff of the
oppressor, or, exactor. For although we be ouertender and delicate when
afflictions press us; yet notwithstanding as soon as the bitterness is past,
we by and by forget them. To the end then that this redeemed people might keep
the singular benefit of God in remembrance, and in a reverend regard, the
Prophet would have them to consider how hard and lamentable this servitude was,
wherein they groned and bowed underneath heavy burdens, when as the staff
never moved from off their shoulders, being pressed by a Tyrant which insulted
over them: for which cause they might well rejoice and be glad of their
deliverance.

And he yet extolles the excellency of this favor by another circumstance, in
regard that God did openly display his arm and power in their deliverance,
even as it were from heaven it self. And therefore he brings in an ancient and
memorable example: that as God had in times past discomforted the host of the
Midianites, Judge. 7.22.
by a wonderful and incredible means, without the strength and succors of
men: so now also he would display even the very same power; to wit, that he
will deliver his people from under that tyranny which shall oppress them,
without the help of any man: even then, when none of the poor Jews shall
dare to lift up their finger (as they say.) We must also observe, that God so
succors his, that sometimes he serves himself of ordinary means: Why God
deferres sometimes to succor us by means.
but when he sees that these means will be hurtful unto men, and hinder
them from looking to the hand of their deliverer; he then works alone and by
miracles, lest any thing should over shadow or hinder men from the manifest
beholding and knowledge of his power. Judge. 7.16.19.21.
Thus the arm of the Lord appeared from heaven in this victory of Gedeon,
where the enemies were cut off without any help of man's hand at all. For what
had Gedeon but a noise of broken pitchers, with which he should very hardly
have scarred a sort of poor mise: he had a little handful of me^ against a
great host: and in stead of all sorts of weapons, they had vain and ridiculous
scarcrowes.

For this cause he compares the future deliverance of the people to this other
deliverance, and shows that the manifest power and virtue of God shall be
known unto all in this last, as well as in the victory of Gedeon. Some
expound this place simply of the burdens, under which thy people was unjustly
and cruelly oppressed.

Others apply this to the destruction of Jerusalem, Vespasian. But they have no
ground for it. Almost all the Jews Hezechias, 2. Kin. 19.35.
when the Lord delivered the City from the siege of Senacherib, and did cut
off his host. But this interpretation cannot agree, Chap. 38.36
because Hezechias reigned not tyrannically over the Jews. Moreover, the Lord
delivered his people then out of the danger, and from the fear wherein they
were, and not out of any servitude. Whence it appears, that the Prophet looked
further off; and that our exposition is both true, and suits best with the text.

Verse. 5. Or, Although.
Surely every battle of the warrior is with noise, and with tumbling of
garments in blood: Yet.
but this shall be with burning and devouring with fire.
ALmost all the expositours agree in this, that Isaiah meant to oppose all
other victories to that which God should give unto his people. For other
conquerours obtain victory in overthrowing their enemies: but here the Lord
shall overcome by his immediate hand. He expounds this speech then, Verse 4.
As in the day of Madian, more fully. The Lord says, he shall not use many
men's help in this work: but shall win the victory from heaven. Now when God
works thus himself alone, having rejected all impediments, we can clearly
discern that he is the author of our life and salvation. Seeing also there is
an opposition which shows the difference between the common manner of
warfare, and the miracle of deliverance, the conjunction vau, which is in the
midst of the verse, should be resolved into a particle aduersatiue: as if he
should say; Enemies are wont to be put to flight by a furious fight: but God
will work otherwise; because he will cut off the enemies of his Church, as if
he shot forth his lightnings, and should send down fire from heaven upon them.
We may well receive their opinion who expound it, With a breath; namely, that
all warriors shall be astonished, and, In burning of fire. But the first sense
agrees best, and is confirmed even by the Prophets own words. It appears also
that the Prophet speaks not here only of that deliverance which the people
received under Cyrus, who gave them liberty to return into their Country; but
we must apply these things also to the kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 6. For unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, and the
government is upon his shoulder: and ^^^^ncy. O^, his name shall be called.
he shall call his name Wonderful, Counsell^r, The mighty God, The Or, of the
world.
everlasting father, The Prince of peace.
ISaiah shows now the final cause; wherefore this deliverance was to be
preferred before all other benefits of God; because he will not only bring
his people out of captivity, but will also establish Christ in his royal
throne; under whose Kingdom there shall be seen a sovereign and an eternal
felicity. And thus he shows that this deliverance shall be no temporary or
perishable benefit, seeing he comprehends the whole time wherein the Church
should be preserved until the coming of Christ. Neither is it any marvel if
the Prophet passes forthwith from the return of the ancient people, to the
full and whole restoration of the Church, which notwithstanding should not
come to pass many ages after. For we have said heretofore in the seventh
Chapter, 2. Cor. 1.20. All the promises of salvation grounded upon the Mediator.
verse 14. that all the promises of salvation are grounded upon the Mediator,
for whose sake only God is merciful unto us: and therefore the Prophets were
often wont to propound this pledge and earnest penny, as often as they would
encourage the faithful, and raise them up to a comfortable expectation of
deliverance. And thus it came to pass, that the return from the captivity of
Babylon, was a beginning of that restauratio^ of the Church, which in
conclusion happened in the perfection thereof; to wit, when Christ appeared: in
regard whereof, there is no absurdity in this so continual a progress of
time. And therefore Isaiah teaches, that they were not to stay their minds in
the beholding of the present benefit, but to consider the end; and thereunto to
refer all these things: as if they should have said; Our happiness consists
in our deliverance from death; not to lead our lives only in the land of
Canaan; but rather that we should aspire to the kingdom of heaven.

This place admonishes us, that we should not swallow up the benefits which
we receive from God, so as we should forthwith put them to forgetfulness;
but ought r^ther to lift up our minds unto Christ: for otherwise it will be
but a flashing and vain joy; because such benefits will not make us taste the
sweetness of the love which God our Father bears us, unless his free
election ratified in Jesus Christ goes before. Lastly, To rest in the enjoying
of outward benefits, without having an eye unto Christ, will prove but a
vanishing joy in the end.
the Prophet would not have this people to rest in the pleasure of that one
outward and transitory deliverance, which they obtained; but that they should
consider the end thereof; to wit, the conservation of the Church until such
time as Christ the only Savior and redeemer should appear. For he it is who
ought to be the matter and end of all our joy.

A child is borne to us.] The Jews do impudently wrest this place: for they
expound it of Hezekias; who was born notwithstanding before this prophecy was
published. But he here speaks as of a new and rare matter; yea, which more
is, it is a promise to confirm the faithful in the hope of a thing to come;
whence we may truly gather, that such a child is here spoken of as should be
borne afterward. He is also called the Son of God. I deny not but the name of
Son stretches very far in the Hebrew tongue, Chap. 65.20.
but it is when some other word is joined therewithal. Every man is the son
of his Father: those who have attained to the age of an hundredth years, are
called Sons of an hundredth years: the wicked are called Sons of iniquity:
those which are blessed, Sons of blessing. Heretofore in the fifth chapter,
verse 1. Isaiah called the fruitful hill, the Son of the Olive. But this
word Son by it self, can be understood of none but of the Son of God. And
here it is attributed unto Christ by way of excellency, to the end we might
kn^w that by this mark he is separated from all other men. Neither is there
any doubt but the Prophet had respect to that famous Prophecy which was so
often in the mouths of all; I will be his Father, 2. Sam. 7.14.
and he shall be m^ Son, Psalm. 86.27. as it is said in the second Psalm,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. For had it not been a thing
commonly known, that the Messiah should be the son of God, the Prophet had
unaptly and to little or no purpose mentioned the name of Son barely and
simply. This title therefore depends upon the Prophecy before going: from
whence the Apostle concludes, that Christ is more excellent then all the
Angels, and is exalted far above them, Heb. 1.5.

Moreover, although Christ should be contemptible in the person of a little
child, yet notwithstanding his dignity is adorned with the title of Son. I
confess indeed that he might also have been called the Son of David: but it
is better referred unto God. Now the other titles following (we know) do in no
sort belong to Hezkeias. And I will hereafter refute at large the cauils
wherewith the Jews arm themselves to corrupt this place. Let them bark as
long as they will, yet is the thing clear and most apparent unto all such as
will judge thereof peaceably, and with sound judgment. There is also great
weight in this which he adds, that this son is given to the people: to the
end the Jews might know their salvation, and also the salvation of the whole
Church was enclosed in the person of Christ. And this gift is one of the
principal articles of our faith, for the birth of Jesus Christ should little
avail us unless he were given unto us. Christ's bi^^^ should l^t^l^ avail us
unless the Father had giu^n him unto v^.
Now in the verses following, Isaiah shows what this child, and his condition
shall be.

His government is laid upon his shoulders.] It is utterly frivolous to think
(as many do) that the Prophet alludes to the Cross of Christ. He bare his
Cross upon his shoulders, John 19.17.18.
and thereon triumphed gloriously over ye prince of the world. But seeing it
is here said, That the government is laid upon his shoulders, in the same
sense as it is said, that the key of the house of David is laid upon the
shoulders of Eliakim, as we shall see in the 22. Chapter, we have no need to
coin new inventions without a foundation. Me thinks here is rather a close
opposition between the government which the redeemer should bear upon his
shoulders, and the yoke which was mentioned before, verse 4. wherewith the
tyrants oppressed the poor captives. This exposition agrees well, and is not
subject to any cavil whatsoever. The Prophet shows then that the Messiah
shall in nothing resemble those foolish kings who give themselves to
lasciuiousnes, never taking thought for the discharge of their duties, for he
shall be strong and mighty to undergo the burden imposed upon him. Thus he
extolles the majesty and excellency of Christ, because he shall obtain honor
and authority by his own power, and shall not execute his office with his
fingers ends only, but with his whole strength.

His name shall be.] Although the verb be of the active signification, yet
notwithstanding because it is taken indefinitlie, I have been bold to render it
in the neuter gender: for it is as much as if the Prophet should have said in
the plural number, They shall call. This manner of speech is in use amongst us
Frenchmen, saying, On appellera.
They shall call. For whereas the Jews refer this unto God, and read it
thus, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The eternal father, and Prince
of peace, shall give him his name; we see easily that they do this of set
purpose, and with an affectation of darkning the glory of Christ: for were
they not so obstinate as to desire to spoil him of his Deity, the text would
run exceeding well as our men have turned it. Besides, what need was there to
adorn God with these epithites, if the Prophet had only meant to say that he
should give the name to Messiah? For the epithites which are wont to be given
to God are either perpetual, or applied to the matter which shall be handled,
which we see is not so in this place. Furthermore, it were a perverting of
order, to put the name of God in the midst of diverse epithites, but it should
rather be put before the verb Shall call, to wit, The mighty God shall call,
etc. Moreover, I see not how the name of Counselor, can simply agree unto
God: for it must be referred to those which are assistants or counselors to
kings, or some others. If any cauiller will yet rest himself too obstinately
in this wrangling of the Rabbis, he shall do nothing else but manifest his
impudency. Let us follow that which is plain and clear.

Wonderful.] We must note, 1. Wonderful. These titles given to Christ be no
vain things.
that these titles be no vain things, but fitly applied to the present
occasion: for the Prophet teaches what a one Christ shall show himself to be
toward the faithful. Now he disputes not of his incomprehensible essence, but
extols his virtues, whereof we shall have experience by faith. Which we ought so
much ye more to keep in mind, Me^ are wont to content themselves with the bare
name of Christ, without consideration of his power.
because men for the most part content themselves with the bare name of Christ,
without consideration of his virtue and efficacy; the which indeed we ought
evermore chiefly and principally to weigh and consider. In the first epithet
he prepares the minds of the faithful to the consideration of a very rare
thing, to wit, that they should expect some more excellent and greater matter
from Christ, then that which we see in the course of Gods ordinary works. As
if he should say, There are inestimable treasures, and wonderful things hidden
in Christ. And the very truth is, that his redemption far surpasses the
work of the creation of heaven and earth. So then the sum is, that the grace
which God has manifested in Christ is more excellent then all other miracles.

The second epithet signifies, 2. Counselor.
that the redeemer shall come adorned and decked with all wisdom. But here
we must call that to mind which I have touched before, namely, that the Prophet
disputes not in this place of the hidden and secret essence of Christ, but of
that virtue which he manifested toward us. He calls him not Counselor then
because he knows and understands all his Fathers secrets, John 1.18.
but rather in regard he issued out of his Fathers bosom, and therefore
performed all the parts of the office of a sovereign and perfect Teacher: so
as it is not lawful for us now to be wise further then his Gospel; to the
praise whereof also this appertains, 1. Cor. 1.24.30. Ephesians. 1.17. Col. 1.9.
for therein the wisdom of God is fully contained, as Saint Paul also often
shows; and therein also Jesus Christ manifests and declares whatsoever is
necessary for our salvation; and that so familiarly, that he speaks no more
to his disciples as unto servants, but as unto friends, John 15.14.15.

The mighty God. 3. The mighty God.
] El is one of the names of God, which notwithstanding is derived from might or
power, so as sometimes it is added in stead of an epithet. But here we may
perceive it is a proper name, because Isaiah contents not himself therewith,
but has added the epithet Gibbor, which signifies strong. And truly if Christ
were not God, it were ill done to rejoice in him; for it is written, Cursed is
he that trusts in man, Iere. 17.5. The majesty of God then must of
necessity shine in him; that in him we may place our confidence, because we
can not rest upon any creature without high sacrilege. He is called the
Mighty God then, for the same reason that he was heretofore called Immanuel,
Chap. 7.14. For if in Christ we only find flesh, and the nature of man, our
rejoicing should be frivolous and perverse, and the stay of our hope should be
grounded amiss, and without any steadfastness. If Christ be God, yea a mighty
God, ^hen we may boldly repose our confidence in him. Ephesians. 6.12.
But if so be he show himself to be a God to us; yea a mighty God, then may
we boldly and securely repose our confidence in him. There is also very great
reason why the Prophet calls him the Mighty and Strong: for we have to fight
against the devil, death, and sin; enemies that are far too mighty and
strong for us to deal withal, who would quickly master us, if we were not
clothed with the invincible strength of Christ. By this epithet then we are
taught that Christ is strong enough to uphold our salvation, to the end we
should desire none but him: Christ is a strong God for us.
for he is God, and will show himself strong for us. This application is the
key of this place, and of others like unto it; to wit, that we distinguish
between the incomprehensible essence of Christ, and that power by which he
manifests himself unto us.

4. Eternal Father.
Eternal Father.] The Greek Translator has added, To come: and in my
judgment has rightly expounded it; for it sets forth the Eternity: unless
we had rather say, that a perpetual and continual order of times and seasons
should agree better, lest the heavenly life, which is yet hidden from us,
should needlessly be restrained to this place. It is true that the Prophet also
comprehends that; yea, and admonishes us that Christ shall come to make his
elect immortal: but because the faithful being yet in this world, must pass
from death to life, this time to come, is referred to the eternal estate of
the Church. The name Father, is taken for Author; because Christ maintains his
Church in all ages, and gives immortality as to the whole body thereof in
general, so to every member in particular. Whence we learn, how frail and
brittle we are, being out of him. For be it that we live very long, according
to the manner of men, what shall become of this old age at the last? Let us
therefore lift up our minds to that eternal and blessed life, which we
possess by faith and hope, although we see it not visibly with our bodily
eyes.

5. Prince of peace.
The Prince of peace.] Behold the last epithet; whereby the Prophet declares,
that Christ shall bring full and perfect felicity with him at his coming; or
rather a quiet and blessed security. For the word peace signifies as much
oftentimes amongst the Hebrews, as prosperity, in regard that among all
blessings, none are found better or more desirable then peace. The sum is,
that all those who will subject themselves under the government of Christ,
shall lead a quiet and a happy life under his obedience. Whence it follows,
that where this King reigns not, men's lives are most miserable and full of
troubles. But herewithall we must observe, that the nature of this peace, and
of this kingdom are both alike. For it has his principal seat in the
consciences of men: otherwise it must needs be that we should be always in
conflicts, and exercised through continual assaults. And therefore Isaiah does
not promise an external peace only, but such a peace whereby we may enter
again into favor with God, from whom we were utterly estranged and enemies
before. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, says S. Paul, Romans
5.1 Now after Christ has quieted our consciences, Phil. 4.7. Col. 3.15.
this very peace shall have the chief place in our hearts, so as we shall
carry our selves patiently under all afflictions: and besides, from this
fountain we shall see outward prosperity to stream down unto us, which is
nothing else but an effect of the blessing of God.

Now to the end we may apply this doctrine to our use; as often as we are vexed
with any diffidence, and that all means do fail us, yea when all things
seems in a confusion before us, let us remember that Christ is called
wonderful; because he has incredible means in his hands to aid his
withal, 1. Wonderful.
and is able by his power to surmount far above all that we can imagine. And
when we shall be destitute of counsel, let us remember that he is that
Counselor. 2. Counselor.
And if our power and strength do fail us, yet let us remember that he is the
mighty God. 3. The mighty God.
And when we shall see new fears ever and anon to terrify us, and that many
deaths do enuiron us on all sides, let us rest and rely upon his eternity;
3. The eternal Father
whereof he is not called the Father for nothing. And let us learn to sweeten
all the miseries of this world even by this remedy. And if it fall out that
we be tossed up and down with diverse tempests, and that Satan labors to
disquiet our consciences, let us remember that Christ is the Prince of peace,
5. Prince of peace.
who can easily quiet all our troubles. And thus these epithites shall confirm
us more and more in the faith of Christ, and shall fortify us against Satan
and hell it self.

Verse 7. The increase of his government and peace shall have none end: he
shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it and to
establish it with judgment and with justice, from hence forth even for ever:
the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.
HE here begins to expound and confirm that which he had said before, where he
called Christ. The Prince of peace; to wit, that his government must endure for
ever, and that there shall be no end of his dominion, nor of his peace; Dan.
7.27.
which also was repeated by Daniel. The Angel Gabriel in like manner had
respect hereunto when he brought the message to the Virgin; or rather he
expounded this place, because it can be understood of none but of Christ. He
shall reign, says he, over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom
there shall be none end: Luke 1.33. Now we see by experience, that the
greatest dominions in the world, do quickly fall to the ground through sudden
mutations, no less then if they were built upon ice. We may also know both by
histories and examples of things which fall out every day, how variable and
unstable earthly kingdoms are. Earthly kingdoms unstable, Christ's kingdom
ete^nall.
There is none but this government only then, which is immutable and eternal.

Now this spreading and perpetuity whereof Isaiah here speaks, contains two
members: for it referres it self as well to the time, as to the state thereof.
Now albeit the state of Christ's Kingdom be such, as it seems ever and anon
likely to perish: yet notwithstanding God contents not himself only to defend
and keep it, but does also enlarge the bounds thereof far and wide; and then
vpholds it, and causes it to stand fast for ever and ever. Which we are
diligently to note, to the end the continual assaults wherewith the Church is
assailed, do not shake our faith; because we are here assured, that amidst
these furious threats, yea amidst the very swords of the enemies, the Kingdom
of Christ shall stand steadfast by the invincible power of God: so as in despite
of the whole world, it shall flourish for ever. We must not judge of the
ste^fastnesse of Christ's Kingdom by worldly things.
Indeed we must not judge of the steadfastness thereof by the appearance of
worldly things, but by the promise; which makes us certain of the eternity and
continual increasings of this kingdom.

The eternity of peace is added to the government, and not without cause,
seeing the one cannot be separate from the other: add also that it should be
impossible for Christ to be a King, but by means thereof he must hold his
subjects in a happy and quiet peace under him, and also enrich them with all
manner of blessings. But in regard they are subject daily to infinite sorts of
troubles, bearing many hard brunts, yea tremble and are pressed with fears and
perplexities; therefore they ought to apprehend this peace of Christ; which
has the chief seat in the heart: to the end they may continue safe and sound,
yea and may stand fast in the midst of the shakings of this whole world.

Whereas the letter mem, placed in the word Lemarbeh, is close, contrary to the
common ma^er of the writing of the Hebrews; some think it signifies the
bondage wherein the Jews should be till the coming of Christ. Others think
that by this sign, this people were excluded out of the fellowship of the
kingdom, because of their disloyalty: and for mine own part I reject none of
these expositions. But yet can we scarcely affirm that the Prophet wrote
thus; notwithstanding because it has been given us from hand to hand, and that
the Rabbines are such diligent obseruers even of the least prick or point, we
cannot think that this was done unadvisedly.

If we grant that the Prophet wrote thus of set purpose, me thinks it is an
advertisement very profitable to the faithful, lest they should imagine that
the Kingdom of Christ was to flourish in outward pomp; also lest hereupon
they should forge any carnal triumphs through a vain hope; but might rather
be assured only amidst so many afflictions, that the Kingdom of Christ
should grow, no man perceiving how; because they had a promise thereof made
unto them.

Upon the throne of David.] Because the Lord had promised David that the
redeemer should be borne of his seed, 2. Sam. 7.12.13.
and that the kingdom of David was nothing but a little shadow of a more
perfect and happy estate which God had determined to establish by the hand of
his Son, the Prophets are accustomed to call Christ the Son of David; Ier.
23.5. and 33.15.
to the end they might bring the people back to the remembrance of this so
memorable a miracle. For howsoever the name of so holy and renowned a King was
for just cause precious and honorable; yet notwithstanding the faithful much
more esteemed the promise touching the restoring of salvation which was
promised unto David; yea and the very remembrance of this prophecy was famous
amongst all; so as there was none, no not the simplest which did not reverence
it, being assuredly persuaded of the truth of it. I will not heap up together
all the testimonies wherein the Prophets promise the afflicted that they shall
be restored in the person of David, Ier. 30.9. Ezech 34.23, 24. and 37.24.
Hosea 3.5.
or of his Son. For they sometimes say, that David should be King, who yet
notwithstanding was dead long time before. So Isaiah in this place shows that
he propounds nothing of his own head, but only refreshes their memories
with the consideration of that which God had in times past promised touching
the eternity of this Kingdom. By the way then, he touched that which Amos
had handled more fully; to wit, that the throne of Christ which had been
overthrown for a time, should be set up again, Amos 9.11.

Isaiah also describes the estate of this kingdom, but it is under a
similitude taken from earthly kingdoms. For he says; that Christ shall be a
King, who shall order and establish his kingdom by judgment and by justice.
These indeed are the two means whereby worldly governments do flourish and
stand steadfast; which on the contrary do by and by fall to ruin, when they
are governed by violence and tyranny. Justice the fortress of Kingdoms.
Therefore in regard that justice is an excellent defense and fortress of
kingdoms and governments, and that the felicity of the whole people depends
thereupon; the Prophet by this particular teaches, that the Kingdom of Christ
shall be an example and pattern of an excellent government.

But this judgment and justice whereof he here speaks, Christ's Kingdom
spiritual.
appertains not to outward policy; because we must hold the proportion which
is between the kingdom of Christ and the conditions of it. Now it being
spirtuall, it is established by the power of the holy Ghost. Lastly, all this
ought to be referred to the inward man; to wit, when we are regenerate of God
to be made truly righteous. The outward justice indeed follows forthwith:
but it is necessary that this renouation of the spirit and heart do go
before. We are none of Christ's unless we be given to uprightness.
We are none of Christ's then unless we be given to uprightness and equity,
bearing that righteousness in our hearts, which he has engraven and fixed
there, by his holy Spirit.

Where it is added, from hence forth, it seems it should rather be referred to
the perpetuity of justice and doctrine, then to the eternity of the Kingdom;
to the end we should not t^^nke his laws resemble those of Kings and Princes,
which continue in comparison but three days, or a very small time, and are
sometimes renewed, that a little while after they should come to nothing; but
that we might know how the virtue and power thereof endures for ever. For they
are established as Zachariah says (in his song) that we might serve God in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. Luke. 1 75.
Romans 6.9.
For as Christ's Kingdom is perpetual, because himself dies not; so also
justice and judgment endures for ever, and cannot be changed by any time.

The zeal of the Lord.] By zeal, I understand a burning affection and care
which God will manifest in the conservation of his Church, by removing all
difficulties and impediments which otherwise might hinder the deliverance of
it. For even as when we enterprise some difficult and hard matter, our
affection, vehemency, and ardent desire surmounts all the hindrances which
lie in our way to break off or let our endeavors: so Isaiah shows that God
will be inflamed with a rare and singular desire to save his Church, that if
the faithful in their understandings cannot comprehend the promise which he
erewhile made them, yet they should not cease therefore to be of good comfort,
because the way and course which God holds, is wonderful and incomprehensible.
Lastly, he signifies that the Lord will not come with a light and slow arm
to deliver his Church, for he will always be inflamed with an inestimable
love which he bears to his faithful ones, and with the care of their
salvation.

Verse. 8. The Lord has sent a word into Jacob, and Or, is fallen.
it has lighted upon Israel.
Here follows a new prophecy. And as I think, this Sermon is divided from
the former, because the Prophet speaks now of the future estate of the
Kingdom of Israel, which was then adversary to the Jews. Now we know that
the Jews were terrified with the forces and power of this Kingdom, and not
without cause: especially when the Israelites made a league with the Syrians,
because the Jews were too weak to resist their power. Wherefore for the
comfort of the faithful, he shows what the estate of the Kingdom of Israel
shall be. He takes Jacob and Israel for one and the same: but this variety has
his elegancie; when he shows that the wicked shall gain nothing by their
devices, in seeking to wind themselves out of Gods judgments, and to blot out
the remembrance thereof. He alludes to the speech of those, who think to
escape by scoffs and taunts, turning whatsoever the Prophets do threaten,
unto sport and matter of merriment: as if some wise man would strive to beat
back a tempest, by blowing against it with his mouth. It is a yielding of the
thing unto them then by way of derision; as if he should say, You are of
opinion that God will bring every thing to pass which he has threatened, upon
others: but all the menaces which he pronounces against Jacob, shall also fall
upon Israel.

The verb To send, is taken, To appoint, or ordain. The particle Beth,
signifies, into Jacob himself. For the word of God must abide and rest there;
because it cannot be, that the same should vanish away without his fruit. So
then he teaches that in this place, which he will repeat hereafter in other
terms, My word shall not return to me in vain: Chap. 55.11. because look
what he has once decreed, is never published but it fructifieth. For by the
word to fall, he shows the certain effect and event of the thing: as if he
should say, I imagine not, neither do I foreshew these things out of mine own
brain; but it is God which has spoken, who can neither change, nor be
deceived.

Verse. 9. And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitants of
Samaria, that say in the pride and presumption of their heart.
BY the word people, I understand not the Jews, but rather the Israelites: as
also that herewithall the Prophet loses this knot, by naming Ephraim
expressly. He adds Samaria thereunto, which was the capital city of this
people, or of ye ten Tribes; because the strong and best furnished Cities,
which think themselves out of all danger, are for the most part much more proud
then others. For they think by agreeing with the enemy, to be always able
to escape out of danger, although all the rest of the Country villages be
destroyed. And therefore Isaiah threatens, that it also shall be enwrapped in
the very same destruction with others. He says also, that all shall feel,
that the propriesies which are come out of the mouth of God, shall not be
pronounced in vain. And by the word To know, which is to be referred to
experience it self, he privily taxes their infidelity; as if he should
say, Because I speak but to deaf ears, and to such as make none account of
my admonitions, experience shall make you wise; but yet too late.

Which say.] Here the Prophet inueighes against the obstinacy and rebellion
of this people; who having been chastised many times with the rods of God, and
that very sharply, were yet notwithstanding so far off from repentance, that
they hardened their hearts more and more, as if they had been made fat with
blows. Truly those who mock thus proudly at the Lord, cannot be brought
within compass, till they be wholly overwhelmed. Now such a conspiracy does
manifestly provoke God to anger, and that of set purpose. This is the cause why
the Prophet says, that this proceeds from pride and presumption: whence it
follows, that it is just with God to apply to hard and knottie wood, hatchets
harder then it.

Verse. 10. The brickes are fallen, but we will build it with hewn stones: the
wild figtrees are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars.
THese were the words of the rebellious, and despisers of the calamity which
was befallen them, as though it had bin for their profit; because they take
occasion thereby to deck their houses and fields the more richly. We will
build more stately ones (say they.) The houses of brick are fallen, that we
may dwell in excellent palaces. The trees are cut down; but we will plane them
with more fruitful ones. The state of Europe.
This vice has not reigned in one age alone; for we see the like obstinacy
even now in the world. With how many calamities has Europe been afflicted
within these four hundred years? with how many scourges has it been called
to repentance? and yet notwithstanding we perceive not that any one of them
has done it any good: but excess contrariwise increases day by day, the
voluptuous inflame themselves, me^ persevere in their vices and wickedness
with greater boldness then ever before. In a word, it seems that afflictions
are even prouocations to pride and excess: what must we look for then, but to
be broken with harder blows then any of the former?

Verse. 11. Nevertheless, the Lord will raise up the adversaries of Resin
against him, and Or, gather his, etc.
join his enemies together.
BEcause the Israelites were puffed up with the confederacy which they had
with Syria, and thought that all things should fall out according to their
wish, Isaiah threatens a sudden change which should cut off all their hope, and
should wholly overthrow all their plots. For the Assyrians rose up soon after,
and made war with the Syrians. And Rezin being slain, the estate of that
kingdom was wholly overthrown. He amplifies the matter when he adds, he
will gather together. For his meaning is, that the Lord will assemble and
mingle diverse enemies together, whom he will send to destroy the King of Syria;
as indeed the army of that great Monarch of the Assyriaus was composed of
diverse nations.

Verse. 12. Or, Syria.
Aram before, and the Philistims behind, and they shall devour Israel Or, with
all the mouth.
with open mouth: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still.
2. King. 16.9
THe Prophet shows what this change shall be, and what shall come to pass
after the death of Rezin, who banded himself with Israel against Judah: to
wit, that whereas the Syrians were friends to the Israelites before, 2. King.
17.3
they should presently after the death of their King, become their enemies, and
make war upon them, which also came to pass. And this is his meaning when he
says that Syria shall be before. For their exposition who by Syria, understand
them of the East; and by the Philistims them of the West, is not agreeablee.
The plainest sense is, that the enemies shall nuiron and assail them on all
sides, becau e those whom they thought to enjoy as faithful friends, should
rise up round about them to overthrow them. Where he says before, and behind,
it answers to the common manner of speech, so as we need not seek a new or
strange exposition. What it is to put confidence in confederacies.
Let us learn by this example what it is to put confidence in the power of
men, and in confederacies with Princes, and especially when we wax secure,
being snared with unlawful bands: for when the Lord will, those who before
were on our side, in an instant shall band themselves together for our
destruction: and the remedies which we shall take to be profitable, shall be
hurtful unto us, and shall compass us round before, and behind. We must also
observe, yt God manifests not his plagues all at once, but when we rush against
him obstinately, and provoke him more and more, then he augments and redoubles
also his blows, and sends new chastisements, to the end he may tame and break
our rebellion and stubbornes. With all the mouth, signifies the same which we
have in our common phrase of speech, With full mouth, as if he should say,
Israel shall be exposed as an open pray unto his enemies, so as he shall be
devoured with open mouth, as of the Syrians; so of the Philistims.

Yet for all this.] This is a harder sentence then all the rest, and ought to
have terrified the unbelievers more then any thing whatsoever. For although
they have suffered many punishments, yet are they not at an end: he has still
new rods ready prepared again for them, because by going on in their
rebellion they draw the wrath of God more and more down upon them. For men
take occasion to become utterly obstinate and to ouerflow in all evil whilst
they suffer but some light punishment, thinking they shall suffer no more, and
so become the more stiffenecked. They also persuade themselves they shall be
delivered from the judgment of God, imagining that all his rods are spent or
worn, so as they give themselves the bridle, and shake off the yoke, as if
they were wholly escaped out of his hands. For this cause Isaiah threatens
that the hand of the Lord is stretched forth still, that they should not
suppose they were able to escape the same.

Now he rather uses accusation, then doctrine, although the threatenings tend
also to this end that the doctrine may be the better understood. But because he
had to deal with desperate people who had profited nothing at all for any
blows they had received, therefore it is that he shows the end of their
calamities is not yet accomplished: so that although God seemed to cease
striking for a time, yet notwithstanding he had not spent all his scourges, but
had his hand still stretched out to afflict them with a new plague.

Verse. 13. O^, but yet.
For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek
the Lord of hosts.
THey exp^und this as if the Prophet yielded a reason why God ceased not to
strike them blow upon blow with new chastisements, to wit, because the people
are so obstinate and stifnecked, that they will not come to an acknowledgment
of their faults, nor to amendment. For wherefore should God give place to the
obst^nate, in whom he sees no repentance? so it might seem they were stronger
th^n he. This is the cause then why he continues to smite them more sharply.
And seeing Israel amended not for any correction whatsoever, his dest^uction
was just: such was their extreme obstinacy, that not so much as any one of
them were moved, or turned any whit, although they had been chastised and
beaten so often. This form of chiding is terrible. For when the Lord not only
admonishes us with words, but pricks us forward, and constreines us by his
works, namely, by diverse chastisements, and yet we remain obstinate, not
enduring that he should pluck us from our wicked delights: is it not a sign
of a desperate malice; and can one think or speak of a thing more horrible?
the rods of God, yea kick and wince, or by their brutishnes inflame the wrath
of their Judge more and more against them: never calling themselves to account
wherefore they are smitten, nor what it is to which the Lord thereby calls
them. When the remedies then profit nothing, what should we think, but that
the malice of such is become incureable and past all hope of amendment?

Now this reprehension appertains not to the Israelites only, but to us also.
For the Lord has already chastised all the world in such wise by diverse
plagues and calamities, that there is almost no part thereof free. And yet
notwithstanding it seems that all have obstinately co^spired against God, in
so much that albeit he do his utmost, yet they are always like themselves,
never ceasing to go on still in their leaudnes. The Lord then may justly take
up this complaint against us. And the truth is, that he speaks now to us by
his Prophet Isaiah: neither ought we to look for another Prophet which should
threaten new chastisements, seeing our case differs in nothing from that of
the Israelites, being guilty of the same iniquities with them.

When he says, that they have not sought the Lord, he therein expounds the
first member of the verse; for God smites, to draw such unto him as recoile
back from him. And yet it seems notwithstanding that by this means he drives
men far off from his presence: but because his property is to draw those out
of their graves whom we think he has overwhelmed with his chastiseme^ts, he
humbles poor sinners by fearing them only, to the end they should return
unto him. And truly the beginning of our conversion, yea the only rule of good
life is, to seek God. If we seek any other way, we go utterly awrie. But
let us now see what it is to seek God, or how we ought to do it. For
hypocrites will always allege this for themselves, that they carefully
humble themselves before the Lord to obtain remission of sins by prayer,
fasting, tears, How the Lord will be sought.
and other outward shows of sorrow. But God will be sought far otherwise, to
wit, The Sinner being humbled before him in good earnest, must willingly
receive the yoke of obedience which before he had shaken off, and wholly
employ himself in his service, whom he before despised.

Verse. 14. Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel head and tail, branch,
and rush in one day.

15. The ancient and the honorable man, he is the head: and the prophet that
teaches lies, he is the tail.


HIs meaning is, that the vengeance of God shall be universal, and that it
shall wrap all estates in it: for the whole people was corrupt, and the
contagion thereof had so invaded the whole country, that there was nothing
whole nor sound amongst them. Now then when impiety has thus gotten the
swinge, men begin to flatter themselves, and every one thinks to frame goodly
excuses when they have many to bear them company; and imagine that they have
sufficient reasons to d^fend themselves withal, when they make comparison of
themselves with others. This is the cause then why he denounces this vengeance
against all in general, because they were all alike infected with a common
disease. By branch he understands the mighty and strong: by rush, or r^ede,
the weakest; that is, the people of base estate, who in a manner had no wealth
at all. He shows then, that the wrath of God is ready prepared, which shall
spare neither weak nor strong, neither small nor great, because there was none
which were pure and clean from the common contagion of filthiness.

But in the next verse he expounds that which he spoke allegorically of head
and tail, plainly and without figure; and says, that the ancient and
honorable which swayed the common affairs, and had the managing of the
Commonwealth, are the heads: to whom he ioynes the false Prophet, which he
comprehends under the word tail. Now he explaines both the first part of the
former verse, making no mention at all of branch and rush But we may yield a
good reason why he omitted this. For his meaning was to press them chiefly
which sinned most, and thereby drew others to sin also by their example,
because they were respected in regard of their estates. He brands the Prophets
with this name of tail, not that they were abiects and contemptible, as some
think: but his meaning is to express the lowest part of the body. The
magistrates and Judges are in the head or highest rank, because they are
promoted to the chiefest place: he puts the false Prophets in the tail,
because they abused the people by their cunning and hypocrisy: as if he
compared the one to lions or bears, and the others to foxes. We are here
admonished not to sleep in our vices, although iniquity reign in all
estates; yea although there should not be a man left that were pure and
upright. For by how much the more wickedness increases, so much the more will
the wrath of God be kindled both against small and great. Which we ought to
take good heed of in this deluge of all mischiefs which we see at this day;
namely, lest when the wrath of God shall once begin to burn, that all things
be not utterly consumed by it.

Verse. 16. For the leaders of the people cause them to err: and they that are
led by them are duoured.
OThers translate, They which bless thee, or speak blessedly: as if he
should say, There is no greater pestilence amongst people then flatteries,
which nourish al licentiousnes of dissolutions. But yet I will follow that
reading which I have approved of before; where we met with the very same word:
Chap. 3.12. Now his meaning is, that the governors and magistrates, whose
office it was to lead and hold the people in good order, and in an honest
course of life, gave liberty and license to all to do what them listed,
suffering them to follow vice and wickedness; and that in regard thereof, they
were worthily esteemed seducers and corrupters: for the corruption flowed from
them upon all the people, as from the head into the members. The duty of
Magistrates of Ministers.
Magistrates and Pastors are chosen to repress the dissolutions of people; to
ordain that which is good and right; and especially to maintain the honor of
God. If they contemn these things, they are rather to be esteemed impostors
then Pastors, because they bring in horrible confusion. And when every one
gouernes as he lists without any order; what is to be expected but some woeful
event? Whereas the people be so chastised for their offenses, we must not
therefore say, that the governors should look for less punishment: for they
made none account of the charge which was committed unto them, and in so doing,
were the cause of all those evils.

When he adds, that those which are led, are devoured: although by this
particle his meaning is to say, that wicked Princes, and those who rule as they
list, cannot but bring all things to ruin: as also because the teachers
deceive and abuse the people, in stead of showing them the right way, because
the people perish through their own default: yet notwithstanding he
therewithal shows, that neither the one nor the other is to be excused: as if
the wicked governors should serve as a covert for their faults, as commonly
men are wont to imagine. For if the blind lead the blind, as Jesus Christ
says, they shall both fall into the ditch, Matthew. 15.14. It being certain
that there was none of them all who was not willingly misled. And therefore
those only who took delight to be deceived, were devoured by the wicked and
disloyal leaders.

Verse. 17. Therefore shall the Lord have no pleasure in their young men,
neither will he have compassion on their fatherless, and of their widows;
for every one is an hypocrit, and wicked, and every mouth speaks folly: yet
for all this his wrath Or, shall not be, etc.
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out.
Here Isaiah shows more plainly how horrible this vengeance of God shall be
against all estates. So far off is it that the guilty should save themselves,
that even children, young men and widows, shall not escape; although they have
been wont to spare such, and that in the cruellest wars. Which mercy,
histories do show has been practiced even by the very heathen at the sacking
of Cities. But the Lord shows here, that he will have neither respect to age
nor sex. Although yet another sense will not be amiss; to wit, that though
the battles deprive many women of their husbands, and children of their
fathers; yet that God will not cease for all that to chastise both widows,
children, and fatherless. But because this sense concerns the principal
point very little, I therefore stay not my self in it. Now to the end they
should not accuse God of cruelty, he therewithal shows good cause why he
ought to be thus severe toward them; because they shall be found wicked; and
therefore worthy to be equally cast headlong into destruction, and that by a
most just sentence.

Hypocrites.] I mind not to differ from the common opinion touching this word,
although Chanaph, signifies a wicked one, disloyal, and corrupt. For it seems
he touches the chief spring and fountain of all evils; saying, that there
was no spark of the true fear of God amongst them. He speaks not of some
light dissimulation then, but of an inward contempt which benummes men's
consciences, so as they cannot be moved by any admonitions at all: as if he
should say, They are wholly sunk deep in their rebellion. But for as much as
iniquity draws the hands, feet, and other parts of the body with it, after
it has once gotten possession of the understanding: therefore the Prophet
adds, Genesis 34.7. Josh. 7.15.
that they a^e all wicked. In the third place he affirms they ouerslowed so
far, as without blushing to boast of their sins. The word N^balah, which some
translate folly, has oftentimes a larger signification among the Hebrews: for
it is taken for villainy, wickedness, and frenzy. The Prophet therefore as I
think, meant to say, that they are so given to iniquity, that there need none
other witness to be taken against the^, then their own togues.

Yet for all this etc.] He again repeates this sentence, which indeed ought
often to be repeated, because it suffices not to be once instructed how
grievous the judgments of God are against the ungodly, seeing we easily and
quickly forget them; and thereof it comes that we soon cast off all care and
fear. And besides, a false opinion b^guiles and blindfolds us, which is, that
after God has chastised us only once, we think his power is spent. Wherefore as
often as God corrects us, it is good we hold us to this principle, namely, that
by ye first, God threatens us with a greater calamity, The first stroke God
gives us (...) fore^unn^r of a g e^ter, vnl^ss^ w^ pr^uent the some ^y timely
repentance. See Leuit. 26 18.21.24.28.
unless we repent betimes. And seeing the Lord ^eiterateth this admonition so
often, let us learn thereby to set it always before our eyes; to wit, that the
wrath of God is not yet appeased, although it seems he has sharply corrected
men's iniquities. What are we to judge then when he gives us but a fillip and
away? as at this day indeed we have been afflicted; but what is it in regard of
these extreme calamities wherewith this people were oppressed; and yet the
Prophet threatens that the Lord prepares new rods for them? What will become
of us then? Truly the Lord will do his office, and will always be like
himself. If this terror do not awaken us, our blockishnesse is intolerable. I
have translated the verb To turn, in the time to come; to the end the sense
might be the more clear: for although he speaks as of a thing past, yet
notwithstanding he threatens a continual succession of punishments to ye
rebellious.

Verse. 18. For Or, unbelief.
wickedness burns as a fire; it deuoureth the briars and the thorns, and
will kindle in the thick places of the forest: and they shall mount up like
the lifting up of smoke.
THe Prophet taxes the wicked, who make a trade of discharging themselves of
their faults to lay them upon God. For either they seek starting holes by
persuading themselves that they are innocent, or they extenuate their sins,
if they be convinced; as if God were too rigorous. And the truth is, that they
will never confess God to be just in correcting them, unless it be by
constraint: and albeit they dare not excuse themselves openly, yet they fret
and grumble inwardly. The Prophet minding to repress such a stubburnnes,
compares the calamities to a fire; but he adds, that the impiety of men is
the wood and fuel which kindles Gods wrath: as if he should say, They all of
them cry out and complain that the wrath of God burns fiercely, and yet they
consider not in the mean while, that they kindle and inflame the same by their
sins, as with bellows, and that these sins do add new matter daily to
this fire: yea even they themselves burn and consume inwardly in the fire of
their iniquities.

That which he says of the briars and thorns, is as much as if he had said;
that this flame should spread it self throughout all the quarters Isaiah
shows that in such wise shall the wrath of God be; because it should not
invade the wicked at the very first, but should kindle by little and little, so
as at length it should ouerspread far and wide. In the beginning, Chap. 33.11
Chap. 5.24. Psalm. 83.14. Chap. 40.24. and 41.2. and 47.14
utterly to destroy and consume us, even as the fire burns up a thick
forest. Lastly, as the other Prophets say; We shall find our selves to be
but straw and stubble, when the wrath of God is once kindled.

Verse. 19. By the wrath of the Lord of hosts shall the land be darkened, and
the people shall be as the meat of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.
Having showed that the cause of all evils proceeds from our selves, to whom
they therefore ought to be imputed; he teaches by consequence, that God
reuengeth himself justly. For seeing men draw miseries and calamities upon
themselves, God permits them not to escape his hands. Not that he is inclined
to cruelty, (for he is loving and gentle) but because he is just, and cannot
endure the wicked. He expresses the vengeance of God by the similitude of
smoke and darkness, then which nothing is more heavy and doleful; because
so fearful a judgment could not well be expressed, but under borrowed
speeches. Although it seems he alludes to the smoke whereof he had spoken
before. For when a fire is grown to such greatness, and burns so on every
side, the brightness must needees be obscured by the darkness of the smoke.

No man shall spare his brother.] In this last particle, and in the verse
following, the Prophet describes by what means the Lord will execute his wrath
after it shall be so inflamed. For though we discern no enemies which might
astonish us, God can arm one of us against another to destroy our selves. As
if he should have said, that God will not be much to seek in bringing his
vengeance upon you which he has threatened; because although others should let
you alone, and not molest you, ye the can overthrow you eue^ by civil wars.
Now it is an horrible thing and monstrous to say, that none should spare his
brother: and that every one shall devour his flesh. For a man never hated his
own flesh: Ephesians. 5.19. But when God has blinded us, what lets that we
should not destroy one another? And although this be odious, yet it comes to
pass every day. There is neither conjunction of blood, Genesis 1.27. and 9.6.
nor of religion, nor of the image of God, which we all bear, that can hold us
in, although even the very heathen sometimes deferred to do evil, being bound
with nothing else but the common band of natural society, because they knew
that the beasts themselves agree together, taking knowledge of one another, not
exercising cruelty to any of their own kind: for one Wolf will not eat
another, neither one Bear another. It is much against nature then that men,
from whom the name of humanity proceeds, should be so cruel, as to eat one
an other; therein surpassing the rage of wild beasts. This evil then can not
fall out but by reason that God has blinded them, and given them up unto a
reprobate sense: for when as men are in peace, they think themselves free from
all dangers, and fear nothing. But the Lord derides such security, and
shows, that he will execute his wrath upon them, even by their own hands,
which he will arm and provoke against them.

Verse. 20. And he shall snatch at the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall
eat on the left hand, and shall not be satisfied: every one shall eat the
flesh of his own arm.
THis is a common speech, To pull and hale on all sides: and this phrase sets
forth an insatiable or cruel avarice. Also this desire of snatching pricks men
forwards unto cruelty. Now he expresses their insatiable desire with greater
vehemency, in that being provoked by a blind cruelty, and possessed with
more then a brutish fury, their teeth also shall be set on edge with no less
appetite to suck the blood of their brethren, then to eat the flesh that is
bought in the shambles. This circumstance greatly aggrauates the sharpnes of
the vengeance, A sign of some fearful punishment ensuing, when brethren bite
and tear one another.
to wit, that the children of Abraham, and the holy posterity of the chosen
people should ouerflow into so horrible a rage. Let us remember then that it is
a token of a fearful punishment of God when brethren band themselves one
against an other, with a furious desire or lust to tear one another in pieces.

Verse. 21. Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, and they both shall be
against Judah: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.
THese two Tribes were specially linked together, for besides that they
descended of one father Abraham; there was yet a nearer conjunction, in that
they took their original of one Patriarch Joseph, Genesis 41.50.
Abraham's great grandchild. Now although they were so near allied, yet
notwithstanding God shows that he will cause them to have such conflicts
together, that they shall destroy each other, even as if they should devour
the flesh of their own arm; in regard whereof, they should need no foreign
enemies. He adds also, that when Manasseh and Ephraim have wearied themselves
in fight, both of them shall join together and set upon Judah to destroy them
also.

Yet his wrath.] If any man shall ponder in his mind what calamities Isaiah
has set forth; he will, I doubt not, be astonished, and wonder very much in
himself to see that he yet denounces sharper punishments then the former. But
the Lord deals thus with the wicked, never ceasing to afflict them, till he
has wholly overwhelmed and rooted them out, because they having been often
summoned to repentance have refused, and still refuse to be reconciled unto
him. We are not therefore to marvel if plagues after plagues be heaped upon
them, as is also declared by Moses, namely, that he will yet send seven times
more punishments upon those which would not come to repentance, Leuit. 26.18 21.
lest they should imagine that after they had been chastised once or twice, all
their punishments were then at an end. Now when he says, that the hand of God
is stretched forth still, he means, that new rods are still in making, which
he has in a readiness to smite them withal: for the Lords anger is not like
to that of women; but his corrections and wrath go both together.

THE X. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Woe unto them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things.
ISaiah now presses ye people somewhat nearer to the quick, as he has done in
the first and second Chapters, to the end they might perceive yt they were
justly afflicted. For men will never confess they have deserved the pains
which they endure, unless they be constreined thereunto, and manifestly
convinced. Now although they were sufficiently convinced even by the former
testimonies, yet was it needful to specify those things again, by which
their hypocrisy might be discovered. For men are so impudent, that they think
themselves safe if they can frame some excuse, and in the mean while blaspheme
God wittinglie. He handled them not too sharply, neither did he exceed measure
in accusing them, no, though in despite of them he stopped their mouths,
seeing they were come to such an impudency.

Auen and Amal are oftentimes conioined together in the scriptures. Psalm. 7.14.
Auen signifies vanity, and iniquity; but the latter signification agrees
best to this place. Amal is as much to say as vexation; and oftentimes that
which is the very cause of it, to wit, the wrong or oppression which the rich
and mighty oppress the poor and weak withal, abusing them by their power
and authority. Chap. 1.10.22.33.
For even as he has heretofore showed that the welspring of an evil life
proceeds from the gouerners themselves, so he now places their ill example in
the first rank, to the end they might receive due punishment for the
wickednesses whereof themselves were the cause. Which we ought diligently to
observe, because such as are promoted unto the highest rooms, think they are
then freed from the common condition of men, so as they ought to yield none
account of their doings unto God. Therefore he shows that they shall have
this privilege before others, even to be first c^astised. Whereas some
establish here two orders; and distinguish between makers of d^crees, and
those that wr^te them: I approve not of it. For in general, without any
distinction at all, he taxes such Princes and magistrates as oppressed the
people in such wise, by their unjust and tyrannical derees, that their
government tended wholly to plain the every. He therefore comprehends all
sorts of governors and superiors.

Verse. 2. To keep back the poor from judgment, and to take away the
judgment of the poor of my people, that widows may be their pray, and that
they may spoil the fatherless.
TO keep back.] Others translate, To cause them to turn from: but the true
sense is, To keep back the poor from defending their quarrel: or, To make
them lose their suite. This is the iniquity and oppression which he mentioned
in the former verse; to wit, that they plucked from the poor that right which
belonged unto them. They were defrauded that the rich might be gratified; and
being utterly spoiled of their livings, they carried nothing away with them
from the seat of justice, but taunts and reproaches. Now he names the poor
chiefly, The weakest goes always to the wall.
because they are lightly destitute both of money and other helps. Whereas the
Judges and Magistrates then ought to have aided them before the rest, they on
the contrary took the greater liberty to oppress and tread them under foot
with greater ignominy. For those who have most riches, friends, credit, and
favor, are not so liable to oppression; because they have weapons in their
fists wherewith they may both defend and revenge themselves. The Lord has
taken the protection of the poor into his own hands. Exodus 22.23. Deuteronomy. 15.9.
and 24.15. Psalm. 68.6.
But the Lord says, he has a singular respect unto the poor, which yet
notwithstanding are for the most part despised: yea he so regards them, that
he will not suffer the wrongs and injuries which have been done unto them to
remain unpunished. For he has not taken up, on him the title of the protecter
and defender of the poor for nothing. In him it is then that the poor and
weak ought to seek consolation; and therefore to endure their troubles and
miseries patiently, because God has care over them, and will not suffer the
harm that is done them to go unrevenged.

The rich and mighty are here also admonished, that they therefore laugh not
in their sleeue, although God defer their punishment: for be it that the
poor be left destitute of their right through injustice; yet the Lord will
judge their cause, and take the maintenance of their right into his hands, who
were thought to be destitute of all help.

Verse. 3. What will ye do now in the day of visitation, and of destruction,
which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? Or, where will ye
be safe.
and where will ye leave your glory.?
THe Prophet does here sharply threaten the Princes that slept securely in
their sin. For it is the common custom of such, who are drunken with their
greatness, proudly to despise al danger. He shows then, that although God
seem for a while to defer and wink at their doings; yet notwithstanding the
time of his judgment is prescribed, and shall speedily knock at their doors
ere they be aware. And because they were grown secure by reason of the
victory over their enemies; as also because they were backed by the league
which they had made with a most puissant nation; therefore the Prophet expressly
tells them, that their destruction shall come from far.

The word visitation is taken here for judgment; because God also visits us
two ways: In what sense this word visitation is taken generally.
in mercy and judgment. For he reueales and manifests himself and his power
unto us in them both. First, when in taking pity upon us, he delivers us out
of the dangers wherein visitation then to our capacity, because when we are
pressed with afflictions, and the wicked in the mean while let loose the
bridle to all dissolutions, it seems to us that God is far off from us, and
that he takes no care of our matters.

Visitation therefore in this place must be taken for judgment; And how it is
taken in this place.
by which God will take the wicked by the neck, so as they shall not escape
him: also that he will oppose himself against their boldness and rebellion.

Now if there be such horrible judgments of God here in this world, how
fearful and terrible will he be when he shall come at the last to judge all
men? For all the examples of chastisements, which now astonish and amaze us,
are but small beginnings of that last vengeance, wherein he will thunder upon
the reprobate: and he also reserues and deferres many things which he seems
to pass over in silence, even of set purpose until that day. And if the wicked
be not able to bear the blows wherewith he smites them here below; how much
less well they be able to sustain his fearful and incomprehensible
Majesty, when they must come before his tribunal seat of glory, at whose
presence even the very Angels are astonished?

When he says, from far; note that we ought not to wax senseless when
prosperity abounds: for all such as extenuate the power of God by a false
security, which rocks them asleep in their vices, shall feel, that in an
instant he can, and also when he will, shake both heaven and earth, even from
the one end thereof to the other.

To whom will ye flee?] He shows how they shall rest upon their forces in
vain, because they shall avail them nothing at all to resist the hand of God.
He also shows, that as they have been cruel toward others, so it should be a
most just recompense, that in their need they should find succor neither from
God nor man: for there shall be judgment without mercy unto those that show
no mercy, Iam. 2.13. This shall happen especially to the Judges, who ought to
have been a refuge for the whole people, because it is their office to defend
and maintain the poor and afflicted: but if in stead thereof they despise,
betray, or spoil the^; is it not good reason they should feel how much their
cruelty displeases God, and that eue^ in their own destruction?

As touching that which follows, Where will ye leave your glory? The
expositors take it as if Isaiah should say, that they shall be deprived of
their dignity. And they think the Prophet in derision asks what shall become
of this their high pre-eminence, wherewith the great ones have no less proudly
then foolishlie advanced themselves, when God suffered them to take their
pleasure? But because this would be too much constrained, I rather think that
Isaiah inquires where they will find hiding places to secure their glory. And
in this sense I take the word, To leave, namely, To put in safety: and the two
particles answers thereunto, To whom will you flee for succor? Where will you
find refuge that you may hide your excellency? Unless any had rather retain
the exposition which I have put in the margin, because the verb Azab
signifies, To assure, as well as To leave. To conclude, if God confound and
overthrow Princes in this wise, that are so high exalted, what shall become of
those that are of base condition? There is none then that has any cause to
flatter himself: for we must needs become all as stubble, Psalm. 83.14.15.
when the wrath of God shall be kindled against us.

Verse. 4. Or, if they fall not.
Without me they shall fall among the bound, they shall fall among the slain:
yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.
BEcause the signification of the Hebrew particle is ambiguous, the expositors
bring many interpretations. Some take it exclusiuely, as in many other texts of
the scripture, even as if he should say, They shall only fall among the
prisoners and slain, because they shall be led captive, or put to death.
Others translate, Without me: and if this reading agree, the Prophet shows
what the cause of their destruction is, to wit, they are revolted from God: and
this is the cause indeed of all evils, namely, to leave the fountain of life,
of salvation, and so consequently, of all good things. And thus he touches the
sottishnes of the wicked to the quick, who thought themselves jolly fellows
when they had forsaken the Lord; even as if there could not have befalne them a
more desirable and pleasant thing, then to be separate far enough from him:
and thus it should be a kind of bitter reproach in regard their calamity should
proceed from no other cause then from the absence of God, whereof they fondly
rejoiced. Others think this should be a broken or an abrupt manner of speech,
to wit, that they should have no refuge but in hiding themselves under them
that were fallen and slain. And also it may be a form of an oath. Now this
sense will agree well, that God should swear with indignation that he would
not pardon one of them, but would deliver some over to their enemies, who
should cut their throtes; and would cause others the wrath of God is not yet
appeased, and that he will find out greater chastisements then the former, to
avenge himself upon them. This teaches us, that there is nothing better then
to be touched with true repentance, and in good earnest to acknowledge our
faults betimes, to the end the Lord may show us mercy.

Verse. 5. O Ashur the rod of my wrath! the staff also in their hands is mine
indignation.
THat which now follows has such reference to the denunciation of punishment,
that yet there is also mingled therewithal some consolation to sweeten the
troubles of the faithful: yea, the special drift of the speech is to show,
that all the evil which the Assyrians shall do them is but a scourge sent of
God for a time only: and yet after the wicked shall have triumphed with joy
above measure, it must needs come to pass that they shall be tamed in the end.
The Hebrew word Hoi, sometimes signifies a bitter exclamation. Sometimes it is
taken as an aduerb of calling; and sometimes also it signifies a woe, as indeed
the old translator has turned it: yet it may not be otherwise expounded here,
but as if the Lord called the Assyrians; or speaks as a man sighing in
himself, that he is constrained to chastise his people by them.

And yet whilst I consider better of every circumstance, I rather condescend
to this opinion; namely, that the Lord calls the Assyrians here, as if he
armed them by his edict to make war. He told the Jews before that they
should come: but hypocrites are so senseless, that they are never touched with
any fear of God, but when they see his plagues; or rather indeed till they
feel them. This is the cause therefore why he now says, Come: as if the Judge
should call for the executioner, and command him to bind the malefactor; or
rather to cut off his head. Thus the Lord calls the Assyrians, to the end he
might execute his vengeance by their hands.

Also the staff.] This may be referred to the Assyrians, and we may resolve
it as if it should be a repetition of the same speech, the words only being a
little changed. And yet I so distinguish them; that the Assyrians are called
the staff of Gods wrath; moreover, that the swords and weapons wherewith they
were furnished, are nothing else but the wrath of God himself: as if the
Prophet should say, God serves himself (as it pleases him) of the Assyrians,
even as of swords to execute his vengeance withal. Lastly, that they are no
otherwise to be feared, but so far fotth as God shall display his wrath by their
means toward the Jews, although they be furnished with munition. In a word,
he shows that all the force of the enemies shall proceed from the wrath of
God, who by a secret instinct shall drive them forward to overthrow this
people: for otherwise they could not have moved so much as one of their
fingers. God also pronounces, that the staff which the Assyrian bears, is
his indignation; to the end the Jews might know that the assaults and
endeavors of the enemies were governed by his providence. For I approve not
that which others translate, In the place, or, In their region: both are too
much constrained. To be short, the Lord calls the Assyrians as executioners of
his vengeance, to the end he may punish the sins of his people by their
hand; and protests, that whatsoever they hold in their hands, is his
indignation.

staff of his indignation, seeing he said before, that the Assyrian was the
rod of his wrath? For one would think he should speak thus, The Assyrian is
my wrath, and the staff which he bears is mine indignation. wrath of God,
because they are not handled at the pleasure of those which bear them, but are
testimonies of Gods wrath.

The Prophet then has spoken aptly, to the end we should not think the wicked
are carried away with the raines in their neck, whither their appetite shall
lead them: but are stated and held short, so as they can do nothing at all
without the will of God. From hence we may gather, that God works by the hands
even of the wicked. But we must be wise according to sobriety, and speak
modestly herein: for we ought wisely and iudicially to distinguish between the
work of God, and the actions of men. How God is said to work by men.
God then works and serves his turn of men three ways. First, in respect that
all of us have our being and do move by him: whence it follows, that all

Verse. 6. I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge
against the people of my wrath to take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to
tread them under feet, like the mire in the streets.
HE goes on still with the former sentence, wherein he called Ashur the rod of
Gods wrath. For even as a father takes not the rod in hand for nothing, but
determines to correct his child: so the Prophet shows that the rod of the
Lord shall not walk at randon; but is ordained and appointed to chastise this
wicked and unthankful people. He calls them a dissembling or froward nation;
because there was no uprightness nor sincerity in them: so then,
dissimulation is opposed to integrity, which is the beginning of all virtues:
as contrariwise, hypocrisy is the mother of all vices. Moreover, he accuses
not the Israelites lightly here, but reproacheth them with a thing more
execrable then any other. And therefore he presently after calls them the
people of his indignation. As elsewhere he says, that the Idumeans are the
people of his curse, Chap. 34.5. But albeit he declares that he is angry
against the Jews, yet the manner of the Hebrew phrase has a far greater
weight; for it imports as much as if the Prophet should say, that this people
is destinate to perdition, because there is nothing else in them but matter of
wrath. It is certain that God is never angry, unless he be provoked
thereunto by our wickedness; but when impiety is come to the highest degree,
then his unappeasable wrath and indignacion burns. Thus he takes away all
hope of reconciliation from the hypocrites and contemners, who ceased not to
heap sin upon sin.

Afterward it is said, he gave the reins to the rage of the enemies, that
they should devour and ouerflow into all kinds of pilling and extortions. And
yet we must not take this as if because the Assyrians had commandment from
God, they might therefore excuse themselves: for God commands after two We must
distinguish between Gods secret, and revealed will.
for seeing the Lord declares his will in his law, I ought not to mount up to
his secret counsel which he has hidden from me, but ought rather to bring my
self simply under his obedience. The wicked do Gods will, yet it is not with a
mind to serve him, but their own lusts.
it is a thing accidental in regard of men: for they have no intent of serving
his will, neither have they any will thereunto. If therefore they take this
pretext, they may be easily convinced as utter rebels against God, seeing they
only do that which pleases themselves: for they have the express will of God
in his law, so as they seek it in vain any where else. In regard of them
then, they do not, the work of God, but the devils, because they serve their
own lusts. It is certain that the Assyrians did not so much as look for any
reward for their pains at Gods hands, but were carried away with their lusts,
ambition, and avarice: in the mean while the Lord ordered their endeavors and
counsels to another end, which was to them utterly unknown. Now the sum of
this place is, that a rare and extraordinary testimony of Gods vengeance
should be manifested, when the Assyrians should ouerflow with a furious
licentiousnes, because they should be sent of God not to deal mildly or
moderately with his people, but to pill and sack them as in open war. He
adds also To be trod under feet, which is the uttermost of all rage, for
what can men do more then with shame and contempt to stamp them under feet
whom they have vanquished?

Verse. 7. But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so: but he
imagines to cut off and destroy not a few nations.
BEcause the wicked do trouble the consciences of the weak by casting out the
foam of their rage, as if God had not the power to hold their fierceness and
fury short; the Prophet preuents this betimes, and exhorts the faithful to
know, that they are justly afflicted by a secret judgment of God, although
the wicked ouerflow into all dissolution. So then he shows that which we
touched erewhile, namely, that the Assyrians shall mind nothing less then to
serve God, and to be executioners of his vengeance: but we shall see by and by
to what end they did it. For some might object thus: Although (says he) that
their endeavors and counsels tend wholly to another end, yet nothing shall
hinder God, that even by them he should not execute and fulfill that which he
has ordained. For many might reply: What a preposterous course is this? Will
God subject his chosen people to profane nations? There is no equity at all in
it, that our estate (be we sinners as we are, in the highest degree) should be
made worse then ye condition of thieves, who by their wickedness and impiety
had deserved a most severe punishment. The Prophet declares then that the
Assyrians should have their turn also, and should be justly punished in their
time: and yet ought no man to think it strange if they afflict, pill, devour,
and massacre others, seeing they should not want their recompense.

Besides, the Prophet comforts the faithful, and asswageth their trouble and
perplexity; showing that God holds the pride of these wicked ones short, lest
they should exercise whatsoever pleased them. He teaches then, that howsoever
the wicked furiously rage, that God notwithstanding moderates his own
judgments from heaven, so as he takes a special charge of the salvation of
his Church. And therefore although that Ashur be inflamed as as cruel beast
after his pray, yet he commands the faithful to lift up their eyes unto God,
whose counsel is far remote from this blind fury of the enemy.

Verse. 8. For he says, Are not my Princes altogether Kings?
THe Prophet shows the cause why the Assyrian will not think himself to be
the rod of God; namely, because he was so blinded with pride, that he
acknowledged not any power above his own. Neither can it otherwise be, that
those should in any sort submit themselves under the providence of God, who
resting upon their greatness, attribute this and that unto their own forces.
For then are we said to give the chief dominion unto God, when we believe
that it is impossible to move the least finger without his will. Contrariwise
whosoever thinks himself to have any power of his own, he usurps Gods power
unto himself, with a pride full of sacrilege: as in this place the Prophet
describes the insolency of a profane King in lively colors, who proudly
vaunted as one having all things. This especially happens to great Princes; for
they are so blinded with abundance of riches, munition, and power, that they
hardly can be brought to think themselves men. Of which we have too much
experience: for what Prince shall we see at this day, who thinks or remembers
that he is a man, and subject to the miseries of this present life? They are so
carried away with giddiness of spirit, that they think to ^ttaine to the top
of whatsoever they have determined by and by, and that in despite of all
impediments whatsoever.

Verse. 9. Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath like Arpad? Is not Samaria
as Damascus?
Here he names certain Cities, although others affirm that they are
regions. Notwithstanding it is more probable that they were Cities, or some
strong places. Shall it not happen (says he) alike to the places which I have
not yet subdued, is to these which have resisted me? He compares Calno, Arpad,
and Samaria (which he vanquished afterward) to Carchemish, Hamath, and
Damascus, which he had vanquished before, and says, that these should not be
stronger then they. Thus have the wicked been wont to boast and glory in their
deeds past; so as they think to break through all impediments, as if nothing
were able to hinder their counsels and enterprises: and which is yet worse, We
must beware how we wax proud of our good successes.
they think to come to the end of all things in despite of God himself, and
without his knowledge. When we read this history, let us learn not to be
proud if we have been strong at some time, or if al things have fallen out
according to our wish. For he that has ex^lted us, can soon deiect us.
For he who has exalted us, can quickly also abase and cast us down. And if
he reprocheth the Assyrian for his over weening, how much more ought they to
be reproved, who attribute the praise of holiness and righteousness unto
themselves, as if they could regenerate themselves by their own proper virtue?
For we need not doubt but such do rob God of his honor, and take that to
themselves which is proper unto him.

Verse. 10. Like as mine hand has found the kingdoms of the idols, seeing
their idols were above Jerusalem, and above Samaria:

11. Shall not I, as I have done to Samaria, and to the idols thereof; so do
to Jerusalem, and to the idols thereof?


Here pride ouerflowes his banks yet further: for the Assyrian not only
exalts himself against men, but even against God also: yea, against the gods
which he worshipped. He boasts that the gods under whose protection other
nations were; could not let him that he should not subdue them, and that the
God of Jerusalem and Samaria should resist him no more then the former. For
infidels are so full of pride, that attributing the victories which they get,
to their own forces, they make no bones to exalt themselves against God and all
divine power. Idolaters reverence their own idols but in show only.
They make fair shows indeed, as if they stood in some awe of their gods;
that is to say, of the idols which themselves have forged; to whom they bow and
offer sacrifice; whereby they seem to confess, that they hold all their
victories of these treen gods: but by and by they offer incense and sacrifice
to their own nets, (as Habacuck says, speaking of Nebuchadnezzar) Abac. 1.16.
when they brag and glory themselves in their goodly acts, counsels, prudence
and industry. For then they discover their hypocrisy, then they lay open
their secret thoughts, which were hidden before under these close fainings:
which we may easily discern, when they suddenly take that to themselves,
which before they seemed to attribute to their god. We need not wonder then
if Senacherib exalted himself above all that is called God; for such is the
fruit of impiety.

Now there is here a double blasphemy. First, in that he aduanceth himself
above thinking himself stronger then he. Besides, in that he matcheth the
true God with the Idolaters show themselves contemners of all divine power, in
contemning the gods which themselves have forged.
yet in regard that the worshippers of them attribute a certain virtue and
divinity unto them; if they lift up themselves against such forged gods, they
show themselves contemners of all divine power. Their own conscience then
witnesses against them, that they bid open defiance to God; neither is there
any ignorance which can excuse them, because they persuade, themselves that God
is enclosed in their images. For be it that this tyrant derided Apollo, or
Jupiter; it is certain that he despised them not simply as idols; but as
having some divinity in them. The other blasphemy of this tyrant was, that
he placed the living God in the rank of the counterfeit gods of the heathen;
and was so bold and presumptuous to exalt himself against him, as well as
against other gods, and to despise the confidence of Israel, as if the virtue
and power of God ought not to be esteemed greater then that of the idols.

Verse. 12. But when the Lord has accomplished all his work upon Mount Zion
and Jerusalem, I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur,
and his glorious and proud looks.
HItherto the Prophet has showed us what the pride of the Assyrian should be,
after he had overcome Israel: but now he declares what should befall the
Assyrian himself, and what the counsel of the Lord shall be against him. The
unbelievers do all things as if God were not in heaven, or were not able to
break all their enterprises. For what mean these hauty and proud words else;
My hand has found the kingdoms of the idols; but that he thought to exalt
himself above all gods? But God opposes himself here against his endeavors;
so that having once served his turn of him, he will also punish him. This
sentence contains two members: first, Isaiah shows that God will frame a
punishment for this wicked and infidel King. Secondly, he shows that the time
thereof is not yet come; to the end the faithful might wait for it with
patience.

Now he testifies, that the fit time to bring this to pass is, after God
shall have chastised the sins of his Church: as if the Father of a family
would first quiet the sturres which are bred in his own house. This is the
drift of Sur, has great weight; as if he should say, that the haughtiness
whereinto the Assyrian is exalted, shall be no let why the Lord should not
pull it down well enough.

He takes the fruit by way of similitude, because the wicked think themselves
blessed when they are swollen with pride and outrage, even as if they gathered
some fruit. He places the heart first, which is the seat of pride, which
being stuffed with arrogancy, vomits nothing but injuries and cruelty.
Afterward he adds the eyes, wherein the inward affection of the heart
manifests it self, which by the eyelids lifted up, are messengers of the vice
which is secret. Although then that the Assyrian lifts up his crests, yet God
declares, that he has means in his hand suddenly to convert the glory of
this King into dishonor and shame. Wherefore he here comprehends the
contempt, disdain, pride, and other arrogant behauiours and signs of vain
glory; all which are to be seen in the proud. Now he brings in God speaking:
for that which God pronounces with his mouth, has greater vehemency then if
he should have spoken by the voice of the Prophet. From hence we are to draw a
general doctrine; namely, that God cannot endure the insolency of the proud,
but he must needs down with it; 1. Pet. 5.5.
because he is at perpetual war against them: Iam. 4.6.

Let us also note that this sentence comes in by way of restraint, to the end
the Prophet might prevent the over great hastiness of men, saying, that this
shall come to pass after that the Lord shall have accomplished his work. For
as soon as we see a man proud, we marvel how the Lord can suffer him. But
Isaiah shows here that God indeed suffers this tyrant, although he
proudly and fiercely exalts himself, because he is minded to serve his turn
of him: and that the time is not yet seasonable wherein the Lord should shatter
the wicked too pieces; but that they must wait with patience. For after he has
afflicted the king^ome of Judah, as bringing his own household first into
order, he will not then be slow nor slothful to punish the enemy stranger:
as fathers who are wont either to cast away, or break the rods wherewith they
have beaten their children.

He takes the mountain of Zion, for the Church, by a figure called
Synecdoche; to the end that by the Temple and royal City, he might decipher
out the whole body, as by the head or principal part.

He expressly says, all the work, We often times hinder the Lords working by our
inconsiderate hastines.
because we willingly hold back the Lord from his work by our inconsiderate
hastiness: yea many times when he has but even new begun. For we are wont
to make such wishes against the reprobate, as it is hard to restrain our
impatience; unless God apply himself to our affections in punishing them by
and by. To abate such heat, the Prophet commands that we should let God
alone, and leave the fit time free unto himself when to exercise his fatherly
chastisements.

All the work then, This word All, has great emphasis here.
is taken for a just measure. Behold here a very profitable doctrine, and of
great consolation. We see the wicked are wonderful proud, and how they lift up
themselves audaciously against God, as if they were stronger then he: also how
they pursue his doctrine with injuries and slanders; so as we can hardly
express the fiercenes of their arrogancy with words. Note.
If the Lord should agree to our will, he should run by and by and thunder
from heaven against them, and utterly root them out. God begins first with his
own.
But his purpose is before he does this, to correct his Church by them. For he
speaks not here of Egyptians, or Assyrians; but of the Jews, of Zion, of the
Temple, his dwelling place, which it pleased him to dedicate and consecrate to
his honor.

So at this day there are diverse diseases in the Church which the Lord will
purge and heal. True it is that he has already begun: but we deceive our
selves if we think his work to be now perfect. He will not cease then, till
he has so tamed us, that being touched with a true fear of his name, Note.
we submit our selves unto him with such modesty and teachablenes as is fit.
Wherefore we must not marvel if he lets loose the bridle to Tyrants, and
suffers them still to exercise their cruelty against his Church: for the
consolation is ready, to wit, having used them as his vassals to correct his
people, he will visit their pride and arrogancy. And it is no wonder if God in
smiting his chosen first, do therein declare that he has a special care of
their salvation. Judgment then must begin at the house of God first: 2. Pet.
4.17.
and afterward he proceeds on in judgment against strangers, who shall be yet
more grieuouslie punished.

Verse. 13. Because he said, by the power of mine own hand have I done it, and
by my wisdom, because I am wise, therefore I have removed the borders of the
people, and have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down the inhabitants
like a valiant man.
THe Prophet does again repeat the open blasphemies which the Assyrian would
disgorge; for he attributes all the victories which he obtained to his wisdom
and power. By the strength of his hand, he means his armed soldiers gathered
out of diverse nations; but withal he brags also, to have been a valiant king:
and this is the custom of these vain braggers, to attribute all that to
themselves which is done in their name; although they in the mean while give
themselves to feasting and ease under the shadow. Afterward he boasts of his
wisdom and wariness, as we commonly say, I'ay este bien entendu and expert.
I have been very discreet and expert. And no doubt but he adornes his frauds
and deceits with the title of honesty, wherewith yet he had circumuented his
neighbors. For behold the craft and cunning of Kings and Princes, even to
trouble

When he says, I have removed the borders of the people, it is as much to say,
I have stretched out the bounds of my government, and have added other
countries to mine own, so as there is no bound nor distinction. As if we
should say, that the French King has taken away the limits of Brittanie,
Burgonie, Aquitaine, Prouence, and other regions, in joining them to his
kingdom. He adds also, that no treasures lay so secret and hidden which he
discovered not, and got to himself: as if he should say, By my wisdom I have
drawn all nations round about into my nets; I have emptied their treasures;
and griped all that was hid into mine hands.

Verse. 14. And mine hand has found as a nest the riches of the people, and as
one gathers eggs that are left, so have I gathered all the earth, and there
was none to move the wing, nor to open the mouth, or to whisper.
HE further adds, that it was no hard matter with him to overcome Kings, and
lay their riches on an heap: and he makes this ye more plain by a similitude;
Simile.
as if he should say, If a man should seek a nest and find the birds gone, he
may take the eggs away without any difficulty. For if the birds sit upon
their eggs (as they have a natural affection to keep their nests) either
they will fly upon him that would take them away, and peck at him with their
bills, or else they would endeavor to drive him away by hissings and shrill
cryings. But this Tyrant boasts that there was no body durst so much as open
his mouth against him, and that by means thereof he conquered all kingdoms
without any great ado; and therefore he attributes all these things to his
wisdom, acknowledging no providence of God at all. Now the Prophet has set
forth these brags of set purpose, and that even by the mouth of the Tyrant
himself, to the end he might show that these boastings of his were so many
bellows (as it were) to kindle the wrath of God. For if such a proud caytiue
were not to be borne with among men, how much less can the Lord suffer or
endure such an one?

Verse. 15. Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or
shall the saw exalt it self against him that moves it? as if the rod should
lift up it self against him that takes it up, or the staff should exalt it
self, as if it were no wood.
HEre the Lord does more apparantlie deride the folly of this outrageous
Assyrian, by which he promises unto himself mountains and wonders. For
says the Lord, it is all one, as if the axe or hammer should despise the hand
that holds it, and should brag of their nimblenes: whereas it appears well
enough that these are but dead instruments, without any proper moving. But
before we further expound the sentence at large, I will touch something
briefly as concerning the Prophets words. The second member of the verse is
somewhat obscure. True it is that the sentence is plain, but there is some
ambiguitie in the manner of speech, which also causes great diversity among
the expositors. All things being well weyed then, me thinks the sense which I
have given sorts best with the text. What? Were it not a monstrous spectacle,
if ye staff should exalt it self against him that takes it up, as if it were
no vvood? For the particle ^^th often signifies as much as Against; and the
Copulative Vau is also often superfluous. And thus we shall have a clear
exposition, and such a one as agrees with the Prophets meaning. Heretofore he
reproched the king of Ashur because he attributed the victories which he
obtained to his counsels and forces: but now he says, that herein this Tyrant
exalted himself against God, neither more nor less then if the axe despising
the hand that ruled it, should appropriate the praise due to the workman unto
it self; or that a staff should rise up against him that handles it, as if
it were some other thing then wood; which yet is dead and without strength.
Whence we may know that men exalt themselves against God, when they attribute
unto themselves more then is meet, and that they war not so much with men like
themselves, as with the Lord himself. Let us then reject these proud speeches
so full of blasphemies, as; I have done this by my power; I have directed this
by my wisdom; I have brought such a thing to pass by my industry. For the
Lord is a iealovs God, Exodus 20.5. and cannot abide to give his glory to
another: Isaiah 42.8.

Now let us observe these comparisons, whereby he likeneth men to instruments.
But first of all we must not refer this to the providence of God in general,
by which all creatures are ordered and governed; as some do: who confess
indeed, that all are moved of God because they can neither will nor choose: but
they add, that every creature is moved according to his natural instinct; as
the Sun, the Moon, the heavens, and such like things. Thus they imagine that
man is carried hither and thither by his own will and free choice; because God
does nothing else but continue the power which he gave at the beginning. Now
their error tends hereunto, that the frame of the whole world is indeed
sustained by the hand of God; yet so, that it is not needful ye particular
mouings should be ordered by his providence. And thus they attribute unto God
the office to send rain and fair weather, in as much as he is the creator of
nature: and yet nevertheless, that God commands nothing; but the rain is
engendered of the vapors; and fair weather proceeds from some other natural
causes. Now this confused government which they leave unto God, is scarcely
the one thousand part of the dominion which he attributes to himself. Isaiah
therefore rightly establishes him as president over all actions, so as he
disposes of men according as it pleases him best, no less then if they were
rods in his hand. He bows their counsels, orders their enterprises, and
moderates their actions; to the end we might know that all things depend upon
his providence, and not upon the appetite of the wicked.



But it is very far from the purpose that some do here move that question
touching the will of man. For although God be said to hold the counsels of men
in his hand, and turns their enterprises and executions to what end it
pleases him; does it therefore follow that they consult not, or cease to
devise this or that? For we must not here imagine any constrained will, as if
God drew men whether they would or no: but he rules all their mouings by a
wonderful and an incomprehensible manner; yet so as their own will remains
unto them still. Now Isaiah teaches chiefly in this place, that all the
endeavors of men are vain, if the Lord give not an issue unto them: and
therefore that the King of Ashur could have done nothing, what enterprise
soever he had taken in hand, if God had not given him his victories. In regard
whereof, he has no cause to attribute the praise of those things to himself,
which he obtained not but by the means of God. And this is it which he
confirms by another similitude, when he says, that the lifting up of the
staff, comes not from the nature of wood, but from the will of him which
handles it.

Verse. 16. Therefore shall the Lord God of hosts send among his fat men
leannes, and under his glory shall he kindle a burning, like the burning of
fire.
HE goes on still with the former doctrine, signifying that God will show the
Assyrian how he has lifted up himself too too much, and that he will bring
that his arrogance down to the ground, wherein he foolishly pleased himself.
For in as much as he put his trust in his forces, and in the multitude of his
munition, Isaiah declares that God will take all this away from him; and this
under the similitude of fat and lean. For by this word fat, he signifies as
well riches, as strength of war: and by the word lean, the want and need of
these things, wherein the Assyrian trusted too much: as if he should say, The
Lord will cause all the fat and well fed things of the Assyrian to wax lean.
It is no new thing to compare prosperity unto fatness: for even as horses
that are overmuch pampered, become proud, so as they are ready to cast their
rider, or wince and fling with their heels if any offer to come near them: so
abundance makes men become wild and cruel, insomuch that a man cannot master
them but by bringing down their flesh.

The other similitude is yet more proper, to wit, that the fire shall be
kindled under his glory: for his meaning is, that by how much the more his
felicity increased, the hotter should the flame be which should consume it.
And therein also he shows, that the Assyrian shall be utterly brought to
nothing, even as if one should pluck up a tree by the roots, or should race
an house to the very foundation. For if a man should only loppe off the
branches of a tree, it would easily bring forth other branches: or if the
roof of an house were only burned, all the other parts would remain safe and
sound. He leaves nothing then to the Assyrian, but affirms that he shall be
utterly consumed. By this word As, or like, which imports a similitude, he
fitly shows, that the flame shall be such that it shall consume all the
glory of the Assyrian.

Verse. 17. And the light of Israel shall be in fire, and his holy one shall be
as a flame, the which shall burn and consume his briars and thorns all in one
day.
HE makes an elegant allusion to this burning, wherewith he had threatened the
Assyrians. For there are two things in fire, to wit, light, and heat: and as
God consumes his enemies by his heat, so he also inlighteneth his faithful
ones with his light. Now it is well enough known that God is sometime called
devouring fire in one place, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29. Chap. 60.20 Mich. 7.8.
and light in an other (as Psalm. 36.9.) in diverse respects, because the power
which he shows toward the faithful is not like unto that which he manifests
against the unfaithful. In a word, he so threatens the Assyrians with
destruction, that therewithal he comforts the faithful,

He plaine^y without any figure shows what this light is, when he adds, his
holy one, so as there needs no long exposition, to wit, that he will defend and
keep this people whom he has elect and chosen to himself as his own from
amongst other nations. He says then, that the favor of God which shines upon
Israel, shall be as a fire to devour the enemies at the last. In a day, that
is to say, it shall burn with a sudden fire. For he signifies a fearful and
unaccustomed burning, which we commonly see to befall the wicked even then
when they think themselves safest and furthest off from danger. To concude, he
shows that all the forces which they shall oppose, shall be as Tow, which
being once set on fire shall quickly come to nothing.

Verse. 18. And the glory of his forest shall come to an end with his
fruitful territory, from the soul to the flesh: and shall be broken, as the
breaking of a standard.
HE continues still the same similitude of burning, and declares that the
fire shall as well consume the high things as the low, and shall leave nothing
found: for it may fall out that the fire will seize upon the top of a place,
and in the mean while it shall leave ye botome untouched. The word Carmel,
which is put here, is not a proper name, as I think, but is rather to be taken
for a fat and fruitful territory: and there would also be some absurdity in
it, to say that Mount Carmel was in the land of Assyria. The sense therefore
is, that not only the ruin of the forests of Assyria draws near, but also
that the grain or corn shall be consumed by the same fire, because it shall
not only run upon the upper parts of the land, but shall pearce down even into
the bottoms. He adds also another similitude taken from man, Even as a man is
composed of body and soul, so also his diseases shall seize upon him one by
one, till every part be smitten. For it often falls out that the body will be
sick and impotent, and the spirit will be sound, and so on the contrary; but
when both together are smitten, it is very dangerous. By this similitude then
he threatens, that nothing shall remain in good plight to the Assyrians, who
are now destinate to destruction, because they shall perish, both soul, and
flesh: not that men's souls are mortal, but because God will openly show his
vengeance upon them. Surely this is very terrible; for the end of corrections
are, that the soul might be saved, although the body should perish, 1. Cor.
5.5. but when the spirit also is destroyed with the dodie, can we imagine any
thing more miserable? For the flame only touches the faithful, but consumes
them not, as it does the unfaithful: in whom it finds nothing but fuel fit
for the fire.

As the breaking of a standard.] There are here a meeting together in the
Hebrew words, which cannot be expressed in another language. But it is the same
thing which he has set before us in his other similies, to wit, an extreme
discomfiture: for when the standard is beaten down, the whole army is put to
flight. For when ensigns are taken, then there is the greater bloodshed. As
when the Historiographers mention any great slaughter, they say that the
standards are taken. Now the Prophet threatens not the Assyrians thus in favor
toward them, that they being admonished, might profit thereby, and be touched
with true repentance: but it was to comfort the faithful, to the end they
should not think the Assyrian should escape unpunished, when he had exercised
his cruelties against the people of God: as also lest they should imagine, that
the Lord had forgotten his promise, or that he was not able to bring the
enterprises of his enemies to confusion. And in deed, unless the Prophet had
speedily prevented the matter this way, many such doubts would have come into
their minds.

Verse. 19. And it shall be easy to number the rest of the trees of his
forest: for a little child shall tell them.
THe Hebrew phrase shows that there shall be a very small number left; and
thus he only confirms the former sentence, to wit, that there shall be such a
waste after the Lord shall have brought the Assyrians down, that the residue
shall be easily told. And yet he goes on further in saying, there shall be so
few, that a little child shall be able to tell all that remain: for we know
that little children have much ado to count to three or four. Thus then the
kingdom of the Assyrians, which in times past appeared as a great forest, the
trees thereof being cut down and overthrown, shall become like to a small
number of trees scattered a great way off one from another.

Verse. 20. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel,
and those which shall escape of the house of Jacob, shall rest no more upon him
that smote them: for they shall rest upon the Lord, the holy one of Israel in
truth.
NOw he returns to the chosen people, and describes the fruit of the
chastisement which was at hand. For in as much as it is an hard and difficult
thing to be molested and afflicted, and that we flee it as much as possibly we
can^ the Lord shows us the fruit of afflictions, that so having learned to
consider the end thereof, we might endure them the more cheerfully: as if he
should say, I know you would feign that the Assyrian were far off from you,
that so you might enjoy your commodities quietly; but yet think with your
selves, that this affliction is as necessary for you, as a potion for a sick
stomach: for you know not the power of God, and therefore withdraw you your
affiance from him, to set it upon the wicked. Now what a miserable thing is it
to put the hope of our salvation in those that are Gods enemies, and to stay
our selves upon them which seek nothing but our overthrow? For the Israelites
rested one while upon the Assyrians; then upon the Egyptians. And therefore
there was no loss in lessening of the people, because this little handful
which remained, learned thereby to put their trust in God. And in this respect
also we may know how needful it was that God should chastise the Israelites.

Now the moderation which he adds, contains an excellent and wonderful
consolation, to wit, that notwithstanding this, yet a remnant of the Jews
should remain, amongst whom the true service of God should be restored. For
the particle In truth, is not superfluous: for before the Lord afflicted the^,
they all made profession to be of the true religion, and called upon God
together: but it was in hypocrisy. Isaiah then deriding this counterfeit
holiness, says, that their hope shall be sound and sincere, when they shall
once be purged from their fainings and deceits. For although they proudly
boasted themselves to rest only upon the Lord, yet did they rest indeed upon
the help of the Assyrians. When the Assyrians therefore should chastise them,
they should then learn to trust in God only, and to turn away their heart
from looking for succors from men. Hence we may gather, that we cannot solely
rest our selves upon God, unless we wholly pluck away all our trust from
creatures. Because we ought so to stay upon him, as to renounce all other
things willingly for his sake. Where this confident trust is not, there has
truth no place, because the heart is double and parted in twain.

Verse. 21. The remnant shall turn, * the remnant of Jacob to the strong God.
THe remnant shall be converted.] This is a confirmation of the former
sentence, although he seems to allude to that place of the seventh Chapter,
where the son of Isaiah was called Shear-iashub. For we have there said, that
this name was imposed upon him accidentally; to the end he might be as it were
a pledge of that deliverance to come, of ye which his father had prophesied. It
was needful also that the Jews should be confirmed diverse ways, to the end
they might be assured that the Lord would bring them back in the end.
Whereunto also appertains that which he adds. In the strong God, that is to
say, to him, whom the people being converted from their revolt, shall
acknowledge to be the protector of their salvation. For this epithet is
attributed unto God, according to the circumstance of the place. It should
seem that the word Ei, which signifies God, should have xpressed his power
sufficiently, but he would also add Gibbor: that is to say, Mighty, or
Strong, to the end he might stir up the people to trust the more confidently
in him. For how could it come to pass that the people should return from
under the Assyrians and Egyptians, unless they were persuaded that God was
all-sufficient, who should do the deed? This then is the welspring of all our
evils; to wit, when we are not resolved that whatsoever we can wish or desire
for our salvation, is in God.

Verse. 22. For though thy people, O Israel, were as the sand of the sea; yet
should but a remnant be saved. The consumption determined shall abound in
justice.
He excludes hypocrites from their foolish confidence: for it was enough in
their conceit for them that they were the children of that holy personage
Abraham according to the flesh only: and under this bare and naked pretext of
their original, they would be thought most holy. In the mean while he exhorts
the faithful to patience; to the end they might learn with a meek and quiet
spirit, to wait for this discomfiture and diminution of their multitude; to the
end that when it should come to pass, they should not be troubled at it as at
some new thing. He comforts them then for fear they should not bear such a
wasting patiently; because therout the Lord was purposed to gather a small
remnant at the least. The Hebrew verb signifies To finish, and sometimes also
To consume. The latter signification agrees best, for he calls this
diminishing of the people, a Consumption, and that Accomplished: and herein he
speaks excessiuely (as they say) for it would be a thousand to one that they
were not all destroyed, and therefore a very few should escape.

The name of Israel may be taken here in the genitive, or in the vocative case;
so as in this latter sense he should speak to the Patriarch Jacob, or to all
the faithful in his name. But seeing ye meaning is clear enough howsoever we
take it, the matter is of no great moment. It may be taken also in the
genitive. For mine own part I rather think it is a proper name to point out
as it were the true and obedient Israelites, for he vtters a vehement speech in
turning himself to the Patriarch; and God in speaking to him that was dead
testifies to the living, that that which he had long ago promised, to wit, that
the posterity of Abraham, which should be innumerable as the sand of the sea,
Genesis 13.16. and 22.17.28.14.
should not stretch it self to a confused multitude, who had cast off all true
godliness, but that there should be an inte^ruption in this degenerate people,
till that a little while after they should be renewed.

He adds also another consolation, to wit, that this little handful shall
abound in justice. For we are in danger to be out of heart, and to doubt of the
mercy of God, when we see the Church of God oppressed with such grievous
calamities, so as it seems it must fall into ruin. Those who are touched with
true repentance know by experience that this is the heauiest temptation of al
others. It was needful therefore that the hearts of the faithful should be
fortified against it, that by considering the fruit which should come unto them
from this discomfiture, they might feel their grief assuaged: which fruit was
this, that thereby the whole earth should be ouerspred with Justice, even as a
river that ouerfloweth. He touched this point before, when he said that this
remnant should rest upon the Lord their God in truth. Verse. 20.


The word Justice is diversely expounded. Some refer it to the preaching of
the Gospel, because the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith by
it, as S. Paul says Romans 1.17. Now the Gospel was published throughout the
whole world by the ministry of the Apostles, who were as a small remnant of
the Jews. Others had rather to take it thus, as if this Consumption were a
testimony or witness of the justice of God, who did so grieuouslie chastise his
people. But I had rather expound it more generally thus; This Consumption
shall suffice to fill the whole earth with Justice. Those which shall remain,
be they never so few, shall yet suffice notwithstanding to cause the rivers to
run with justice, in such wise that the whole world shall be covered therewith.

Verse. 23. For the Lord God of hosts will make a Consumption, and shall place
the bounds in the midst of the earth.
THis repetition does again pluck away the means from these proud contemners
of God wherein they flattered themselves. For it was a thing almost incredible
that the Jews should perish as it were in a moment, Genesis 17.7.
who had so many promises made them, and with whom God had contracted a
perpetual covenant: it also seemed to be repugnant to the nature of God, which
is immutable. The Prophet threatens then, that the Lord is the author of this
Consumption, to the end he might beat down the pride of the wicked, who
trusting in their present felicity, thought themselves out of all danger, and
being puffed up with this vain confidence, laughed at all admonitions and
warnings. God, says he, shall bring your land to a desert, so as in the most
flourishing part thereof shall be seen a consumption most like unto a
wilderness. For he takes the midst of the earth for the heart of it, that is to
say, for the places most strong and best fortified. Many think the word
Consumption should be an adjective: but I had rather affirm that it is a
substantive, according to which sense it is taken in Daniel, Dan. 9.24.27. Romans
9.28.
and in other places.

Saint Paul alleges this text, but it is somewhat different in words from
these of the Prophet in this place, to wit, according to the vulgar exposition
which was then most received. Now although the Apostle spoke properly,
faithfully, and according to the Prophets meaning, yet the words which he
recites being drawn from the Greek interpretation, have occasioned many to
err from the true sense of the Prophet. For in regard that the Greek
translator had turned it Logos, that is to say, The word, many have descanted
upon the Gospel, and thereupon have affirmed, that the abolishing of the law is
here signified, because the Gospel puts an end to the figures and ceremonies;
and co^seque^tlie, that it is a word abbreuiated and compendious, whereby we are
discharged of ye yoke of the law under which the people sighed. But this comes
nothing near ye Prophets intention, for he calls consumption here a
decreasing, by means whereof the people shall be almost brought to ruin: and
thereunto tend both senses, namely, that of S. Paul, and of the Greek
interpretation also. For by Word, they understood that which the Hebrews
express by the word Dauar. And although the Prophet has not the word Dauar,
yet notwithstanding that which he has in the text signifies a thing
determined, that is to say, a Consumption, and both of them have one and the
same meaning. To conclude, the Apostle repeates that in this place which Isaiah
said now touching the future consumption of the people, and teaches that this
prophecy was chiefly accomplished in his time when as the Jews for their
unthankfulness were cut off from the kingdom of God, some small remnant only
reserved.

Verse. 24. Therefore the Lord God of hosts, says; My people which dwell in
mount Zion, fear not Ashur. He shall smite thee with the rod, and shall lift
up his staff upon thee, after the Or, example
manner of Egypt.
He goes on with the former consolation, which only appertained to the
faithful, who in very deed were then a small number. For many gloried in the
name of God, and would be taken for his people; but very few there were who
showed that by their practice, which they professed in word. He speaks not to
all then indifferently; but to those only which stood in need of consolation.
For seeing they were in danger to lose all their hope, when they compared their
condition with others, and that the kingdom also was destroyed: for this
cause, I say, it was very expedient they should be comforted. And this
distinction is to be noted: for otherwise it had been absurd to have directed
speeches so diverse, unto persons of one condition. He adds the reason of the
consolation; to wit, that this discomfiture shall be nothing else but as the
lifting up of the rod, which shall be only to chastise them, and not to
destroy them.

The letter Beth, is a particle of similitude. The word Derec, signifies
example. I expound it then, After the example of Egypt; as if he should say,
Although the Assyrian be cruel, and by all means will seek thy ruin; yet he
shall not kill, but shall only smite thee. He alleges the example of Egypt
then, Exodus 1.14. and 12.31.
the bondage whereof was very hard; and yet not deadly. For in the midst of
perplexities and confusions, the Prophets are wont to bring the people back to
the contemplation of this redemption, whereby God delivered his chosen people
miraculously from the hand of this cruel tyrant Pharaoh. The sense therefore
is, even as the Lord was the strongest then, Exodus 14.24
and destroyed the Egyptians, who practiced your destruction: so will he now
also easily overcome the Assyrians.

Others expound it, In the way of Egypt, in regard the Assyrians made war
with the Jews, because of the Egyptians. But this exposition cannot agree; and
if we look narrowly into the text, we shall find none more fit then that
which I have alleged; as also it is approved of the best expositours. For
there are here two members one opposite against another; to wit, the
affliction wherewith the Egyptians had vexed this people; and the calamity
wherein they should be wrapped under the Assyrians. As the punishment which the
Egyptians inflicted upon them was not mortal, no more should that of the
Assyrians be. As if it had been said in these or the like words; Thou know
my force and power against Pharaoh; so also shall thou know it against
Senacherib. Neither would the knitting together of these sentences match well,
unless we should expound it thus.

Verse. 25. But yet a little while and mine indignation shall be consumed: and
my wrath shall be kindled to destroy them.
He means not only the siege which Senacherib planted with a mighty army
before Jerusalem, 2. King. 18.17. 2 Kin. 25.4
but the other discomfitures also whereby this city was destroyed, the Temple
rased, and the people carried away captives. For it was needful that the
faithful should be fortified against these grievous adversaries with such
promises as these. Which we are diligently to observe; because if we lightly
pass this over, as other expositours do, we cannot fitly join these things
together. Thus the captivity of the people was as a consumption; because
Babylon was as their sepulcher, and their exile as a kind of death. When
necessity then appeared, and that Senacherib with his army began to press
near upon them, so as they were in great distress being thus besieged, this
very consolation was exceeding necessary. For it might seem that Judea was
utterly consumed, and there was little or no hope of succor left touching
outward appearance: as if he should say; Observe therefore this consolation
diligently; to wit, the Lord will spare thee: true it is he will defer it
for a little while, and will hold his succor hidden as it were from thine
eyes; but in the end he will deliver thee, and will be revenged upon thine
enemies, whom he has determined utterly to consume.

If any will take the verb Calah, To consume: he says, he will consume his
wrath, in the same sense, as we are commonly wont to say, we consume the years
and our age: that is, I will give way to mine indignation, till such time as I
have utterly destroyed the Assyrians. But the word, to accomplish, is more
proper; as if he should say, Till I have executed mine indignation. And this is
the destruction wherewithal he threatens the uncircumcised elsewhere. For
when the Lord has taken away all hope of mercy, he then executes his
judgment against the unfaithful.

Verse. 26. And the Lord of hosts shall raise up a scourge against him, as the
plague of Madian, in the rock of Oreb, and his staff upon the sea: and shall
lift it up Or, after the manner of Egypt.
in the way of Egypt.
ISaiah uses here the word scourge, and not rod: thereby signifying, that the
Lord would handle the enemies much more roughly and severely then they handled
the Jews. For he threatens them with an utter destruction: and declares the
same more plainly by two examples: the first is of the Madianites, who were
horribly destroyed in the valley of Oreb; which was thus nominated because of
their king: the second is of the Egyptians, which were drowned by the Lord in
the red sea, when they pursued his people. (...) conquered all the country,
will threaten Jerusalem, as if with his only look he could take and sack it.
By he word Zion he comprehends all the city, taking a part for the whole,
because this part was the highest, and ouerlooked all the quarters of the
City. From the foolish ouerweening of this tyrant the Prophet shows that the
city of Jerusalem was not far off from an utter downfall: for the whole
country, yea the City it self was so astonished, that none durst oppose
himself against the enemy. Thus the Prophet meant to amplify the benefit of
God by these circumstances, to wit, that it was to be attributed to the
special favor and good will of God, and not to man's help, which auailed nothing
that Jerusalem was delivered, even as if a man should have pulled a sheep out
of the jaws of the wolf.

Verse. 33. Behold, the Lord God of hosts shall out off the bough with fear,
and they of high stature shall be cut off, and the hie shall be humbled.

34. And he shall cut away the thick places of the sorest with iron, and
Lebanon shall have a mighty fall.


ALmost all the expositours do expound this place of the Assyrians, for they
think the Prophet threatens this destruction wherewith the Lord will root them
out after they have besieged Jerusalem; as if he should speak on this wise, The
Assyrian shall be so swollen with pride, that he will think himself sure of
Jerusalem as soon as he shall have once looked upon it: and also, that all
shall be astonished at his coming, so as some shall flee away, others shall
yield themselves voluntarily; therefore he will by and by imagine himself Lord
over all: but the Lord will suddenly overthrow all his deseignes, and will cut
down his high branches. Yet when we advisedly consider every thing, and
especially that which is by and by added of Lebanon, with the consolation that
follows, I am of opinion that this place ought to be referred to the Jews
themselves. So then Isaiah, as I think, continues still to threaten the
calamities which should happen soon after to the people: as if he should say,
the Assyrian shall not only come to Nob, but shall spoil the whole country;
and therefore he shall waste and wholly root out whatsoever is beautiful and
good therein, even as if one should cut off the boughs from the trees, or as if
the tree it self should be plucked up by the roots.

The Chapter following confirms this interpretation, The beginning of the
Chapter ensuing, depends still upon the two last verses of this present Chapter.
wherein the Prophet gives consolation against this calamity, and that
consolation is joined to this verse, and is added as a fit remedy to assuage
the bitterness of so great heaviness. I do not greatly allow of the division of
the Chapter, which is often times clean against the hair, and wholly
confounds the sense of ye Prophet: I think then that that consolation ought
to be joined to this verse, as if there were no division at all.

Moreover, this similitude is not easy to be expounded, for it sufficiently
appears that by the high and mighty trees he means whatsoever is strong,
excellent, and high; so as he foretells the ruin and destruction of Judea, and
compares it to the cutting down of a forest, signifying that there shall be
nothing so high and excellent in the country which the enemies shall not cast
down even till they shall have stripped the land of all her ornaments. He also
makes mention of Lebanon, for we know that it was a mountain greatly renoumed
in regard of fair and goodly trees which were in it: but if he had spoken of
the Assyrians, there should have been no reason in it for him to speak of the
destruction of Lebanon. Whence we gather, that he here threatens the Jews
again, and that the preface of his Sermon agrees very well when it begins at
this particle demonstratiue Behold, Verse. 33. Chap. 10.

Read the former Section save one, for the better understanding of the verse
following.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. But there shall come a rod forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe
shall grow out of his roots.
BEcause the description of so horrible calamities might astonish the faithful,
and might therewithal minister matter of despair unto them, it was very
requisite to set some word of consolation before their eyes. For the beholding
of the kingdom wasted, the cities overthrown, and all parts of the country
destroyed, could not but work sighs and deep gronings in them, so as they
might very easily have been shaken, and in the end utterly become desperate if
the Lord had not prevented them by this consolation. The Prophet then shows
what the Lord will do in time to come, as also how he will restore the
kingdom. Now he still continues the similitude which he had used in the former
Chapter, Verse. 33.34.
for there he said that Judea should be brought to naught, even as the fire
consumes the forest. The deformity of this country then should resemble a
wast ground, where nothing can be discerned but ashes, after the trees have
been consumed with fire. But to the end there might be some resemblance
between things opposite, he says, that a rod shall come forth of a stock,
which yet shall become a tree, and shall spread his branches and fruits far
and near. For this cause I have chosen rather to translate the word Gueza, A
dry stock; then root: although the matter be not great whether of them both
we use; and yet this word stock, notwithstanding does better express the
Prophets meaning: for he signifies, that howsoever the stock be dry, yet the
graffe which shall come forth of it, shall be more excellent then all the
forests in the world.

Whence we gather, that this prophecy cannot agree to any other person then
to Christ; because no such graft was seen to come forth, before he came into
the world. Verily this can no way be applied unto Hezekias, neither yet to
Josias; because they were advanced even from their birth to be Kings at the
length. As touching Zorobabel, he never came to the thousand part of that
dignity which the Prophet extolleth in this place. We see then that the
consolation of the poor and desolate Jews, is here set before them in one
only Messiah, and that their hope concerning the same, is deferred even till
his appearing. For when he was manifested, there was no hope left of any
restoring, or reestablishing of the kingdom; neither in deed could they have
had any if this promise had not been added: because it seemed that the house
and lineage of David was utterly extinct. For this cause he mentions not David,
but rather the family of Ishai; 1. Sam. 16.11, 12. 2. Sam. 7.11 and Psalm.
78.70.71.
because the dignity of this family was so diminished, that it seemed rather
the house of a country Farmer, then the house of a King: for such indeed was
the house of Ishai, when David (little thinking thereon) was called to the
government of the Kingdom. Thus then after they had lost their ancient glory,
and had received so great a discomfiture, he calls it the family of Ishai,
because it was the most inferior of all others. And therefore I think that
the consolation rather begins here, then at the end of the former Chapter.
The Jews might doubt in so horrible a destruction, who should be their
defender: Isaiah promises one unto them, howsoever he must come forth of a
dry stock.

He continues still the former similitude of the forest (as I have said)
because it has greater elegancie then if he had simply said, that Messiah
should come. For having showed heretofore that the forest should be utterly
consumed, he adds notwithstanding, that a rod shall come forth, which shall
restore the abundance and beauty of this burnt forest again: and this rod is
Jesus Christ, who should come to be the protector and Savior of his people.
Now it is not needful to show how abject and base the beginnings of this
kingdom was. Truly all that was to be seen therein was so poor and weak,
that to outward appearance all things (the original of the blood royal
excepted) seemed to be directly contrary to this which should be accomplished
in the person of the Redeemer. Yea so low were they brought, that this royal
race was as good as utterly extinguished: for who would have thought that a
poor Carpenter had been begotten of the royal feed? Besides, in what place,
I pray you, was Christ borne, Mark 6.3.
and what was his bringing up? To conclude, after he had spent his whole life
in contempt, and continually exposed to shame and derision; was he not cruelly
and shamefully put to death, by which he was to begin his kingdom? Yet
notwithstanding all this, he grew into an infinite greatness, even as a great
tree grows up of a small and little seed: as Christ also himself teaches
us, Matthew. 13.31. whereof we have daily examples. Mark. 4.32.
For it must come to pass of necessity, that the same should befall his
kingdom, which came to pass in his own person.

Verse. 2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.
NOw he begins to speak of Christ plainly and without any figure. It had been
sufficient to have propounded the consolation under the former similitude: and
fitly did the opposition answer between the burning of the forest, and the
new restoring of it again. He therein described the twofold estate of the
people: for having spoken of the calamity, he by and by adds the hope of
restoration: the beginning whereof notwithstanding, must come forth of a
little bud: but now he manifestly shows what this deliverance shall be, and
what the condition both of Christ and his Kingdom should be also.

Some think this should rather be referred to Ezekiah, who was a figure of
Christ: but how inconsiderately we showed heretofore. For when Ezekias was
borne, the name and royal dignity of the house of David had yet vigor and
strength in his successors: and besides, he was far short of this
greatness, whereof he will speak by and by.

Moreover, hence we gather, that the spiritual Kingdom of Christ was promised
in times past to the ancient people, inasmuch as the virtue, power, and
majesty thereof is here established in the gifts of the Holy ghost. Now
albeit Christ had little need of these gifts and graces: yet was it needful
for us that he should be thus enriched with them, because he took our flesh
upon him; to the end he might afterward power out again all those benefits
upon us, whereof we should otherwise have been utterly destitute. For out of
his fullness must we all draw grace upon grace, even as out of the fountain;
Ioh. 3.37.38.
according to that in John 1.16.

The Spirit of the Lord.] We must keep that in mind, which I touched erewhile;
to wit, that this is to be referred to the humane nature of Christ; because it
could not be that he should have been enriched with the gifts and graces of
the Father, but as in respect that he was made man. Besides, as he descended
from heaven for our sakes; so did he also receive the gifts of the holy Ghost
from heaven to adorn us with them: and this is that anointing whereby he
obtained this name of Christ, the which he communicates to us. For whence comes
it that we are called Christians but ^y reason that he receives us into his
f^llowship, Ephesians. 4 7.
and that he distributes to every one of his fuln^sse, according to the
measure of his f^^^ ^^^^ralitie? We ^re (...) be in this place, not so much
wi^^ Ch^ ^t is in him ^e f, as wh ^ h^ h^^h ^^ceiued ^f his Father, that he
^ight fi^l v^ w^^^ his abun^ nce.
And in very deed, this plac^ does not so much teach us what Christ is in
himself, as rather what he receiu^d of the Father, that he might fill us with
his abundance. Now albeit there is no great need that we should stand long in
opening the meaning of the words, yet not withstanding if any will have a short
difference between wised^me and understanding, I am of opinion that the word
wisdom, does generally comprehend whatsoever belongs to the order and rule of
life: 1. Wis^^me.
and then that understanding is added in stead of the exposition thereof. 2
Vnderstand^ng.
For if we have the foresaid wisdom, we shall have understanding enough.
This word counsel, 3. Counsel.
signifies as much as the word Judgment; whereby we are able to give
resolution in doubtful things: for it were not sufficient to have
understanding, unless we were therewithal endued with counsel, to guide us
safely in matters of importance. The word strength, is sufficiently known. 4.
Streng h.
As touching knowledge, or skill, it differs l^ttle from understanding, unless
it should rather appertain unto knowing, and so ^t should declare the act. 5
Knowledge.
The fear of the Lord, 6 The fear of the Lord.
signifies a sincere affection to serve and honor God. Now the Prophet reckons
not up all the graces of the holy Ghost here, as many have thought. For the
Papists have sottishly and unlearnedly drawn their seuen-formed grace from
this place: and some of the antien^s have been no less absurdly deceived
therein then they. Isaiah mentions but six, and they have added the seventh
of their own head. And as one error lightly follows another, so they have
endeavored to restrain the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost to be but seven
in number: and yet notwithstanding in other places we see that there are as
many epithites more attributed unto him, Gal. 6.1. 2. Tim 1.7.
according to the diversity of his effects. Morouer, it is a thing
sufficiently known, that we our selves are made partakers of many other
benefits by the means of Christ, then those which are here recited; to wit,
meekness, chastity, sobriety, truth, holiness, and the like, which comes
to us from no other fountain then from Christ himself. He recites not all
the gifts here then, which were conferred upon the Lord Jesus, neither was it
needful so to do: his meaning was only to show that Christ was sent unto us
furnished and adorned with all graces fit to enrich us with all.

If these things had not been added, peradventure These gif^^ of the holy
Ghost, namely, wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength, knowledge, and the
fear of the Lord, are therefore powered into Christ, that we standing in need
of all, or any one of them, might boldly beg the same at his hands.
to the end we might boldly go unto him to ask those things we stand in need
of. For he will enrich us with wisdom and understanding he will give us
counsel when things are confused, he will make us strong and valiant in
combats, and will beautify us also with godliness; that is to say, with the
true fear of God: in a word, he will furnish us with all things needful for
our life and salvation. The Prophet then comprehends all gifts and graces
here, so as it is too foolishly done of them, who have gone about to suppress
that which is not here expressed.

Now he shows that all graces are in Christ, to the end they might be
communicated unto us: for which cause we are called his companions in the 45.
Psalm, verse 8. For as the strength of the members flows from the head, so
Christ powers out the virtue of his heavenly unction upon the whole body of his
Church. Whence it follows, that those who are barren and dry, have no
communion at all with Christ, and therefore do falsely challenge unto them the
name of Christians. As often therefore as we feel in our selves the want of
any of these gifts, let us accuse our own infidelity as the cause of it;
because true faith makes us partakers of all Christ's benefits. Let us humbly
entreat the Lord then, that he will not suffer the lusts of our flesh to reign
in us, that so Christ may wholly unite us unto himself. Let us also observe,
that it is only in Christ, in whom we are to seek all good things. For we
greatly deceive our selves, if we think to obtain any thing at the Fathers
hand by any other mean.

Verse. 3. And shall make him prudent in the fear of the Lord: for he shall not
judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove by the hearing of his ears.
THe verb Riach, which is put here in the conjugation of H^phil, signifies
properly to smell. It may also be expounded in the active signification, To
give a piercing smell: which I think agrees as fittest to this place; that
this prudencie might also be placed amongst the gifts of the holy Ghost. And
this effect also agrees particularly unto the person of Christ; to wit, that he
is wise and prudent to govern his own boyond all that the capacity of any of
the faithful is able to comprehend. First, we are to note the similitude of
the verb, To smell; which signifies that Christ shall so abound with judgment
and discretion, that he shall not need to apprehend any thing either by sight
or hearing, because he shall be able by his only smell, to discern the most
secret and hidden things.

The most part of the expositours take the particle, In the fear of the Lord,
as if all the affections of the heart should be discovered before Christ, so
as he should be able easily to judge who are the true servants of God. But
let the readers consider if the sense would not agree better to say, that the
fear of God is taken here for a certain rule of judgment. For the Prophet
does of set purpose distinguish the heavenly judgment of Christ, from the
judgment of men; to the end we might know that the outward appearance of
holiness or integrity, is nothing at all approved before him. The sense then
is, that when we come before the tribunal of Christ, he will not only examine
things according to the outward actions, as men do in civil policy: but the
life is there examined and squared out, according to the rule of true piety.
Neither indeed is it fit for men to be the searchers of the heart: and we
shall often see, that there is only a vain appearance in those whom we shall
esteem honest men: but Christ judges not by the outside, because he knows
and sounds the uttermost and hiddenest secrets of the heart. His judgment
then is far different from man's judgment, who though they be never so expert
and witty, do yet too foolishly often times ouershoot themselves. Thence it
follows, that none can be the true servants of God, but those whom Jesus
Christ approves. Now they cannot be approved of him, unless they show a pure
and upright heart: for we cannot deceive him by any false and vain appearances.

Verse. 4. But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and with equity
shall he reprove for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with
the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
Here he teaches that Christ shall be the protector of the poor: To whom
these graces formerly mentioned do prope^ly appertain.
or rather he shows who they are to whom the grace of Christ properly
appertains; to wit, to the poor and meek: that is, to those who being
humbled under the sense of their own misery, have thrown to the ground this
high and proud conceit of themselves, wherewith men are usually puffed up, till
being meekened by the word, they have learned to humble themselves. The Prophet
here protests then, that Christ will not be the defender and protector of all
in general, but of those who acknowledge themselves poor, and destitute of
all good things. And this Jesus Christ himself showed to the Disciples of John
Baptist, when he told them that the Gospel was preached to the poor: Mat
11.5. For all are not indeed indifferently capable of this doctrine, All are
not not capable of this doctrine.
but those only who being stripped of all ouerweening of the flesh, have their
recourse to this heavenly saueguard and protection.

There is here then a close opposition; to wit, that Christ gouernes not the
rich: that is to say, those who are blown up wiith a false opinion of
themselves: because that howsoever he calls al men unto him, yet notwithstanding
the most part refuse to subject themselves under his government; for they are
the poor only, which suffer themselves to be guided by him. This text
admonishes us to strippe our selves quite and clean of all pride, and to put
on the spirit of meekness and modesty, if we desire that Christ should rule
us under his hand. Behold here then the spiritual poverty which the Prophet
recommends to all the members of Christ, which is not to be swollen with an
ouerweening, b^t truly to be humbled with the feeling of our poverty and
misery, to the end we may depend upon Christ only. Having once resolved
thoroughly upon that, this King and faithful protector will take care of our
salvation, and will defend us even to the very end against all our enemies: we
also here learn, who they be that he calls unto him, Come to me all you,
says he, that travail and are heavy laden: Matthew. 11.28. Needful it is then
that we travail and be pressed under the weight of our burden, if we will
feel and have experience of his succor.

We have also to observe the order which the Prophet keeps here: for first
he places poverty, and afterward meekness or gentleness: We must be poor
before we can be brought to meekness.
because we must be poor before we can be brought to be meek and lowly. As
long as we th^nke our selves to be any thing, being puffed up with a vain
confidence of our own worth, our heart forthwith ouerfloweth into all pride
and conceitednesse, so as we cannot be humbled nor brought into any order: but
when we once know our own misery, then we begin to abase our selves, and
being weak and oppressed, we are forced to sigh under the burden. He here
describes then ye condition of Christ's people, In the former verses the Prophet
did set forth the nature (...) of Christ as he is the King of his Church: here
he describes the qualities and condition of his subjects.
as heretofore he had set forth the nature of their King: whence also we are
to learn, that all do not indifferently partake in these excellent gifts of
the holy Ghost, wherewith Christ was adorned, as we have seen heretofore, but
the poor and humble only.

Now this word, to judge, signifies government; the principal part whereof is,
that Christ makes us partakers of those gifts which he has received of his
Father, to the end he might live in us, and we in him.

And shall smite the earth.] In this place the Prophet extolles the efficacy
of the word, which is the royal scepter of Christ. For the rod of the mouth is
as much to say, as a verbal scepter: and in the second member, speaking of the
breath or spirit of the lips, he repeates the selfsame thing: as if he should
say, Christ shall not need to borrow strength from others to beat back his
enemies, and to overthrow whatsoever is contrary to his dignity and Empire;
for his only breath or word shall be sufficient thereunto. Now this may be a
general sentence, seeing it is of necessity that the faithful do first die,
to the end they may be renewed into a spiritual life. And in this sense, Romans
15.16.
the Gospel is called the sword of the Spirit, dedicated for the killing of
the sacrifices: but the latter part of the verse requires another sense. And
yet notwithstanding, if any be minded to use a distinction here, the smiting
of the earth shall be referred as well to the elect as to the reprobate, Heb.
4.12.
because ye Gospel is a two edged sword, piercing into the inmost and darkest
corners of the heart and discerning the thoughts and affections: but it wounds
one of them after one manner, and the other sort after an other. For in
mortifying the vicious nature of the elect, it kills their lusts, that they may
be a living and sweet smelling sacrifice before God: but it smites and kills
the reprobates outright, because they rot in their perdition; yea, it is made
unto them the savor of death unto death as the Apostle speaks 2. Cor. 2.16.
And I could easily grant that he speaks here of both effects in deed, were it
not that the use of the Hebrew tongue does contradict it, because the Hebrews
do often repeat one and the same sentence in diverse words.

Now it follows by and by after, that Christ is armed with the breath of the
lips to slay the wicked withal; unless some will say that Isaiah added this
second member for amplifications sake. And in very deed it is much more to
slay, then to smite only. Seeing then it is the property of the Gospel to
humble all men generally, it is a thing accidental in the reprobate when he
strikes them with a deadly wound. Thus the Prophet should conioine the
special to the general, thereby showing that the wicked fall upon the sword
of Christ unto eternal destruction, because they are not consecrated to be
acceptable offerings. How ever it be, undoubtedly this last member ought to be
wholly restrained and referred to the wicked, and therefore it was added, in
as much as this efficacy appears not at the first in the preaching of the
Gospel: The wicked may for a time take pleasure in contemning the word of the
Gospel, but in the end the Gospel shall smite them through unto endless
perdition.
and contrariwise many despise and ^est at it, holding whatsoever Jesus Christ
has said in his word to be no better then a fable. But howsoever they feel
not his power by and by, yet can they not escape it, but at the last they shall
be smitten to death therewith. And yet it seems the Prophets meaning should
not be sufficiently explaned, because he not only speaks here of the inward
feeling wherewithal the wicked are touched whether they will or no, but also
even of that impiety it self which shall be scattered and abolished by the
virtue and efficacy of this scepter, as the Apostle Saint Paul expounds it
in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. who questionles had respect unto this place when he spoke
of the ruin of Antichrist, and in that place he opens unto us the meaning of
the Prophet. He shows then that Jesus Christ shall never be without enemies,
which shall endeavor to overthrow his kingdom, to abolish or stop the free
passage of his Gospel (otherwise the Prophet had said this without cause) but
Jesus Christ shall destroy them by the sound of his word, as well every one of
them in particular, as all of them in general, with their head and Captain
also. Thus S. Paul sets before us a double use of this doctrine in an other
teach, but also that he convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. For the Pastor ought
not only to feed the flock, but also to keep and maintain it against all
harms. Christ performs all these things, and therefore he is furnished with
force of arms fit and necessary to surmount the lies of Satan, the cruelty
of tyrants, and all sorts of enemies. It hereby appears, False doctrines can
no otherwise be put to flight, but by the power of the Gospel preached.
that false doctrines can not otherwise be abolished but by the Gospel; for the
Magistrate shall use the sword in vain (which yet must be used
notwithstanding) to repress false teachers and false prophets: all this, I
say, will serve to no purpose, unless the sword of Gods word be first walking:
which we ought diligently to observe against the Papists, who being destitute
of the word of God, have their refuge to new weapons, by means whereof they
think to make their party the strongest. And which is worse, they are so
impudent to brag that heretics can not be overcome by the word, although both
the Prophet, and the Apostle Paul also establishes none other means but it.

When the Prophet says by the spirit of the lips, we must not restrain it to
the person of Christ only. For this is to be referred to the word which is
preached by the ministers of it; because Christ works so in them that his will
in their mouth should be reputed his mouth; and their lip^ as his own lips:
Luke 10.1^
that is to say, when they speak by his mouth, and preach his word faithfully.
On the other side, the Prophet sends us not here to secret revelations, that
Christ might reign in us: but he openly extols the outward preaching of the
word, and teaches that the Gospel preached and sounded forth, is a royal
scepter in the hand of Christ; otherwise he had unfitly made mention of the
mouth and of the lips. Whence it follows, that all those which reject the
outward preaching of the Gospel, do as much as in them is to shake off, or at
the least would pluck from Christ the scepter which he holds in his hand: not
that the efficacy whereof the Prophet speaks depends upon the voice of men,
but in regard that Christ himself works by his ministers, who will not have
their labor to become vain or unprofitable, but that they should bring in the
elect under his obedience, and kill the reprobates, as S. Paul glories in a
certain place, that he has vengeance ready against all unbelievers and
rebels, 2. Cor. 10.6.

Here we must again remember what is the nature of the kingdom of Christ:
The nature of Christ's kingdom.
for as he has neither crown upon his head, nor yet material armor upon his
back, no more does he rule in the world by force of arms, Not^.
there it is certain the Son of God reigns; but where it is rejected, there
is his rule and dominion abolished by the same means. Whence it appears how
ridiculous the bragging of the Papists is, when they say that the Church is
amongst them only, when as yet in the mean while they put Christ himself to
silence, and can not endure his voice: nay, do they not on the contrary
disgorge their edicts with full mouth, their laws, decrees, and tyrannical
constitutions against it?

Verse. 5. And justice shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reins.
OTher translate girdle: but because the Prophet sets Christ before us decked
as it were with his royal ornaments, I have rather translated it sword-girdle,
or hangers: for this also is a kingly ornament as was the scepter which was
given him heretofore. Verse. 4.
And Job minding to show that God will strip kings of their honor, says, that
he will unloose or unbuckle their girdle. Job. 12.18. Wherefore to be girt with
a sword-girdle is nothing else but to be placed in royal dignity, as we also
shall see hereafter in another place, Chap. 14.5.
Chap. 22.21. Now the Prophet here describes two sorts of girdles, to wit,
justice, and faithfulness: unless any had rather say that the word faithfulness
being a substantive, should be put in the place of an adjective, as if he
should say, that Christ shall be g^rt with faithful justice. For faithfulness
is not added here as a diverse thing from justice; but to declare what this
justice is wherewith Christ is girded. Some think he speaks here of that
justice which Christ communicates unto us, so as it should not only be in him,
but in his members also. By faith or verity they understand that faith whereby
we embrace the salvation which is offered unto us.

The Chalde Paraphrast expounds it thus, The just shall come about him, and
the faithful shall approach unto him. But I take it more simply, as if he
should say, He shall not appear as kings clothed with purple, and crowned with
a diadem, or girt with a sword-girdle, but justice and faithfulness shall shine
in him. I confess that justice is not so enclosed in Jesus Christ that it also
appertains not to all his members: yet notwithstanding we must observe this
manner of speech, that Christ Girded with righteousness, comes forth to govern
his members by it, the which also he forthwith powers out upon than by a secret
power of the holy ghost. If we distinguish the word faith from justice, me
thinks it should be put for faithfulness or stedfastnes; as if the Prophet
should say, that Christ will never deceive those that are his, because he will
always continue like himself.

Verse. 6. The woolfe also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
with the kid, and the calfe and the lion, and the fat beast together, and a
little child shall lead them.

7. And the cow and bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie together: and
the lion shall eat straw like the bullock.


He again describes the qualities and conditions of those which shall be
subdued unto Christ. For because there is a mutual correspondency between the
King and the subjects, he sometimes ascends from the body to the head, and by
and by from the head to the members: and we have already said, Verse 2.
that Christ reigns not for himself, but for his faithful ones: whence it
follows, that he frames our understandings to his will, by the operation of
his holy Spirit. Yet notwithstanding the Prophet aims at a further thing: for
it is as if he should promise an happy reestablishment to the world,
describing a^ it were the order which was at the beginning, before that woeful
and sorrowful change happened by the revolt of man, under the which we are
constrained to sigh at this day. Whence comes it that the brute beasts are so
cruel, that such as have any strength give themselves to snatch, rent, and
devour with violence? Certainly there should have bin no discord between God
and the creatures, if they had continued steadfast in their first and pure
original. When they rise up then one against another, and that the weakest
have need of defense against the strongest, is it not a testimony of that
confusion which is issued from the sin of man? Now seeing Christ is come to
the end, that having abolished the curse, he might reconcile the world unto
God; it is not without cause that the re-establishment of a perfect estate is
attributed to him: as if the Prophet should say, that the golden world should
return, during which time all felicity should flourish: that is to say,
before the fall of man, and the change and ruin which followed thereupon.

God by Hosea speaks thus; I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of
the field, with the birds of the air, and with the creeping things: Hose.
2.18. as if he should say, After that God shall become merciful to the world
for Christ's sake, he will therewithal show the signs of his good favor unto
it: to the end that whatsoever corruptions did proceed from the sin of man,
might come to an end. To conclude, the Prophets under these figures, teach the
very same which S. Paul affirms plainly; to wit, Col. 1.20.
that Christ came to gather the things which were scattered both in heaven and
in earth: Ephesians. 1.10. The sum of all then is, that Christ shall come to
chase all hurtful things out of the world, and to restore it to the first
beauty in which it was before it was accursed.

And therefore he says, that the lion shall feed the bullock: Had not the
contagion of sin infected the world, we should have seen no beast given to
devouring, or blood sucking, but the fruits of the earth would have sufficed
all living creatures.
for if the contagion of sin had not infected the world, we should not have
seen any beast given to blood nor to the pray, but the fruits of the earth
would have sufficed all things; which kind of food indeed was prescribed unto
them by the Lord. In the meant while, although Isaiah says, that the wild and
the tame beasts should live quietly together, to the end the blessing of God
should appear and shine every where; yet notwithstanding he aims chiefly at
that which I have said, to wit, that no hurtful affection should be discerned
amongst the people of Christ, neither yet any cruelty or inhumanitie
whatsoever. And whereas before they had been as lions and leopards, they
should now become like lamb; and sheep; because they shall have put off all
cruel and brutish affection. For by these kinds of speech, he meant nothing
else but to say, that those which in times past had been like outrageous and
cruel beasts, should become gentle and tractable. And therefore he compares
violent men and robbers, to wolves and bears, which live of the pray and
spoil: and pronounces that they should become tame and meek, so as
contenting themselves with a common and ordinary diet, they will carefully
avoid the doing of wrong or hurt unto any.

Now here we must argue from the less to the greater; to wit, if Christ do
appease and set the brute beasts at unity together, much more will he nourish
brotherly concord between men, whom he will govern by the spirit of
meekness. And yet it is not the Prophets meaning that any are thus gentle and
peaceable of their own nature, before they be reformed by grace; but he
promises, yt how perverse soever their nature shall be, yet they shall forsake
their cruelty, and shall become as meek as sheep or lambs.

Whereas he adds, that a little child shall lead them: it signifies, that
those beasts which were otherwise cruel and untamed, shall readily yield
cheerful service, so as there shall be no need to use any violence to repress
their cruelty. In the mean while, we must keep in mind the similitude which
we have touched; to wit, that those shall obey Christ, which shall be given
unto him, although they were outrageous beasts before; and shall obey in such
wise, that they shall by and by follow him, and that at his least beck: as it
is also said in the 110. Psalm, verse 3. Thy people shall come willingly.
Neither ought they to be placed in the rank of sheep, which are not endued
with this meekness. Let us suffer him then to master and rule us, and let us
willingly submit our selves to those to whom he has given us in charge,
although they be like little children. Thus it seems that the Ministers of the
word should here be compared to little children, because they have no
external power; neither doc they show themselves to have any civil authority.

sheep, bears and lions. I confess we shall find a marvelous diversity in
men, who yet are led by the very instinct of their own nature: some are meek
and peaceable, others turbulent and inhumane; but yet it is certain that all
are savage and outrageous, till Christ have tamed them by the Gospel. All are
puffed up with ambition and pride, before they be purged with this medicine.
True it is that many may well counterfeit a false appearance of modesty and
humility, No true humility to be found, where the Spirit of Christ dwells not.
but in the mean while they burst with pride inwardly. To be short, where the
Spirit of Christ dwelles not, there let us not look to find any true
humility.

Verse. 8. And the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the aspe: and the
weaned child shall put his hand upon the cockatrice hole.
HE continues his former speech; to wit, that when men shall be received again
into favor with God, and that they shall be purged from their vices by the
spirit of regeneration, they shall then also be freed from their hurtful
nature. For men should not need to fear the biting of venomous serpents, but
in regard yt they are unworthy that God should subject the parts of the whole
world under their authority. And in that the serpents have this liberty to
hurt little children, truly it thence appears, The liberty of doing harm
which one creature has over an other, argues that the whole posterity of Adam
is infected with sin, even form the conception.
that all the posterity of Adam is infected with sin from the conception in
the womb. Now we are to observe this similitude whereof we have spoken; to
wit, that those who are filled with an hidden venom to hurt, shall in such
wise change their natural inclination, that they shall not hurt so much as
little children.

Some are openly fierce and cruel; others carry and nourish their malice in
secret, as a serpent does his poison; as David also describes it, Psalm. 55.22.
For some are more ready to manifest their malice; others more slow. In a word,
whatsoever they be, he signifies that all must be purged from their malice, as
well open as secret, after they shall be once subjected under Christ. He also
signifies, that hence forward there shall be a general security every where,
so as those who are destitute of all help, shall live in safety, in such wise
as they shall adventure to expose themselves even to the most perilous dangers.

Verse. 9. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of mine
holiness: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters that cover the sea.
NOw he plainly shows, that even men themselves having subdued their natural
peruersitie, shall be inclined to equity. He speaks then of the faithful,
who are truly regenerated into newness of life. For although there are many
hypocrites full of iniquity, mingled in the Church with the elect of God; yet
notwithstanding they are like to to the Ishmaelites, whom God will drive out
thence when his time is. To this purpose we are to note that which is said in
Psalm. 15, 2. and 24.4. that none but the lovers of justice shall have any
settled or sure r^st in the Temple of God, to dwell there perpetually. This then
appertains to the lawful citizens of the Church to be pure and exempt from
all desire to do hurt. Whence we gather also, that it is a singular gift of
the holy Ghost, when men abstain from violent courses; because ambition,
pride, cruelty, and covetousness, will ordinarily push them forward to wrong
their neighbors every kind of way, and therefore the Prophet adds to very
good purpose that this inestimable gift flows from the kno^ledge of God. Thus
then it behoues that all flesh be humbled, and that me^ learn to put
themselves into the protection and safeguard of God, and to maintain brotherly
kindness between themselves when they know that he is the father of them all.
For although many which are not yet renewed by the spirit of Christ may have
some appearance of humanity, There may be some appearance of humanity even in
the vnregenerate^ which yet sp^ings only from selfeloue.
yet is it very certain that they are carried away therein with the love of
themselves, because all have this naturally so rooted in them, that they will
always seek their own profit rather then the profit of an other, and
therefore think they are put in this world only to serve their own turn and
not their neighbors: yea, they would have all the world at their command if
it were possible, which Plato Plato.
also wisely considered.

From hence proceed deceits, periuries, thefts, robberies, and an infinite other
such like wickednesses. There is no fit remedy then to tame this unbridled
lust but the knowledge of God only. Now we see how the Prophet does again
establish the dominion of Christ in the faith and doctrine of the Gospel, it
being the means (indeed) without which he does not ordinarily gather us to
himself: for thereby he illuminates our understandings to manifest unto us the
heavenly life, which is nothing else (as himself witnesses) but to know him
to be the only true God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3.

Moreover, the abundance of knowledge is here closely compared to that small
taste which God gave to the ancient people under the law. And albeit the Jews
were kept under such childish rudiments, yet unto us has the perfect light of
the heavenly wisdom shined by the means of the Gospel, as Jeremiah also
foretold, They shall not every one teach his neighbor, nor every one his
brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me, says the Lord,
from the least unto the greatest, Ier. 31.34. If so be yt this fulness of
knowledge then have taken possession in our understandings, it will purge and
cleanse them from all maliciousnes. This place also informs us what manner of
Church there is in the Papacy, where the light of holy doctrine being
smothered, yea almost clean extinct, their whole religion is, to be
blindfolded in a brutish ignorance.

Now if it so fall out that we have not a perfect knowledge at the first dash,
Though we attain not unto a perfect knowledge the first day: yet we must
endeavor to profit more and more continually.
yet we must endeavor day by day to profit more and more, 2. Pet. 3.18. and that
in such wise, that the fruit thereof may issue from this root. Whence it
appears that the greater part have profited but very meanly in the school of
Christ, when so many cosenages, extortions, and violences have their full
swinge on all sides.

Verse. 10. And in that day the root of Ishai which shall stand up for a sign
unto the people, the nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall be
glorious.
HE returns again to ye person of Christ, and repeates the same similitude
which he took up heretofore in the beginning of this Chapter, to wit, of the
root, or sprig issuing out of the dry stock, which had no appearance of any
sap in it. He says then it shall come to pass that the Gentiles, who in times
past had the Jews in abomination, shall yet come and do homage to the King of
the Jews. Now this might seem a thing altogether incredible: and no doubt but
this promise was a long time derided, because such a change should rather have
been expected when the kingdom stood and flourished in his full strength then
after it was destroyed. But needful it was it should be brought thus low, to
the end it might afterward be exalted; and that the glory and power of God
might hereby be better known, then if all things had been in their flourishing
estate. For what is he that with the eyes of flesh could have apprehended such
a height, Luke 2.31.32
from a little sprig that it should be discerned of all people, and should draw
the eyes of every one unto it? He compares it to a standard lifted up on high:
and we know that this was accomplished in the publication of the Gospel, yea
much more excellently then if Christ had soared above ye clouds. Hereunto
appertains that which is said in S. John, Numb. 21.9
As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
lift up, John. 3.14.

Christ is then sought when we run unto him to obtain salvation, as in many
places of the scripture, where the seeking of God, is as much to say as to put
our whole hope and confidence in him. And therefore the Greeks have translated,
They have hoped, respecting the sense, rather then the signification of the
word.

As touching that which immediately follows, that his rest shall be glorious,
all the expositors almost do expound it of the Sepulcher of Christ, taking a
part for the whole, because they by and by after refer it unto his death. And
to say the truth, the burial of Christ was but an appendance of his death. The
sense then according to their opinion should be, that the death of Christ which
was ignominious before the world, shall be full of glory and majesty. But
when I consider all circumstances more narrowly, the Prophet in this place by
this word rest, signifies the Church: as also it is said in the Psalms, This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, Psalm. 132.14. And thus he decketh the
company of the faithful with an honorable title, because in them he will have
his perpetual mansion. Seeing then that the Church at that time was exposed to
mocks and reproaches, he promises that it shall be brought to a better and more
happy estate, and shall yet again recover her first beauty. Here then we
have an excellent testimony, which gives us to understand, that God will dwell
for ever in his Church, although this shall not always appear so unto men.

Verse. 11. And in the same day shall the Lord stretch forth his hand again the
second time, to possess the remnant of his people (which shall be left) of
Ashur and of Egypt, and Or, parthe.
Pathros, and Ethipia, and of Elam, and of Shinar, and of Hamath, and of the
Isles of the sea.
BEcause the prophecy touching the future glory of the Church was incredible,
he now declares by what means it shall be brought to pass; to wit, that God
will manifest the strength of his hand to perform as it were a famous and
memorable act. Moreover, to confirm the elect people in good hope, he brings
to their remembrance the deliverance past, to the end they might not doubt that
God should not be as well able to deliver them now, as he was to deliver
their fathers, Exodus 12.31.
who had experience thereof in former time in Egypt. For this word again,
aims at that, and it is all one as if he had said, Now also will God be the
Redeemer of his Church. This he confirms by another reason; to wit, although
it seemed that God should despise his people; yet will he not be deprived of
his inheritance. The sum is, that God will take care of the salvation of his
Church, to the end he may not be bereaved of his right.

Notwithstanding he speaks expressly of the remnant, because this deriuerance
should appertain but to a little handful of seed. Lastly, he repeates that
which he had said heretofore; Howsoever God separates and scatters his Church,
yet can it not be that he should wholly reject it; because it is no l^sse
precious unto him, then our heritage is dear unto every one of us. Now he
speaks not of the Assyrians, which had led the people into captivity, but
also of other nations amongst whom the Jews were scattered. For after the
greater part of the people were carried into Babylon, some fled into Ethiopia,
others into other regions; because they feared lest they should be led into the
same bondage with others. As touching Parthe, in the text it is Pathros, some
think it should be Parthe; and this is probable, although others say that it
is Arabia the Stony. Under the word Elam, he comprehends the Medes, Zocdians,
Bactrians, and other Eastern people. Shinar, or Ethiopia, is comprehended in
Chaldea. By Hamath, some understand Cilicia, and other neighbor regions about
Mount Taurus. Under this word of the Isles, the Jews understand all the regions
which are beyond the sea. For according to their opinion, Greece, Italy, and
Spain are Isles; because the sea is between them and others. We see then that
the Prophet speaks not only here of the deliverance which was under
Zorobabel, but the aims at a further mark: for the Jews were not then
carried into Egypt, neither into Ethiopia, nor yet into any other regions. This
cannot be understood then of the deliverance out of Babylon, but ought to be
referred to the kingdom of Christ, under which this deliverance has been, and
is accomplished by the preaching of the Gospel. Moreover, we must observe,
that this which is here mentioned, is a special work of God, and not of men;
because he says, that the Lord shall stretch out his hand; herein
attributing that to the divine power of the Lord, which men cannot accomplish
by all their strength.

We are also to note, that from the consideration of the benefits which the
Lord has done for us in times past; we ought to be the better confirmed in
hope for the time to come: so as when we call to mind the deliverance out of
Egypt and out of Babylon, Former deliverances should encourage us to hope for
the like in time to come. 2. Cor. 1.10.
we may boldly conclude, that the Lord is as mighty now as he was then; and
that he will no less assist us at this day, even in setting up the Church
again in her primitive beauty and glory. He can perform the same thing the
third, the fourth, yea many times, which he has done once or twice. Whereas
the Prophet calls those whom God delivers a remnant, let us learn not to
affect a great multitude, Multitudes not to be affected, unless truth and
righteousness do also flourish.
but let us content our selves with our small number, and not be abashed
although we be but a few. For if so be the truth and righteousness of God
flourish amongst us, we shall have true and ample occasion given us to rest
therein securely.

Verse. 12. He shall set up a sign to the nations, and assemble the dispersed
of Israel, and gather the scattered of Judah from the four corners of the
world.
THis verse contains nothing in it but the explication of the former. Now this
manner of speech is taken from a similitude, the sense whereof notwithstanding
may be double; to wit, either that the Lord in making this sign, will amaze
the enemies in such wise, as they shall not dare to stop the passages against
the people which shall return; or rather that he will set up a sign to the
poor banished, to the end they should make no difficulty to take their
journey home again. Besides, the use of this doctrine has its force amongst
us even at this day: for look how the standard is lifted up in the Camp, to
assemble every one to his colors, and to hold himself in battle array; so
also is the standard now set up before us, to the end all of us should gather
our selves together thereunto; that is to say, The Gospel which the Lord has
lifted up amongst the Gentiles, and in the which Jesus Christ is preached unto
us. From hence let us observe, that we cannot be gathered unto the Lord,
unless we come under this ensign, and be united unto him by faith. For he
will not acknowledge us for any of his sheep, if we be not gathered in from our
scattering, and that all of us do assemble our selves under this banner: as
himself also says, My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me: John 10.27.
There is a repetition in the word To gather: for he shows how effectual the
calling of God shall be, because he will set his people in their former
estate, even as soon as he shall be pleased to make but a sign only.

The word scattering, is collectiue, and under it he comprehends the Jews
scattered here and there. It seems also that he alludes (as he often does in
other places) to one self same text of Moses, where the Lord promises to
gather together his people, when they shall be scattered to the utmost parts of
the world, yea even into the four corners of the earth: Deuteronomy. 30.4. Now this
was fulfilled under the leading and government of Christ: at this day therefore
ought we to hope, that by the means of this good Captain, the poor and
desolate Church shall be restored. For otherwise there is little hope that
this small remnant shall be gathered together, unless the elect do bend
their eyes toward this ensign. We ought often therefore to call these promises
to mind, to the end we being underpropped by them, may be more and more
established and confirmed.

Verse. 13. The hatred also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, neither shall Judah vex
Ephraim.
hatred nor envy, as they were before. Not as if there should no wicked ones
at all be found still among them; but that the Lord will root them out at the
last. Yet we are especially to observe that which he adds touching the
pacifications of civil hatreds and dissensions; to wit, that the children of
Abraham shall no more molest one another, but shall be at unity in one
religion, and in the true fear of God. For it was an odious and detestable
spectacle to see them so long time sworn enemies one to another. Envy the
fountain of dissensions.
It is not for naught that he shows the fountain of dissensions; to wit,
envy, which was the cause why the successors of Abraham did rent one another,
when the Tribes of Judah and Ephraim strove amongst themselves for the
excellency. This cursed fire brand envy, has kindled all the wars in the
world, when as no man will humble himself, nor part with the least jot of his
right. In a word, the Lord promises here, both an outward and an inward
peace, which is an excellent and desirable benefit above all things.

But some will say, that this was never yet accomplished,

I answer, Abraham, whom the Lord daily purges by afflictions and
banishments; causing them by this means to forget all ambition and envy: for
we shall not usually find desire of vain glory amongst them, who have been
meekened and instructed in the school of Christ. Thus then, that which Isaiah
here promises, has already been fulfilled in some part, and is
accomplished every day. But we must go on still in these exercises, and have
fightings daily, as well within as without, until we obtain that eternal
peace which we shall enjoy hereafter, with all felicity in the Kingdom of
God.

Verse. 14. But they shall flee upon the shoulders of the Philistims toward the
west: they shall spoil them of the East together: Edom and Moab shall be the
stretching out of their hands, and the children of Ammon in their obedience.
HIs meaning is, that the Lord will also assist his people by another means; to
wit, that he will triumph over his enemies, and subdue them under his power.
For as he has hitherto spoken of the safety of the Church; so now also he
declares, that she shall obtain victory over her enemies. Now he makes
mention of the nations against whom the Jews had continual wars: the
Philistims Ammonites and Moabites, by whom they were conjoined both by
consanguinitie and neighborhood. And Idumeans, who were not withheld by any
neerenesse of kindred whatsoever, Genesis 36.1.8.9.
from being the sworn enemies of the Jews; they came of Esau the brother of
Jacob, the remembrance whereof ought to have turned them from all hatred and
rancour. The Church ouercomes by suffering.
And therefore the Lord promises to his Church, that although she should have
enemies, that yet notwithstanding by suffering under them, she shall conquer
and bring them under in the end.

The stretching forth of the hands, signifies the domination which the Church
shall obtain over her enemies: for ordinarily the hand, signifies power, and
the Hebrews use the phrase, To stretch out the hand, to subdue this or that. So
as it is said in the Psalm, I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand
in the floods, Psalm. 89.26. To stretch out the hand then signifies power to
rule and govern; and contrariwise he also adds the obedience which the
enemies shall yield unto her.

The Jews who dream of an earthly kingdom and Messiah, interpret all these
things carnally, and draw them to I wot not what outward power, whereas they
should rather be esteemed according to the state and condition of Christ's
kingdom. True it is that the effect of this prophecy was seen to be
fulfilled in some part, when the Lord brought back the Jews from captivity,
at which time he raised them up into a good estate in despite of all their
neigbour enemies: but the faithful were to expect a more excellent victory,
which in the end they obtained by the preaching of the Gospel. For albeit we
must fight continually under the cross, yet we overcome our enemies
notwithstanding: Luke 21.19.
and possess our souls in patience, quietly with a meek spirit bearing
whatsoever befalles us. We also heap coals of fire upon the heads of our
enemies, Romans 12.20.
and by this means likewise we obtain victory over them and over all their
injuries and reproaches, under which it seems we are subject.

Verse. 15. The Lord also shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea,
and with his mighty wind shall lift up his hand over the river, and shall
smite him in his seven streams, and cause men to walk therein with shoes.
He means nothing else in this verse but to show that the Lord by his
admirable power will open a way unto his people which seemed to be shut up
before. Now he speaks by a figure, for one side of the sea is called a tongue,
because when the sea enters upon both lands, and occupies one part, it seems
like a tongue thrust out. He speaks of the Egyptian sea then, yea of Egypt it
self, which he yet more plainly declares hereafter. But he principally names
the sea and the rivers, because these be fortresses of the regions and the
closings in of all passages.

Upon the river.] No doubt but he means the river Nilus, which waters and
compasses all Egypt in many places, by means whereof they might have shut up
the passage before the people returning into Judea. I doubt not but the word
Ruach is here taken for wind, although these words of the Lord be joined
therewith: for all the winds are the Lords, seeing he gouernes and guides them
as it pleases him, and especially a vehement whirlewind raised up
miraculouslie is so taken when this word is used.

Now he alludes to the first deliverance of the Church when it was brought out
of Egypt. For when it pleased God to give them passage, he dried up the sea by
the violence and force of the winds, Exodus 14.21. I grant that God needed not
the help of winds, because he was able to have done it of himself: but when he
uses ordinary means, first from thence What we have to learn from Gods
working by ordinary means.
yet are they all in his hands, so as he will turn their force and violence
which way soever it shall please him. For example, when the wind arises, it
takes his beginning of a natural cause: all the winds also have their several
proprieties: the south wind is moist, the north wind cold, and the effects
which proceed from them are altogether alike: for the south wind makes the
bodies moist, and the north wind dries them. The Lord shows by admirable
miracles that he has a superior power, and an ouerruling hand far above
these natural causes, so as nature (that is to say, the disposition of things,
as profane men have imagined) ouerrules not, but he only. Secondly Isaiah
speaks not of the wind alone, but of the wind of the Lord, to the end we might
know that the wind is not raised up by chance, but is directed by the hand of
the Lord.

And he shall smite him in his seven streams.] Others translate floods, and
expound it thus, He will divide Nilus into seven parts. Now although this
exposition be received of all, yet I approve not of it; and as I take it, they
have failed here by forgetfulness rather then by ignorance, for I hold them
learned men notwithstanding, and such as are well exercised in reading the
ancient writers. It is well enough known by histories, that Nilus has seven
principal mouths; others were called false mouths, because they had no name.
Look then how many arms or mouths it had, so many streams and rivers it made
as it seems; and his rivers would have been so many lets and impediments to
slacken the voyage. Now Isaiah did purposely name the^, because of the great
fame of this flood. Moreover, although this flood was deep, yet
notwithstanding he says, it shall be so dried up, that one shall not need to
pull off his shoes to pass over it: which yet they must needs have done if
there had been never so little water remaining.

The Prophet then under these borrowed speeches means nothing else but to
certify them, that no power whatsoever shall be able to let God, when it
pleases him to deliver his people out of captivity. He touched the history
of the first deliverance, to the end they might know that the same should now
befall them which had happened to their fathers in times past. This is the cause
why he does thus paint it forth before their eyes, because the means of this
deliverance should not appear. For this promise so barely published, would not
have entered into their hearts so effectually as this notable example did, which
was thus propounded and set before them.

Verse. 16. And there shall be a path to the remnant of his people, which are
left of Ashur; like as it was unto Israel in the day that he came up out of
the land of Egypt.
THis verse contains no new matter, but opens that further which went before;
to wit, that the people shall feel the very same powerful hand of God in
their deliverance out of Babylon, Exodus 14, 29. Josh. 3.16.
as they had formerly proved in their deliverance out of Egypt. He opened a way
through the seas, also through Isaiah says, for his people by the same admirable
means. Now what the Lord has once done, let us expect the same again for the
time to come; and let us to this end consider the ancient histories. This also
ought to be referred to the last deliverance of the Church, when we
altogether shall be fully delivered out of all miseries and calamities: so as
howsoever the things which are taught us concerning the resurrection and
eternal life, seems incredible unto us, and that the means thereof appears
not unto us as yet; let us know notwithstanding, that it shall be easy with
God to find both the way and means.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And thou shall say in that day; O Lord, I will praise thee: though
thou wast angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou Or, thou will
comfort.
comfortest me.
ISaiah now exhorts all song also he shows why it is that God does good to
his Church; to wit, that the memory of his blessed name might be magnified;
not that he needs any of our praises, but because this is profitable unto our
selves. For we ought diligently to consider, what honor he does us when he
vouchsafes to serve himself of our endeavors, in the magnifying and publishing
his glorious name; we notwithstanding being such unprofitable, yea altogether
unprofitable servants. The Prophet in this song addresseth himself in general
to all the people, even as if he spoke to one man: This is noted from the
word. Thou, in the text.
for it was requisite they should be joined together, as if they had been but
one. According to this example, our conjunction ought to be so strait, that
there should be but one soul and one mouth: Romans 15.6. especially if we
mean that our prayers and thanksgiuings should be acceptable before God.

Though thou wast angry.] The sum of this song The sum of this song.
is, that howsoever God was justly provoked to anger against this people, yet
notwithstanding satisfying himself with one little stroke of the rod, he will
easily be appeased. Now because the particle Ci, is often put for showing of
the cause, some translate; O Lord I will praise thee: for being angry against
me, thou were by and by appeased. But because it is sometime taken otherwise, I
have followed that which I thought to agree best to this place. The faithful
then do first acknowledge we feel the wrath of God, yet we may resolve with
our selves, that it shall not endure long: but that he will send us some
consolation after he has chastened us.

But if we have deliverance, Afflictions no satisfactions of Gods justice.
then let us remember that the afflictions are ended: not because we have
satisfied the justice of God, as if we had merited it at his hands; but because
he bears with our weakness, even of his fatherly loving kindness. This
confession therefore appertains properly unto the faithful and elect: Great
diffe^ence between the afflictions of the godly and the wicked, th^ugh they
seem alike in outwa^d appearance.
for although the afflictions of the faithful and the wicked are alike in
appearance, yet is there great difference between them. For the wrath of God
against the reprobate is perpetual: and the plagues which they receive are the
tastes and beginnings of their eternal destruction: neither have they any
promise of refreshing or comfort But the faithful feel by experience, that
the wrath of God endures not long, and do therefore cheer up their hearts
with good hope and assurance; because they know that God will be merciful unto
them in the end: which hope certifies them, that he chastises them not so
much for their sins, as rather to bring them to repentance, 1. Cor. 11.31.
that they should not perish with the world.

Verse. 2. Behold God is my salvation; I will trust and will not fear: for the
Lord God is my strength and song, he Or, shall be.
is also become my salvation.
ALthough we ought to apprehend the help of God in the midst of afflictions
by faith, yet Isaiah speaks here of that knowledge which is grounded upon
experience: for he endites a song of rejoicing, when God by outward testimonies
gave them to understand, that he was pacified toward his Church. Heereunto
appertains the particle behold, because the bright and shining light of Gods
countenance, which had for a time bin hidden from them, did now shine again
upon them; and that so apparently, that it might almost be pointed out with the
finger. Now inasmuch as we are terrified in afflictions, so as it cannot be
avoided, but ye the conscience of sins will ouershadow our understandings; no
otherwise then as if the help of God were far from us, or did nothing at all
appertain unto us; the Prophet does here describe what a change there is in
the affections, when God has once reconciled us unto himself. But this
prophecy extends it self principally unto the coming of Christ, This
prophetical song extends it self principally to the coming of Christ.
in which time God caused his salvation to appear after a more special manner.

He adds afterward, that when we are once well resolved that our salvation
depends upon God, that the same is a steadfast foundation of fall assurance,
and a singular remedy to appease fears. For without this we must needs
tremble, be still in unquietness and perplexities, and miserably tossed to and
fro. Hence we gather, that confidence proceeds from faith, Confidence
proceeds from faith, as the effect from the cause.
as the effect from the cause. For by faith we feel that our salvation is in
God: from thence follows a quiet and peaceable estate in the conscience: but
where faith is not, there the conscience cannot be in quiet. Let us know then
that we have well profited in faith, We have well profited in faith, when we are
furnished with this confidence.
when we are furnished with this confidence which the Prophet here describes.

Moreover, this confidence ought so to bear rule in our hearts, that it ought
to put all fear and horr^ur to slight: not that we can be utterly exempt from
all fear and disquietnesse, Confidence ought so to bear sway in our hearts ^s
to put all fears to flight.
but because assurance will bear away the victory at the last. Yet
notwithstanding we must remember what I have said; namely, that the Prophet
here sets forth the cheerfulness which the faithful enjoy, when God is
favorable unto them; whereas in former times they were almost overwhelmed
under the weight of temptation.

For the Lord is my strength.] He more clearly and in a more especial manner
expresses, that the faithful shall have good occasion to sing, because they
shall know by experience, that their strength was in their God: for the truth
is, that their deliverance was an excellent proof of the power of God. But
seeing Isaiah recounts not here the benefit of one day only, but extolles the
work which God determined in himself, to continue until the coming of
Christ; it thereupon follows, that the praises of God are not sounded forth as
is meet, Who they be that are fit to praise God.
unless it be by them who feeling their weakness, do only seek unto God,
that he would furnish them with strength and power. For it is not said here,
that he should be a part, or the stay of our strength, but that he is our
full and perfect strength. The reason is, because we have no more strength and
power, then that we receive from him. And in this regard also the faithful
say, that he is their song; because they are thus liberally dealt withal by
him, to the end they should exercise themselves in thanksgiuings. Whence we
gather, that the beginning of joy proceeds from the favor of God, Psalm. 50.23.
and that the end of that joy is the sacrifice of praise. Truly the hearts of
the faithful ought to be so disposed to patience, We ought to praise God even
then when we se^ manifest tokens of his wrath, much more when we perceive
signs of his favor.
that they should not cease to praise God even when they see tokens of his
frowning countenance: yet in the time of peace and prosperity, they have much
more cause to open their mouths, to the end they may sing forth ye benefits of
God with a loud voice.

But because the wicked rejoice even whilst they despise God, and besot
themselves like bruit beasts with a false joy, rocking their consciences
asleep therein, never awaking themselves to praise God, justly does our
Savior Christ curse their joy; Woe be to you, says he, that now laugh, Luke
6.25.
for you shall weep: your joy shall be turned into heaviness, and your
laughter into gnashing of teeth. In the end of the verse, if any be pleased to
retain the preterperfect tence of the verb, the sense will be, that the
faithful sing joyfully, because God has saved them. The sense will also agree
very well in the future tence; to wit, that God has not delivered his chosen
once only, but that he will also continue the same unto the very end: for the
faithful ought not to stay themselves in the beholding of the present benefit
alone, but to stretch forth their hope to the continual progress of Gods
favor.

Verse. 3. Therefore with joy shall ye draw waters out of the wels of Or, out
of the Savior.
salvation.
BY this verse he confirms that which we have touched before, to wit, that
this Chapter is as it were a seal to confirm the promise made touching the
deliverance of the people; This song is a seal to confirm the promise made
touching the peoples deliverance.
as if he should say, The salvation of the Lord is set before you as a living
fountain, out of which you may draw waters in abundance. This similitude is
very fit, for as there is nothing more necessary for this present life then
water, so nothing troubles and disquiets us more nor goes so near us as the
want thereof does. Thus by a figure called Synecdoche (when a part is taken for
the whole) he shows that whatsoever is necessary for the sustentation of life
is given us freely out of the mere bounty of God. And because we are barren
and empty of all good things, it is no marvel that he compares the fountain
which satisfies

Of the savior.] This word savior agrees much better here then if he had
said, out of the fountains of God. For we have far greater cause of
consolation when we know y^ himself is the author of our salvation. The
Prophet therefore has appropriated this epithet according to the circumstance
of the place. Now if this promise comprehends under it the whole kingdom of
Christ, we for our parts ought always to apply the same unto our use. Let us
know then that the goodness of God is here offered and set before us, to the end
we might satisfy our selus to the full therewith. For we ought (as David
says) to be as the parched ground, gaping for thirst, Psalm. 143.6. and to
aspire unto these waters of the savior. Now this goodness of God is wonderful
and incredible, when he permits not that our desire should be in vain, but
freely offers and presents a fountain unto us, out of the which we may draw
waters in abundance. Moreover, Jesus Christ is this fountain, Jesus Christ the
true fountain.
and in him we have the participation of all Gods benefits; for as S. John
says, we draw all out of his fullness, John 1.16. It remains then that we
go directly unto him as soon as our poverty and want presses us.

Verse. 4. And ye shall say in that day, praise the Lord, call upon his name,
declare his works among the people, make mention of them, for his name is
exalted.
HE not only exhorts them one by one to praise God, and to give him thanks, but
would also that they should stir up others with them to do the like: And as
he had said before, Chap. 2.3.
many people shall go and shall say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, provoking one another by mutual exhortations to embrace the pure
wo^ship of God: so after he has commanded every one of them to render thanks
to God, he would now also that they should incite one another to the same
duty. He shows then that this ought not to be said only to one, but to all;
and not only in one time, but for their whole life. Now in a brief sum he
shows how God is rightly honored when he commands us to call upon him, and to
rejoice in none but in him only. For this cause also the holy scripture by the
word Invocation, comprehends often times under it the whole service of God,
using therein a part for the whole: for by prayer we show the trust that we
have in God; and this indeed he requires of us above all things. I also think
that p^ayer is joined with praise, that the Prophet might comprehend the whole
service of God.

Make mention etc.] His meaning is that this deliverance shall be so excellent
a work, that it ought not to be hidden from any corner, but published thorowout
the whole world. I grant that he would have the Jews to acknowledge this in
the first place, but after he caused all people to have the knowledge of it.
And this exhortation whereby the Jews showed their good will, was as a
preamble to the preaching of the Gospel which was afterward published. For as
the Jews magnified the favor which God had showed them amongst the Medes and
Persians and other nations near about them; so also after Christ once
appeared, they ought to have been heraults to publish the name of God thorowout
all the quarters of the world. Hereby it appears with what zeal all the
faithful ought to be moved, namely, that they cause the goodness of God to be
manifested unto all, to the end the service of God may be embraced. Now we
ought then especially to be moved with such an affection when we have been
delivered from some great danger, as out of the jaws of the devil, and from
under the tyranny of eternal death.

Verse. 5. Sing unto the Lord, for he has done excellent things: this is known
in all the world.
HE goes on still with his exhortation, showing us from what affection this
praise ought to proceed; for he teaches that it is our duty to publish the
goodness of God in all places: and yet must we not exhort nor provoke others to
go forward, and our selves in the mean time to stand still with our arms
acrosse, but we ought to lead them the way by our example: for there is
nothing more absurd then to see them slothful and negligent, which provoke
others to praise God. Now in saying that God has done excellent things, he
thereby signifies that there is great cause to sing. Neither in deed would the
Lord have them to sing forth his praises upon no ground; but he gave them ample
and very good cause thereof when he delivered his people out of that extreme
hard bondage. Now we have already said that we must not restrain this song to
one moment of time, but that it ought to be extended even unto the whole
kingdom of Christ. This work therefore is excellent indeed when God sent his
Son, Ioh. 3.16.17. Heb. 2.14.
by whom he has reconciled us unto himself, and has destroyed the dominion
of death and of the devil. If we then consider well of this work of our
deliverance as we ought, we shall have exceeding abundant matter given us to
praise God. When he says in the last, member, that this is known in all the
world; he therein touches the calling of the Gentiles, and confirms that
which has been already said; to wit, that this work shall be such as it
ought not to be concealed in some one corner; but to be publish^d thorowout the
whole world.

Verse. 6. Or, rejoice and sing.
Cry out and shout, O inhatant of Zion: for great is the holy one of Israel in
the midst of thee.
HE again exhorts the faithful to rejoice in God, and therewithal shows
what is the true rejoicing, and whereupon it is grounded. No felicity but
where God dwells.
For we can have no felicity, but when God dwel^es in the midst of us: without
this, our life is poor and miserable, although we had the abundance of all
other benefits and riches whatsoever. So then if our hearts be joined to this
treasure, this felicity will draw all our senses easily unto it. He calls God
holy, to the end we might know that he will make himself felt of us when he
dwelles with us: that is to say, we shall not only reverence his Majesty,
wherewith we are by and by overwhelmed; but that we shall be also fully
assured that he has a fatherly care over us, albeit we be separate from the
rest of the whole world. For he calls him the holy one by the effect; because
by gathering us under his wings, and saving us by his grace, he sanctifies us
as a thing consecrated for his own use. And therefore if God be with us, the
feeling of his gracious presence will fill our hearts with joy unspeakable. By
rejoicing and singing, he signifies, that when God displayeth his power in the
midst of us, we have occasion to rejoice greatly. Also, speaking directly to
the inhabitants of Zion, he shows that all are not capable of so great a
benefit: and he therewithal closely exhorts us to persevere in the unity of
faith, that being knit unto the Church, we may rejoice with this happy and
blessed joy.

From the first Chapter hitherto, the Prophet has denounced judgment against
the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel: from the beginning of the Chapter
following, to the 24. the Prophet foretelles what horrible calamities should
befall the enemies of the Church. And thus God judges his own house first, as
Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 4.17.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The burden of Babel, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.
Seven reasons showing the cause why God caused the ruin of the Churches
enemies to be foretold.
FRom this Chapter unto the 24. the Prophet foretelles the grievous and horrible
calamities which should befall the Nations and Countries then known to the
Jews; either because they were neighbors unto them, or else in regard that
they had traffic or leagues with them.

And this he does upon good reasons: for Isaiah and the rest of the Prophets
should speak of such calamities, to the end that all might understand, that
they come not to pass but by the secret and wonderful counsel of God.

For if they had prefixed no prophecy touching

After that Babylon was taken, use and experience ruin of Babylon and other
places with it was foretold: not that the Babylonians had any profit at all by
these prophecies, neither yet the other Nations, as though these writings came
to them.

Another cause then was this, God meant by if they should have seen them
escape the hand of God altogether without punishment. For if so be the
monarchy of Babylon should have continued safe, the Jews would not only have
thought they had served the Lord in vain, and that the covenant which he had
contracted with Abraham had been to no purpose, seeing strangers and wicked men
were better dealt withal then the elect people of God: but they might also
have entered into a worse suspicion, to wit, that God had favored these cursed
thieves, who trod all justice and equity under their feet by their robberies
and seditions; truly they Babylon also shall be punished.

Luke 12.47.
Just it is that the servant which knew his masters will and did it not, should
be beaten with more heavy stripes. When God then denounces such rough
punishments against poor blind wretches, he therein did set a looking-glass
before the Jews (who had been trained up in the law) what chastisement they
had deserved.

And yet the chief mark that Isaiah aims

Now in the beginning the Prophet spoke of the destruction and wasting of the
kingdoms of Judah and Israel (as we have seen) which was to come, When God
corrects, he alwais begins with his own.
because judgment must first begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17. for the
Lord has a special care of his own, and chiefly regards them. Wherefore even
as often as we read these prophesies, let us learn to apply them to our use.
True it is that the Lord does not by piecemeale foretell all things which come
to pass at this day in kingdoms and amongst nations, and yet notwithstanding
has he not resigned up the administration of the world, which himself keeps
in his own hand, to another, When we then see the ruin of cities, the
calamities which befall nations, and the change of kingdoms, let the things
aforesaid come unto our minds, to the end we may humble our selves under Gods
scourges, and learn to be wise by other men's costs, and cry unto the Lord for
comfort in our afflictions.

Verse. 1. The burden.] As touching this word b^^^en, What is understood by this
word burden.
which we shall meet so often withal, I will briefly show how we are to
understand it. When the Prophets mean to denounce any adversity, they
usually use this word burden, that the people might know burden to all the
prophesies, as it appears in the 23. of Ier. verse. 36. where the Lord
sharply rebukes them, because by this flouting kind of speech they not only
disfamed his word, but also made it odious and contemptible.

Moreover this word shows, that God sends bear the punishment of his own
sin. He expressly shows, that that which he was to threaten was revealed unto
him by a heavenly vision, to the end this authority might put all discourses
of fleshly wisdom to silence. It was a thing no doubt hard to be believed,
that a Monarchy so beautiful, and abounding with so great riches, could be
overthrown by any means. In regard therefore that so great a power might not
dazell their eyes, the Prophet brings them to the truth of the heavenly oracle,
to the end they might by faith understand that judgment of God which they were
not able to comprehend by sense.

Verse. 2. Lift up a standard upon the hie mountain: lift up the voice unto
them that wag the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
THere is a similitude in the word mountain, because it is spoken to Babylon,
hie place like a fortress mounted up above all peoples, and that in regard of
the Monarchy. Unless any standard shall be lifted up, they shall run
thither from far countries, because it will draw people unto it from all
parts by the sight of it. I take this latter sense to be the most probable; but
I thought it not amiss to set down that first which was commonly received.

Notwithstanding, this might seem ridiculous, that the Prophet should here
lay a commandment upon the creatures, as upon his subjects; were it not that
he was taught to do so of God, and was furnished as it were with his
authority. For a private man here commands the Medes and Persians; he calls
armies, he bids them display the banner, sound the trumpet to prepare unto
battle. In this place then we have to consider the Majesty of God, in whose
name he speaks; kinds of speech in the Prophets, to the end we might know
that God threatens nothing by his servants, the execution whereof is not at
hand. Isaiah might have spoken more simply, and in plainer terms might have
told them, that the Medes and Persians shall come, and break open the gates of
Babylon, how strong and invincible soever they seemed to be. But these
exclamations have much greater vehemency in them, when he not only threatens
war, as taking to himself the person of an Herald; but with sovereign
authority, commands the Medes and Persians to come, as if they were soldiers
under his pay. Besides, he not only teaches that they shall be ready when
God shall only make a sign unto them, because they shall be pricked forward
by his secret instinct: but being sent of God to denounce the ruin of Babylon,
he attributes the effect of so incredible a thing to his own voice. The sum
is, that when God has once spoken, we need make no doubt but that his word
shall be accomplished.

This is also worthy our observation, that he speaks to the Medes and
Persians, and yet names the^ not: and this has much greater vehemence in
pointing them forth with the finger: as when we say, This man, and that man.
This manner of speech serves to confirm the prophecy, when he shows things
which were far off, as being present. When he says; Shake the hand, and they
shall enter: his meaning is, that the Medes and Persians shall no sooner set
forward at Gods commandment, but they shall have an open and easy way to
march, without any impediment. Now although the Hebrews call Princes, gracious
Lords, and bountiful, (as our Lord Jesus Christ also gives them this title in
the Gospel) notwithstanding it rather seems that the Prophet speaks of the
excellent power whereof the Babylonians boasted. Luke 22.25.
For they were furnished with multitudes of people, and all preparations for
war, above any others: so as it was a thing incredible unto them, that they
should ever be overcome. But the Prophet declares that nothing shall be able
to let, that God should not prepare the way, and give passage to the enemies.

Verse. 3. I have commanded them that I have sanctified: and I have called the
mighty to my wrath, and them that rejoice in my glory.
Here the Prophet brings in the Lord speaking and declaring his Commandments.
He calls the Medes and Persians his sanctified: that is to say, those which
he had prepared. For the verb To sanctify, is diversely sanctified, whom he
has set apart, and prepared for his service, howsoever they be no whit aware
of it,

Whence we are taught, to attribute and refer all the changes in this world,
to the secret counsel of God. In this place also we have a marvelous
consolation; to wit, that the wicked shall be able to do nothing but that
which is decreed of God, let them enterprise what they will. Where he
immediately adds, that he has called them; it is much more then to command:
which he puts in the first place. For his meaning is, that the enemies shall
not only rouse up themselves at the sign which God shall give them, but at
his express commandment: even as if I should call one to come unto me, and
he should forthwith follow me. He shows then that Babylon shall be destroyed
by the Medes and Persians, no otherwise then if they should yield obedience to
the call of God. For although their ambition, pride, and cruelty, was the
motive (touching themselves) which provoked them to the war; yet God fitted
them thereunto without their priuitie, that they might be the executioners of
his judgment.

Verse. 4. The noise of a multitude in the mountains like a great people: a
tumultuous voice of the Kingdoms of the Nations gathered together: the Lord of
hosts numbreth the host of the battle.
HE now adds a more lively description, by which he sets the things themselves
as it were before their sight, because ye Prophets contented not to speak
only, unless therewithal they did even plainly represent the things whereof
they spoke; for words barely and coldly pronounced after a common manner, move
not so much; neither do they touch men's hearts so to the quick as fuguratiue
speeches do, which represent the lively image of things. It is then as if the
Prophet should say, You now hear a man speak, but know ye that this voice
shall have such great efficacy that by the very sound thereof nations shall be
moved, peoples shall make a noise, and a great sound, for the great multitudes
of them; yea, they shall cast forth fearful cries, and all to bring Babylon
to ruin. This cry then shall have such force, and that after my death, as if
that which I now threaten were presently before your eyes.

By this therefore we see of how great efficacy the word of God is, when all
creatures both in heaven and in earth yield obedience unto it. So much the more
then ought we to be confirmed in this doctrine, seeing nothing came to pass
which was not foretold long time before. This is the reason why he affirms in
the latter end of the verse, that God will assemble diverse nations together
under his conduct: and howsoever they shall have no meaning at all to execute
those correctio^s which he has ordained, yet shall they do nothing but by his
appointment, even as if some Captain amongst us should muster or set his
soldiers in array.

Verse. 5. They come from a far country, from the end of heaven: even the
Lord with the Or, vessels, or instruments.
weapons of his wrath to destroy the whole land.
HE yet more fully confirms that which I said erewhile, to wit, that the
preparations of war come not out of the earth nor by hap hazard: for albeit
men by their lusts raise up those troubles which are in ye world, yet God has
an ouerruling hand above them. Isaiah therefore rightly attributes the
pre-eminence unto him, seeing men are nothing but the weapons of his wrath. Now
he says, that the destroyers of the Monarchy of Babylon shall come from a
far country, the reason is, because we seldom fear any dangers, unless
those which be very near unto us. Babylon was in such wise fortified and well
compassed about with so many kingdoms and provinces which were subject unto
it, that it seemed no enemies could ever so much as approach unto it. In a word,
she feared no dangers at all, even as if she had been compact together, and
built in the clouds.

In as much then as there was no danger which threatened this city any way
round about it, he therefore shows that the destruction thereof shall come
from far. For although all things may seem quiet and peaceable in our
conceit, having no controversies at all with our neighbors, yet
notwithstanding God is able to cause enemies to come from the uttermost part
under heaven. Wherefore we have no occasion to promise a secure and prosperous
estate unto our selves, although we should discern no danger near at hand to
threaten us. If this prophecy should have been carried to Babylon, no doubt but
they would have despised it as a mere fable. For let it be granted that they
would have had some respect of the Prophets person, yet would they (in this
their proud confidence wherewithal they were possessed) have contemned these
threatenings as vain and frivolous. An example whereof we have ready at hand:
for we at this day speak of the Turk in our Sermons, yet every one thinks
they be idle tales, because we think they are very far off: notwithstanding
we see how much ground he has gotten in a small time, in ouerrunning those
which were far remote from him, and were more mighty then he. The sottishnes
of men is so great, that they can not be awakened unless they be beaten upon
till they may feel the blows. Let us therefore set the Babylonians before us
as an example to teach us wisdom, that so we may scare the threatenings which
the Prophets denounce in their Sermons betimes, lest we be overtaken with the
reprobates, who trusting to their tranquillity are so astonished when the hand
of God appears and smites them, that they are utterly unable to stand, but
rather fall down senseless and amazed.

Whereas he puts the whole land for Babylon, he has respect to the largeness
of the kingdom, that they might not think to prevent the assaults of the
enemies by means of the provinces wherewith they were environed on every side:
yea, notwithstanding that he shows the calamity shall be such, that it shall
not only come in one way upon them, but shall be as a deluge, ouerspreading a
great part of ye world. Moreover, the Medes and Persians are here called
instruments, or vessels of the wrath of the Lord in a contrary sense to that
which the reprobates are so called by S. Paul Romans 9.22. For there the Apostle
opposes the vessels of wrath to the vessels of mercy; and teaches, that the
free grace of God shines in the elect, and his just and severe judgment in the
reprobate. But the Prophets meaning is, that the Medes and Persians are as
darts in Gods hand, of whom he serves his turn to execute his wrath and
vengeance.

Verse. 6. Howl you for the day of the Lord is at hand: it shall come as a
destroyer from the Or, of the strong, or, destruction of the destroyer.
Almighty.
HE follows the matter still, and commands the Babylonians to howl; not that
he directs his speech to them, as if he were in hope that it should profit
them, but in showing what effect it should have, he intermingles this manner of
speech with great vehemency. He speaks of the day of the Lord after the
usual phrase of the scripture, because that when the Lord deferres his
judgments, it seems he cease from performing of his office, even as Judges
do when they go not up into their Judgment seats. Let us then observe this
language well; the reason is, howl, because he will openly display his
strength for their destruction. For the verb Shadad signifies to scatter and
to destroy, whence Shadai one of the names of God, which some have translated
Almighty, is derived. Here is then an elegant allusion to this etymology, as
if he should say, The Babylonians in their destruction shall feel it is not
vain that God is called Shadai, that is to say strong, and Almighty to
destroy.

Verse. 7. Therefore shall all hands be weakened, and all men's hearts shall Or,
run out.
mel^.
HE shows that the Lord shall have so great power to destroy the Babylonians,
that they shall be utterly destitute of any thing whatsoever, that might hinder
or turn back his wrath. For albeit they were very rich and mighty, yet
should they have such dejected hearts, and such weak hands, that they should
neither have will nor power to resist. And thus by the way he glanceth at the
cruelty wherewith the Babylonians were puffed up: seeing it is in the power of
God to dissolve men's hearts, to break, loosen, or weaken their hands, or
arms, in such wise that all valor shall fall to the ground, and strength
shall be turned into smoke. Now when the heart quails, what auailes castles,
great troops of men, riches, forts, and fortresses? what auailes a shop well
fraught with tools without a workman? we have experience of this daily, even
in those to whom God notwithstanding gives great means. And thence we may
perceive how vain that confidence is, which we put in the helps of flesh,
seeing they are so unprofitable, if God do smite our hearts but with the least
astonishment.

Verse. 8. And they shall be afraid, anguish and sorrow shall take them, and
they shall have pain as a woman that trauelleth: every one shall be amazed at
his neighbor; and their faces shall be like flames of fire.
BEcause the signification of the word Tsirim, is doubtful, the Greek
translatours have turned it, Ambassadors. But here it signifies anguish, as
may sufficiently be perceived by the similitude of the woman in travail with
child: which is afterward added. For he here sets before them as it were in
one word, that which he had told them before; to wit, that their hearts should
melt, Verse. 7.
and their hands should be weakened, because, says he, anguish and sorrow
shall surprise them. But whence comes this astonishment? From God. The ancients
called this astonishment, a distracted fear. Thus called they the hobgoblins
visions, and such like things which frighted men, albeit they had no inward
occasion at all so to do. This was not altogether from the purpose; but yet
notwithstanding they erred too grossly, because they understood not that such a
thing proceeded from God.

As a woman is travel with child.] Surely the Babylonians had just occasion of
fear, seeing themselves assailed by valiant and warlike men; but yet the
Prophet threatens them that they shall quail and be in a swound, although they
were strong enough to resist them; because they should be dulled by a secret
judgment of God. To this appertains that which he adds; namely, that every
one shall be amassed at his neighbor, even as when men affrighted, look ghastly
here and there: and not only that, but also when there shall be any hope of
succor, yet they shall stand still like blocks, as men deprived of all
feeling. But the vehemency of the fear is yet much more clearly expressed in
the member following, when he attributes unto them faces like fire. For they
are too sparing, who think (as some do) that this word signifies shame; as if
it were said in one word, they shall blush with shame. Isaiah meant a greater
and a more fearful thing then so. When torments press us indeed, the face
will be inflamed, and we shall glow as being closed in with dolours: truly it
were too light then to refer it to a blushing only, in such an horrible
desolation. For he describes so strange a calamity, that for the bitterness
of it, flames shall sparkle as it were out of the face: which indeed comes to
pass, when men are vexed with extreme dolor. The similitude of a woman in
trauile, not only expresses the greatness of the grief, but also a sudden
hurliburly. Even as the calamity then should be bitter and violent, so also
Isaiah says, it shall be sudden: and good reason, for the Babylonians, who we
furnished with so many forces, could never have dreamed that they should ever
be molested by any means whatsoever.

Verse. 9. Behold, the day of the Lord comes, cruel with wrath and fierce
anger, to lay the land waste: and he shall destroy the sinners out of it.
HE repeates that which he touched heretofore; to wit, that although the
Babylonians rested securely in their abundance; that the day of the Lord
notwithstanding is at hand, which will astonish these secure fellows. But yet
it may be demanded, cruel, seeing there is nothing more desirable, then to
enjoy the presence of God: neither is there any thing indeed but this only,
which makes us happy. I answer, David also testifies where he says; that he
is merciful and favorable to the good, severe and rigorous to the wicked:
Psalm. 18.16.27. For what can the wicked conceive in God, but an extreme
severity? and therefore they tremble as soon as they hear him spoken of. But
the faithful on the contrary, conceive and receive great joy and sweetness
in such words; so as nothing can be propounded unto them more delectable. And
therefore when the Prophets turn themselves to the faithful, they mingle joy
and gladness therewithal in mentioning of God; because they only feel him
gracious and merciful unto them: but if they speak to the unfaithful, the
judgment of God is no sooner propounded, but they add tears and sorrows.
For even as the faithful rejoice at the presence of God, because they
apprehend his goodness by faith: so also the wicked on the contrary are
afraid, because their consciences reproues them, and finds them guilty in
regard their severe Judge is at hand. Amos 5.18.20.
And because hypocrites also seem to wait for the day of the Lord with great
desire, boasting that he will assist them; the Prophets are wont to unmask
them, testifying also, that this day shall be cruel and terrible.

Isaiah also applies a description to this prophecy, much used; the better to
show how greatly the wrath of God is to be feared. For inasmuch as we are slow
by nature, or rather blockish, we move not much if the Lord should speak of
his judgments simply. Because therefore a bare and naked speech should have
little vehemency, he finds out new kinds of speakings to awaken our
drowsiness. By sinners, he means not all men in general; but those wicked
and desperate wretches which dwelt in Babylon.

Verse. 10. For the stars of heaven, and the planets thereof shall not give
their light: the Sun shall be darkened in his going forth; and the Moon
shall not cause her light to shine.
TO the end men might be the more lively and effectually touched with the fear
of Gods judgment, the Prophets are wont to add excessive manners of speech
to their threatenings, which should even set the wrath of God as it were before
their eyes; that so it might pierce into all their senses: even as if there
were not one of the elements which should not rise up on Gods behalf to
execute his vengeance. And yet these excessive speeches exceed not the
heinousness of the offense: for it is impossible to set forth so horrible a
representation of Gods judgment; but the feeling thereof shall be far more
terrible. Well, he speaks of the Sun, Moon, and stars, and the reason is,
because these are excellent testimonies of the fatherly kindness of God
toward men. Christ therefore shows, that Gods goodness does in special manner
appear, because he makes his Sun to shine upon the good and bad: Matthew.
5.45. When the Sun, Moon, and stars then shine in the heaven, God gives us
cause of rejoicing, even as it were by a sweet and amiable countenance. In as
much then as in the brightness of the heavens, he shows a joyful and
cheerful face, even as if he laughed: the darkness which the Prophet here
describes, signifies as much, as if God having hid his face, would cast men
headlong into sorrows and into darkness, because he is angry with them.

There is the like description in the second Chapter of Joel: and we have
already said, that this manner of speech is familiar in the Prophets; to let
us know, that all things shall turn to our ruin, if God be once against us.
True it is he sometimes shows signs of his indignation in the Stars; but
that is extraordinary: and the darkness which the Prophet here describes,
shall not come before the last coming of Christ Jesus. But this ought to
suffice us, namely, that all creatures which employ themselves for our service,
as testimonies and instruments of the loving kindness of God, shall not only
cease from the service which now they do us; but shall even arm themselves
for our destruction, as soon as God shall ascend to judgment.

Verse. 11. And I will visit the wickedness upon the world, and their
iniquities upon the wicked: and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to
cease, and will cast down the pride of tyrants.
THe Prophet speaks not here of all the world: but Babylon being then the
seat of the mightiest Monarchy in all the earth, therefore it is that he
attributes this name world unto it by a phrase of speech, having great weight
in it For Babylon then was as a world, and seemed to occupy almost all the
earth. But in the mean while, he declares that nothing is so highly exalted in
this same offenses and iniquities had deserved. He takes away all occasion of
false accusations then, to the end we might understand that God is not
delighted with the calamities of men: for when he deals with them according
to their deserts, all must have their mouths stopped, in regard he never
sends bitter and sharp afflictions, but he finds the cause thereof in men
themselves. And yet we must keep in mind that which I touched; to wit, that
the Prophet greatly comforts the faithful when he shows them that he will
punish the cruelty of the Babylonians at the last, howsoever he spared them
for a time.

He expresses this immediately, in touching one particular vice; to wit,
pride: for thence it was that Babel took liberty to oppress the poor to the
uttermost, even as she listed. But from thence ought we also to gather a very
profitable doctrine; namely, that God must needs visit us sharply, if we be
proud, and please our selves in our selves. For under this word, the Prophet
comprehends all manner of arrogancy and high imaginations. Be it then that men
think themselves something; or that they admire their riches, and care for
none in respect of themselves; the Lord cannot bear any arrogancy, God c^n
not in^^^ e the pr^^d. P^o 8.13. ^^n. 4.6. 1. Pet. 5.5.
neither will he leave it unpunished. Seeing then that this is noted here as
the principal and most notorious wickedness amongst a great many other
wherewith Babylon was stuffed, so also the wrath of God we see is most set on
fire by this sin. Now this arrogancy was not without tyranny and cruelty
as it ordinarily falls out: and therefore he adds immediately the glory of
tyrants. For violences, outrages, and oppressions do follow, when men despise
others; neither can it be chosen that a man should abstain from offering
violence unto another, unless he put off all persuasion and opinion of
himself. Let us pull down our peacocks feathers then, and learn we also to
bring under our loftiness to a true and voluntary humility; unless
peradventure we had rather be smitten down and humbled to our confusion and
destruction.

Verse. 12. I will make a man more precious then fine gold, even a man above the
wedge of Ophir.
HE here describes in particular the cruel and horrible war which shall be
made upon the Babylonians: as also the faithful being instructed by these
prophesies, wished (by the spirit of prophecy) for that which was the
extremest and most cruel stratageme of war, to wit, that the Medes and
Persians might pluck the little children from their mothers breasts to dash
them against the stones: the sum is, that Babylon shall not only be
destroyed, but also wholly rooted out. For when he says the life of man shall
be more p^^tious then gold, he means, that the enemies shall be so fleshed in
shedding of blood, that men shall not escape their hands for any ransom
whatsoever. Why so? Because they shall love rather to massacre then to take any
ransom.

Isaiah here describes it, for histories witness otherwise: and Daniel himself
(who was there present) says, Dan. 6.1.
that the city was taken only, Dan. 5.30. This is the cause why some
expositors have been driven to refer every thing which is said here of
Babylon to all reprobates: Isaiah spoke not this whilst the Monarchy of Nineue
flourished, but whatsoever he foretold against the profane nations in the whole
course of his ministry, is put all upon one heap as it were. Thus then the
order of time was not kept, but the likeness of things was the cause why they
have put all these prophesies in one. For whence is it that Isaiah makes no
mention of Nineue, seeing he afterward shows that the Assyrians only were
they which molested the Jews (with whom the Babylonians were in league) but in
regard that he speaks not of the histories of his time till he comes to the
three and twenty Chapter, but only prophesies of the judgments of God which
came to pass after his death?

Now when he declares that Babylon shall be destroyed utterly; it is certain
he speaks not of one destruction barely, but under it comprehends the full
ruin thereof, which followed long time after the first. For Babylon flourished,
yea after the Persians had subdued it, and kept the name and dignity of a
thrice renoumed city. And howsoever it be true that another city was built,
called Ctesiphon, that part of the glory and riches of Babylon might be taken
away; yet notwithstanding the commodity of the place, the sumptuous buildings
and fortresses of the city, caused that (the dignity royal excepted) she was
in nothing inferior to the head city of Persia. Yea, after the death of
Alexander the Great, when Seleucia was built near unto it, yet could it not
stain the name and reputation of this so ancient a city. From hence then we
gather, that the things which are here spoken, can not be restrained to one
time. And yet is it not without cause that the Prophet threatens them so
sharply, seeing the change of their empire was the beginning of diverse
calamities which followed thereupon afterward. The change of Babels Empire,
the beginning of future calamities.
So that howsoever all the people were not slain, yet notwithstanding in
regard the city was forciblie assailed and taken by a sudden assault, and
that by night when all the kings court were drowned in drunkenness; it could not
be but the Medes and Persians hewed all those in pieces which they met withal:
and therefore we need not doubt but the most valiant of the enemies made many
slaughters before they received all the people to their mercy. For will any
man doubt but that this proud nation was dishonorablie handled by these
barbarous conquerors, seeing it was impossible to subdue them by any other
means?

Now after that Babylon was by little and little brought under, she by and by
after changed her king, and after she had been a while under the government of
Alexander the Macedonian, Alexander the Macedonian. Seleucus. B^bel brought to
ruin at last.
she suddenly f^ll into the hands of Seleucus, who endeavored by all means to
abate the greatness of it, till at the last it was brought utterly to ruin.
And thus whilst God suffered her to stand, she served as a deformed and
shameful spectacle, that the accomplishment of this prophecy might be the
more excellent and certain: and therefore our Prophet rightly affirms, that
the wrath of God shall not be appeased, until this den of thieves shall be
wholly brought to naught. As touching the words, some of the expositors take
Enosh (which we have translated man) for a warlike and noble man: and Adam
(which we have expounded person) for all handicrafts men. But in as much as
the Etymology agrees not well herewith; I do not think the Prophet meant so:
I am rather of opinion, that it is a repetition of words, which is common with
the Hebrews. Others take the word Ophir, (which I, according to diverse
expositours, have translated, pure gold) for a precious stone: but we gather
from many places of the Scripture, that it signifies very pure and tried gold.

Verse. 13. Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out
of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the d^^ of his fierce
anger.
THis is an other figure which serves for an amplification. For God cannot
repeat this doctrine too often. The reason is, not only to astonish the
infidels, but also to bring consolation to the good, who are often times
disquieted, when the wicked are at their ease, and have all things at their
desire: which David confesses when he says; I have cleansed mine heart in
vain, and washed mine hands in innocence: Psalm. 73.13. These lively images
then are for good cause thus painted out before our eyes, to show us plainly
the destruction of the wicked. And therefore it is as if Isaiah should say;
Were it so that the very heavens had need to be shaken for the bringing
down, and the rooting out of infidels; even that should be done. For they
think themselves out of all danger, and so deeply rooted in the earth, as if
it were impossible to pluck them up: but the Prophet shows that they greatly
deceive themselves, because the Lord will rather shake the heaven and the earth
also, then that they should not come tumbling down from their greatness,
whereunto they are mounted up aloft. Whence it follows, that although the
world presents a thousand leaning stocks unto us, as well high as love, yet
notwithstanding there shall be no steadfastness in any of them, unless God
therewithal be merciful unto us. And if this appears in particular
judgments, how much more will it appear in that general judgment, when
Christ shall ascend into the judicial throne of his majesty to pronounce
sentence of condemnation against all the wicked?

Verse. 14. And it shall be as a chased Do, and as a sheep that no man takes
up: every man shall turn to his own people, and flee each one to his own
land.
He declares that outward succors shall profit the Babylonians nothing at
all: and by these similitudes, shows with what fear the soldiers shall be
seized. Now Babel did not only strengthen her self with the men of war of
her own Country, but she had strangers also under her pay. He says, they
shall all resemble little Fawnes or Does, which are very timorous beasts: and
to scattered sheep; so as they shall retire neither to their Ensigns nor
Garrisons, nor yet keep any order. And when he adds, every one shall flee to
his land; it sufficiently appears from thence, that the Prophet speaks not of
the inhabitants of Babel, nor of her people; but of strangers which had been
called to her succor. For it has been said heretofore, that the hearts of men
are so in the hands of God, that when it pleases him they suddenly recover new
strength, who were before fearful and amazed: and contrariwise, those who
have showed great valor and boldness, lose it all in an instant, and become
weak and effeminate.

Verse. 15. Every one that is found, shall be stricken through: and whosoever
joins himself, shall fall by the sword.
HE here confirms that which he said heretofore; to wit, that none shall
escape out of Babylon, and that all those which shall be therein shall perish.
Xenophon Xenophon.
tells, how by the commandment of Cyrus, Cyrus.
all those which were met withal the first night, were put to death: and the
next day, all those which had not brought in, or laid down their weapons. But
we have already said, that this prophecy has a further extent; because this
first taking was only the beginning of all other calamities, whereunto Babylon
was expressly reserved by the Lord, to the end it might be punished the more
often. Others expound the second member otherwise then I have translated it:
for in as much as Saphah signifies, To lose, or, To consume; they read,
Whosoever shall be lost; and expound this of old men, who by reason of their
age, can live no longer: as if he should say; they would not pardon, no not
even those who are already worn with age, and upon the brim of their graves,
yea when they should have one foot within as it were, and should be ready to
yield up the ghost. But because this is a constrained exposition, and that the
very same verb signifies, To be joined, I had rather follow Jonathan, Jonathan.
and others, who think the Prophet speaks of the bands and squadrons: as for
example, when a City is to be taken, the soldiers join together to beat
back the assaults of the enemies. Unless any had rather understand by these
words, the confederates and companions which were joined together with the
Babylonians, the more to amplify the greatness of this discomfiture.

Verse. 16. Their children also shall be broken in pieces before their eyes:
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.
He paintes out an image of more then barbarous cruelty. For behold the
uttermost extremity of the enemies rage; when no age whatsoever shall be
spared; when little children are slain, who should rather be defended in
regard of their young years. And yet he further amplifies the cruelty, when
he says that this shall be done in the presence of their fathers and mothers.
That which follows of the houses which shall be spoiled, and of the women
which shall be ravished, tends also to the same end: and this falls out when
the enemies having forgotten all humanity, and being inflamed with cruelty,
would yt those whom they have subdued were utterly rooted out, with their name
also.

Verse. 17. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard silver, nor be desirous of gold.
THe Prophet having prophesied the destruction of ye Babylonians, shows
therewithal also the authors; or, he rather expresses, that God shall be the
mouer of them: and therein also specifies how or by whom this work shall be
done: for he says, that he will stir up the Medes. Certainly he could not
conjecture this by any humane reason; for there was then no enmity nor
dissensions between the Medes and the Babylonians. And although there had been
discord; what was the power of the Medes then, to do the Babylonians any
harm? Seeing things were not so fitted then that the Medes could make war
with the Babylonians, it is very certain that the Prophet was inspired of God
in this matter, especially if we consider that he foretold th^se things more
then an hundred years before they came to pass. When he adds that they shall
not covet gold, nor silver, he excuses not the Medes of their ravening and
avarice, as if they should be so liberal as to despise gold and silver: but he
rather meant to say, that this war shall be so cruel and terrible, that
nothing shall be seen but a final destruction; for example, because the
special drift which the Spaniards aim at now adays when they make war, The
Spaniard.
is only to spoil and rob, they do more easily spare men's lives, and are not
so addicted to shed blood as the Almans or Englishmen be, Almans. Englishmen.
who think of nothing but killing their enemies.

Now let it not seem strange to any man that the Lord who is loving and
gracious does yet notwithstanding serve his turn of so cruel executioners: for
he works justly even by the wicked; and yet is not spotted himself with their
malice. Wherefore we must not judge of the work of God by the executioners
thereof, who are carried away with ambition, covetousness, or cruelty: but we
ought to consider therein the just vengeance of God, which the Babylonians had
well deserved, because of their wickednesses.

Verse. 18. With bows also shall they destroy the children, and shall have no
compassion upon the fruit of the womb, and their eyes shall not spare the
children.
SOme translate, They shall cut, and think that this is spoken by an excessive
manner of speech, as if they should use the children of the Babylonians in stead
of arrows, in regard they dashed them against the stones, that they might
break them with the greater violence. But I had rather take it more simply,
namely, that the cruelty of ye Medes shall be so great, that they shall not
spare so much as the little children, which notwithstanding are never touched
except it be there where they commit exceeding outrages. In a word, that
neither old nor young should be spared, as we have said erewhile. But we read
not that the Medes used any such cruelty: and Babylon was in good estate, and
flourished long time after this discomfiture: and although the seat of the
kingdom was carried thence, yet she kept her renoume still, for the very day
and night before that it was taken, there was no hurt done, except it were to
those which bare arms. In the mean while howsoever it was the Prophets
meaning to comprehend other judgments of God also which threatened the
Babylonians, and came to pass long time after this first calamity: yet is it
not without reason, neither from the purpose that he describes the manners of
barbarous nations, that so the Jews might the better understand that God had a
just recompense ready in his hand to execute upon the Babilonish tyranny. No
doubt but ye faithful also upon the ground of this promise made the
imprecation contained in the 137. Psalm, Blessed shall he be that takes thy
children and dasheth them against the stones.

Verse. 19. And Babel the glory of kingdoms, and the beauty and pride of the
Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorah.
ISaiah meant to conclude his prophecy touching the ruin of ye Babylonians in
a brief manner in this place, although he adds some amplifications to confirm
his speech touching the full rooting of them out. For the Prophets speak in
such sort of the punishments of the wicked, that they leave them no hope of
mercy wherewith they might comfort themselves. But as touching the faithful,
although it seems now and then that they should be chastened too severely, yet
are they sustained with this assurance, that the Lord will have pity upon
them, and will not utterly destroy them. Whence we ought to gather, that we
must not always judge according to the outward appearance. For we shall many
times think that the children of God are utterly undone, whose salvation
notwithstanding is near, yea even in the midst of death it self.

In Sodom and Gomorah.] Sodom and Gomorah.
This example is often alleged by the Prophets, to the end we might know that
howsoever all chastisements be not equal, yet notwithstanding in as much as
God is impartial in his judgments, the memorable example which he showed
thereof in the destruction of Sodom appertains to all reprobates: Genesis 19.24.
so as those who harden themselves in their sins with the like obstinacy,
shall be no less punished then they were. And they distinguish between the
punishments of the elect, and reprobates, in such wise, that still God left
some seed to the Israelites; but to the wicked none: as we have seen in the
first Chapter; Chap. 1.9.
If the Lord, says he, had not left us a seed, we had bin as Sodom and as
Gomorah. But he pursues the reprobate with all severity: and therefore the
Prophets threaten them with the very same ruin which happened to the
Sodomites; that is to say, an utter destruction without all hope of recovery.

He says it is the overthrow of God; to the end we should not think it came
to pass by chance, or by the will of men. For even as the fire fell not upon
Sodom and Gomorah from heaven at random; so Babylon also was not destroyed by
haphazard, but by the just vengeance of God. Which being always like unto
himself, did execute his just judgment against them, and will still do the
same against all reprobates even unto the end. Whereas Babylon is called the
glory and bright beauty of Kingdoms; No glory can withstand Gods almighty
power.
this is added for amplifications sake, to teach us, that God cannot be
hindered from performing his work by any glory or excellency whatsoever,
that he should not utterly root out the wicked. For in regard that this
destruction was incredible, therefore so much the more did an excellent example
of Gods mighty power appear in the confusion of it.

Verse. 20. It shall not be Or, sit upon.
inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelled in from generation to
generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch his tents there; neither shall the
sheepheards make their foldes there.
BY the word To sit, he signifies a firm estate; as if he should say, Never
look that Babel shall be restored any more. For all these phrases of speech
tend to one and the same end; namely, the Babylonians shall be so destroyed,
that their ruin shall be perpetual. This also he further amplifies when he
adds, that the destruction shall be so great, that the very Arabians shall
disdain to pitch their tents there, and the sheepheards their foldes. Now we
may well say that this place was become wonderful desert, and inhabitable,
seeing these vagabonds made no reckoning of it: for this nation of the Arabians
in very deed, Arabians vagabonds and thieves.
did nothing else but trot up and down, and had no settled abiding. For having
left their own Country, because it was barren; and therefore is called the
desert Arabia, (for of that we speak) and being given to nourish cattle and
to hunting, they frisked it hither and thither, and abode in the midst of the
fields; especially in places of best pasture. Thence it came that the Greeks
called them by a name which signifies dwellers in tents.

The region of Babylon was wonderful fruitful before this destruction, by
reason whereof this change was so much the more terrible, and as it were
prodigious, whether in regard that it lost the first fruitfulness, or that all
abhorred the sight of it, because of the continual calamities wherewith it was
wasted. Certain it is the Prophet declares it shall come to pass, that not
only the buildings shall be broken down, but that the land also shall be
accursed.

Verse. 21. But Ziim shall lodge there, and their houses shall be full of Ohim:
Ostriches shall dwell there, and the Satyrs shall dance there.
HE goes on in describing a desert place, and alludes to that he said before;
to wit, that Babylon should be uninhabited. I cannot well tell how this word Ziim
should be translated, in regard the opinions of the expositours are so diverse;
who agree no more in this, then they do about sundry names of beasts and
herbs. The use of these things continued not always, and the Jews being
ignorant themselves, have not the knowledge of them; although some amongst them
are not ashamed to brag of their skill in physic: and yet notwithstanding are
ignorant not only of the nature of plants, but of beasts also. Whereas some
are of opinion that Ziim, was a wild beast: others, that it should be a bird:
and some others a fourefooted beast: herein there is no great difference. For
mine own part, I make no question but the Prophet meant in this place to
speak either of wild beasts which cannot be tamed, or of birds which make
their nests in forests far remote from men. And there will be no
inconvenience in it, if we expound that which follows of Satyrs, or Fairies,
which the Frenchmen, according to the diversities of regions, in one place call
Hobgoblins, Robin good fellows; and Bugbeares in an other. For as Satan
abuses men by diverse impostures, so also he allots diverse names to every one
of these.

It is certain that the word Ziim, is sometimes taken in the Scripture for
wicked spirits: for it comes of Ziiah, which signifies dryness or desert: as
Iim comes of Aiam, which signifies fear. For in as much as the devil works
strange illusions by Fairies and Satyrs, therefore the names thereof are
attributed unto him. The Prophets drift is, to show that there should be such
desolation, that the place should not only be forsaken of men, but the evil
spirits also should work their illusions there: for by the solitariness of
the place they take occasion to terrify those which pass thereby. And look
how thieves and enemies show themselves more cruel when they come out of some
obscure place or caves: so also the devils seek for the night, darkness, and
places far remote from men's sight, to the end they may the more affright them
which are fearful and timorous of nature.

Verse. 22. And Iim shall cry in their palaces, and dragons in their pleasant
palaces: and the time thereof is ready to come, and the days thereof shall
not be prolonged.
He sets forth that which has been touched before, and shows how horrible
this change shall be; that it might appear that this shall come to pass from
the judgment of God, and not by fortune. He also amplifies it when he says,
that this shall happen not to houses, but to pleasant palaces. The shortness of
time whereof he speaks here, may be referred to the first destruction; yet so,
as it was requisite that the expectation of the faithful should be held the
longer in suspense. I have told you that Babylon was not so quickly
ouerturned; and that the discomfiture made by the Medes, was not so great that
the City might therefore be compared to a desert. He says then, that the
destruction thereof shall shortly come; the beginnings whereof were seen soon
ofter, for the Jews were to content themselves, in regard that this vengeance
upon Babylon was not promised them in vain.

The holy Ghost in like manner is wont to prevent our heat and hastiness, A
just reproof of our impatiency.
because we would have God execute his judgments out of hand, and should
chastise the wicked as soon as we think good. But he only knows the fit
season, which yet we are impatient in waiting for, by reason of the boiling of
our passions. The meditation of Gods eternity, the best bridle to curb our
impatiency.
But if we could meditate of his euerlastingnesse, we should easily bridle
this over great hastiness by patience: but because we have much ado to hold
in our importunity, God does somewhat incline unto us, showing that he will
come by and by. And yet let us not judge of the shortness of the time, We must
not judge of this shortness of time according to our carnal reason.
according to our reason: but let us lift up our hearts to heaven, and despise
the days of this life. Above all, let us learn to stoop as soon as we begin
to see the judgments of God coming toward us, yea though it be in the least
measure: although he defer the execution of them for a long time. The second
member is immediately added for a confirmation; to wit, that the days of
Babylon shall not be prolonged: as if he should say; The Lord has appointed a
day, so as none shall be able to make truce any longer.

THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. For the Lord will have compassion of Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel, and cause them to rest in their own land: and the stranger shall join
himself unto them; and they shall clean to the house of Jacob.
BEcause the particle Ci, has diverse significations, we may conioyne this
verse with the former, thus; But yet the Lord will have pity upon Zion: and so
it should show how much the condition of the Church differs from that which
he described before. But I had rather take it for a particle rendering the
cause; and that indeed agrees best to this place, as in many other texts: so as
the sense shall be this; God shall destroy Babylon, because he shall have
compassion of Jacob; whom he can neither despise nor reject. Whence we
perceive, that the Prophet has endeavored hitherto, to assuage the sorrow of
this poor people; to the end they might learn to be of good comfort in those
their afflictions, which God would at Note this consolation.
From hence we may gather a sweet consolation, when we see that God thus
gouernes all the world for our salvation. For all things aim to this end, that
the elect may be saved; and not overwhelmed by any changes how many soever
befall the^. mercy and compassion ceased to be in God for a time? We must
distinguish between faith^ apprehension, and experience.
Thus then we must distinguish between the understanding or knowledge of
faith, and experience: for whilst the signs of Gods indignation appear on
all sides, in regard that (according to the judgment of the flesh) we think
he is angry; so his grace is hidden from us: yet faith

He will yet choose Israel] (says he. Gods election etern^ll.
) The election of God is eternal: for he chooses us not, as if he thought not
on it before: and even as we were chosen before the foundations of the world,
so does he never repent himself of the same his election, Ephesians. 1.4. Romans
11.29. But when the Lord corrects his children, this has in it some appearance
of reiection, as we may gather from the ordinary complaints of the faithful:
Psalm 7.4.1
Lord why have thou put us away for ever? Why is thy wrath kindled against the
sheep of thy pasture? Psalm. 74.1. For we apprehend the election or reiection of
God according to our infirmity, We often measure Gods affection toward us by
his outward work. Our vocation a confirmation of our election. How God is said
to elect, and reject us.
and measure his affection toward us by the outward work, (I speak of that
knowledge which proceeds from experience, which is corrected by the light of
faith.) And therefore when the Lord calls us, that is to say, when he
confirms his election, it is said he chooses us; and contrariwise that he
reiects us, when he shows us any evident sign of his indignation. See then
how we are to understand this verse, to wit, that although the Lord should so
sharply correct his people as if he meant to cast them off, yet
notwithstanding he will show in the end by the effects, and will give them to
know that he has elected them, when he shall give sufficient testimony
thereof, and shall take compassion upon them.

Now we may easily collect that which I said erewhile, to wit, that there is
great difference between the chastisements which the faithful endure, Great
difference between the chastisements of the elect, and those wherewith the
reprobate are visited. Note.
and those wherewith the reprobates are visited. For the faithful bethink
themselves forthwith of their election, whereby they take heart of grace: but
the unbelievers see nothing but thick darkness, bottomless gulfes, and fearful
confusion on all sides. As soon then as the Lord corrects us, let us by and by
call to mind this difference, to the end we may confirm our hearts in the hope
of an happy issue.

When he speaks of their return into their own land, he therein sets before
them a sign of grace and reconciliation: for the land of Canaan was a pledge
of adoption to the children of Abraham. The land of Canaan a pledge of adoption
to Abraham's posterity.


And the stranger shall join himself with them.] He prophesies of the calling
of ye Gentiles, as if he should have said, The Lord will not Canaan, but will
also enrich them with a great increase: A prophecy touching the calling of the
Gentiles.
for he will join the Gentiles with them, that of two peoples there may be
made but one only body. This benefit then is not to be referred to a few
days, but appertains to the whole Church, which God promises to set at rest
in a sure place. For the Prophet speaks not only of the Church of that time,
but of that also which should be before, and under the kingdom of Christ,
otherwise this addition should be improper.

Verse. 2. And the people shall receive them and bring them to their own place,
and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for
servants and handmaides, and they shall take them prisoners whose captives they
were, and have rule over their oppressors.
HE shows that the strangers shall willingly accompany the Jews, and that
in such sort, that they shall not refuse to become their servants. We have
seen the proof of this when the people came out of Babylon, Ezra 1.6. but
this was only a small taste of those things which were done by Jesus Christ,
to whom all this must be referred. For the Lord in deed inclined the hearts of
the nations which hated his people deadly, to be loving to them whom he meant
to restore to their country and liberty by their means: but so far was it
off that many nations helped the Jews after their return from Babylon, that
contrariwise the neighbors through envy conspired one with another to molest
them. Ezra 4.4. For they were not only bent against them to drive them out of
the land of Canaan, but also to root them from off the earth. These things
then were accomplished under the kingdom of Christ, to whom all power is given
not only in earth, but in heaven also, Math. 28.18. who by his Gospel has
united the Gentiles with the Jews, which before were strangers, Ephesians. 2.14.
to the end they might not only help the Jews to take possession of their
inheritance, but also to bring them under so, as to bear the yoke quietly and
willingly.

And hereunto appertains that which he adds of servants and handmaides: Exodus
4.22.
for seeing the Jews are the first borne in the house of God, we which are
joined unto them seem to have bin assembled as it were under their hand,
because they were before us, The Jews might hold the honor of the first born
still in the house of God if their own ingratitude deprived them not of it.
and obtained the first place before all other nations: which honor they might
hold even at this day, if by their own frowardnes and ingratitude they
deprived not themselves of such a dignity; and yet their unthankfulness did not
let the Lord to effect that which he here promises. For the Apostles who were
Jews, subdued strange nations by the word of God; yea even those which in
times past held them prisoners, and to whom they paid tribute, to wit, the
Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians, and at last the Roman Empire, so as all the
Gentiles might justly be called their heritage, although they would not reign
over them, The Apostles meant not to reign by their conquest, but to win men
to God.
but win them to God, that so together they might acknowledge one Lord and
Prince. This then ought to be referred to the yoke and government of Christ
whereunto the Jews subdued the Gentiles, and not to a worldly kingdom and
rule, as the Jews falsely imagine.

Verse. 3. And in that day shall the Lord give thee rest from thy sorrow, and
from thy fear, and from the sore bondage wherein thou did serve.

4. Then shall thou take up this proverb against the king of Babel, and say,
How has the oppressor ceased? and the gold-thirstie Babel rested?


He adds a confirmation to the former promises: God will pr^u^ the
stedfastnes of our faith in p^omising us salu^tion, and in the mean while
withholding from us all hope of obtaining the same.
and thus God uses to provide for our weakness, because it is very hard for
us to give credit to his word; but especially then when things are troubled.
And yet the Lord will this way prove the steadfastness of our faith, when he
cease not to promise us salvation, and yet all hope thereof shall be quite
and clean cut off from us. He confirms this with many words, that so casting
off all doubt, we should not cease to rest our selves upon his gracious free
promises, how desperate so ever things seem to be. And herewithall also he
exhorts the Jews to acknowledge, and never to forget so excellent and
memorable a work of God. Now of set purpose he makes express mention of the
yoke and bondage; thereby to teach the Jews, that the Lord would take away all
these impediments when it pleased him; and that nothing should let him to
deliver his people, as soon as he saw occasion. We are in these times to ^pply
this doct^in^ to our uses.
Let us apply this doctrine to our use now, even in this miserab^e servitude
and vile bondage of Antichrist, under whom poor Christians are holden. For
albeit they be environed and enclosed on al sides in his nets and snares, yet
have they God for their deliverer, who will easily overcome all manner of
difficulties and impediments. And this may also be refer^ed to all vexations,
miseries, and troubles.

Moreover, by the word proverb, or, parable, (for amongst the Hebrews it
signifies grave sentences, high and worthy of note) he shows that this
destruction of Babylon shall be so great, that men shall make a proverb of it:
which they are wont to do in great and wonderful things. This word how, is an
interrogation proceeding from a taunting manner of astonishment: for it was
incredible that Babylon (furnished with such abundance of riches and strength)
could be overthrown, and fall into the hands of her enemies. He justly mockes
then at their vain and foolish confidence, in regard that being puffed up with
their intolerable pride, they thought themselves invincible and out of all
danger. But it seems contrary to the modesty of the faithful, to mock at
the misery of others: a man would think they should rather have compassion on
them. To scorn the wicked is not against modesty, when our zeal is ordered
therein acco^ding to the equity of Gods judgments. Psalm. 2.4.
But this is not against mod^stie, when our zeal is ordered according to the
equity of Gods judgment: for by humane affection, we may bewail the misery
of those who perish through their own folly; and yet the^ewithall despise
their pride and fury. And even as the Lord exalts himself against them,
scorning their beastliness; so also he does in this place command us (which
love and desire his glory) to contemn them not after a proud and insulting
manner, but as magnifying and extolling his goodness and power. By this example
then it is lawful for us to scoff at Gods enemies, when they are overthrown
and abased: as at Antichrist, whose power we daily see to decay by little and
little.

The word Madheuah, which is put in the end of the verse, may be translated
gilt, or of gold: but because this word is conjoined with tyrant, or exactor,
it is very like the Prophet speaks of the covetousness and insatiable desire
of gold, which the Babylonians thirsted after. For it often comes to pass,
that how much the more, great Empires, Commonwealths, and nations have of
riches, so much the more do they burn with lust of increasing and having.

Verse. 5. The Lord has broken the rod of the wicked, and the scepter of the
rulers,

6. Which smote the people in anger with a continual plague, and ruled the
Nations in wrath: if any were persecuted, he did not let.


HE now answers to the former interrogation, and would not that the faithful
should any way doubt of the event thereof, but rather that they should stand
astonished at such admirable works of God. For the interrogation served to
awaken up their minde^ to the greater attention. It is as much then as if he
should have said; It came not to pass by chance, or by any blind passion of
fortune, that you were not still oppressed under a continual bondage, but you
are wholly to attribute it to the providence of God, who brake so sore a yoke
of servitude from off your necks. Now the wicked are at their wits end when
they Gods wor^^ ought diligently to be observed, but especially in the
redemption of his Church.
but especially then when he manif^sts his power in the redemption of his
Church; when by his admirable strength, he redeemes any one of us: from under
the servitude of the devil, the tyranny of Antichrist, and from eternal
death. For these are no common works; and therefore we may not in any sort
attribute the same to the power of man, or to any other causes whatsoever. He
ioynes the scepter of the rulers, to the staff of the wicked; showing by this
repetition, that an unjust tyranny cannot be established by a power imperial in
any sort whatsoever. Then by and by after, he more clearly shows, that the
Monarchy of the Babylonians shall be abolished, because it was unjust and
tyrannical; and says, that the people were smitten with an incurable wound,
and extremely afflicted, because they ouerflowed in all excessive dissolutions.
By this we are admonished, that howsoever God may seem to wink at the tyranny
of the wicked for a time, yet that he will spare them never the more for all
that in the latter end, for they shall be destroyed even as we know Babylon
was, because the Lord is just, and continues always like himself.

Verse. 7. The whole world is at rest and is quiet: they sing for joy.

8. Also the fur trees rejoiced of thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
since thou art laid down, no hewer came up against us.


Here he shows how Tyrants are hateful to all the world, Tyrants hateful to
all the world.
for they are no sooner dead or destroyed, but all leap for joy, showing what
affection they carried toward them, which for fear before they dissembled.
Then shall you see men utter forth their discontentments and hatreds: and not
men only discover their joy, but even the dumb creatures also, as the Prophet
adds afterward, speaking of the fur trees, and cedars, by way of
amplification; for as all things are ouerturned and perverted by tyranny, so
also it being abolished, it seems all things are put into their perfect estate
again.

Now to the end the speech might have the greater vehemency, he adds a figure
called Prosopopeia, by which he brings in trees speaking and rejoicing, that
they shall stand quietly now this tyrant is dead. So then ye Prophets drift is
to show that the heavenly Judge can not endure tyrants always to vsurp, God
will not always suffer Tyrants to vsurp.
whom all the world detests and hates. Whence we may gather, that albeit men be
silent, and dare not open their lips whilst tyrants bear sway, yet the Lord
notwithstanding hears their secret groans and complaints. Let us not wonder
then if tyrants be cut off by such admirable means; for it is necessary that
God who is privy to all the outrages which they commit, should favor and
assist the innocent.

Verse. 9. Hell beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming, raising
up the dead for thee, even all the princes of the earth, and has raised from
their thrones all the kings of the nations.
EVen as before he attributed gladness to Trees, so now also by the same manner
of speaking he attributes speech to the dead. For he brings them as it were
out of their graves, to the end they should deride the pride of this tyrant;
and all the words following are nothing else in a manner but most pleasant
taunts and flouts. For when great kings approach near a place, people tremble;
they go before and receive them with great pomp and preperations: so Isaiah
faines that the dead shall go before this tyrant, who after his death shall
descend into his sepulcher, that they may do him homage, but yet such as to him
appertains. Which is as much as if he should say, His death shall not only be
acceptable to the living, but to the dead also, so as they shall receive him
honorably according to his deserts.

Verse. 10. All they shall cry and say unto thee, Art thou become weak also as
we? Art thou become like us?
BEhold what taunts the dead shall utter against this tyrant, when he shall be
in their company; as if they asked a reason of him, why he also is dead as
well as others. And therefore the Prophet being astonished with the novelty of
such a thing, brings in the dead enquiring thereof with admiration, as of a
thing utterly incredible. For tyrants are so blinded with their greatness, that
they think themselves no mortal creatures, but make themselves half gods,
and worship themselves. For this cause it is well enough perceived after their
death, that their condition differed in nothing from other men; howsoever they
thought themselves exempted out of their rank.

According to this sense, the dead reproach him with a wonderful nipping
derision, in saying, that he is made like unto them: because death only gives
us to know (as the satyrike Poet speaks) how weak a thing the body of man
is. David also speaking of Princes, See Chap. 5. verse. 9. sect. 2.
and of their dignity, says thus; I have said you are Gods: yet must you die
like men, and fall like one of the people: Psalm. 82.6, 7. For the bodies of
Princes must needs be eaten and consumed with worms at the last; although
sumptuous and glorious sepulchers be prepared for such kind of persons.

Verse. 11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the sound of thy viols:
the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.
HE mentions the royal pomp, to the end one might more diligently note this
mutation, when they should compare the former things with the latter: and thus
shows that nothing could let this tyrant from being brought into a like estate
with others. Under the instruments of music, he comprehends all pleasures
and voluptuousness, wherein Kings are wont to take delight: because by the
sweet harmony thereof, they not only forget death, but also by these mixed
sounds, all cares are driven away; so as their minds are somewhat intoxicate
therewith.

In the second part of the verse, the dead do pleasantly say unto him; Thou
have a bed fit for thee. For in stead of tapestrie, or a soft pillow, thou have
mothes; and for a sumptuous couerlet, thou have worms. To be short, we have
here a lively image of men's foolish confidence, who being besotted with the
present prosperity and peaceable estate of their affairs, rejoice and cheer
up themselves. This doctrine ought to be diligently observed: for howsoever men
know well enough what their condition is, and have death still before their
eyes; yet are they so dulled with ambition, and tickled with pleasures, yea
bewitched with vain glory, that they utterly forget themselves.

Verse. 12. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning! and
cut down to the ground, Or, which weaknedst men.
which did cast lots upon the nations?
ISaiah continues the matter which he began before in the person of the dead;
and concludes, that this tyrant differs in nothing from others, although by all
his flatteries he endeavored to persuade himself that he was some god. He
uses an elegant similitude in comparing him to the star of the morning;
calling him the son of the twilight, and that because of his excellency and
glory, which made him shine far above all others. Whereas some have expounded
this place of Satan, they have done it ignorantly: for the scope of the text
does sufficiently show, that it should be understood of the King of Babylon.
But when men snatch up places of Scripture at random, and consider not the
coherence of the text, we need not marvel if we often meet with so many
errors. And yet was it a more absurd blockishnesse, when they made Lucifer the
prince of devils; making folks believe, that the Prophet gave him this name.
But for as much as such inventions have no color at all; let us leave them for
fables as we found them.

The expositours have been deceived in the second member of the verse, in
translating the Hebrew particle in the passive signification, saying, Thou art
weakened; seeing it is in the active signification. Notwithstanding, because
the verb whence it is derived, signifies to cast the lot; and that the
particle Sur, is joined therewith, this sense agrees well, that this tyrant
divided all regions by lot, as the Lord and Master of them, and drew them to
himself, as if they had appertained to his succession. And yet I reject not
the other exposition; namely, that he weakened the people.

Verse. 13. Yet thou said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, and exalt
my throne above besides the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of
the Or, covenant.
Congregation of God Or, in the sides of the north. This phrase To say,
expounded.
.
THis must be joined to that which went before. To say, in this place is taken
to resolve in himself; according to the Hebrew phrase. For he derides the
pride of the Babylonian, who resting upon his greatness, durst be so bold as
to promise himself continual happiness; even as if it had been in his power
to bring the events of things to pass at his pleasure. Wherein we have a
fair looking glass to behold the foolish pride wherewithal the wicked are
puffed up; which also sometimes they are not ashamed to vomit forth. Neither
must we here consider the person of one tyrant only, but the damnable fury
of all the wicked, which make their conclusions in secret, no otherwise then if
they were able to dispose of all things according to their own fantasy. Whose
plots S. James describes in lively colors; We will go into such a City, say
they, we will buy, and sell, and get gain: and yet in the mean while, they
know not what shall come to pass to morrow: Iam. 4.13. They never think they
are under Gods hand; but have this sottish conceit, that they will do all
things by their own strength. I grant that this brag, I will ascend into
heaven, and that which follows also, is so absurd, as it seems impossible how
it could come out of the mouth of a mortal man: but in regard it was not the
Prophets meaning to set down the speeches of Nebuchadnezzar, word for word,
let it suffice us to consider the thing it self. For to speak the truth,
whosoever he be that attributes more unto himself then the condition of men
can bear, he exalts himself against God, as the Giants did, of whom the
proverb speaks: whence it follows, that all their devises shall come to
confusion. But especially he, who passing beyond the bounds of his calling,
prouokes the Lord against him by his boldness. And therefore let every one of
us content himself with his estate, and not desire to be mounting up aloft:
but let us rather continue in that degree wherein God has placed us. Indeed if
God reach out his hand unto any, and lift him higher, he may go further: but he
ought to usurp nothing to himself, nor to clime up thereunto of his own
head. And concerning those who are exalted unto high degree and dignity, they
ought to carry themselves humbly and modestly; not feinedly, but with such
meekness of spirit, as if they were not exalted at all.

Besides, we may sufficiently see wherefore the Prophet accuses this tyrant
of Babylon particularly of such outrage, and also what the scope is to which
these figurative speeches do aim, the rather by those that follow, to wit,
that he desired to mount into the mountain of the testimony, and by such
pride to make himself equal with God. For howsoever he made these discourses
after the ordinary manner of men, that he was able to conquer the Jews, yet
because he despised the help of God, under which they shrouded themselves, as
he had often heard tell, it was as much as if he had conspired to overthrow the
heavens. Now in stead of the mount of Zion, he puts the sides of the north,
which description is also contained in the 48. Psalm. The mountain of Zion in
the sides of the north, is the city of the great King. He called it before the
mountain of the testimony, which title is drawn from the verb Iaad, which
signifies, to unite, to agree, and make peace. And therefore Moed signifies
peace, covenant, and day prefixed. Lastly, it may be referred to time, place,
and persons. But I had rather take it here for covenant, or agreement. For the
Lord speaking of the Tabernacle of the covenant in Exodus, says, I will there
make appointment with you. Exodus 25.21.22.29.42. We must not think then that
he speaks here of an assembly of men, as when the profane meet in fayres or
in their feast days: but that the Lord meant there to show a sign of his
presence, and to ratify his covenant; which we ought diligently to observe,
because this condemns the sacrilege of this wicked king, who rather fought
against y^ very heavens, then against an earthly place.

Verse. 14. I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and will be like the
most high.
A Man would marvel that the Prophet does thus accuse the king of Babylon, as
if he would be check-mate with God, seeing that (as we have said) such a
thought could not once enter into any man's heart, but that he must needs quake
and tremble for fear. For even as there is in us some seed of religion by
nature, so also are we constreined in despite of our teeth to bear some
reverence to this divinity, which we think to be the most excellent above all
things. And there is no man so senseless that would imagine to cast God out of
his throne, because we are all taught by nature rather to honor and worship
God. And therefore howsoever the heathens knew him not, yet notwithstanding
they worshipped their Idols. Thus we may imagine, it was not likely that the
king of Babylon meant to drive God our of heaven, and to reign there himself.
Yet does not the Prophet accuse him without cause: for although the ungodly
resolve not to reign in Gods stead, yet notwithstanding they fight against him
when they exalt themselves more then they ought; hereby attributing that to
themselves which is proper unto him: which is as much in effect, as if they
meant to pluck him out of his seat. And what did satan else when he deceived
the first man? You (says he) shall be as gods. Genesis 3.5. Therefore all such as
dare attribute more to themselves then God permits, do lift up themselves no
otherwise then if they meant to proclaim open war against him; for where
pride gets the masterie, Where pride gets the masterie, there the contempt of
God must needs follow.
there of necessity must be the contempt of God.

And thus also we may note that which we have touched before, to wit, that this
tyrant bent himself of set purpose against God as it were in rushing himself
against the Church which is his holy heritage. Seeing then that he violated the
heavenly Sanctuary, this ought not to seem any excessive manner of speech
unto us. Now from hence we observe a doctrine full of consolation: for we are
taught that the wicked do arm themselves even against God, The wicked arm
themselves against God, is often as they set themselves against his Church.
as often as they set themselves against his Church. This king here is not
accused for lifting himself above the Angels, but for indeuoring to ouerwhelme
the Church of God. Now the service of God at this day is not shut up in any
certain place, but is spread thorowout the whole world. In what part soever
then the name of God is called upon, if there any tyrant do purpose or practice
the destruction of the faithful, let us know that such a one sets not himself
so much against men, as against God, who will not long endure the proud so to
make war upon him. We shall find the like example hereafter in Senacherib,
of whom the Prophet says, that in threatening and offering violence to Zion,
Chap. 36.18.19.20. and 37.4.6.17.
he did it to God himself. Let us therefore be assured that we are so under
the protection of God, that whosoever does us wrong, shall have God for his
enemy. He that hurts you (says the Lord) hurts the apple of mine eye. He that
wrongs any member of Christ, may assure himself to have God for his enemy.
Zach. 2.8. He also testifies that he dwells in the midst of the Church, Psalm.
46.5. so as none can assail it but he must bear the first brunt. He will then
surely take vengeance of all the wrongs which the Church indures, although he
suffer it to be afflicted for a time.

Verse. 15. But thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the
pit.
HE has heretofore showed, how it was the King of Babel that enterprised to
set his seat above the clouds. And now he opposes an event quite contrary;
to wit, the sides of the pit, or cave, that is to say, some corner of the
sepulcher into which he should be cast. For he said before, that this tyrant
would ascend above the mountain of Zion in the sides of the north, because the
place on this side was high above the rest. Now he takes this word sides in a
contrary sense, as if he should say, that he shall be put in the most
contemptible place of the pit or sepulcher, even as when a man thrusts one into
some dark or by-corner. For if so be a sepulcher be large and spacious, they
desire to lay the honorablest personage in the midst of it: but he says, that
this fellow shall be cast into some hole, or into the sides that shall be left
empty. See how the Lord scorns the pride of the wicked from an high, so as
when they shall have devoured all by their covetousness, and pierced the clouds
and the heavens with their pride, yet will he expose them to derision at the
length, having ouerturned all their enterprises eue^ in less then the
twinkling of an eye.

Verse. 16. They that see thee shall look upon thee and consider thee, saying,
Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, and that did shake the
kingdoms?
THe Prophet scorns this wicked king again in the person of the dead, and yet
this may also be understood of the living: but it is better to refer this
whole speech to the dead; unless we had rather understand it of the sepulcher,
which is almost all one in effect. Now we are wont to stretch forth our neck,
and to stand upon the tipto when any admirable or rare thing is presented to
our view. So in regard it was a thing almost incredible that this king
furnished with so great power should be dead, the Prophet says, that all have
cast their eyes upon him to behold him diligently, as if they could hardly
believe that to be true which they saw evidently before them. They ask in the
first made the world to tremble with his look only, could be so suddenly and
easily brought low. Next, the Prophet shows how all his wicked Athanasius
used, See Martin Luther upon the Psalm ^f degrees. fol. 33.
when some threatened him with the fury of Julian. Now the Prophet shows that
this change came from the hand of God, who by his only will can overthrow the
whole world.

Verse. 17. He made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the Cities
thereof, and opened not the house of his prisoners.
IN this verse he expresses the cruelty and wilderness, rased the Those who
have obtained victory, have been accustomed sometimes to release their
prisoners, that they might win their hearts by gentleness: Tyrants had rather
be feared then loved.
but Tyrants had rather be feared then loved: because they persuade
themselves, that the only safe way to reign, is to make themselves feared of
all, through a brutish cruelty. We need not wonder then at their so miserable
and woeful an end: for it cannot be but God must render them like for like;
after he has corrected his Church by their cruelty, showing no more mercy to
them, then they did to others. Thus then he shows how miserable Tyrants are,
in regard they have both God and men their enemies.

Verse. 18. All the Kings of the Nations, even they all sleep in glory, every
one in his own house.

19. But thou art cast out of the grave like an abominable branch: like the
raiment of those that are slain, and thrust through with a sword, which go
down to the stones of the pit, as a carkase trodden under feet.


He opposes the King of Babylon against other Kings; to show that he shall
be more wretched after his death, then they all. And thus he amplifies the
judgment of God (who should execute vengeance upon the cruelties done to his
Church) by comparison. This place is the cause why I dare not restrain that
which Isaiah speaks here of the King of Babylon, to the only person of
Nebuchadnezzer: because we find not by histories, that he was deprived of
burial. Although the Jews tell, how Euil-merodath commanded he should be
taken out of his sepulcher, because the great Lords of his kingdom durst not
do him homage, till they were certain of the death of his father. But S.
Jerome, howsoever he be credulous enough in other things, yet holds this as a
fable. He speaks not then of one man particularly, 2. These. 2.
but of the whole Kingdom: even as when the Scripture speaks of Antichrist,
it comprehends the estate of all the Popes. And therefore he scorns the pride
of all Tyrants, under the person of one, testifying what their issue shall be;
to wit, that they shall fall into such misery, that not so much as a small
handful of dust shall be given them for their burial: howsoever in times past
they were like insatiable gulfes, whom all the wealth in the world was not able
to satisfy. Those which have scarce one foot of land, have notwithstanding the
honor of burial; and this was esteemed sacred and inviolable above all things
among the Patriarks: for it was a great dishonor to be deprived of this
privilege. Yet he shows that the Kings of Babylon should receive such an
opprobie, that being cast out of the sepulcher of their fathers, they should be
a spectacle of disdain unto all.

First of all then let us consider why burial was so esteemed among all
Nations. Doubtless this came from the Patriarks, whose bodies the Lord
commanded to be buried, in hope of the last resurrection. The carkases of
beasts are cast out, The reason why we are buried, and beasts are not.
because they are ordained to none other end but to turn to rottenness: but
our bodies are covered with earth, that being laid up therein, they may wait
for the last day; at which time they shall be raised up to enjoy the soul in
an eternal and blessed life.

Whereas diverse superstitions are crept in touching the burial of the dead, it
is certain that Satan has brought this to pass by his subtletie; who is wont
to corrupt and peruent all things, which yet in their own nature are good and
profitable: for he has forged infinite ways whereby to bewitch men. But
concerning the Jews, we are not to marvel if they had many ceremonies in
this behalf, neither ought we to condemn them for it: for they had not so
clear and manifest a revelation of the resurrection, because Christ was not
yet revealed. But the matter is far otherwise now, seeing we behold our
resurrection in Jesus Christ app^rently, and the veil being taken away, we
now see the promises as in the sunshine, which were obscure to the Jews. If at
this day then any would bring in and revive the ancient ceremonies; such a one
should suppress the light, and do great wrong unto Jesus Christ: for, they
endeavor to put a veil before him, who has discovered himself unto us with
open face. Notwithstanding it is not unprofitable to regard the interring of
the corpse, Burial of the dead ought to be retained, but superstitious customs
therein to be rejected. The cause why some are left unburied.
because it is a witness of the last resurrection, which we yet wait for. But
we ought utterly to reject all such superstitions, and pomp of funerals; which
indeed every faithful man should abhor.

But if any be left unburied, we must consider the cause. For many Prophets,
Martyrs, and holy personages have been deprived of burial. We hear how the
Church complains, that the bodies of Gods servants were cast out to the beasts
and birds, and that there was none to bury them: Psalm. 79.2. And we daily
behold how they burn, drown, and hang the servants of Jesus Christ, whose
death notwithstanding is precious and blessed in Gods sight. Psalm. 116.15
For even as the Cross of our Lord was blessed; so also the gibbets, bands,
chains and deaths which his members endure do partake of this blessing, yea,
and that in such wise, that they far surmount the felicity, decking-maiestie,
and pomp of all the kings of the earth: so as according to S. Paul's example,
they may boldly glory in these afflictions. Romans 5.3. 2. Cor. 12.9. Gal. 6.14.
Moreover, albeit we can see nothing but a sign of Gods wrath upon those whom
he depriues of burial, yet must we have our recourse to the former, and such
sentences.

Iere. 22.19.
Now as Jeremiah threatened Ioachim that he should be buried as an ass, because
he deserved rather to be laid with the brute beasts then with men, who after
death are separated from the condition of beasts by means of burial: even so,
in as much as this Babylonian had exalted himself above all, it was good
reason he should be dejected beneath all, so as his body might remain without
burial. Isaiah then foretells that this tyrant shall not be buried in his
house, that is to say, in the Sepulcher of his ancesters and predecessors: for
we must not think that the Sepulchers were within the houses. The similitudes
which are conioined do further express the just ignominy of this tyrant: for,
as hurtful and unprofitable trees are plucked up by the roots, so he shows
that the king of Babylon was not worthy to remain among men. Afterward, he
compares him to the garments of the slain, because those which die in battle
are not buried according to the accustomed manner, but as bloody and stinking
carrions trodden under feet are tumbled into the pit clothes and all, lest they
should infect the air with their smell. Neither will any man offer to touch
clothes defiled with blood and mire, for fear of drawing some infection from
them. Now we can not affirm that this happened to the kings of Babylon, yet no
question but it was fulfilled, neither ought we to doubt any thing at all of it.

Verse. 20. Thou shall not be joined with them in the grave, because thou have
destroyed thine own land, and slain thine own people: the seed of the wicked
shall not be renoumed for ever.
NOw he shows the reason why the king of Babylon is unworthy of burial, to
wit, because he which had destroyed his own land, was neither worthy to be
received into it, nor covered therewith. For even as the earth sustaines us
whilst we live, so also does it cover us being dead, and keeps us in her
bowels unto the coming of Jesus Christ. It is then a just punishment of
cruelty when she refuses to receive those into her bosom that have offered
her violence, and defiled her. He yet adds a more fearful threat, to wit,
that God will pour out the remainder of his plagues upon the successors. Yet
when he says, The seed of the wicked shall not be renoumed for ever, we may
expound this member two ways, either that the race of the wicked always, for
it is either referred to the time past, or to come. To seed of the wicked have
borne sway for a while, yet the memory thereof is vanished and gone in the
end. In the time to come, thus, God will race of the wicked, that there shall
be no more mention of them. Now it is usual with the Lord to curse the seed of
the wicked; Psalm. 112.6. Prou. 10.7. Psalm. 34.16.
as on the contrary he blesses the offspring of the faithful. And even as the
memory of the just indures for ever, so also does it follow of necessity that
the remembrance of the wicked should be utterly extinct and abolished. Now
howsoever we see not these things fulfilled with our bodily eyes, yet have we
ample and pregnant testimonies for it, whereby the truth of the doctrine is
sufficiently confirmed unto us.

But we are now to observe the reason of this vengeance, to wit, the Lord will
hereby punish the pride of reprobates who will needs advance their names, and
leave a perpetual renoume thereof behind them: and hereunto tend all the
counsels, enterprises, and endeavors of profane men. Contrariwise, the Lord
blots out their name and memory, which yet seemed to be engraven in
everlasting monuments. Thus it comes to pass that they are not only exposed to
contempt, but every one detests and abhors them. Which in conclusion befalles
all tyrants, for howsoever they be flattered and applauded of all whilst they
live, Tyrants flattered of all whilst they live, but being dead, they are
detested of all.
yet are they and all their posterity held in vile estimation when they are
dead and gone. And thus it appears they are detestable to God, Angels, and men.

Verse. 21. Prepare a slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their
fathers: let them not rise up nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the
world with Or, Cities.
enemies.
Here Isaiah prophesies against the king of Babylon in plainer terms then
heretofore. Now we must remember what I have said already, to wit, that
hitherunto he has not spoken of one particular man only, but of the whole
kingdom: and now he also takes away the ambiguitie of this manner of speech.
Whereas the old translation has it, Prepare his sons to the slaughter, it
comes not near enough, to the right sense, for the letter Lamed being put
before ye word sons, shows it should be translated, Prepare a slaughter for
his sons. Now let us see to whom this speech is directed, for we must of
necessity understand that he here covertly speaks to certain officers,
sergeants, or executioners, whom God commands to prepare themselves for the
execution of his judgment. And who are they? partly the Medes and Persians, as
also others, by whom Babylon was rased to the foundation. It was not utterly
destroyed when the Persians took it (as we have said before.) Thus then he
speaks to those whom God had ordained in his scret counsel to destroy
Babylon. This phrase of speech has greater vehemency in it then if he had
barely said, The slaughter is prepared: for he shows that God not only
disposes of that which the wicked are to do, but that he also has
executioners at his commandment, to avenge himself upon their iniquities.

the iniquity of the fathers shall be punished by means hereof: it may at the
first seem over severe, to couple the children with the fathers, as touching
the punishment which the fathers have deserved, and ought to bear. And yet
seems it to be more hard, that the punishment due to the fathers should be
extended to the children, and their childrens children. But this absurdity may
easily be avoided, Ans. Exodus 20 5. and 34 7. Deuteronomy. 5.9. Ier. 32.18. Ezekiel.
18.20.
if we interpret the Hebrew word Aon. Misery: because it signifies as well the
punishment of the sin, as the sin it self. But because such sentences are
found in many places of the Scripture; to wit, that God will visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children: we need seek no such evasion.
Neither does the place in Ezechiel; The son shall not bear the iniquity of
his father: Ezech. 18.20. cross this. For God punishes not the innocent:
neither must we so understand this place, as if the punishment due to the
ancestors, were conveyed over by God unto the children, altogether guiltless:
for the fault of the children is forthwith coupled therewithal.

But leaving now to speak of that universal curse of all mankind, whereunto
all of us are subject from our mothers wombes; let us take an example from some
wicked one; whom when God reiects with his whole race, truly we have no cause
at all to complain of it. For his blessing is free: and it is not lawful for
us to compel him to bestow it equally upon all: because he may dispose of his
grace according to his own good pleasure; and it is the duty of every of us
apart, to acknowledge, that whatsoever good thing we have received, it is none
of our own properly nor naturally, but comes unto us from elsewhere; namely,
from Gods free libealirty. If so be then that he reject any, must it not also
needs follow, that his seed should be accursed? For what can remain in
those which are destitute of his grace, but a mass of impiety? And if they
deserve eternal death, much more are they worthy of temporal punishments: for
he who expects the cutting off of his head, ought much more to judge himself
worthy of the prison and stripes. We must observe this point diligently. For I
hold the solution of those but childish, who think the Lord punishes the
children of the wicked with temporal punishments, because of the iniquities of
their fathers: thinking it not unbeseeming for the Lord to correct those that
are innocent. Now we know he never punishes such as have not deserved it:
besides, he is naturally inclined to mercy. But how should he spare the wicked,
if he should exercise his wrath against the guiltless? This then must be held
as a thing resolved; to wit, that all such as are destitute of Gods grace, are
subject to the judgment of eternal death. Whence it follows, that the
children of reprobates, whom the curse of God pursues, are subject to the same
condemnation with their fathers. And therefore Isaiah speaks not of innocent
children, but of the lost and desperate; which, it may be, have surpassed their
fathers in wickedness: and therefore are justly coupled with them, and
adjudged to the same punishments with them; because they have walked in their
steps. But some may say, that then they bear their own punishment; and not
that which their fathers have deserved. I grant this to be true in part: but
the reiection began before in their fathers; for which cause they are also
forsaken and cast away of God. And yet their fault is not so particular as if
they were not guilty at all; but being inwrapped in the same sins in regard
of reprobation, they are also liable to the same miseries and punishment. I
know well enough that this solution will not satisfy those who never cease to
dispute and braule against God: but if so be I satisfy the faithful, and
those that are not contentious, I pass not much what the rest say. As for the
faithful, I doubt not but they will content themselves with this solution,
which I dare affirm to be most true.

In the end of the verse, some translate, That they fill the world no more with
enemies: as if the Prophet meant to say, that all the wicked are the enemies of
mankind; yea, even of the whole earth: and therefore that the Lord prouides for
the safety of all, when he sweeps them from the earth: otherwise it should be
choked by them, as with thorns and briars. It seems that this signification
expresses somewhat more; because the earth receives us into her lap, if we
discharge our duty: but if we be contemners of God, it nourishes and
sustaines us unwillingly, as her very enemies. Yet had I rather follow the
other signification, which is more generally received: for I think the Prophet
meant to say, that the wicked grow up into a stock and lineage, and bring forth
children in great abundance; so as they exceed their progenitors in number, and
are more glorious in show: and thence came the proverb, that an ill weed
grows apace. We may thank our selves that the wicked are so multiplied.
Now whereas we behold an infinite multitude of wicked ones, which have covered
the face of the whole earth as it were, we may even thank our selves for it:
and yet the Lord never deals so severely with us, but he reserues always
some good seed, although it be very thin sown: yea he always has an eye
unto some corner of the world, where he may give his servants some little
breathing. And if he should diminish the multitude of the wicked nothing at
all, it is certain they would forthwith ouerspread the whole earth. By this is
confirmed that which we have said before; to wit, that the children of the
Babylonians were not slain causlesse; because it is here said, it was to the
end they should not fill the world with Cities. It follows then, that they
were wicked, and therefore cut off by the just judgment of God; that by this
means he might provide for the safety of men; and that the Lord cannot be
accused of cruelty or hard dealing.

Verse. 22. For I will rise up against them (says the Lord of hosts) and will
out off from Babel the name and the remnant, and the son, and the nephew,
says the Lord.
NOw the Lord testifies, that he will do that himself which he before had
commanded others to do by the ministry of the Prophet: so that we must observe
both the one and the other, Though God use men as his instruments in bringing
the wicked to naught, yet the work is properly said to be his own.
namely, that it is a work of God when the wicked come to naught, although he
use men as instruments to execute his judgments. For he spoke thus to them
heretofore: Prepare a slaughter, verse. 21. Whence we have to note not only the
power of God, but also the efficacy of prophecy. Whence the Prophets
(ordained of God) give commandment to all nations to do this or that, it is
then so far off that men can hinder the event thereof, that they are even
constreined to perform the will of God. Now because we ordinarily stay our
selves upon men, and in forsaking God attribute the power of doing all things
unto them, we must hold this principle, that seeing God works by them,
himself is properly the author of the work, whereof they are only but the
executioners and instruments. This is clearly enough laid open unto us by the
dependence of the places following.

I have thought it best to resolve the letter Vau into a particle of showing
the cause: for he yields the reason wherefore he commands the Medes and Persians
to prepare a destruction and slaughter for the Babylonians: for I will rise up
against them, This phrase I will arise, expounded.
says he: and this phrase where God says he will arise, is very frequent.
Thus also the Prophet applies himself to our capacity, because the majesty
of God is so high that we can not comprehend it. We think he takes his ease,
and is idle, whilst he winks at the wicked: and therefore when he will cause
men to feel his power, and give some testimony thereof by some visible work,
he says he will arise.

The epithet which he afterward adds, calling him The Lord of hosts, serves
for a confirmation of this sentence: as if the Prophet should say, I have not
given these Commandments to the nations of mine own head, for it is God that
gouernes and leads all the battles under his own hand. Seeing ye Prophet is
ordained then to pronounce the sentence on Gods behalf, he may also command
me^, to ye end they may yield obedience unto him. He yet repeates the same
thing in the latter end of the verse, Says the Lord.
showing that he speaks nothing but that which the Lord gave him in charge,
that so the prophecy might be the more autenticall. God cuts off not only the
posterity of the wicked, but their memory also. Pro. 10.7.
Now it has been often told us before, that Babylon was not thus ruinated till
after the death of Alexander the Great. By the sons, and nephews, he means
not only the Posterity, but the Memory which the wicked would obtain, so as
they might be long renoumed after their death. God took even this also away
from Babylon, that so no remembrance should remain thereof at all, but only
reproach and ignominy.

Verse. 23. And I will make it a possession to the hedghog, and pooles of water,
and I will sweep it with the beasome of destruction, says the Lord of hosts.
HE yet again confirms the same things which he spoke heretofore touching the
future destruction of Babylon, to wit, that men shall hereafter inhabit it no
more, but it shall be made an hidious Cave, into which wild beasts shall
retire. Some say that the word Kipod (which we have translated Bicure)
signifies a Beuer, others an Hedghog, other a Torteis. But it is very likely by
the circumstance of the place that our Prophet speaks of a beast which
frequents the waters; because afterward he mentions a poole, or marish, which
in deed properly belongs to the situation of the place: for howsoever Babylon
was not compassed in with pooles, yet is it situated in a moist soil.
Euphrates waters the region on the one side, and Tigris on the other: thence it
is that the Lord threatens to drown it.

Verse. 24. The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely like as I have
purposed, so shall it come to pass, and as I have consulted it shall stand.
IT was needful to add an oath for the more full confirmation of the
threatening. The reason why God in feign to add an oath to his threatenings.
For nothing is more hardly beaten into our heads then to hear tell of a
present destruction of the wicked, because we see them flourishing, furnished
with all kind of helps, seeming to be out of all dangers, and utterly secure.
Therefore we are at our wits end in beholding them, being so dazzled with their
glory, that we can scarsly believe God when he threatens their ruin and
perdition; and therefore he adds an oath, that they might have no occasion to
hang in any suspense. See the like in Chap. 22.14.
Whence we may see how gracious and loving he is toward us in succoring our
weakness by applying this remedy unto it, for otherwise his bare word ought to
suffice. This serves then for the great consolation of the faithful, as we
shall see hereafter. But this short form of an oath which he uses ought to be
well known unto us, because we meet often with it in the scriptures: Oaths
slip out of our mouths at randon with too much boldness, but Gods sparingnes in
suppressing the greater part of his oath ought to bridle our inte^perancie*
and thereby the Lord bridles us lest we should take too great liberty in oths
which slip out of our mouths at randon with too much boldness: for he
suppresseth the greater part of the oath, If I perform not this which I have
decreed, let men take me for a lier, and hold me no more for God: this I say,
or some thing else like unto it (fearful to utter) should be here supplied.
Men ought then to refrain their tongues, lest they ouerflow too lightly in
execrations, making horrible imprecations against themselves: yea let them
rather learn by the Lords example here, to hold in their rebellion.

Verse. 25. That I will break Ashur to pieces in my land, and upon my
mountains will I tread him under foot: so that his yoke shall depart from
them, and his burden shall be taken from off their shoulder.
SOme think this is spoken of the host of Senacherib, 2. King. 19.35. Chap.
37.36
which was destroyed by the Angel, whilst the siege was before Jerusalem. If
we shall receive this interpretation, the sense will be thus; to wit, The Lord
will shortly show some evident proof of this ruin, wherewith he threatened
the Babylonians. For those which heard the prophecies, might ask, What shall
the ruin of Babel profit us, when she has destroyed us first? were it not
better for us to remain in our own la^d, and that she might continue safe? What
consolation can we take in her destruction, seeing with her our selves must
also perish? And truly I make no question but Isaiah sets before them a proof
of Gods favor in the destruction of their enemies; which was either come to
pass already, or should shortly happen. I dare not affirm in what time the
Prophet foretold this, There may be some prob^ble conjecture that Senacherib
was discomfited before the time of this particular prophecy.
unless there be some probable conjecture, that the discomfiture of the host
of Senacherib, made by the Angel, was already accomplished. According to this
sense the Prophet should take this famous example, to give them good hope of
the deliverance to come: as if he had said; You have heretofore felt how
miraculously God assisteth his people in time of need. And this is the reason
which makes me think the army of Senacherib was already destroyed. It was
needful then that there should be some use of this doctrine.

No absurdity would follow, if the Prophet should put the Assyrian here, for
the Caldean.
For although they had no Monarchy, yet is it very likely they were always
first prepared, as often as war was to be made with the Jews: and so fought
under the leading of others, that in the mean while they made the greatest
part of the army. First, they were nearer hand then the Caldeans, and those
which then ruled, knew well that such people would be loyal and obedient,
because of the ancient hatred which they bare to the Jews. Add hereunto, that
it was the benefit of the Conquerours to subject the conquered by continual
wars, until they were inured to bear the yoke. All which considered, it is
not amiss that Isaiah speaking of Babylon, comprehends all the forces thereof
under the name of Ashur; so taking a part for the whole.

Thus there is no reason that constraines us to expound this place of the
discomfiture performed by the Angel in the host of Senacherib. For as I take
it, the Prophet meant only to affirm, that God would put an end to the
tyranny of the Assyrians; so as they should not be always so mighty: as if
he should say, Although God permit the wicked to bear rule over you for a
time, yet this domination or superiority shall not last ever; for he will one
day deliver his people from the servitude which oppresses them, by breaking
the yoke from off their necks. And as has bin said already; although the
Assyrians were subdued by the Caldeans, yet did they not cease for all that to
be enemies to the church still. But Babylon, which succeeded Ni^^uie, having
the pre-eminence by transporting thereof, began to make war with the Jews.

Where it is said, that Ashur shall be broken in Judah: we must not take it as
if they should be slain there, or destroyed by some discomfiture; but that the
elect people should be delivered from their tyranny: by means whereof their
dominion should be abolished. The breaking therefore is not referred so much to
the persons, as to the Empire. That which he adds touching the yoke and the
burden, cannot be properly understood of the Assyrians only, who yet never had
taken Jerusalem. And therefore we must note that succession, whereof I spoke
heretofore: because the Caldean^ had no occasion to make war, unless it were
because they boasted to have the pre-eminence over the Assyrians. Now ye see
the cause why I thought good to extend this prophecy to that deliverance
whereby the Lord showed himself the protector of his people against the
Caldeans and Assyrians; because the yoke was then shaken off, under which the
Jews were miserably hampered: yea, thus it comprehends the deliverance
purchased by Christ, whereof this was but a beginning.

Some think touching that which follows concerning the Mountains, that they
have put the plural number in stead of the singular, as if he spoke of mount
Zion: but I had rather translate it otherwise. For in as much as Jerusalem was
situated among the mountains, the whole country was contemned for that
regard. Wherefore the Prophet speaks by way of derision, granting to the
enemies that the mountanous region was indeed the less esteemed because of
them. But this contempt served to amplify the power of God, who delivers his
Mountains from under the dominion of a mighty Monarchy. Hereunto appertains
that which is contained in the twentieth Chapter of the first book of Kings,
verses 23.28.

Verse. 26. This is the counsel that is consulted upon the whole world, and
this is the hand stretched out over all nations.
THe Lord contents not himself with a confirmation or two: no, he has much
ado to refrain from assuring us more and more of one and the same thing; and
all because he knows how greatly our understanding is naturally inclined to
distrust: for no repetitions suffice us, although he makes never so large
promises in many words, and adds his oath thereunto. The Lord then we see is
desirous to remedy this evil, The Lord is desirous to cure our infidelity.
and thereto tends the repetition, that we should not esteem it as
superfluous. For those who think the Prophet (or rather the spirit of God)
should heap up too many words, Those who think the spirit of God is wont to
use too many repetitions, have not yet thoroughlie felt their own weakness.
have not yet attained unto any knowledge of their own weakness. Well, in the
first place he propounds the will and counsel of God: secondly his power.
Whence comes it that we doubt of his word, but because we attribut not that
strength unto God which to him belongs, neither are we well persuaded of his
power? These two things are wholly the cause of our incredulity, against
which we ought to oppose two other things, We must oppose the counsel and
power of God against our in^^delitie.
which Isaiah here recommends unto us, to wit, the counsel, and the power of
God. For we must in the first place hold it without controversy that the Lord
is true, because he pronounces nothing but that which is stable and ^^^utable:
secondly, that he is so mighty, that every knee must bow under his hand. Now
it is not for us to search into the secret counsel of God, because the Prophet
commands us here to rest our selves contented in the decree which the Lord
has manifested unto us by his word. We must not then fly any higher to pry
into the secrets of God, but must rest satisfied with the infallible
testimonies which he propounds unto us by the mouth of his Prophets. Let us
with all the powers of our affections embrace the promises of God, and join
his power thereto.
Let us therefore with ^ll our affections embrace the promises of God, and
join his power thereunto, because his mighty hand ought never to be separated
from his mouth.

But we must take heed we imagine not an idle power after the manner of
Philosophers, but such a one as the scriptures do inform us of, that is, a
power full of efficacy, and speedy in execution. of all the world, and of all
nations, seeing he speaks only of Babylon? Isaiah shows, that albeit it
should ouerspread far and wid^, and comprehend infinite multitudes of people,
yet none of all this should let God to put his decree in execution.

Verse. 27. Because the Lord of hosts has determined it, and who shall
disanull it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it?
Here the Prophet uses an exclamation as it were the better to confirm the
former sentence. For having told them that thi^ was the counsel of the Lord,
to the end he might show them it is so inviolable that it can not be broken,
Psalm. 33.11. he asks the question as of a thing utterly impossible: Who (says
he) can disanull his counsel, or turn his hand back? and thus by this
exclamation he sets himself boldly against all creatures. For the Lord no
sooner decrees a thing, but he stretches forth his hand: Is it once lifted up?
the work then must of necessity be put in execution. Now he not only excludes
men by this his exclamation from being able to hinder the decree of God, but
all things else whatsoever; yea, be it that any other creature besides the
devil or man would set it self against his will. To conclude, he shows that
God is not subject to repentance or change, but whatsoever falls out, Number.
23.19.
were it in the greatest confusion in the world; yet is he always like
himself: neither can his enterprise be foreslowed by any occasion.

If any reply, that God has changed his counsel sometime, as when he
pardoned the Niniuit^, Abimelech, God sent a message to the Niniuits by Jonah,
but he manifested not that which he had decreed in his secret counsel; which
was to show them mercy.
or Pharaoh: the answer is easy. For when the Lord sent Jonah to the
Niniuits, he manifests not that which he had decreed in his secret counsel,
but meant to touch their hearts, and to bring them to r^pentance by the
preaching of the Prophet, that he might show them mercy, Jonah 1.2. and 3.10.
The like he did when he threatened Abimelech and Pharaoh, because they had taken
Abraham's wife unto them, Genesis 12.17. and 20.3. for the Lord by fearing them
caused them to change their course, lest they should be punished for their
obstinacy.

Verse. 28. In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.
THis should be the beginning of the fifteenth Chapter, The fifteenth Chapter
should begin here.
because the Prophet enters now into a new argument: whence it evidently
appears how ill the Chapters have been divided, or rather torn in sunder. For
having spoken of the Babylonians, he comes to entreat of the Philistines, of
whom he was to speak before he came to mention other nations. Now these were
the Jews near neighbors, and hated them deadly: these were the remainder of
the nations which the Israelites had spared, although the Lord had expressly
commanded the^ to be wholly rooted out. The peoples infidelity was the cause
why the Lord suffered this remnant to remain even as thorns to prick their
eyes; which punishment God had threatened them with before, as the Scripture
reaches, Numb. 33.55. Deuteronomy. 7.16. Wherefore in regard there was deadly feed
between these two nations, there came no sooner any damage unto the Jews, but
the Philistims counted it their gain. For they desired to see the Jews rooted
out, neither could any news be better welcome unto them, then to hear that
the people of God were overwhelmed with all manner of miseries and calamities.
This is the cause why the Prophet prophecieth against them, The cause why the
Prophet prophecieth against the Philistims.
as against the perpetual enemies of the Church.

Now the time is to be noted wherein this vision was represented unto the
Prophet: because the Philistims were very strong during the life of Ahaz: and
this wretched hypocrit was punished for his disloyalty, because by forsaking
God, he fled unto outward helps; as namely, unto men. And therefore in his
time the Philistims recovered the Cities that Vzziah had taken: yea they
gathered more strength after his death, because they hoped to attain their
enterprises, by reason that the heir of the Kingdom was but a child. For
Ezechias, who was the new King, had as yet neither wisdom, counsel, nor
authority. It is needful then to observe these circumstances diligently,
because Isaiah respects not the Philistims so much (although he speaks of
them) as the faithful whom he would comfort by this prophecy, and fortify
those with good hope, who might otherwise have thought Judah to have been laid
waste, in regard it was assailed with enemies on all sides, no succor
appearing from any place whatsoever. Isaiah then seeks to establish the faith
of these poor afflicted ones, destitute of all succor; and bids them be of
good courage, because God will undoubtedly help them. He calls this prophecy
a burden, because it would be unwelcome and troublesome to the Philistims, Why
the Prophet calls this prophecy a burden.
who thought themselves safe in regard that the Jews were miserably oppressed;
neither was there any hope lost them of a better estate. He shows then that
the destruction of the Philistims also draws near.

Verse. 29. Rejoice not (thou whole Palestina) because the rod of him that did
beat thee is broken: for out of the Serpents root shall come forth a
Cockatrice, and the root thereof shall be a fiery flying Serpent.
IN the very entrance, he beats back that vain confidence wherewith the
Philistims were rashly puffed up: and in adding, thou whole, he signifies that
all, how many soever, shall have their part in this calamity. As if he should
say; That region shall not be spoiled in one place only, but there is not the
least corner which shall not feel it: and as far as the land does reach, so
far shall the destruction and ruin thereof be perceived on all sides. As
touching that which he adds of the rod broken; some refer to Ahaz but
besides the purpose; for he was overcome in all the wars which he had
against the Philistims. And therefore it should rather be referred to Vzziah:
and yet am I loath so to restrain it unto him, that it should not therewithal
be understood of the whole body of the Jewish Nation. It is as much then as if
he had said to Palestina, or Palestin; Think thou to take thy rest, whilst
the Jews which afflicted thee in times past, are destroyed? No, thou greatly
deceiuest thy self: for ere long thou shall be vexed much more. This is the
cause, as I have said, why I restrain not this to one particular person; but
rather as I take it, under the person of one, he points out the whole body of
the Jews. He forthwith adds the reason why Palestin should not rejoice; to
wit, because the Jews shall be better able to annoy them then they were in
former time. For if the Philistims received any detriment by the Jews before,
they should feel it ten times more heavy hereafter. The which he sets forth by
a very fit similitude: for the Cockatrice is more dangerous then the Adder, and
the fiery Serpent more hurtful then the Cockatrice. But God be thanked we
are not annoied with these hurtful beasts in this Country. The Prophets
meaning is nothing else then, but to show that the Philistims greatly beguiled
themselves, in thinking that the Jews should not ouermatch them. And therefore
I consent not unto them, who refer the name of the Cockatrice, and flying
Serpent, unto Hezechias. For howsoever they have great show of reason for it,
because Hezechias conquered all that the Philistims held, even unto Gaza: 2.
Kin. 18.8
yet the Prophet meant to stretch this promise further. Let us know then, that
albeit we begin at Hezechias, yet notwithstanding this favor appertains to
all the Jews, as to the whole body. Now from hence we may gather a general
doctrine; namely, that when we are oppressed with adversities, The rejoicing
of the wi^ced lasts but a while.
and the wicked rejoice thereat, as if we were utterly confounded, and they
were the only happy men; the Lord testifies, that all this their joy is but in
vain. God will evermore uphold his Church, and set her in her first estate,
though all men should judge her cast away. The children of God shall get new
strength, which will break the hearts of the wicked for very despite: not that
the faithful wish or purpose any such thing; but because it must so come to
pass: for God has so ordained it. Neither are these names of Cockatrice, and
fiery Serpent, any names of disgrace unto them; for they are not such by
nature, but are so called, In that Gods children are hurtful to the wicked, it
is not from their own disposition, but from the wickeds malice. Psalm. 18.27.
in regard they are deadly to the wicked, though harmless in themselves. For
it comes to pass by the just judgment of God, and the malice of the wicked,
that that which is in it own nature profitable and healthful unto them, is
turned into loss and poison. Such is the nature also even of God himself, and
of his Gospel: 2. Cor. 2.16.

Verse. 30. For the first borne of the poor shall be fed, and the needy shall
lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and Or, he.
it shall slay thy remnant.
The prophets in their denunciations against the wicked, respect not the^ so
much, as the comforting and encouraging of the faithful who are oppressed by
them.
THe Prophet, as has been already said, had not respect so much to the
Philistims (whom his threatenings feared nothing at all) as to the Jews, whom
he meant to comfort in their afflictions: for they were so oppressed that they
were now near unto despair; and therefore he calls them the f^^st borne of
the poor by a note of excellency, in regard of their miseries: for being now
brought into utter extremity, they held as it were the first rank of all
wretched people. Now he promises that the Lord will deliver them from such
calamities, and will then feed and nourish them as at the first: whereby we
may see that the Philistims were destroyed and cut off for the salvation of
Gods people: who also had made this promise unto Abraham and his posterity,
Genesis 12.3.
saying, I will bless those which bless thee, and curse those which curse
thee: for they must needs have God for their enemy, They must needs have God
their foe, that offer violence to his children.
who offer violence to his children. Then the Prophet compares them to sheep,
whom we ought to resemble, if we mean to have God hold us under his
protection. We meet with no one thing oftener in the scripture then this
similitude. Psalm. 95.7. Psalm. 100.3. John 10.16.27.
Does the Lord correct us then? Surely we may well be compared to strand
sheep, laid open to the violence of wolves and thieves: but if contrariwise he
smite our enemies, he will gather us again together, that we may rest in a
quiet and safe place. This is it which the Prophet signifies by saying they
shall rest in safety. The Lord then promises two things here, first good
pasture, that is to say, all things needful for food and raiment: secondly
safety and defense, to the end we may rest enclosed and shrouded against all
dangers. Two duties required in a good shepeard.
These are the two duties belonging to a good shepherd: and in these two are
included all things necessary for salvation.

In the second member he directs his speech again to the Philistims, whom he
compares to a tree, that has his roots so deeply fixed in the earth, that it
seems a thing impossible to pull it up; but yet if the root wither, it must
also of necessity lose his vigor, though it be never so profoundly settled.
Whence we are to gather, The state of the wicked is never so fast rooted, but
God can easily displa^t them.
that the estate of the wicked is never so firm, but that God will easily
ouerturne it: for he will not only prune off the bows, but will parch, and
bring to nothing the very root that lies hidden in the earth.

That which follows, he shall slay thy remnant, is commonly referred to
Hezekias; but as I have already showed, I had rather extend it generally to
the whole body (of which he speaks as of one man) of the King as head, who
represented Jesus Christ. We may also refer it to the Assyrian, and to all
others whom God used for the rooting out of the Philistims. For the Jews are
accustomed to speak thus indefinitly, when they mind to point out the
officers by whom God executes his judgments.

Verse. 31. Howl o gate, cry o City, thou whole land of Palestina art
dissolved, for there shall come from the North a smoke, and none shall be alone,
at his time appointed.
HEre the Prophet uses amplifications to seal up the truth of his prophesies
in the hearts of the faithful, and the more effectually to imprint those
things therein which without these would hardly have been believed. It has
been said elsewhere, that the gates signifies the places most frequented, in
which they kept their meetings. He threatens then that all the Cities shall
lament, yea and that extraordinarily, because the most honorable assemblies
should make it. That which is added touching the smoke, may be taken for the
fire, so as the thing it self should be showed by the sign, because the smoke
appears before the fire burns forth. By North we may understand as well the
Assyrians as the Jews, seeing both of them were situated on this side of the
Philistims: yet had I rather refer it to the Jews: I mean not now to stand
refuting of the contrary opinion. As we have said heretofore then, the
Philistims thought themselves great gayners by that which the Jews lost, when
the Assyrians had done them any scathe. Which also happened not long since to
many nations, who took pleasure to see their enemies destroyed by the Turks:
for they knew well enough that such victories brought heaviness and damage unto
them. So as when they whose ruin they thirsted after were vanquished, the way
by that means was laid open for such as in the end subdued them.

Whereas he adds in conclusion that none shall be alone, it appertains to the
enemies, who shall be so furnished with power and authority in the day
prefixed, that is to say, when God shall have decreed the destruction of
Palestina, that none shall remain idle in the house, but all shall be ready
and prepared to march forward. As if any in praising the authority and power
of some Prince should say, that all his subjects assemble themselves and are in
a readiness as soon as he holds up but his least finger.

Verse. 32. What shall then one answer the messengers of the Gentiles? that the
Lord has established Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.
I Had rather interpret this of all Nations simply, then of any one in
particular: for as soon as strangers are entered into a City, they are wont to
inquire what is done there, to the end they may get some news. It is as much
then as if he had said; What answer shall they give to strangers, when they
shall inquire after news? What shall be the common talk after the Philistims
be vanquished? This, The Lord has established Zion. His meaning is then, that
the overthrow of the Philistims, shall be such an excellent pledge of Gods
mercy toward his people, that all shall thereby understand,

(...)fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for they
shall go up with weeping by the mounting up of Luhith: and by the way of
Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.
HE here names other Cities; for his meaning is to bundle up all the Cities of
this Country (as it were) in one fardle, that they may be thrown into the
same destruction with the rest; as if he should say, Not one shall escape.
Whereas he adds a little after, Therefore the harnessed of Moab: although the
Hebrew particle be a showing of the cause, yet others expound it otherwise; but
it is a matter of no great moment. The Prophets meaning is to show that none
shall be exempted from howling, seeing the strongest and most valiant amongst
them shall do it. Afterward he shows that every one shall be so affected with
his own grief, that he shall not mind his neighbor. In the 5. verse he
takes to himself the person of a mourner, or a sorrowful person: but it may
seem strange, yea very unfitting, that the Prophet should bewail the
destruction of the Moabites, for he should rather have sorrowed at the
calamity of the Church, and reioiced at the overthrow of the enemies. But the
Prophets are wont to take upon them the person of those against whom they
prophecy afflictions, to the end they may represent their estate as it were
upon a stage or scaffold. And thus they moved affections more, then if they had
propounded the doctrine simply without this art. And yet no doubt the Prophets
trembled themselves at the judgments of God, yea even at those which they
threatened the wicked withal: but that which I have said is less co^streined,
and agrees best, as we may easily discern by common experience. He calls
them fugitives which fled thence: for his meaning is that those which shall
escape from Moab shall come unto Zoar, whom he compares to a heifer of three
year old, which is in her full force and strength, and has not yet brought
forth, nor felt labor, nor the yoke; but fetches her frisks, and plays the
wanton.

Now when the forces of the enemy presses near upon a place, then they flee
to other Cities which hau^ not yet been assailed, and which seem to be
furthest out of danger. Zoar was such a one, because the enemies had not yet
ouerrun it: but if any had rather expound this of the whole region, I gainsay
him not, Iere. 48.34.
because it seems Jeremiah speaks in general, who notwithstanding borrowes
many sentences from our Prophet: unless some had rather affirm that he there
expresses as well Zoar, as Horonaim, or rather the whole region which lies
between them. If it be referred to the whole nation, the sense will be, that
the Moabites who were nourished up in pleasures and abundance of all good
things, felt no evil till it came upon them, from whence they grew proud. And
therefore to tame them, it was requisite they should be driven to Zoar, which
was far remote from the Moabites, thereby showing that they could not save
themselves but by flying very far off.

Those whom the Lord thus tenderly fosters, are here admonished to be humble,
and not to provoke the wrath of God against them by their pride and
dissolutions: How such ought to behave themselves upon whom God bestows most
of his benefits.
but to be sober; yea even the^ when all things prosper with them in the best
manner that can be wished: as also to prepare for all changes when God shall be
pleased to visit them.

By the mount of Luhith he describes other places of the country of Moab, and
sets forth the flight of this people, and the sorrow that shall be thorowout
the whole kingdom. Whereas we have turned, They shall raise up the cry;
others have translated, They shall break, or cleave asunder with loud cries,
affirming that there is a transposition of letters, and that the letter Gnain
is doubled. In this sense this verb should be derived from Raah, which
signifies to break or bruise: but because this serves not much touching the
principal, I have let that stand which is most approved, so as the verb
descends from an other, which signifies to waken or raise up. If any had rather
retain the word, To break, the sense is, that there shall be a breaking, and
(as it were) a brusing of the members with sorrow and crying when one smites
one arm against an other.

Verse. 6. For the waters of Nimrim shall be dried up: therefore the grass is
withered, the herbs consumed, and there was no green herb.
THe Prophet amplifies this desolation by a kind of excessive speech. He says,
The which falls out when God depriues a land of all helps. Also that the
waters for it is very likely they were exceedingly necessary for this quarter
which was dry: for such countries as those bring forth nothing unless they be
watered. But howsoever this be an excessive speech, yet it conteines nothing
but that which is most true: for he passed not his bounds, but was feign to lay
forth these things in the more words, because of the peoples dullness, to the
end they might know that this land being deprived of Gods blessing, should
become a desert deformed, and void of all beauty.

Verse. 7. Therefore what every man has left, and their substance shall they
bear to the brook of the willowes.
THat which every one has reserved, signifies the same which we usually say,
that which is left, or spared. For his meaning is to speak of riches reserved;
thereby showing what happens ordinarily in those countries which the enemies
invade, to wit, every one labors to transport his goods to an other place, and
to lay them up safe there, that so they may fetch them home afterward. Now he
says that these shall have no fortress nor refuge to put their goods in
safety: so as they shall be constrained to hide them amongst the willowes.
See here an extreme misery, when we can find no place of refuge, to safeguard
and keep that which we have gotten with great labor, from being a spoil to
the enemies. It is very likely that these willowes stood in some secret and
close place remote from others. Some expound this of the enemies, which bring
the riches which they have pilled, to the river, to part the pray among
themselves.

Verse. 8. For the cry went round about the borders of Moab, and the houling
thereof unto Eglaim, and the skriking thereof unto Beer-Elim.
THe Hebrew particle Ci, was added for ornament. His meaning is, that all the
quarters of this Country shall be filled with cries and lamentations in every
corner; because this destruction shall reach from one end to another. To the
cry, he adds a skriking or double houling, to express the execesse of dolor;
it being the manner of desperate persons to become utterly desolate, and to be
resolved into tears.

Verse. 9. Because the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: and I will Or,
increasings.
bring more upon Dimon, even lions upon him that escapes Moab, and to the
remnant of the land.
He not only describes here the dolor, houling, flight, and trembling, or
the covetousness of the enemies in raking together of riches; but the
slaughter of men, which must needs be fearful, when the great and renowned
rivers (as Dimon was) were filled with blood. By increasings he means that
the Lord, in whose person he speaks, will augment the murders; so as the
dead bodies shall be piled one upon another, and there shall be no end thereof,
till they be all put to the sword. Now howsoever the adversaries were cruel in
this destruction, yet the Lord passed not measure for all that: because he
justly punished the inhumanitie which the Moabites unjustly exercised over the
Jews; upon whom they ought to have had compassion. It was just then for them
to bear the same punishment which they had laid upon others.

Which are escaped.] These are also the increasings whereof he spoke; or at
least part of them. For behold the highest pitch of all these calamities; that
if any endeavored to save himself in battle, from out of the hands of his
enemies, he should meet with lions and cruel beasts which should devour
him. And this is the true meaning of the Prophet, if we narrowly weigh the
whole context. He meant to express this discomfiture, and the misery thereof
in lively colors, by showing that the small remnant which shall escape the
slaughter, shall fall into the paws of the lion: because the hand of the Lord
does so pursue the wicked, that they can no way escape: if they pass one
danger, they by and by fall into another. But withal let us remember, that the
Prophet speaks these things for the consolation of the faithful, that they
might fortify themselves by some promises against the cruelty of the enemies,
who in the end should be cut off, and should find no refuge at all in their
gods, fortresses, or lurking holes; neither should their flight any thing at
all avail them.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Send ye a lamb to the ruler of the world, from the rock of the
wilderness, unto the mountain of the daughter Zion.
Here the Prophet insults over the Moabites, for that they knew not God
whilst they had time; but boldly expected his punishing hand, till at length
they were destroyed by it. In this place then there is a condemning of too late
a repentance; when men cannot be brought to amendment by any admonitions
whatsoever, but harden their faces against God. In a word, this kind of
exhortation has place, when the disease is become incurable. Now we must
diligently observe the words, because both Hebrews and Christians interpret
this place amiss. St. Jerome.
Saint Jerome expounds it of Jesus Christ, because he descended from Ruth came
Ruth 1.4. Matthew. 1.5. and the most part of Christian expositours follow him. As
if the Prophet should say; Lord, although so severe a judgment be prepared for
the Moabites, yet thou will not utterly destroy them. Why? Because they must
send us the Lamb, which is the ruler of the world. But as this exposition has
no ground, so needs it not to be refuted. As touching the Hebrews, they
think this was Isaiah having prophesied the restoration of the Kingdom of
Judah, they think that therewithal he exhorts the Moabites to acknowledge
their King. And so would have this a royal edict to correct their
disobedience: as if he should say; Send the tribute which you owe. But we
read not in any place that the Moabites were subject or tributaries to the
Jews: neither is there so much as any probable conjecture of it. Whereas they
allege the history of the Kings, they are mistaken: for it is there spoken to
the king of Israel: Ahab and Samaria are there expressly named: 2. King. 3.5, 6
and we know that the Samaritans bare a deadly hatred against the Jews. The
true sen^e of this place.
I content my self then in the first exposition which I have touched, as being
the truest and most natural: because the Prophets meaning is to condemn the
Moabites for not repenting in time, and therefore should now seek
reconciliation in vain; which before to their great utility they might easily
have obtained.

Thus the word send, must be taken by way of deriding: as if he should say; You
may now send, but look for no pardon, nor to get any benefit by it. The wicked
despi^e admonitions till they feel the sma^t of the rod, and then they seek
to God, but for the most part in vain
For when the wicked are admonished, they proudly despise all exhortation: but
when the rod is upon their back, then they fare like frantic men, running
hither and thither, seeking help every where, trying all remedies, but without
any fruit; for they profit no whit thereby. Isaiah then scorns at their
obstinacy and rebellion, and shows there will be no time of repentance when
the destruction shall come upon them, which they have justly deserved.

The Jews think that the Prophet speaks here of Hezechias, but contrary to
all reason: for there is no mention made here of any certain land, but rather
of the whole world; whereof the Prophet speaks in gene^all. This ought then to
be referred to God himself. He calls that a lamb, which should be offered in
sacrifice: for the Nations professed to worship God when they offered their
sacrifices. By the stone or rock of the wilderness, he means a City, which
was esteemed the chiefest in Moab; although we may well afffirme, that he
meant to comprehend the whole Country: and so a part should be taken for the
whole. To the mountain: That is to say, to the true Temple of God, Deuteronomy. 12.5,
6, 7. 2. Chron. 7.12.
where the sacrifices were offered according as the Law comcommanded. This
place is of excellent use against the obstinate, who reject all wholesome
doctrine, proudly despising God, till his judgments take them in the neck.

Verse. 2. For Or, it shall come to p^sse that the daughters of Moab shall be at
the fords of Arnon, as a bird taking her flight, flies from her nest.
it shall be as a bird that flies, and a nest forsaken: the daughter of Moab
shall be at the fords of Arnon.
THe Prophet now shows what he meant to say, by his former derision; to wit,
that the Moabites must not think of sending sacrifices then, because they
cannot otherwise save themselves, but by fleeing from their Country. By the
similitude of birds, he expresses the terror wherewith they being once
stricken, shall flee at the noise of a lease. For he threatens the fearful
and wearisome flight of the Moabites, who had abused their rest.

Verse. 3. Gather a counsel, execute judgment: make thy shadow as the night in
the midday: hide them that are chased out: bewray not him that is fled.
HE goes on with his speech. But if we will rightly understand this place, we
must set the calamity wherewith the Moabites were extremely afflicted, before
our eyes. Now he calls their wickednesses to remembrance; to the end all might
know how justly this calamity besell them. When they had all things at their
desire, they ouerflowed in dissolutions, and rejected all reprehensions: now
being forsaken and left destitute of help, they mourn; seeking remedies, but
find none. How God deals with the wicked.
For thus God deals with the reprobates: he supplies their necessities, and
puts all they can wish into their hands, to leave them without excuse. But
after they have abused these blessings of God through their wicked lusts, and
have turned all things to an ill end, he takes from them all means and helps,
and then brings them to nothing. Whilst the Moabites were in prosperity, they
made no great reckoning of mercy and uprightness, although they might have
ruled, and had a flourishing Kingdom without doing any man wrong: yet did they
abuse it to establish their tyranny. Now then when they are deprived of all
authority, banished, and fugitives; Isaiah in scorn, admonishes them to
gather a counsel, and to execute justice, which before they had ouerturned by
fraud and extortions. For Isaiah has an eye to the time when the Moabites were
spoiled of all principality and pwer. And it seems this reproach is like to
that which the Lord used to Adam, saying; Behold Adam is become as one of us:
Genesis 3.22. For he is there scorned by a biting kind of speech, that not being
content with the excellent graces he had received, he would needs be like God
himself. So the Moabites being not contented with their ornaments and riches,
vexed the poor Jews and Israelites after a barbarous manner; pilled and polled
them, and imagining wicked devices against them.

Seeing then that they had abused the excellent gifts of God, he justly
reprocheth their fact. Which also appertains to all reprobates, who insolently
exalt themselves when they prosper; and abusing the same, do offer hard
measure to the faithful. For in as much as they pollute the things which God
has consecrated to a right end, it is good reason they should be deprived of
them, and suffer extreme want. We see daily examples hereof before our eyes.
Whence is it that those who are advanced to great places of honor, fall so
violently, but because God auengeth himself of their tyrannous government and
wicked practices? The Lord also reprocheth their shame, contempt, tears, and
complaints: as when they cry out, Oh that I might return again to my goods!
Oh that I were set in my first estate! But then alas repentance is too late.

Make thy shadow.] The Moabites (as I have touched before) might have refreshed
the Jews somewhat in their misery when the Assyrians vexed them. At the
least, had there been any spark of humanity in them, they ought to have
received the fugitives: but in stead of doing this, they persecuted and
wickedlie offered violence to those which were oppressed too much already by
the hands of others. Good reason it was then that the Moabites should have
experience in their own persons of that cruelty which they had exercised
toward others, that being chased from their dwellings, banished and wandering
to and fro, they might find no succor nor shadow to hide and defend themselves
from the heat. For why should they enjoy that comfort which they had unkindly
refused to give unto others?

He takes the midday here for extreme heat: and this similitude is often
found in the scriptures, to wit, that the Lord was as a cloud at hie noone, and
as a pillar of fire by night, Exodus 13.21.22. Numb. 14.14. Deuteronomy. 1.13. because
he did it once in the wilderness. The Prophets retained these phrases of speech
because they were then in use, although they recited not the history. Besides,
when he says, hide them that are chased out, he speaks of the Jews, who
being pursued and vexed by the Assyrians, were notwithstanding vncourteouslie
entreated by ye Moabites, whose duty it was to have entertained and comforted
poor fugitives, especially those who fled to the^ for succor. But since they
chased them away, it was requisite that themselves should be chased and deprived
of all help and succor. For just and equal is that sentence of the Lord, who
commands that every one receive that measure which himself has measured,
Deuteronomy. 19.19.21. Matthew. 7.2. Now the Prophet would have the Moabites to
acknowledge their sins, to the end they might confess the punishment of
their cruelties to be justly inflicted upon them. Although he rather respects
the Jews, to teach the^ that God neglected not their miseries; but would
afterward let them see that he revenged all their wrongs.

Verse. 4. Let my banished dwell with thee: Moab be thou their covert from the
face of the destroyer: for the extortioner shall end, the destroyer shall be
consumed, and the oppressor shall cease out of the land.
THe Prophet speaks to the Moabites as if he humbly sued unto them in the
name of the common people; as if he should say, You are neighbors and of the
same blood, I pray you receive and succor the oppressed. If you will not help
us, yet at the least harm us not. He brings in Go^ speaking, who is wont to
put himself in the place of his people, as if he ^ooke upon him the person of
a suppliant. It is very certain that the Moabites showed none of this kindness
to the Jews: nay they rather joined with their enemies to hurt them by all the
means they could. This place is worthy our diligent observation, for God
here shows the great care he has over his chosen, A Consolation. God is no
less moved with the wrongs d ne to his c^o^n, then wi^h those which are done
directly against his own Majesty.
seeing he is as greatly moved with the wrongs done to them, as with those
which are directly against his own Majesty. As in Zachary he witnesses,
that as often as his children are oppressed by any, they even touch the apple of
his eye, Zacha. 2.8. He sees the tears and hears the groans of the afflicted
which call upon him, Psalm. 12.5. and 38.9. and 102.20. And howsoever this
always comes not to pass in our sight; yet will he show in due season that he
has heard them. Let us then learn from hence to be kind, Be merciful to
poor exiles, banished for the truths sake.
and given to succor poor exiles: especially the faithful, banished from
their country for the confession of the truth. For there is no service which
God accepts, or allows better then this: as on the contrary, nothing is more
displeasing or detestable in his sight, then cruelty and inhumanitie.
Wherefore if we will feel any refreshing in our calamities, let us show our
selves loving and merciful, and not withdraw our help from those that have
need. Blessed is he, says David, which judges wisely of the poor and
needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble, Psalm. 41.1. Whereas
on the contrary there shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no
mercy, Iam. 2.13. Now in that the Lord calls the Jews here his banished:
although this might well be referred to the chastisement, as if he should say,
they are indeed driven out of the land of Canaan according as they were
oftentimes threatened before: Deuteronomy. 28.64.
yet he therewithal means, that they remain under his protection and
safeguard, acknowledging them for his own, although they be chased and banished
out of their country. For this calamity which the Jews endured, seemed a
kind of reiection, but the Lord takes them still for his children, although he
thus sharply corrected them.

Hence we may gather a singular consolation, to wit, A Consolation.
that we are still of the number of Gods children, howsoever we may be smitten
with hard and grievous plagues. The extortioner shall end. He now directs his
speech to the Jews, and continues to comfort them as before, showing that when
their enemies shall be cut off, they shall thereby be eased of all their
miseries and calamities. Now howsoever the Prophet spoke heretofore expressly to
the Moabites, yet did he therewithal direct his speech to the Jews also. But
then he only threatened the Moabites as enemies: here, he more clearly
promises comfort to his people; as if he should say, O Moab, thou thoughtest
that my people were utterly undone, but I will subdue their enemies, and put
an end to their afflictions: thou shall perish, but my people shall in the end
escape from the heavy burdens which oppress them. Unless any had rather say
that there is a change of the time here: so as the particle Because, should
signify until, and so reading the sentence all with a breath. But because
this may seem constreined, I had rather retain the natural sense.

Verse. 5. And in mercy shall the throne be prepared, and he shall sit upon it
in steadfastness in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment,
and hastening Justice.
IT is ill done of the Hebrews to expound this whole verse of Hezekias For the
Prophet speaks of a greater restoration of the Church: the Moabites were not
as yet chastened, whilst the government of Hezekias flourished: and at that
time the blessing of God began to shine again upon the Jews. It is as much
then as if he had said, the enemies of the elect people do plot the ruin of
this kingdom, which God had promised to stand firm; 2. Sam. 7.13
yea, and that for ever. To the end then that the faithful might not be out of
heart in this woeful scattering; the eternity of the kingdom which had been
set before their eyes by an excellent prophecy, Dan. 7.27.
is here brought to their remembrance. This place therefore can be referred to
none other but to Jesus Christ, of whom Hezekia, as also David and his
successors were figures. These then do rather lead and conduct others to
Christ, who is the only safe keeper and protector of his people: who indeed
gathers together the remnant that is scattered. Ioh. 10 16. and 11.52.
Thus then he brings the faithful back unto Christ: as if he should say,
You know what God you serve: he has promised to be the only keeper of your
salvation; to the end you may remain safe under his protection, John 10.28.
And if it so fall out that things go cross sometimes; yet has he promised
you a redeemer: under whom you shall recover a new and steadfast felicity. What
then if for a time you be sad and heavy? yet will this Savior of the Church
come in the end: who will set you in a flourishing liberty. And therefore settle
your selves constantly in the expectation of him: yea even then when you shall
see the estate of the Church miserably scattered.

All consolations whatsoever are fading and transito^ie, unless they be
referred unto Christ.
We have need to observe this diligently, because all consolations whatsoever
are but earthly and transitory, if all be not referred unto Christ. Let us
then fasten our eyes upon him, if we will enjoy any prosperity or happiness:
for he has promised that felicity shall accompany us, even in the midst of
persecutions; Matthew. 5.10.11. and that all our anguishes and vexations shall
open a way unto us to eternal life: yea, that all the afflictions which we
endure, shall turn to a full measure of happiness unto us, Romans 8.28.

Now Isaiah shows that this shall not come to pass by means of men; but by
the grace of God, which is the only builder of this throne. Wherefore to him
only must we attribute this mercy, and acknowledge that it is of his free
goodness that he has established this sacred throne in the midst of us. Now
the Prophet confirms it very well in saying, that the cause must be sought no
where else, but in the mere mercy of God. This is a grounded truth: for God
was not moved thereto by the worthiness of any merits; alas they were of no
value to set up that throne again which was fallen down by the sin and
iniquity of the people: but seeing those whom he had adopted, had undone
themselves, he meant to show a token of his infinite bounty in their
restoration.

Shall sit upon it in steadfastness.] There is almost no one word here which
has not his weight, so as this verse is worthy to be continually remembered. I
grant indeed there is an allusion here in the word Tabernacle, 1. Sam.
16.11.12. 2. Sam. 7.2.
as some do expound it: to wit, that he was as a common person before he was
called to sit in the royal throne. For the Prophet meant to decipher out a
lively image of the Church, which is far unlike the thrones of kings and
princes; neither shines it with gold, silver, or precious stones as they do.
Now howsoever he proposed the spiritual kingdom of Christ under a base and
abject resemblance: yet he therewithal admonishes, that it shall be^
prepared, and set up among men in the earth. For if it had been only said that
the throne of Christ should be set up; it might have been demanded whether his
seat should be set up in heaven or in earth.

But when he says in the Tabernacle of David, he shows that he reigns not
only among Angels, but among men also: lest we should imagine he were not to
be found, unless we ascend up into heaven. The wicked laugh at this: taking
all that we say of the kingdom of Jesus Christ but for a fable; as if it were
a fancy forged in our own brain. For they must behold that we tell them of
with their eyes; Unless the wicked see y^ with their eyes which is told them,
they will believe nothing.
also it must agree to their senses: as for us we ought in no wise to conceive
any thing carnally of him; but to content our selves with his power and virtue.

In steadfastness.] The word Emeth signifies all steadfastness whatsoever; and
truth. Here the Prophet means that the kingdom of Christ shall be firm and
stable, as Daniel also has witnessed, Dan. 2.44. and 7.14. Likewise the
Evangelist Luke: Of his kingdom (says he) shall be none end, Luke 1.33.
Wherein it differs from the common condition of other kingdoms, Christ's
Kingdom differs from the common condition of other Kingdoms.
which often fall and tumble down by their own weight: be it that the
foundations of them be riches and other great commodities, alas their
steadfastness differs very little from vanishing shadows. But howsoever the
kingdom of Christ seem to totter now and then, yet Isaiah tells us that it
shall stand for ever, Christ's Kingdom may now and then seem to totter: but it
shall ever stand steadfast, because God vpholds it.
because God vpholds it with his hand. We must therefore arm our selves with
these testimonies against the temptations which shall happen when Christ's
kingdom is assailed with many and mighty enemies, so as a man would imagine it
would fall to ruin forthwith. Let the world devise what it can then, yea, let
hell it self cast forth flashes of flaming fire: yet must we stick fast to
this promise.

Who shall judge.] I take the word ^^ophet for Governor: as if he should say,
there shall be one that shall govern: we often see a magnificent throne, and
yet no man fits on it: and it will ordinarily fall out that kings shall be
either idols or beasts, who have neither judgment, wisdom, nor any discretion
in them. But here he says, that he which shall sit in this throne will
perform the office of a good governor: which is added, to the end we may know
that Christ will be our protector in deed: for the judgment which is
attributed to him is nothing else but the safe custody under which he has
received us, and which none can wring from him: neither will he let the wicked
remain unpunished when they have offered us violence, if so be that with a
meek and quiet spirit we will put our selves under his protection.

By the word hasten, the Prophet shows that Christ will take vengeance
quickly and speedily of our afflictions: We must set Christ's speedines in
coming to our rescue, against our impatiencie.
which we ought to oppose to our impatie^cie, because it seems to us that he
is too slow in succoring us. But when we shall be so ouerswayed by our
passions, let us think, surely this comes to pass because we give not place
to his providence. Although then that he tarry according to the sense of the
flesh, Although Christ seem to tarry long in our sense, yet he knows what
time is fittest to help us.
yet does he always moderate his judgments after a most excellent order,
according as he knows the seasons best for us. For this cause then let us
quietly wait his good pleasure.

Verse. 6. We have heard of the pride of Moab (he is very proud) even his pride
and his arrogancy, and his Or, insolency.
indignation, but his lies Or, shall not be approved, or, shall not take effect.
shall not be so.
THe Prophet adds this sentence by way of preue^tion. For that which he had
promised touching the restoration of the royal throne, seemed incredible;
neither could they persuade themselves that the Moabites could be destroyed,
seeing they flourished at that time with abundance of riches, as also in
strength and power of men: who for this cause (being puffed up with
prosperity) became exceeding proud. Add also, that their malapertnes
wherewith they insulted over the poor Jews, was unto them like a sore and
hard engine to break and bruise their hearts. The Prophet that he might prevent
this temptation, tells them that the brags of the Moabites are well enough
known; but yet their pride shall not hinder the Lord from punishing of them:
because there is neither force, riches, nor multitude that is able to resist
him. Isaiah then speaks as of a thing commonly known: to wit, that the
Moabites were become so extreme proud, that they feared nothing: it being in
deed the usual fashion of those that abound in wealth and power, to insult
malapertlie over God and men. But how great soever their arrogancy is the Lord
will easily pull it down.

His insolency.] The word Eurah for the most part signifies indignation: but
the circumstance of this place seems to require somewhat more. This noune
comes of the verb to Transgress, as if we should say in Latin, To exceed, and
therefore I have thought good to translate it insolency. Jeremiah having
mentioned their pride and arrogancy, speaks of hautines of the heart, Iere.
48.14. and 29. I make no question but Isaiah and Jeremiah both meant that this
people were so cruel in regard of their ouerweening, loftines and statelines,
that they would wax wroth and angry upon the least occasion; and churlishlie
advance themselves against others. This vice is always joined with loftines of
mind, Riches begets pride, p^ide brings forth wrath, and wrath is for the most
part accompanied with outrage.
because the contempt of others is accompanied with pride: and those who
ascribe unto themselves more then is meet, are easily provoked to anger upon
the least occasion: such can bear nothing, and are not only inclined to wrath,
but to outrage also. For by their good wills they would subject every man under
them, neither will they give place by any means to any man whatsoever. If
every one be not ready at their beck they take it in foul scorn. Proud men
do easily bewray this their high stomach: whereas the humble on the contrary
are of a loving disposition, joined with modesty answerable thereunto, and are
soon entreated to pardon any that have done them wrong.

His lies.] The Hebrews call the members of man, or the branches of a tree
Baddim: and they also take this word for Divination, which is used in this
signification in some other places. Some think it is put here by a figure,
for children: others refer it to words, or thoughts: others expound it of
strength or sinews. But in mine opinion it is taken rather for a foolish
boasting, because this noune is often taken for a lie: and we shall see
hereafter how this signification agrees best to this place. The expositors also
differ in the word Cen. The most translate, That lies, or words are not
upright: others, Moab vtters his vain brags, when he can not attain his
chief enterprise.
that lies are not true. For the substance, I am almost of their opinion:
neither doubt I but the Prophet meant to say that Moab vtters his vain brags,
because he can not attain to his chief enterprise.

For the sense of the words we shall best gather it out of the four and
fortith Chapt. of Jeremiah verse. 30. for having there repeated the very words
of our Prophet, he presently adds by way of exposition, They shall not do so,
as if he should say, That which they have resolved in themselves to do, shall
never come to pass. Yet notwithstanding I am not of opinion that there should
be a particle of similitude in the first member, but rather of confirmation, as
it were by a negative, because he declares that there shall be no stedfastnes
in Moabs counsels: neither should his diuinations or lies come to effect. Thus
the proud often determine of all things no otherwise then as if the disposing
of them were in their own hands, and themselves exempt from being ruled by the
providence of God. Such pride says Isaiah shall fall, and whatsoever they
promise unto themselves concerning their power, shall vanish like smoke.

Hereby we are admonished, that pride is greatly displeasing unto God: Pride
displeasing to God.
and by how much the more men be puffed up in regard of their riches, so much
the nearer are they to their own destruction.

Verse. 7. Therefore shall Moab houle unto Moab; every one shall houle: for the
foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn: yet they shall be stricken.
HE sets forth that more plainly which he touched before: to wit, that this
pride and cruelty which proceeds thereof, shall be the cause of Moabs ruin.
Iam. 4.6. 1. Pet. 5.5.
For seeing the Lord resists the proud, he must needs take down this
haughtiness, under which the Church was miserably and shamefully trodden under
foot. According to which example, the end of all proud persons must of
necessity be lamentable. Where it is added, Moab unto Moab; his meaning is,
that there shall be a dolorous song as it were, when they shall make their
moan one to another touching their calamities, and shall weep for one another
griefs.

Some translate, Because of Moab; but unfitly. For it is by and by said, that
the houling shall be general, or amongst the people.

For the foundations.] It sufficiently appears that Kir-hareseth was the head
City, and the Kings regal seat: but some think it to be a proper name;
others say it is appellatiue: no doubt but the etymology of the word was taken
hence; namely, because it was built of chalk. It may be also that it was
called thus, in regard of the height of the walls which were made of brick.
Now this was a city greatly renowned in that Country: yet he rather names the
foundations then the City it self, because it should be raced to the ground.
As if he should say; You shall not lament the ruin of the City or buildings,
but the utter subversion of it, because there shall nothing remain of it.

They expound the word Necaim, Lame: I had rather translate it, Hurt. The
particle which is set before it, signifies as much as, Certainly, or, Surely:
sometimes it is taken for But, or, Notwithstanding. Those which take it in the
affirmative, expound it thus: You shall surely mourn, when you shall be hurt
or stricken: that is to say, you shall not need to hire those that shall feign
a mourning for you, as they usually do at the burial of some; but you shall
mourn in good earnest. But I expound it Only; as if he should say; All that
shall remain, shall be stricken; not one shall escape in safety. And by this
manner of speech he expresses the extreme ruin of that City, showing that
those which live, shall not only bewail the calamities of others, but their
own also: because they themselves shall be stricken. If the proud be thus
sharply corrected, let us learn to carry our selves modestly and peaceably;
and freely to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God.

Verse. 8. For the vineyards of Heshbon are cut down, and the vine of Sibmah:
the lords of the heathen have broken the principal vines thereof: they are
come to Iaazer: they wandered in the wilderness: her goodly branches stretched
out themselves, and went over the sea.
THe Prophet describes, the destruction of the whole Country here under an
allegory. It is very credible that it abounded with good vineyards: which we
may easily collect from this place, and another like unto it in the 48. of
Jeremy, verse. 32. Now when the Prophets threaten any Countries with
destruction, they are wont to recite the chiefest things in them. For example,
if we were to speak of Picardie, truly we would not mention vines: as if we
spoke of Orleance, or Burgondie. The Cities which the Prophet describes in this
verse, are the head Cities in the Country of Moab.

He says, that the principal vines of the vineyards were plucked up by the
Lords of the nations: that is to say, by the conquerours which bare sway as
they listed over the people who^ they had subdued. Where he says, that these
branches came to Iaazer, it is for amplifications sake; because this city was
situated upon ye bounds of the land of Moab. As if he should say, They shall
not only cut down some part of your vines, but the whole Country shall be
laid waste from one end to the other. Some refer this to the enemies: but I
had rather refer it to the vines which stretched so far, that they came to
Iaazer: so as the sense shall be; Although these vines should spread even unto
Iaazer, and should cover much land from thence unto the wilderness, yet shall
the lords of the nations tread them under foot. So that the text runs well,
because it is said afterward, that the vines spread themselves unto the
wilderness; yea, unto the sea: thereby signifying, that it was a fruitful
soil, but especially for vines; he adds, over the sea; because in fertile
grounds they are wont to keep back the sea with rampires for gaining of
ground: and they prevent the violence of the water with boords and timber, to
enlarge the land.

Verse. 9. Therefore will I weep with the weeping of Iaazer, and of the vine of
Sibmah: O Heshbon and Elealeh I will make thee drunk with my tears, because
upon thy summer fruits, and upon thy harvest a shouting is fallen.
Here the Prophet takes another person upon him, as we have noted before: for
he sorrows and complains in the person of the Moabites. I deny not but the
faithful have always trembled at Gods judgments, neither could they ever so
put off the bowels of pity, but they had still compassion upon the wicked; yet
does he not describe his private affections here: but his meaning is, to get
authority to his doctrine, that none might doubt of the accomplishment of it.
And therefore he represents the sorrow and heaviness which they should all
feel after the discomfiture (as it were upon a scaffold) in the person of a
Moabite; and all to the end he might the better confirm the Jews in the truth
of this promise, which might otherwise have seemed incredible unto them.

Because upon thy summer fruits.] The expositours interpret this latter part
diversely. The verb Naphal, signifies to Fall, and to run upon. Those which
take it in the last signification, refer the word Hedad, to the enemies
themselves: as if he should say, The cry of the enemies shall run upon thy
harvest: so as there should be a close opposition here between this cry, and
the singing whereof he will speak in the next verse. Others expound it, It
shall come to pass that they shall cast forth cries: as if singing should
cease, and as if the pleasant songs and mirth of the reapers, who are wont to
rejoice after harvest, should be no more heard. But I had rather refer it to
the cry of the enemies: wherein I follow Jeremiah, the faithful expositour of
this place, Ier. 48.32.
who says, That the destroyer shall run upon thy summer fruits. Which
Isaiah calls here the cry of the enemies: as if he should say; When thou
shall prepare thy self to gather in thy harvest, the enemies shall run upon
thee, from whom thou shall hear this hideous cry instead of thy cheerful
songs, and shall chase thee thence.

Verse. 10. And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field:
and in the vineyards shall be no singing nor shouting for joy; the treader
shall not tread wine in the wine-presses: I have caused the rejoicing to
cease.
He confirms his threatening by more words, showing that the whole region
shall be destroyed and laid waste, so as there shall be no more vintage nor
harvest. When he says, that God will take away the songs of the vine-dressers,
he respects the ancient custom. For they were wont to dance and manifest
their joy after the grapes were gathered in. For which cause, Virgil Virgil.
says, that the vine-dresser sings when his last labors about his vines are
finished, even as the Mariners shout for joy when they be arrived in the haven.
For then having suffered much, and escaped many dangers, they hope to have
rest, and to obtain some refreshing. This is as much then as if the Prophet
had said, Being deprived of the revenue of their fruits, nothing shall remain
unto them, but the bewailing of their poverty.

Verse. 11. Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine
inward parts for Kir-hareseth.
THe Prophet under the person of a Moabite does again describe a great
lamentation proceeding from such grievous sorrow, that their bowels should
break, or make an horrible noise. For he would show the thing it self by the
sign of it. Now we have already showed whereunto these lively descriptions
tend; to wit, that having the thing demonstrated as it were in their sight, we
might the more confidently expect the obtaining of that which far surmounts all
our thoughts. In that he names the chief City again, he notes out the ruin
of the whole Country, taking a part for the whole.

Verse. 12. And it shall appear that Moab shall be weary of his high places:
then shall he come to his Or, Sanctuary.
Temple to pray, but he shall not prevail.
HE now returns to the sentence which he touched in the second verse: to wit,
that the idolaters seeing their affairs to succeed ill, do run to idols,
thinking to find some comfort in them. Although he here expresses some thing
more: for in as much as Idolaters have their temples and ordinary chapels,
they trot to that temple which they take for the most holy (when any great
calamity befalls them) as to the place where they hope to find God most
favorable unto them. For if the Papists at this day fall into any great and
extreme danger, they persuade themselves they shall sooner obtain their
requests (and this has been a common and ancient superstitious conceit) if
they trot to Saint Claude, or to our Lady of Laurette, or to some other Idol
more famous than the rest: than if they should resort to the Church that is
nearest hand. They make their extraordinary prayers in places furthest off.
Thus the Prophet calls the most renoumed and frequented temple among the
Moabites, a Sanctuary; and says, they shall go thither: but to no purpose.
Now it appears by the holy history, that the famousest temple of the Moabites
was dedicated unto Chem^sh: 1. King. 11.7.

Some expound the particle, They shall not prevail: that they should be so
weary, that they should not have so much strength as to go to the temple. But
the first sense is the fittest as I think: for he takes away all hope from the
Moabites, so as they should find no succor, no not in the gods themselves.
This member, and when is shall appear, has great weight: for it signifies
that the Idolaters are not led with reason, but rather by their natural
appetites, even like unto brute beasts. For as beasts judge by touching,
smelling, and seeing, so also the Idolaters have no better schoolmaster to
instruct them than their own carnal sense. If any then convince them by sound
arguments, that they do ill; a man shall gain nothing from them. And
howsoever they sometimes have experience that all their labor in vexing
themselves after their manner is but lost; yet will they not therefore give
over, but forge new means, and will bring in services of their own in^ention,
which they would feign have God to approve of. If they have good success, that
they attribute to their superstitions, and so wax the more obduarate: and if
matters succeed ill they reject their inventions, condemn their new devised
worship, and blame their gods. To be short, they depend wholly upon events,
Idolaters depend altog^ther upon events.
judging of nothing neither by reason, nor by the word of God. Therefore they
are newfangled evermore, according as experience leads them. But it seems the
Prophet passes yet further, to wit, that the Moabites shall come to the Temple
of Chamos when their folly shall be manifestly discovered unto all; rather
with shame and blushing, then of any mature deliberation.

Verse. 13. This is the word that the Lord has spoken against Moab since that
time.
THis short sentence is the confirmation of the prophecy: for his meaning is,
that he has even pronounced the very decree of God himself, and has uttered
nothing but the Lords message. Thus putting off as it were the person of man,
he brings in God speaking in this manner:

Verse. 14. And now the Lord has spoken, saying, In three years, as the yee^^s
of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned in all the great
multitude, and the remnant shall be very small and feeble.
THree years.] The time is not only prefixed for the certainty, but also to
the end the faithful might not languish in waiting any longer. Now he alludes
to the agreements and covenants of men, wherein they have been wont to set
down a certain day which they must not break. This is specially done in
mercenarie businesses; which similitude is often used in the scriptures, Job.
7.1.2. and 14.6. Chap. 21.16.
because the hireling waits with exceeding desire for the appointed day wherein
he is to receive his wages. For they groan as it were under the burden, and
bear their ordinary labors unwillingly. Thus God says, he will assign a
certain day unto the Moabites which they shall not escape; but all their
puissance shall therein be brought to nothing. He speaks expreslie of the
multitude, because they were a great people; and therefore bragged of it as if
they had been invincible. Where he ads that the remnant shall be feeble. he
means, there shall be such a change, that there shall be great ods between
their former and latter estate, because nothing shall be seen but a woeful and
hidious spectacle in those that remain.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a
City, for it shall be a ruinous heap.
HE prophesies against the kingdom of Syria, and mentions the head City,
which was the regal seat of the Kingdom. The reason why this burden is
pronounced against Damascus.
Now it was requisite that this destruction should be described as well as ye
rest, to the end the faithful might assure themselves that God would assist
them in time convenient, and would not always suffer the wicked to molest them
without ceassing. For the king of Syria was confederate with the king of Israel
against the king of Judah; as we have seen before in the seventh Chapter: and
because the Jews were not strong enough to resist them, being destitute of
sufficient means, they might also have doubted of succor from God, as if he
had left them at six and seven. That he might therefore free them from this
perplexity, he threatens destruction to this kingdom of Syria, from whence
they might well conclude, that God fought for the defense of his people.

It is not known in what time Isaiah prophesied this, neither (as I have
touched heretofore) does he observe the precise order of times when he
threatens any nation with the chastisements which it deserved: but as I
conjecture he foretold this, The time when this burden wa^ threatened.
when the two kings of Israel and Syria had invaded Judah: having therewithal
conspired the destruction of the Church. For in as much as he ioines the
Israelites and Syrians together, he calls them both to the same judgment; to
let them understand that they had so profited by this wicked and cursed league,
that both of them should be inwrapped in one and the same destruction. The
Prophets meaning then is to comfort the faithful of the tribe of Judah,
because he especially had regard to them (and not to the Israelites nor
Syrians, whose ruin he now foretells) lest they should be left comfortless.

The particle demonstratiue, Behold, seals up as it were the truth of this
prophecy. Whereas he only mentions Damascus in particular, it follows not
therefore that he meant to exempt the other parts of the kingdom: but this
manner of speech is very usual in the Prophets, namely, to take a part for the
whole, so as under the ruin of the principal City, Reasons why the Prophets
threaten ruin to the chief Cities, rather then to the inferior.
he comprehends that which should

Verse. 2. The Cities of Aroer shall be forsaken: they shall be for the flocks;
for they shall be there, and none shall make them afraid.
Number. 32.34 Deuteronomy. 2.^6. and 3.12. and 4.48.
IT is uncertain whether by Aroer here, he means that City whereof mention is
made elsewhere. It should rather be the name of a Region or Country; howsoever
he describes the form of a Country laid waste: for he says, that the places
where Cities were built, should now be common pastures; so as nothing should
remain but the lodges and tents of sheepheards: for if any inhabitants were
left there, they should drive their flocks to another place.

Verse. 3. The munition also shall cease from Ephraim, and the Kingdom from
Damascus: and the remnant of Aram shall be as the glory of the children of
Israel, says the Lord of hosts.
He now shows the cause why the Lord would cut off the Kingdom of Syria. The
Prophet Amos recites many: Amos 1.3. But that which Isaiah mentions here, was
the principal; to wit, that they had drawn the Kingdom of Israel to the bent
of their bow, to make war against the Jews. No doubt but the Israelites were
enticed by the flatteries of the Syrians, to make a league with them to fight
against their brethren. And the better to deceive them, the Syrians alleged
that they would aid them against all their adversaries. And therefore the
Israelites also rested themselves upon the strength of their confederates: so
as they were persuaded, that none were too hard for them. Under the word
Ephraim, he means all Israel, as in many other places; for Ephraim was the
chief Tribe of the people. Besides, he says, that the munition and kingdom
shall cease from a place, when the strength thereof is broken, and the
excellency thereof brought low.

The remnant.] That is to say, the peoples both of Syria and Israel should be
brought to naught: and the better to authorize his prophecy, he adds
forthwith, that God has spoken it. Now when God punished these two kingdoms
so severely, no doubt but hereby he provided for the salvation of his Church,
redeeming and delivering it even by the destruction of the enemies. And for the
rooting out of them both, he used the help of the Assyrians, whom the Jews
themselves had called: in which fact of theirs, they sinned very grossly. Yet
could not their offense hinder the Lord from being careful of his Church; God
sometimes delivers his Church, by setting her adversaries together by the ears.
delivering it, by setting his enemies together by the ears. And by this we
may se^ how great care the Lord has of us, seeing he spares not to punish even
great and mighty kingdoms for our safety. We may It is fit we should now and
^h^n be left h^lpel^sse, to bring us to the true sight of our own we^ken^sse.
we begin so to pride our selves in it, that we can give God no audience. He
must be feign therefore to remove all impediments out of our way, to the end we
may come to the true sight of our poverty: as it happened to the Israelites,
who were stripped of all their succors, after Syria was once destroyed.

Verse. 4. And in that day the glory of Jacob shall be impouerished, and the
fatness of his flesh shall be made lean.

5. And it shall be as when the harvest man gathers the corn, and reapeth
the ears with his arm: and he shall be as he that gathers the ears in the
valley of Rephaim.


ALthough he had promised to speak of Syria and Damascus, The reason why the
Israelites are matched with the Syrians in this judgment.
yet now he ioynes the Israelites with the Syrians: and the reason is, because
they were confederates in one and the same quarrel. The Syrians, to whom
Isaiah especially directs his speech, were even as a firebrand to kindle the
wrath of the Israelites, as has been said: but the Israelites were no less
guilty, and therefore justly are they wrapped in the same afflictions, as if
they had been yoked with them. It is uncertain whether he means all the
elect people, when he speaks of Jacob; so as he should comprehend the Tribe of
Judah also. Yet is it very likely it should be referred to the ten Tribes
only, who challenged this name unto themselves: so as he calls them glorious,
by way of derision, because when they waxed proud of their strength, multitude,
and confederacies, they despised their brethren the Jews. Whereas he threatens
them afterward with leanness, he does it to tax their insolency: as on the
contrary the Prophets scorn and reproach them for being become fat. For their
prosperity made them proud, being puffed up with the fruitfulnes of their
country, even as fat horses overmuch pampered, are wont to kick with the
heel; which is the cause why Amos calls them fat kine: Amos. 4.1. Amos 4.1.
How wanton and lusty soever they were then, the Lord protests, that he will
take down their fat, which caused them to be so glorious.

And it shall be. Verse. 5.
] By this similitude he shows how fearful the judgment shall be. Look,
Simile.
how reapers gather the corn into their arms, so shall this multitude (how
great and mighty soever) be reaped by the enemies. And that he might not omit
any thing, harvest shall be ended, some loose ears shall be gathered, which
lay scattered here and there: as if he should say, After the multitude shall be
gathered in, and the land made bare, eue^ as a field that is reaped, the
remainder which shall be scattered, shall not therefore rest in safety.
Moreover, he harvest, because the people were grown secure upon trust of
their great multitude: But as the reapers are not amazed at all when they see
the corn very thick; so, says he, the great multitude shall not disable the
Lord from rooting them wholly out. We may in like manner refer this to the
Assyrians; but yet the sense will be ye same, because they were Gods servants
to execute this vengeance. We need not stand to debate much about ye verb To
gather, because it signifies nothing else but that the slaughter shall be like
an harvest, which being once ended, others are permitted to gleane the ears
which lie scattered. For after that the ten tribes had bin led captives, the
Assyrians gleaned up the remnant also, when they understood of their new
devices, 2. King. 17.4.5. He makes especial mention of Rephaim, because the
Israelites were well acquainted with the fruitfulnes of it.

Verse. 6. Yet a gathering of grapes shall be left in it, Chap. 24.13.
as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the utmost
bows, and four or five in the high branches of the fruit thereof, says the
Lord God of Israel.
HE had preciselie affirmed that nothing should remain of the discomfiture;
even as if the name of the nation should be utterly defaced. Now he adds a
consolation A Consolation.
to assuage the bitterness of the slaughter. For he shows yt there shall some
remain, although the enemies determined to consume and destroy plucks his vine
so clean but there will some grape or cluster lie hidden under the leaves:
Likewise as a man never shakes his olives so thorowlie but that some one will
hang still in the top of the trees: so howsoever the enemies be enraged, and
the wrath of God kindled, yet as he therein shows himself a severe Judge, so
will he show himself gracious and merciful, in reserving a small number; in
not suffering the spoil of the enemies to fall upon his elect. Whence we may
gather, In wrath God always remembers me^cie.
that his mercy will always take place in the midst of his most fierce
vengeance. For he speaks here of the children of Abraham, who albeit they were
revolted from God, and had made themselves unworthy of their adoption, yet did
the goodness of God overcome their malice. True it is they had deserved no such
favor, but yet must the covenant of the Lord remain sure and inviolable, so
as the testimony thereof appears in this remnant, although the people for
their parts had abolished it wholly as much as lay in them. Which we ought
diligently to observe, that when we see no face of the Church at all, The
Church may seem at sometime to be utterly wasted, but God still reserues a
small remna^t because of his prom^se.
but that the faithful seem to be perished, we should not think it is
therefore raced out, because God is immutable, who has promised that it shall
stand for ever, Genesis 17.7. There shall ever be some remain then, although to
outward appearance we oftentimes behold the contrary.

Verse. 7. At that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes shall look
to the hol^e one of Israel.
NOw he sets forth the fruit of this chastisement: The second consolation.
and this is the second consolation, which should sustain the faithful in
their adversities. For howsoever they felt nothing shall look unto God, which
is the most desirable good thing of all others. For when we return unto God,
then the world, which was laid wast before, begins to be brought into his right
frame again. Therefore when we are estranged from him, because none of us
repents willingly, we can not be brought back again into the right way
unless he use the spur and corrections to drive us forward. Hereby then we
are admonished to bear our chastisements cheerefullie, seeing God uses the^
as means to purge us from a most deadly apostasy. For to look unto God, God
vset^ corrections as a special remedy to preserve us from apostacy.
is nothing else but (having once turned out of the way) to come into his favor
by turning again unto him, and to put our selves under his protection. What is
the cause why men give over themselves to all leaudnes? Surely because they
forget God. What it is to turn unto God.

Knowledge of God breeds reverence: forgetfulness contempt.


For where the true knowledge of God is, there is also reverence of his
Majesty joined with it: and wheresoever forgetfulness bears sway, there
contempt must needs reign. Although this manner of speech appertain properly
to faith, as if he should say, when the Israelites shall be once tamed by these
sharp chastisements, they shall then feel by experience that there is no
succor but in God alone: in which sense he presently adds the word maker.
Truly it was a detestable senselesnes that they rested not upon that God only
who had endued them with so many excellent gifts. The Prophet shows then that
they shall become wiser by being humbled under calamities and afflictions, and
shall begin to hope in him who had bound them unto him by so many benefits.

He calls God their maker, not as in regard that he created all mankind, but
in the same sense that he calls him the holy one of Israel. Although then that
all me^ be created according to Gods image, yet Israel was properly the work
of his hands, Genesis 1.27. Exodus 19.6.
because they were his holy inheritance and chosen people. And this repetition
is used to signify the same thing according to the common custom of the
Hebrew tongue. He calls God holy, not only because he is so in himself, but
also in regard of the effect, for he sanctifies and chooses to himself the
children of Abraham: whence it follows, that the creation whereof he speaks,
ought to be referred to spiritual regeneration, for so God is specially
called the maker of Israel.

Verse. 8. And he shall not look to the Altars, the works of his own hands;
neither shall he look to those things which his own singers have made, as
groves and images.
THis exposition declares more clearly, that this looking, whereof he spoke in
the former verse, is to be understood properly of faith and hope. For he
says, that all false trusts shall vanish, when men begin once to hope in God:
for the very truth is, no man beholds the Lord aright, that forsakes not al his
superstitions. And therefore we are here taught to take away all impediments if
we will have access unto God: those therefore do foully deceive themselves,
who will join him with idols; as the Jews once did, and as the Papists now
do: and note we also, that this vice has not reigned for a day or two in the
world, but always. Let us the^ utterly abando^ all those obstacles, that so
resting ourselves upon the only goodness of our God, we may rightly and
clearly behold him, and put our whole confidence in his mercy.

Now that he might more plainly show his detestation, he calls the false
gods the work of their hands: that the Israelites being ashamed of their
folly, might put away and rid their hands of such a reproachful imputation. Now
he spares no words in describing this sin, because they were principally
defiled with it: as indeed there is no wickedness more abominable in Gods
sight then it. They had an infinite number of superstitions among them, and had
set up idols and altars in innumerable places; so as Isaiah had just occasion
to reprove and press this sin home upon them.

made with men's hands as others were; yet ought they not to respect either the
matter or workmanship, but God himself which was the author of it, at whose
commandment this Altar was set up. And therefore the essential form (as you
would say) which it had received by the word of God, must be considered: and
none account to be made of the rest, because God himself was the master
builder of it. As for other Altars, howsoever they somewhat resembled that at
Jerusalem; yet were they detestable, because they had received no authority
from Gods word. And the like reckoning may we make of all the inventions of
man's brain; let them have what goodly appearance soever of holiness you will:
God can allow of nothing, but that which he has consecrated by his word.
for God cannot allow any thing but that which is consecrated by his word.

Verse. 9. In that day shall the Cities of their strength be as the forsaking of
boughs and branches, which they did forsake, because of the children of
Israel; and there shall be desolation.
HE goes on still with that which he began to speak of touching the
destruction of the inhabitants of the land. Now because the Israelites thought
themselves safe in regard of their bulwarks and strong Cities, he threatens
that this shall stand them in no more stead, than if the enemies walked through
desert places. Whereas some think that Choresh and Azt^bath are the proper
names of Cities, it is far fetched: I rather understand it that he speaks
here of thornie or untilled places: as if he should say, Your defense of walls
and ditches, shall serve you to no more purpose, then if you dwelt among
thorns and bushes. I make no doubt but the particle Asher, stands here for a
note of similitude, and therefore I have translated it, A^^ so that the Prophet
should say all with a breath (as it were) that the people shall now be
scattered by a fearful flight, even as God once drove out the Cananites
before them. Those which make this particle a relative, are constrained to
supply something, and to break off the course of the speech.

But the Prophet puts them in mind of an ancient example, to the end the
Israelites might perceive how vain and deceivable that defense is, which is
opposed against the hand of God. It is a very grievous reproach: for the
Israelites considered not that God had given them this land to inherit, to the

This text will be the easier to understand out of Moses, whom the Prophets
often follow: for in the promises, he says thus in express terms; One of you
shall chase a thousand: and contrariwise in the threatings; A thousand of you
shall be chased by one: Leu. 26.8. Deuteronomy. 32.30. Josh. 13.10. Even as he had then
so astonished the Cananites, that they fled by and by before the Israelites: so
also did he punish the unthankfulness of the people, by leaving them without
power to resist. Thus the Lord manifested his power two ways: first, in
driving out the Cananites: secondly,

Verse. 10. Because thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation, and have not
remembered the Or, rock.
God of thy strength: therefore shall thou set pleasant plants, and shall
graffe strange vine branches.
HE shows the cause why God handled the ten Tribes so severely, lest they
should complain that they suffered wrongfully, or were hardly dealt with. To
be short, his meaning is to say, that all these afflictions are come upon them,
because they have wickedly contemned God. For their unthankfulness was too too
vile, and altogether inexcusable; that having received so many benefits, they
should now prostitute their hopes, by resting upon the help of idols and
profane nations: as if they had never tasted the bounty of God in any thing.
Indeed none of the unbelievers being called to judgment, shall be able to
excuse themselves for not offering wrong to God in runnning after creatures.
But the case was far otherwise with the Israelites, to whom God had manifested
himself in such wise, that they ought to have rested in his favor alone, and
to have rejected all the corruptions that reigned in the world. Justly then are
they condemned of ingra^itude, in that they buried the matter of true
confidence in forgetfulness. And to speak the truth, after God has once
caused us to taste the sweetness of his fatherly goodness, if it take deep
root in our hearts indeed, in cannot possibly come to pass, that we should
finally set our hearts upon the inordinate love of creatures. Whence it
follows, that those are very ungrateful, which trot hither and thither, not
contenting themselves with God alone for by this means they set naught by his
inestimable bounty. Therefore it is that the Prophet expressly calls him the
God of salvation, and the rock of strength The word Tsur, signifies both the
one and the other: for it was a most prodigious thing not to hold themselves
faithful unto God, who had so oftentimes delivered them, and that as it were
by an outstretched arm.

The sin.
Whereas he adds, And have no^ remembered: it serves for amplification; because
he closely taxes them of wicked forgetfulness, in not considering how many
favors God had showed them before. The punishment.
Thou shall plant. Now follows the punishment; lest they should imagine this
their unthankfulness should escape scot-free; to wit, because they had
forsaken the fountain of all good things. For albeit they should take care how
to live, yet should they be consumed by penury and famine: because the enemy
shall spoil and waste whatsoever they have gotten by their industry. This
place is taken out of Mose^: for this curse among others is there pronounced.
Deuteronomy. 28.30.39. Whence we may see, The Prophets are the true expositours of the
Law.
that the Prophets borrowed many things out of Moses, and are the true
expositours of the Law; as I have often showed. He speaks of pleasant vines,
and of branches brought from far, because the greatness of the loss should
augment their sorrow.

Verse. 11. In the day shall thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning
shall thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be gone in the day
of possession, and there shall be despera^^ sorrow.
THou shall make to grow.] He signifies a continual husbandry employed about
planting and sowing. Yet may we understand it of the success that comes of it:
as if a vine newly planted, should immediately bring forth wine. This agrees
with that which is presently added; where the morning is taken for the day: and
thus it seems he should speak of a sudden ripening; unless any had rather
refer it to diligence, because they were busy at work by break of day. There
is some ambiguitie in the words: for some turn it, The branch shall be gone in
the day of affliction. But seeing the word Chalah, signifies Heritage, it
should signify properly (as I think) in this place, a gathering together:
neither do I see how the word Branch should agree. I confess indeed that
when they speak of vines, the word Harvest is used; but abusiuely. It might
also be translated, Collecting: yet would I not obstinately stand to contend
about these two words, because the sense will always be one; provided that the
foresaid word be taken for the gathering of fruits. Thus then the text will
run well; Although thou ceasest not from labor, holding thy self hard at it
from morning to night: yet shall thou gain nothing by it, because the fruit
shall wither of it self, by the shaking of the bows; or, thy vines shall be
spoiled.

Thus then by the figure Synecdoche, under the verb To plant, he comprehends
a daily labor which husbandmen and vine-dressers take in the fields and
vineyards. Such a labor must needs be very irksome, and proceeds from the
very curse of God. For if he that is destitute of possessions, be oftentimes
banished out of his Country, he will not be so much grieved as he that
inioyeth fruitful lands, especially if he have bestowed any long time in
husbanding of them: the Lord then meant to execute his vengeance upon the
Israelites, because they had abused the abundance of the land, and let loose
the raines unto all excess. The like punishment is also threated generally to
all the wicked; to wit, that they shall rise early, and labor extreme^y;
because it shall be without any fruit: whereas on the contrary, those which
rest upon the Lord, are well assured to reap the certain fruit of their
labors, because the blessing of God accompanies the work of their hands.
Read Psalm 127.2. and 128.2.

Verse. 12. Ah, the multitude of many people, they shall make a sound like the
noise of the sea: for the noise of the people shall make a sound like the noise
of mighty waters.
OThers expound Ah, Woe, as if it were a curse: sometimes it is used as a word
of calling, as we have seen heretofore. But as I think, it should rather
signify Alas in this place: for he mournes for the calamity which he foresaw
would befall Israel: be it that he does it of a brotherly affection, or that
he thereby would pierce the deeper into the hearts of this senseless and
blockish people. No question but the Prophets feared the vengeance of God
whereof they were the Heralds, more then any other: and howsoever they
sharply threatened the people as in regard of the person they sustained, yet
did they never so cast off the affection of love, but they always had
compassion of those that should perish. Notwithstanding the consideration of
the covenant which God had contracted with the seed of Abraham, was the cause
of this: and we see that this affection was in S. Paul, who desires to be
accursed for his brethren the Jews, Romans 9.3. When Isaiah then sets the matter
thus before his eyes, it could not be but that he was touched with extreme
grief. Now in that he sets this destruction before the view of the Israelites
as if he himself beheld it, it is to confirm his threatening, as we have
showed elsewhere. The word multitude is set down, because the army was
gathered of many and diverse nations, whereof the Monarchy of the Assyrians was
composed. By the similitudes which he adds afterward, his meaning is only to
amplify his speech: for he compares the enemies to a Sea or deluge which
drownes the whole country.

Verse. 13. The people shall make a sound like the noise of many waters: but God
shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the
chafe of the mountains before the wind, and as a rolling thing before the
whirlewinde.
ALthough he seems to continue on the threatening which he began before, yet
does he now begin to comfort the faithful, by repeating again the very same
words with the former: as if he should say, It must needs be that those who
have forgotten God should be chastised, and as good as overwhelmed for their
wicked revolt: but the Lord according to his wonted goodness will repress the
overmuch cruelty of the enemies; for having once served himself of their rough
dealing, he will find a means well enough to beat them back and chase them
away. See here a singular consolation, by which he meant to put the faithful
which remained in good hope. Now he speaks not of the Jews only, as the most
have imagined, for hitherunto he has directed his speech unto the ten Tribes:
amongst whom no doubt there were some that truly feared God; who had been left
in a desperate case if they had had no promise whereon to rest.

By these similitudes he describes horrible storms and tempests: for when the
holy Ghost would comfort the faithful, he sets those things before them which
are wont most of all to terrify and cast down their spirits: to the end we
might learn that it is easy for the Lord to still all the violence of
tempests, be they never so furious. And look how he has the sea, the winds,
and tempests at his command, so easily can he curb the rage and violence of
their enemies. Therefore he by and by after compares the Assyrians to straw, or
stubble: for howsoever their fury was terrible to the Israelites, yet the
Prophet shows notwithstanding that they are no more in Gods account then
straws or rushes: because without any pains whatsoever he will scatter all
their preparations. They were not then to judge of their forces and power
according to sense. As often therefore as we see that the wicked have gotten the
bridle in their necks to run upon us for our destruction, let us arm our
selves (as much as is possible) with this meditation: A meditation of great use.
True it is that we see no matter of hope left, but God sees a means ready
to bring all powers that are raised up against us to naught. The word Galgal,
signifies a round thing which the wind drives easily away.

Verse. 14. And lo, in the evening there is trouble: but before the morning it
is gone. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us.
THe sense is this, look how a tempest raised up in the evening appears not
in the morning if it be by and by appeased: so also shall it come to pass that
immediately after the enemies shall be driven away, you shall suddenly epsy
(beyond all hope) a sweet and quiet calm. The Prophet meant to set down two
things: first, that the rage of the enemies A Consolation.
and fearful changes to approach: for is all this ought else then a tempest
which the Lord will easily still? Tyrants come upon us as waves and billows,
but the Lord will quickly disperse their rage: let us therefore patiently
wait for his help. For albeit he now and then suffers us to be tossed to and
fro, yet will the Lord in the end bring us to the haven, and that even through
the midst of all storms.

Now if the Prophet thus comforted a small handful of the remnant, we need not
doubt but this promise also belongs unto us. For we in deed are but an
handful, and the poor Church is shut up within very narrow bounds. But if we
consider the estate of this kingdom of Israel, how small a number of Gods
servants was to be found there? Alas there was none almost that durst open his
mouth, so much was religion and godliness hated of all sorts. Although then
that the Lord destroies the multitude of the wicked, yet will he always leave
some planke for his Church to save her self from shipwreck, and to bring the
small remnant of the poor faithful, who are tossed with others as in the same
ship, to a safe hau^n.

This is the portion.] He speaks of the faithful which were hid in the
kingdom of Israel, and ioynes them to the body of the Church, although the
members were scattered here and there; as it often comes to pass to the
children of God. And here we may behold the end of the wicked, The end of
persecutors.
which have persecuted us. For howsoever we be exposed to their rage and fury,
although they spoil, rob, and tread us under foot, offering us all the
outrages in ye world; yet shall they be but like unto waves, which disperse
themselves by their own violence, and so vanish suddenly away. We ought to
wait till the like befalles all such tyrants at this day, who miserably vex
and afflict the Church, and handle the children of God unkindly. Let this
consolation then be engraven in the table of our hearts, being fully assured
that the like judgment will overtake them.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Oh the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the river of
Ethiopia.
I Cannot affirm of what people Isaiah speaks; although it be apparent enough
that it was some country bordering upon Ethiopia. Some refer it to the whole
land of Egypt; but without any good probability, seeing he makes a particular
treatise thereof in the Chapter following: and therefore we must understand
this as spoken to a people separate from the Egyptians. Many suppose that it
should be the Troglod^tes; which yet seems not very likely, because they had
no familiarity with other nations: for their speech (as the Cosmographers
testify, was rather a whistling or h^ssing, then any distinct sound of words.
But as touching these here mentioned, it is plain that they had both society
and league with other nations. Yet is it uncertain whether they conspired
against the Jews or no, or whether they joined with the Egyptia^s to make war
upon the Assyrians. If they were the open adversaries of the Jews, then Isaiah
denounces their punishment. But contrariwise, if they did feed the Jews with
deceitful promises, he shows that they were to expect no succor from them;
because they did nothing but entertain time with their frivolous messages. How
ever it be, we may gather by that which he speaks of the nations near
adjoining, which he will name in this Chapter, in what place this people was
seated; to wit, very near unto Egypt and Ethiopia. Unless any had rather
affirm, that it is meant of part of the sea coast of Ethiopia; Chap. 37.9.
because it will appear by the 37. Chapter of this book, that the Assyrians
had war with the King of Ethiopia. Now when it is said, that this land makes
a shadow with wings, it appears that the sea was nigh unto it; so as it became
rich in regard of much navigations. For small and poor regions cannot frequent
nor occupy in strange Countries. His meaning is then, that this people used to
traffic much by sea.

Verse. 2. Sending Ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of Or, ru^^e^.
reeds upon the waters, saying; Go ye swift messengers, to a nation that is
scattered abroad and spoiled, to a terrible people from their beginning even
hitherto; a nation by little and little, even trodden under foot, On every
side.
whose land the floods have spoiled.
THis is properly to be referrred to the state of those times. It seems that
this people had solicited the Egyptians, or Syrians, to vex the Jews: or else
that the Assyrians used them to molest the Country of Judea; or, that they were
companions of the Egyptians, joining hand in hand to beat back the Assyrians,
lest they should wax too strong and mighty. We can affirm nothing but by way
of conjecture, because all histories are silent in this behalf. Seeing then
that we want witnesses in this case, we must use probable conjectures. It is
very likely that these iournies were not taken in hand to go to some place
near unto them, but far off. Whereas he calls them ships of rushes, we
are not to think it strange; because it appears by ancient histories, that
the Egyptians commonly used such vessels by sea, in regard that Nilus is so
steep and dangerous to those that sail in it in some places, by reason of the
height from whence the waters do violently fall; (which they call Catadupes)
that it is impossible to bring ships of wood that way, without breaking and
renting them upon the rocks. And therefore they are constrained to use little
pliable vessels. And lest the water should enter in and drown them, the
histories say, that these ships were lined with pitch in the insides of them.

Go ye swift posts.] This place is obscure; yet will I follow that
interpretation which I take to be most probable. The Prophet shows the end of
his prophecy; that is to say, why he foretold the destruction of this people;
to wit, (if we take them for the sworn enemies of the Jews) to bring some
consolation to the faithful, which were miserably scattered and dispersed,
that by receiving this good tidings, they might rejoice and give thanks unto
God. But if any had rather say that the Jews were drawn by this nation to an
unlawful league, then this exhortation is by way of deriding them, so as he
rebukes the folly of the elect people, who forsook God to depend upon vain
and frivolous succors. For whereas some attribute these words unto God, as if
he should command these nations inhabiting near the sea to hasten to the
destruction of the Jews: I see not how it should agree to the sense of the
text. Neither is there any more appearance in that which others think, to wit,
that by the words following the Prophet s^te forth the destruction of this
obscure and unknown people, because that by the spoiled people he means the
Iew^s, which should be vexed and scattered after a strange manner, so as no part
amongst them whatsoever should remain safe.

He calls them a terrible nation, because they should be an astonishment to
all those that should behold them, being disfigured with such horrible
calamities. For I cannot approve of their judgment who expound this of signs
and wonders which the Lord showed amongst the Jews to make them feared of all:
he has regard rather to that place of Moses where it is said, The Lord shall
make thee an astonishment and a wonder, Deuteronomy. 28.28.37: also, the nodding of
the head, and a proverb and derision is used in other places, Iere. 18.16. and
19.8. and 25.18. He signifies a people then whose sight shall be so fearful,
that they shall be an astonishment unto all: and we know that as this was
foretold, so also did it come to pass to the Jews.

When it is said on every side, it is as much as if one should draw lines, and
that they should be so well knit together, as there should no place be left
empty between them: or as if an husbandman made such furrows in his field,
that he leaves not one clot of earth unturned up, or broken. Thus was this
people beaten down and broken.

By the floods, he means a great army of enemies, to wit, or the Assyrians.
Now he alludes to that which he said before in the 8. Chapter, verse. 6. to wit,
that the people being discontented with their little river Shilo, desired
rather roaring and violent waters. After then that they had called the^ forth
for their succor, they were overwhelmed by them as with a deluge. So that the
cause of all this ill success was for that they contented not themselves with
Gods promises, but sought out strange helps. If now then this commandment
given to the swift posts be taken as from the person of God; thence we gather
that he does not always assist his elect at the first brunt, but withholds his
help till things be grown to a desperate estate. For he sends not a joyful
and happy message to those that were in safety, or to those that were only
lightly touched with the rod, but to a nation spoiled and trodden under foot:
yet in that he commands them to hasten, his meaning is, that the judgment
shall be sudden and unlooked for; so as light shall shine out of darkness (as it
were) even in a moment.

Verse. 3. All ye the inhabitants of the world and dwellers in the earth shall
see when he sets up a sign in the mountains, and when he blows the
trump, ye shall hear.
HE shows that this work of God shall be so excellent, that the Jews shall
not only perceive it, but all the inhabitants of the world also. These words
which are put in the future tence, are by some translated in the Imperative,
according to the scripture phrase: but it agrees best to take it in the time to
come. As if he should say, even the people far off shall ^e witnesses of this
calamity: because all shall behold the st^ndard, and shall hear trumpets
sounding thorowout the world. And hence it shall appear, that this war was
not raised up by men; but that God himself will show that he is the only
author of it, and that by excellent witnesses. When wars are made every man
discernes what is done openly: but the greater part of men attribute both the
beginnings and issues thereof unto fortune. Isaiah contrariwise shows, that
all these things ought to be attributed unto God, because he will plainly
manifest his power by a new and extraordinary means: for he works so
sometime, that his hand is hidden, and his work unknown unto men, And
sometimes again he shows his power in such wise that every one is constrained
to acknowledge it, and that is it which the Prophet meant to say in this place.

Verse. 4. For so the Lord said unto me, I will rest and behold in my tabernacle
as the heat drying up the rain, and as a cloud of dew in the heat of
harvest.
AFter he has threatened the destruction of the Ethiopians or of their
neighbors; and having therewithal showed that great consolation should
thereby redound to the Jews; or else by way of a flout having derided the
foolish confidence which deceived them: now he adds that God will so moderate
these confusions, that he will in the end gather his chosen people unto
himself. The particle Ci, which I have translated Furthermore, is sometime put
for showing the cause; sometimes aduersatiuelie. But the latter sense in this
place seems to agree best: the reason is, because the Prophet preuents a doubt
which might otherwise have greatly troubled the consciences of the weak. For
when we see things in an vproare, there is a veil forthwith spread as it were
over our eyes* which takes away from us the sight of God^ providence: for the
estate of this people whose destruction he threatens was such, that this
prophecy might seem a fable or matter of scorn: for (as we may collect)
there was no danger nor change to be expected.

Some refer this to the person of Isaiah, as if he satisfied himself, by
depending upon that which God had revealed unto him: that is to say, as if he
had now quieted and settled his mind; which indeed we ought to do after we
have heard the voice af God, waiting assuredly for the accomplishment of that
which is foretold us. As Abacuk says; I will stand in my watchtower: Abac:
2.1. But I rather think, that the Prophet recites that which the Lord6 had
revealed unto him, and that the Lord himself pronounces this sentence with
his own mouth: as if he should say, I will rest; that is, I will hold me still
and do nothing: for the word also signifies to See. Now he which looks
earnestly, acts nothing; but only contents himself with beholding that he
sees with pleasure and delight.

Hereunto serves also the word Tabernacle; as if the Lord should rest himself
on ^he roof of an house: (...) on the contrary, he is said to ascend into his
judgment seat, when he auengeth himself upon the wicked behauiours of the
unbelievers: for these phrases of speech are fitted to our capacity. Unless
any had rather affirm, that the Prophet alludes to the Sanctuary: so as
howsoever the majesty of the Lord may seem to be hidden for a time from this
afflicted people, yet should not his rest be utterly without fruit. The sum
of all is this; that howsoever all things should be confounded, so as one might
imagine that God would meddle no more with the government of the world; yet
does he take his ease on this wise, as you would say of set purpose, even as if
he were shut up, and fallen asleep in a chamber, minding to manifest the
fruit of this his rest in due season.

As the heat drying up.] Isaiah does yet better express that which he has
said before, by this similitude. We may apply it to the Prophets meaning two
ways. First, as if God being awaked out of his sleep, would show such a
gracious countenance as should rejoice the Isaiah would say; Howsoever God
shows not himself careful after the manner of men, neither runs with
violent heat to take vengeance; yet has he secret means in his hands to
execute his judgments, and yet in the mean while never stir his least finger.
It may be also, that he meant to show that God would use an extraordinary
means in rooting out this people. But that which I touched erewhile may
suffice; to wit, that whilst men are besotted with prosper^ie, and drunken in
their delights, thinking that God has no more to do with them; even then
their destruction is at hand. The reason is, because God is able with his only
look to cast down all the forces and preparations of the whole world. And
therefore he says, he will be like to a fair bright day, and to the heat,
drying up the rain: secondly, to a watrish cloud, in the hottest day of
summer. Now we know that such a rain is very fit to ripen fruits; and that
the heat coming after the rain, brings them forward and makes them swell;
because it disperseth all the moisture that is in them, by the force of his
heat.

This it it then which the Prophet meant to say, that howsoever many miseries
and calamities be prepared for the reprobates, yet all things notwithstanding
falls out for a while as they would wish; The wicked are near to their ruin
then, when they think themselves most secure.
so as they seem the only happy men in the world; no otherwise then if God
meant to sati^sfie them to the full with the ^^st of his benefits. But in
conclusion, they shall find that they were only fatted up, as Oxen for the
slaughter: for they shall perish in an instant, and that even then, when they
seemed to be come to the very top of their happiness. Whence we may learn,
that we are not to judge of Gods judgments according to outward appearance:
for when the wicked think themselves most secure, then their ruin and
overthrow is at the doors. Thus does he comfort the faithful in very fit
season, lest they should think the unbelievers more happy then themselves,
because God winked at their faults: for albeit he seems to cocker them whom
he so forbeares, yet will he quickly bring them to destruction.

Now we are to apply these things to these miserable and troublesome times
wherein the persecuting tyrants of the Church have their full swinge, abounding
in all wealth; A consolation for the Church.
bringing their enterprises to pass no less then if all things were in their
own power: why so? because they surpass all others in strength, counsel, and
policy. But let us know for certain, that all these things are brought to
pass by the determinate counsel of God, who is contented to let them go on
forward with their deliberations, and lets them prosper: that so he may at the
last destroy and utterly cut them off. I am not ignorant that some others draw
the words of the Prophet to another sense: but I hope, that whosoever shall
wisely consider the whole context, will easily subscribe to mine exposition.

Verse. 5. For before the harvest, when the flower is finished, and the fruit is
ripening in the flower, then he shall cut down the branches with hooks; and
shall take away, and cut off the boughs.
WOrd for word it is, For the presence of the harvest: but we must a little
mitigate the sharpness of the words. The Prophets meaning is not obscure: for
when harvest draws near, and that grapes be ripe, the wicked shall find
themselves disappointed, and that suddenly of their whole revenue; in hope
whereof they meant to glad themselves. Thus he goes on still with the same
matter, and confirms that which he spoke before by the former similitudes; to
wit, that the wicked are not overthrown at the first, but flourish for a time,
and the Lord seems to spare them: but when the harvest is come, and that the
vines have once budded and blossomed so as the juice begins to utter it self,
then are the very branches cut up by the roots. So, when the wicked are near
unto their ripenes, they shall not only be deprived of the fruit they expected,
but shall be cut up root and rind.

The Lord will give this issue to wicked men, after he has suffered them to
enjoy their delites for a time: for they shall be so rooted up, that they shall
never be able to revive, nor yet to be planted in any sort. From hence then we
gather a singular consolation, to wit, A singular ^onsolation.
that when the Lord seems to wink at the practices of the adversaries, he
thereby tries our faith, but yet suffers not things to be guided by the
unbridled hand of blind fortune, as profane men think. For he is in heaven as
in his Tabernacle, and is resident in his Church as in a poor tent or cottage,
yet so, as he will come forth when it shall be The reason why God suffers the
wicked to flourish for a while
For if he should cut them off as corn before it be ripe, we should neither so
certainly nor clearly know his power nor his goodness, as when he suffers them
to grow up to their full height, suffering them to be full eared and to flourish,
to the end that their own weight may the sooner overthrow them, or that he
himself may cut them up with his sickle as fat and full ears.

Verse. 6. They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to
the beasts of the earth: for the foul shall summer upon it, and every beast
shall winter upon it.
HE shows that the wicked shall be rejected as a thing of naught: Matt. 3.12.
Luke 3.17.
John Baptist in like manner compares them to chafe which is cast out upon the
dunghill. And Isaiah shows, that they shall be left to the beasts and birds,
so as the birds shall make their nests in the mids of them in summer, and the
beasts shall make their lodgings in them in the winter: as if he should say,
they shall not only be a reproach unto men, but even to beasts also. Such then
is the condition of the wicked, who think themselves cocksure even then when
they lift up themselves most against the poor Church. But the birds shall make
their nests upon them on the one side, and they shall serve for houses and food
for the wild beasts on the other side: so as they shall not only be in worse
case then the meanest man in the world, but their condition shall be far
binferior to that of the brute beasts: for being exposed to all shame and
contempt, they shall manifest to the whole world that Gods providence is
wonderful.

Verse. 7. At that time shall a present be brought unto the Lord of hosts (a
people that is Or, rent, or torn.
scattered abroad, and spoiled, and of a terrible people from their beginning
hitherunto, a nation by little and little even trodden under foot, whose land
the rivers have spoiled to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, even
the mount Zion.
THe Prophet shows again wherefore he threatened the ruin of this profane
people. For in as much as all nations in a manner had conspired the destruction
of the Church, it should seem that her utter subversion was now come. The Lord
shows then that he will assist her in due season; for had he not resisted such
enterprises, and repressed the plots of the enemies betimes, the Jews might
have despaired: therefore he lets it be known that he has a care of his
Church, so as howsoever it pleases him to chastise her, yet shall she feel
his help in time convenient. Yea, he will oppose his strength against the
power of tyrants and of her enemies, lest they should overthrow her, and so
attain their long expected hopes. That the Jews then might be imboldned to
wait with patience, he not only separates them from the Ethiopians, but
aduertiseth them in like manner that God will moderate his judgments for their
salvation.

Now he alludes to the second verse of this Chapter, where we saw the people
of the Jews termed by these names and titles. He uses the verb To bring,
because before this they should be led away as captives, so as it should be no
more lawful for them to go up to the Temple, then for foreign nations. We
must also note this word Rent: for his meaning is that the people shall be
scattered, as if he should say, Howsoever you must be brought to a small
number, and shall be but a poor remnant, yet shall this little portion that
remains be offered unto God for a sacrifice.

From hence we are to gather a most fruitful doctrine, and exceeding fit for
our time A doctrine of singular use.
We see the Church at this day to be almost past recovery; for she is
scattered, oppressed, overwhelmed, and trodden down on ever side. What ought
we to do in the mids of so great distresses? We must lay fast hold upon these
and the like promises; and assure our selves that howsoever the world go, yet
God will defend and maintain his Church. And albeit she be as a body torn in
pieces, and scattered here and there, yet will he easily gather her scattered
members together again, by the work of his spirit: for he will never suffer
the remembrance of his name, nor the invocation thereof to perish. The Lord
will so work, that of these pieces which lie now scattered here and there,
there shall be a people made and gathered together. For it is easy with him to
gather into one, those whom he knits together by the unity of his Spirit,
although they be divided far asunder one from another. Although then that we
see the Church diminished, and some of her members cut off; yet shall some gift
be reserved out of her, to be presented and offered unto the Lord.

To the place of the name] The Prophets are accustomed to use this manner of
speech often. For when they mention the service of God, they set is forth by
external exercises: as by altars, sacrifices, washings, and such like. Now the
very truth is, that in regard the service of God is internal, it cannot be
represented but by outward signs; whereby men testify that they serve and
worship God. Now he names the mount of Zion here chiefly, because this place
was consecrated unto God, as the place wherein he would have sacrifices offered
unto him. For the Lord honored this place above al others in causing the
doctrine of his word to come out thence, as we have seen Chap. 2.3. so that
under this name we may rightly understand the pure and sincere worship of God.
To conclude, the Prophets describe not this service in such wise as it should
be after Christ his coming; but such as it was in their own times: the reason
is: because it was needful for them to apply themselves to the capacity of
the people whom they taught. Hence we may gather, that we appertain not unto
the Church, unless we be offered unto God in sacrifice: We can have no
assurance that we belong to the Church of God, unless we offer up our bodies
and souls a sacrifice unto God.
Romans 12.1. and 15.6. 2. Cor. 5.15. Whosoever he be the^ that challenges any
interest in God, let him offer himself up such a sacrifice unto him, and let
him no longer live unto himself, but give and consecrate himself unto God.
The means whereby this is done, is by the sword of Gods word, (to wit, the
Gospel) whereby Paul glorifieth that he sacrificed and offered up men unto
God: as Romans 15.6. before alleged.

By the place of the name of the Lord, he means not that the essence of God (of
which we must not think in any wise as of a carnal or earthly substance)
should be enclosed therein, as if he were tied to any one place: but because it
was the place wherein the Lord was pleased to manifest testimonies of his
power, and to be honored and called upon: where he also showed his presence by
his goodness and power; especially in regard of the weakness of the people,
who otherwise could not comprehend his majesty. And yet we are to note, that
we cannot be acceptable unto God, unless we be united unto him in the same
faith: that is to say, unless we be knit together as the members of his
Church. It is not needful indeed that we should run to Jerusalem or to mount
Zion: for Zion is now spread over all the world, and is consecrated unto God in
general. It remains then that we have the same faith amongst us, and that we
be joined and lincked together by the band of love. For if these be wanting in
us, then is there nothing in the midst of us but pollution; Where faith and
love is wanting, there all things are unclean unto us.
neither have we any thing that is holy and consecrated unto us.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The burden of Egypt. Behold the Lord rides upon a swift cloud, and
shall come into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence,
and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of her.
THE burden of Egypt.] Here the Prophet prophecieth against Egypt, because she
was ye, refuge unto which the Jews fled as soon as they saw any danger near.
For having forsaken the Lord, The reason why this burden is pronounced against
Egypt.
in whom they should have reposed all their help, they looked for no succor
at all, unless they had it from the Egyptians. And therefore it behooved that
this Nation also should be brought low: so as there should no riches nor
strength remain any longer in it to deceive the Jews withal: who (as long as
Egypt flourished, because it was well peopled, and furnished with all
provisions) contemned the Lord; or at the least made very slight reckoning of
his promises. There was a twofold evil then in this matter: first, that
whereas they should have rested upon

Behold the Lord rideth] This manner of speech is found in other places of the
Scripture, as in the 104. Psalm, verse 3. but only in general. But Isaiah
applies it here unto this prophecy; because the Egyptians thought themselves
so well fenced on every side, that God could no way find a gap open to enter
into their Country. He derideth this their foolish ouerweening then, and
against that, sets the high and mighty power of God, who is borne or carried
upon a swift cloud: by means whereof, he will easily enter in upon them,
neither shall any of their fortresses or bulwarks be able to keep them out.
Now because the riches of Egypt had not only bewitched the Jews, but their
false religion also, therefore the Prophet does in like manner tax their
sottishness in this behalf; because God would make all their help which they
looked for from idols, to vanish and come to naught also. I forbear to spend
time in showing the vanity of their childish conceits, which some have dreamed
of touching the idols of Egypt; to wit, that Christ made them fall down when
he fled thither in his infancy: for it deserves no refutation at all. Yet have
they abused this place to prove this goodly fiction, as also many places more
like unto it; and yet the Prophet meant no such matter. For he speaks of that
discomfiture which the Assyrians gave the Egyptians; showing how it ought to be
attributed unto God, and not unto fortune; as profane men are wont to do. He
shows then that this is a judgment of God: by whose hand all things that fall
out in heaven and in earth, are guided and governed.

Now he tells them that their idols shall fall: that is to say, that they
shall profit the Egyptians nothing at all, although they put their confidence
in them, and thought to be in safety under their protection. For it is not to
be imagined how much this people was addicted unto superstition; The Egyptians
gross idolaters.
insomuch as they worshipped cats, oxen, crocodiles; yea onions and all kinds
of plants. So as there was nothing to which they attributed not some divinity.
His meaning is to say then, that the power of all these false gods which the
Egyptians had taken for their patrons, shall fall to the ground. Having
therefore showed that the Egyptians do rest in vain upon their superstitions;
he therewithal also beats down the proud imaginations which they had
conceived in regard of their earthly powers. By the word heart, he means the
magnanimity which should quail at the length, even in the most valiant
amongst them: so as as they should not dare to enterprise any thing, although
they had all the furniture they could desire. Thus he shows that they shall
make war against God, who will so weaken their hearts within them, that they
shall wax cowards, when the time comes that they must enter battle with there
enemies. Neither does he say, that they shall be terrified only; but he adds,
that it shall be in the mid ^est of all the Kingdom, where was the safest and
quietest abiding; because they were there far enough off from all assaults of
the enemies. The faithful had good occasion to consider well of this, when the
Egyptians were at war: and we also ought to behold the same in all mutations
of Kingdoms, which proceeds from no other cause then the hand of God. If the
hearts of those, who are otherwise warlike persons, and have made great proof
of their valor, do fail them, if their forces be also feebled; all must be
attributed to the just vengeance of God.

Verse. 2. And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: so every one
shall fight against his brother, and every one against his neighbor; City
against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom.
HE here describes in a more special manner, with what calamity God was
determined to smite the Egyptians. In saying, Civil dissensions the worst
calamity that can befall a Commonwealth.
that he will set the Egyptians together by the ears; he means such civil
dissensions which cause those to be rent in sunder, which ought to defend one
another: which is the most hurtful mischief that can befall any City or
people. Now it was needful the Jews should be persuaded that God (in whose
hands the hearts of all men are) could make the Egyptians to be inflamed with
hatred one against another, by a secret instinct; whereby they might be
brought to destroy themselves, although they were more mighty then their
enemies abroad. Civil dissensions fall not out by chance, but Gods providence.
Hence we learn, that the people never fall to be mutinous, but the Lord sets
them on to fight and make war one with another: as if a man should gather a
company of Fencers together into the market place. For he sets them agog to
fight, and drives them forward to hurt; yea even to kill one another. So then
even as we are to attribute it unto God, when there is friendship and love
among Citizens: so also ought we to attribute it to his vengeance, when one of
them rises up against another, killing and murdering one another.

Now by way of amplification he adds that which is yet more horrible and
prodigious, to wit, that those who are knit together by parentage, shall band
themselves to destroy each other. If men be worse then beasts when (in
forgetting they are created of one and the same nature) they fight together:
how much more is it a thing abhorring to nature, that brethren or kinsfolks
should devour one another? By how much the more monstrous this is, so much the
more ought we to acknowledge it to be God his revenging hand, and his
fearful judgment upon them. It seems then that Isaiah proceeds by degrees:
for first of all he mentions the brother, neighbors, thirdly the Cities,
Kingdoms. By Kingdoms, he means the Provinces into

Verse. 3. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst of her, and will
destroy their counsel, Or, yea, though they should.
and they shall seek at the Idols, and at the sorcerers, and at them that
have spirits of divination, and at the soothsayers.
EVen as the Prophet in the former verses took heart and courage from the
Egyptians, so takes he from them now minds and spirits. These two things are
exceeding necessary for the defense of kingdoms; because wh^nsoeuer they he
taken away, there is no means left for upholding of a State. Now the Egyptians
thought themselves far before all other nations, What opinion the Egypti^s
had of themselves.
as touching the conceit they had of their own wisdom: and proudly disdained
them as barbarians; thinking themselves to be the only learned, industrious,
ciu^ll, courteous, and honest men of the world. For they bragged that they were
the inuenters of learning, that Philosophy and Astrology came from them: in a
word, Let not the wise m^n rejoice in his wisdom.
that Egypt was as it were the shop of all the liberal sciences. Therefore they
could not imagine that wisdom and counsel should thus fail from amongst
them: and doubtless if this prophecy had come to their view they would have
scorned it, thinking that the Sea should sooner lack water, and that the whole
order of nature should be ouerturned, then that they which thought themselves
so naturally wise, should become fools. Yet does Isaiah boldly affirm it:
for indeed, he spoke not of his own head, but having foretold that they should
be stripped of their pride and arrogancy; the context requires that we
understand now that they should be smitten with amazednes, seeing both these
faculties of the soul depended upon the free gift of God.

The word Ruaach in this place is taken for understanding, or sharpnes of wit:
which we ought d ligentlie to note, because many deceive themselves touching
this word. The former sentence is yet better expressed by the word counsel:
for thereby he shows whence this abasement should proceed; truly from this,
God would deprive them of counsel.

Yea though they should seek.] This is an anticipation or cutting them off:
for he preuents the objections which the Egyptians might m^ke. Have not we
gods to go and ask counsel at? Are there not wise men, diuiners, and
enchanters amongst us? and make thou so slight account of these? He affirms
that none of these shall do them any good, though they trust never so
confidentlie in them, being puffed up also with a vain persuasion of their
wisdom. I will not bestow much time about these names, wherein
notwithstanding it seems Isaiah proceeds on gods, then the magicians, and next
the diuiners and soothsayers.

Now they had their oracles, wherein they chiefly trusted: the magicians were
inferior to them, albeit they had great authority amongst them. In the third
place, when there was any question of things of small importance, then they
asked counsel of the diuiners and soothsayers. And thus you see that the
superstitious are so tossed up and down with unquietness, Idolaters so tossed
to and fro with restles though^s, that nothing can quiet them.
that nothing can content them. For as they are inconstant and variable upon
all occasions, so run they first to one shelter, and then to another: and in
the mean while Satan by that means does so cosen them, that in the beginning
he represents unto them some appearance of rest and quietness, which they make
account shall continue: but to no other end (as the sequel proves) but to
show them soon after, that being far off from their expectation, he might
vex and torment them so much the more; and constreine them still to be seeking
of new hopes. From whence we learn, that the only way to have true contentment
of heart, is to rest upon God only. The only way to attain true contentment.
And no doubt but the Prophet condemns these arts, as being far remote from
all reason. For God has manifested all things which are necessar^e to be
known by those arts and sciences which he has allowed, He that walks
plainly, walks safely.
and would we should use. If any man will be wise beyond these, he must of
necessity have the Devil for his scholemaster.

Verse. 4. And I will deliver the Egyptians into the hand of cruel Lords, and a
mighty King shall rule over them, says the Lord of hosts.
NOw he shows what should befall the Egyptians being once deprived of
understanding, and their courages being quailed, to wit, they were to expect
nothing but bondage and slavery. For a people being once destituted of
understanding and magnanimity, needs must they become their own overthrow,
although no enemy else should assail them. So that the Lord is wont after
this manner to revenge himself upon his enemies, depriving them of all means
whereby to defend their liberties. I grant that the Prophet threatens a thing
more grievous, to wit, that the dominion whereof the Egyptians proudly bragged,
should not only fall to the ground, but that they themselves also should be
subdued under a sore slavery and bondage. Now howsoever the word cruel be put
in the singular number, yet notwithstanding he says in the plural number
that they shall be in subjection to Lords, which is much more combersome to
bear, then if they should only obey one.

And a mighty King etc.] He means that the power of the tyrant under whom
they shall be subdued shall be so great, that it shall be hard for them to
recover their liberty. Histories make mention of diverse changes which have
happened in many Countries, which yet could not be kept long by those which
have conquered them. For oftentimes the keeping of that which a man has won
is more difficult, then the Conquest it self. But the Prophet tells us that
this estate shall not easily be changed, for the servitude of the Egyptians
shall be of long continuance: the reason is, none shall dare to oppose nor make
war against so mighty a Conqueror. We may also understand it thus, that
Princes over a small people are more courteous and humane toward their
subjects then those that are more puissant: who trusting unto their greatness,
let loose the raines to do whatsoever they list. For as they think, their
power is invincible; so do they give liberty to themselves to act whatsoever
their fancy drives the^ to. Whether of the two expositions we receive, the
sum will be this; That the Egyptians, who esteemed themselves in the first
rank, and the most renowned among men, shall fall into the power of another;
and shall be oppressed under an hard bondage; to wit, under a mighty King,
against whom, none shall dare to oppose himself. By this we may see how great
the folly of such men is, who desire a mighty King, that rules over many
Countries: as also how justly they are punished for their ambition, which yet
notwithstanding cannot be reformed, though so many experiences do daily fall
out in the world. France and Spain boast at this day, that they are subjects
to so mighty Princes: but they shall feel to their smart, how profitable such
a false pretense of honor is to them. But we have spoken of this matter before
in another place: Chap. 8.6, 7.

Verse. 5. And the waters of the sea shall fail, and the rivers shall be dried
up and wasted.

6. And the river shall go far away: the rivers of defense shall be emptied
and dried up: the reeds and flags shall be cut down.


HE goes on with that which he began before; to wit, that the fortresses in
which the Egyptians kept themselves so strongly, and in such security, should
avail them nothing at all. For they seemed to be impregnable, because they
were environed with the sea, with the river Nilus, and with many strong places:
and the histories testify, that the passages whereby they entered into the
Country, were very difficult, because there was no mouth or entrance into
Nilus: for which cause they could easily repulse the ships which came to land
there. Thus they glorified much in this goodly seat and place that was so
strong by nature: even as the Venecians at this day, seeing themselves so
strongly environed with deep and long rivers, think themselves altogether
invincible. But such fortresses and defenses are utterly unprofitable, Defenses
serve us to no use, when God is minded to correct us. Nor the strong man in his
strength.
when God is purposed to chastise us. Hereunto serves that which he adds
touching their munitions. He alludes to the causes, which not only let and
hinder the ouerflowings of Nilus, but also kept the whole land: as if he should
say; You shall need no such things, because Nilus it self shall be dried up.

But it is very certain, that this river was never drawn dry; and yet has
the Prophet foretold nothing which was not fulfilled. We must therefore call to
mind what we have said in another place; to wit, that these desolations are
represented in lively colors before us, as well in regard of our dullness, as
also to set forth the thing performed (as it were) even in our view. For it is
very necessary we should have such a spectacle as might move our spirits, and
quicken us up to consider of the judgments of God: which we should easily
contemn, if by this means we were not prevented. Observe we then this pride
of the Egyptians, who had abundance and diverse sorts of riches; never imagining
that it was possible for them to be humbled by so fearful a ruin. He
mentions the rush and ^eede, because there was abundance of them; which served
to sundry purposes: unless any had rather say, he means that the marshes and
ponds shall be dry.

Verse. 7. The grass in the river, and at the Or, mouth.
head of the rivers, and all that grows by the river shall wither, and be
driven away, and be no more.
AT the mouth.] Others translate, Rivers: but he understands it rather of the
spring it self, which is seldom or never drawn dry; although it may fall out
that floods and rivers may wax dry. He takes the mouth then for the head of
the river, which shall so dry up, that no place in the Country shall be watered
by it. And howsoever the head of Nilus was very far off, yet is it not without
cause, that the Prophet threatens that this river, from whose ouerflowing the
fertility almost of the whole land proceeded, should be dried up, even to the
very head and spring it self. For it seldom ra^ned in this Country; but Nilus
perfo^med that office for them every year: and fit ouerflowed but sparingly,
it presaged want and famine. This is the reason why the Prophet threatening the
drithe of it threatens therein the barrenness of the whole Country. And for
this cause also he says, that there shall be such want even in the ^ead it
self, from whence the waters should flow forth, that the grass shall be dried
up.

Verse. 8. The Fishers also shall mourn; and all they that cast angle into the
river shall lament; and they that spread their net upon the waters, shall be
weakened.
ISaiah has respect still unto the estate of Egypt. We have showed in the 16.
Chapter, A note touching the usual course which the Prophets hold in their
writings.
verse. 8. how the Prophets are wont to use these lively descriptions: as when
they prophecy against any Country, they specially mention that with which it
most abounds, as also that for which it is most renowned. If it be a Country
of vineyards, then they mention vines: if it abound with gold, they mention
that also: if with silver, then they speak of silver. So prophesying here
against Egypt, he speaks of fishing; because this region was waterish, and
abounded with many rivers.

I will not reject their translation who translate the verb Amal, To cut off:
but the best interpretation is, They shall be weakened: for this answers to the
sorrow and grief of which he spoke before. Now we know that there were great
numbers of fishers in this Country, which was not the least part of the riches
of Egypt. When the Fishers then should be taken away (of which the Country was
full) in which trade also consisted a great part of the riches of the Eyptians,
it must needs follow that they should be much weakened. As for example, if
draperie should be taken from a people, which are accustomed to live upon it,
great poverty must needs ensue. He therefore notes a wonderful change of the
whole Country.

Verse. 9. Moreover, they that work in flax of diverse sorts, shall be
confounded; and they that weaue nets.
AS he spoke before of their sorrow; so now he speaks of their shame: because
those who before lived well, and at their case upon this trade, should gain
nothing any longer by it. Now these occupations depend one upon another; to
wit, fishing and net making. And yet some doubt whether he speaks only of net
makers or no: for if we take the word Serik^th, for all exquisite linen, it is
very likely that this is to be referred to those weauings which are the fairest
when they are made of small and fine thread. We also know, that there are
clothes of very great price made in Egypt. And it shall not be amiss to
comprehend the garments of linen under the name of net-worke, or white nets:
for these garments were of great price, in regard they were wouen with great
difficulty. Thus then it should be a metaphorical manner of speech, under
which the Prophet closely nips the dissolutenes of the Egyptians, who clothed
themselves with linen garments as if they had been wrapped in nets. If we
understand it so, then the next verse coheres with it: and for min^ own part,
I can not see how so exquisit and artificial manner of weauing can belong to
the trade of fishing. But if any had rather refer it to fishermen, the sense
shall be, that all such as exercised the art of fishing, and gained much
thereby, should now be oppressed and overwhelmed with grief. I think it is
not needful to translate the Hebrew word Seker, which the Prophet uses, Nets,
because the Etymology of it shows it rather to signify a trade by which
much is gained.

Verse. 10. For their nets shall be broken, and all they that make ponds shall be
heavy in heart.
WHere great store of fish is they also have great Pooles or little fish ponds
to keep them in: for were it not for them, the fishermen should be constreined
to sell their fish for nothing. Besides that, they oftentimes cast their nets
into the water and take nothing. He therefore continues the former argument:
for if fish can neither be taken, nor kept, the Ponds shall serve to no purpose.

Verse. 11. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools: the counsel of the wise
counselors of Pharaoh is become foolish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the
son of the wise? I am the son of the ancient kings?
HE here ioines wisdom and folly together very fitly: for it is impossible
this persuasion should be plucked from men, but they will be wise, yea and so
esteemed, although it be in despite of God himself. It is all one then as if
he were of their opinion: when he calls them wise, whom by and by after he
taxes with gross folly. The Hebrew particle Ac, is sometimes aduersatiue: but
because it seems the Prophet sets himself against the Egyptians, I had rather
translate it, surely, or certainly, or, now at the least: because he derides
Pharaos Counselors, who of all others were the greatest fools, and yet in the
mean while took themselves, and would be reputed for the wisest men. Thus it
is a kind of exclamation, as if he should say, Where is this wisdom of Egypt
become? What is become of these Counselors which despised every man? Why
defend they not the Kingdom? Now is the time when their wisdom may be
manifested. We see then how this serves for a confirmation and ratification of
this present prophecy, for as much as it appears that the Prophet speaks not
of things unknown, but has the certentie of Egypts destruction apparent as it
were before his eyes. Being fully persuaded then that he was authorized from
God, he is bold to proclaim that all these Princes are but fools, how wise
soever they make themselves. In a word, the Prophet teaches, All wisdom^ which
is separate from the word, will in the end prove extreme folly.
that all their glory who attribute to themselves the least dram of wisdom
without God, is but folly, because it will be perceived to be so in the end,
for when they shall come to trial, they will show themselves no better then
children.

I deny not but the Lord suffers them to bring many enterprises to pass, that
they may get credit and fame among men: but he besots them in the end, so as
notwithstanding all their experience and ripenes of wit, they will show
themselves more fond then little babes. If any man want wisdom let him ask it
of God.
Let us be admonished then to pray for the spirit of counsel and understanding
of the Lord, and when we have obtained it, let us carefully use it in
vprightnes with all modesty. For God resists men's wisdom, when they attribute
more to themselves then it meet: and such as too proudly advance themselves
do well deserve to be punished for their folly. He therefore often times makes
them stand confounded, to the end men may know that their wisdom is naught
else but a vanishing smoke. The fear of God, the only foundation of true
wisdom.
For there is no true wisdom but that which it grounded upon the fear of God,
which is the beginning of wisdom, as Solomon teaches, Prou. 1.7. and 9.10.

How say ye etc.] He reproues Pharaoes counselors for flattering of him, as
parasites are wont to do now adays to get ye favor of Princes: for all their
flatteries tend to none other end; because they find that the only ready way
to get their suites, and to creep into favor. And thus among so many
flatteries and lies, truth can find no place at all among them. Now howsoever
this is an ordinary fault in the Courts of great Lords, yet bare it the sway,
especially among the Egyptians at that time: for they stood upon their
antiquity, as being the most ancient of all nations besides, boasting, that
they found out the arts and liberal sciences. Now, if the common people had
this good conceit of themselves, how much more were their Kings infected
therewith in respect of them?

There was a double boasting then; that is to say, of antiquity and knowledge;
both which Isaiah reproues; and tells them, that neither of them shall do
them any good. Pharaoh gloried much of the antiquity and wisdom of his
Nation, which was ye peoples fault also as well as his; but he speaks of the
King especially, as of the head, in whom this pride was more plainly
perceived, then in the common people. But let us beware how we brag of our
ancestors, as if we were borne to it by inheritance: no, let us go to heaven
to find wisdom; Ier. 1.5.
and let us ask it of him that is author of it. As for antiquity, it is a
sottish and vain brag: and yet Princes are so hampered with this vice, that
they could find in their hearts to go seek their race and beginning beyond
the Moon, as they say: yea, they can very hardly be dissuaded from this
vanity. flatterers also help to augment this folle, who (as we see) have
found out many pleasant things touching the genealogies of Kings and Princes.
For no music sounds more delectable in their ears, then when they are
separated from the common people; as if they were petty gods. But it often
comes to pass, that whiles they be so busy in seeking too curiously their
grandfathers, and great grandfathers, that they make themselves ridiculous by
it, because it comes to pass, that they find themselves descended from some
handicrafts man, or trades man.

A story touching Maximillian the Emperor.
I have heard a pleasant story from some of good credit of the Emperor
Maximillian, who (because he was wonderful curious in seeking out his
pedigree) a merry fellow persuaded him that he had found his genealogy in
Noah's Arc. This wrought so upon him, that neglecting and forgetting all other
affairs, he only doted upon this news; in so much that he would permit
none to speak with him; no not the Ambassadors which were come unto him to
deal in matters of importance. Every one wondered at this folly, and disliked
it in themselves; yet none so hardy that durst take in hand to counsel him. At
the last his Cook being bolder then the rest (whom the Emperor used as a
Iester, and took pleasure many times to hear him talk) having obtained leave
to speak, said to the Emperor; No man desires the honor of your imperial
majesty more then my self; but me thinks, if it please you, this your great
industry to find out your pedigree, is neither profitable nor honorable. I
now honor and reverence your Majesty (said he) as a god; but if you will
stand so much upon your title from Noah's Arc, then you and I must needs be
cosins at the least; for we all came from thence. Maximillian was so moved with
the speech of this knauish fool, that he was then ashamed he had gone so far
in the matter, although before, neither friends, counselors, nor affairs
could hold him back from it. For he knew well that his name, which he meant to
make more honorable then his ancestors, should be made less honorable if
they came once to the first original, from whence Princes and subjects, noble
and base, are all descended. But is not the folly of these men great, when
fools and Iesters can perceive it? Yet this is no new vice, but it is rooted
deep in the spirits of the most men.

That we may avoid this evil then, Instruction.
let us learn to depend upon God only, and let us prefer this grace of our
adoption before all riches, nobility, and parentage. As touching the Kings of
Egypt, they were indeed descended from most ancient Kings, who had reigned a
long time; and this made them to swell thus with pride, even as if wisdom had
bin borne in their house.

Verse. 12. Where are now thy wise men, that they may tell thee, or may know
what the Lord of hosts has determined against Egypt?
ALthough it be word for word; And they shall show thee, and shall know: yet
the clause should be thus resolved, That they may show thee, yea that they may
know at the last. Which phrase of speech is very common among the Hebrews. Now
because the Egyptians had their soothsaiers, they thought nothing to obscure or
secret, but they might have sufficient resolution from them of it: for they
went to ask counsel as well in things of small importance, as in great; and
held whatsoever these men said, as oracles. This vanity the Prophet derides,
saying; How will they show you that which they know not? Has God made them of
his counsel? It is very likely also that the art which they used in divining,
is here condemned: for the art was not only unlawful of it self, but
enchantments and sorceries were contained under it. Three ways by which we may
foresee things to come.
There are three ways whereby we may know or foresee things to come. The first
and chiefest is, by the revelation of the holy Ghost, who only can resolve us:
as also by the gift of prophecy, which is imparted Master Caluins judgment
touching Astrology.
As touching the knowledge of the stars, a man may at some times come to the
discerning of certain things, by their situation and conjunction; to wit,
famins, fruitful and unfruitful seasons, the pestilence, and such like: yet
this is uncertain, because it has its ground upon conjecture only. Respect
therefore must always be had herein, what proportion the stars have with
these inferior places. For men's actions are not governed by them as a sort of
foolish and deceitful Astrologians think, of whom there are multitudes at
this day that insinuate themselves into the savor both of Princes and
subjects, as if they had the knowledge of all things both present and to come
in their sleeue. But such fellows are mere coseners, who beguile men by their
illusions, and resemble those of whom the Prophet speaks in this place: and
yet Princes give ear unto them, reuerencing them as if they were gods. Truly
they are well worthy to be so abused; and it is also a just punishment upon
them for their curiosity.

These goodly diuiners forsooth do likewise brag that they understand the art
Magic, wherein the Egyptians were very skillful: but thereunto they also add
things that are worse and much more detestable, to wit, coniurations and
inuocations upon devils, Coniuring most hateful and hurtful, as may be seen
by the woeful events it brings forth.
which is the most hateful and hurtful thing that a man can either conceive
or utter. The Lord curses such coniecturcs and customs of divining; neither
can it be but the issue and event thereof will be most woeful, and full of
confusion.

If these things were condemned in the Egyptians, how much more do they deserve
to be condemned in those who shroud themselves under the name and worship of
God? It is a wonder me thinks that those who otherwise are both witty and well
learned should suffer themselves to be so grosely abused by such impostures, as
if they were utterly deprived both of wit and judgment: but it is just with
God thus to avenge himself upon the ingratitude and unthankfulness of men.
Truly so far forth as we may judge of things to come by that which is past,
which also we have observed and known by use and experience in things, which
is best of all: this in it self can not be disliked: yet I would have no man
imagine that any certentie can be gathered from hence of that which is to come,
because the matter always hangs upon conjecture. Notwithstanding Isaiah does
professedlie set himself against this subtletie, which men account a great
virtue; not that it is evil in it self: but because such a witty and subtle
fellow is hardly to be found, that with this his knowledge is not also
confident to have at his fingers ends whatsoever is worthy and necessary to
be known. And thus they set light by the secret providence of God, as if
nothing were hidden from them.

There is yet another vice besides: that is, they affect rather a kind of
subteltie and iugling tricks, then true wisdom in deed. But Isaiah
especially taxes this pride which is in men of great wits, who by their own
reason will presume to measure the events of things, as if (they) and not the
Lord had not the government of the whole world in his hand: therefore against
their diuinations he opposes the heavenly decree. Hence we may gather how
fitly Isocrates Isocrates.
said that Gods felicity is powerful and mighty in deed, but that our
wisdom is so likewise. The Apothegme of this elegant Orator seems a goodly
one at the first blush: but seeing he takes wisdom and prudence from God to
give it unto mortal men, such a parting of stakes is no less sottish then
wicked. For what blasphemy is it to attribute a prouide^t counsel unto men,
and only leave to the Lord an happy fortune? If any now dare leave those
means by which the Lord does instruct us, Those that seek to coniurers, are
most worthy to be confounded with shame and dishonor.
to have recourse to the impostures of the devil, truly such a one is most
worthy to be deceived with shame and great dishonor, for he seeks the
remedies which are not, and despises those which God offers him.

Verse. 13. The Princes of Zoan are become fools: the Princes of Noph are
deceived, they have deceived Egypt, even the corners of the tribes thereof.
ZOan was one of the chief Cities of Egypt: Noph was also very much renoumed:
but we can not certainly judge what Cities they were, unless any shall take it
to be Alexandria, the antiquity and wealth whereof may be gathered from many
places of the scripture. Whereby also their error is refuted, who say, that
Alexander the Great built it. For albeit it was often laid waste before, yet he
never built it up again wholly, but only repaired it. Now it appeeres by the
third Chapter of Nahum verse. 8. that it was once a free City, and had league
with the Egyptians, being as greatly renoumed as any City in the world. He
rightly affirms then that the beginning of her destruction came because of
her folly. Wherein the chief strength of a commonwealth consists.
For the chief strength of a commonwealth or of a kingdom consists in
counsel, and wisdom, without which, neither riches, nor multitude of men do
profit any thing.

I take this word Angulum, which signifies a corner, by way of similitude for
the principal part of the building whereupon the whole weight rests: so that
I had rather read it in ye nominative case then in the accusative, because it
should be referred, as I take it, to these wise men, upon whom the Egyptians
relied as securely, as though no mishap could possibly befall them. But Isaiah
tells them that this leaning-stock is too weak, because the resting
ouer-confidentlie upon their counsels was the destruction of Egypt. Therefore
after a taunting manner he condemns this deceitful wisdom, which indeed
rather deserves the title of vanity and folly, because it is separate from
the fear of God. For men not only abuse this excellent gift of God, but they
are also puffed up with vain ambition and subtletie, which pleases them far
better then true wisdom. Besides, there is also a devilish fury in them,
for they quite suppress the providence of God, referring all these events
whatsoever to the capacity of their own brain.

This is the cause why the scripture cries out so often against such wise men,
showing all their wit to be mere madness. For they take that upon them which
belongs to God, whereby they commit horrible and intolerable sacrilege. We
need not marvel then if the Lord show fearful examples against such
wisards. For howsoever they be ingenious and quick witted, yet they stumble
and miss the mark even in small matters, casting themselves into such great
dangers, as a simple clown or artificer could have easily avoided and
foreseen. Let this be a warning unto us lest we wax proud in heart, in
attributing some praise of wisdom to our selves. If so be we have any
prudence and dexterity in us, let us wholly refer it to the free liberality
of God, and keep^ our selves within the rule of modesty and sobriety. For if
we make the Lord the stay of our wisdom, we have a sure corner stone, The
surest corner stone.
which can never be beaten down, nor overthrown.

Verse. 14. The Lord has mingled among them the spirits of errors: and they
have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man erreth in
his vomit.
BEcause it was incredible, and unexpected, that the leaders of so wise and
politic a people should overthrow the Country by their folly therefore the
Prophet attributes the cause of it to the judgment of God; to the end the
Jews should not be as it were hoodwinked in so excellent and memorable an
example. For profane men are wont to attribute Gods judgments to Fortune,
when any thing that is new and unlooked for falls out. now he speaks by way
of similitude: as if he should say, even as wine is powered into a cup or
glass; so will the Lord make the wise men drunk, by pouring the spirit of
giddiness into them, that being at their wits end, and beco^ming senseless,
they may be made unable either to say or do any thing rightly. The cause why
they deceived Egypt then was, because themselves were deceived first. And in
that the Egyptians suffered themselves to be so abused, and were not able to
keep themselves from it; therein may we see the judgment of God upon them.

How God is said to deprive men of wisdom and counsel.
And yet Isaiah makes not God so the author of this their senselesnes; as if the
Egyptians might have laid the blame upon him. But thus stands the case; men of
themselves have neither understanding nor judgment: for whence comes wisdom
but from the Spirit of God, which is the only fountain of light,
understanding, and truth? Now if the Lord takes this his Spirit from us, what
have we to charge him withal? He is bound to us no way at all: and in that he
is liberal in giving to men, it proceeds from his mere favor. So then when
soever he smites men's hearts with the spirit of giddiness and error, he does
it always upon just causes, howsoever (I grant) they may be hidden from us.
But for the most part he punishes the wicked, who have lifted up themselves
against him with this blindness: as it happened to the Egyptians, who being
swollen with an opinion of their own wisdom, were ready to burst with pride,
and despised all in regard of themselves. It is a superfluous matter then to
dispute of predestination in this place, seeing the Lord punishes them for a
notorious vice. Wherefore when he blindes or gives them up, he cannot be
accused of cruelty; for it is a just chastisement of their rebellion and
wickedness: neither can he which punishes men's iniquities be called the
author of evil.

Let us now show after what manner God inflicts this punishment upon them. How
God works justly by evil instruments.
He delivers them up to Satan, who effects this: for he it is properly who
sowes the spirit of error and frowardness in men's hearts: but because he acts
nothing but at Gods commandment, it is said, that God does that, which Satan
indeed does. For where it is commonly said, This o^ that is done by Gods
permission: nothing is more frivolous. The Prophet expresses yet more; to wit,
that this punishment was sent of God, besause he is a just Judge. For he works
by Satan as a Judge does by the executioner, and justly punishes those that
have offended him: as we read in the book of the Kings; Satan there presents
himself before God, and asks leave to deceive the Prophets of Ahab. his
request being granted, he executes Gods commandment: for of himself he was
able to do nothing. 1. King. 22.21.
We need not heap up many testimonies of Scripture; the thing it self is
manifest enough.

In that he adds, they were deceived by their counselors, he therein sets
forth the judgment of God in the second manner. For it might well be, that
although the Princes had been witless, much like to men drunk, that the
people nevertheless were sober and of sound judgment: but he also says, that
the seducers should obtain the efficacy of error to deceive the people also.
Thus you see a twofold judgment of God in this place, both against the
seductors, and the seduced. By vomiting, he means a beastly kind of
drunkenness, adding it by way of amplification, showing, that they are not
drunken after an ordinary manner, some wit remaining still in them; but that
they were drunk like swine.

Verse. 15. Neither shall there be any work in Egypt which the head may do,
nor the tail, the branch nor the rush.
THis is the conclusion of the former sentence: for his meaning is, that there
shall be such a brutish blockishnesse in all the Egyptians, that whatsoever
they enterprise, shall vanish away and come to nothing. This must needs be
fall them who are destitute of counsel, and it is a just punishment of our
pride and ouerweening. The Prophet then meant to note out the event and effect;
to show that all things should have woeful successes. And in menacing the head
and tail, What is meant by Head and Tail.
he signifies thereby, that all estates, from the highest to the lowest, shall
be destitute of counsel; so as they shall be able to do nothing to the
purpose: unless any had rather understand it as touching the manner of the
proceeding of their actions. Let us learn from hence, that the beginning and
end of all things depends upon God only, of whom we must ask counsel,
wisdom, and a prosperous success in all our businesses: unless we mean to
have things succeed with us, as they did with the Egyptians.

Verse. 16. In that day shall Egypt be like women; for it shall be afraid and
fear because of the moving of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shakes
over it.
HE repeates that again which he had said before, to wit, that the Egyptians
should have no strength at all. Some think the Prophet alludes to a womanish
behavior, wherewith the Historiographers have taxed the Egyptians: which was
this, all order being perverted, women managed the public affairs, and men
kept the house, and performed the offices that belonged to women. It may be
Isaiah aimed at th^s. But all being well considered, this conjecture cannot be
current, because he threatens a judgment here which should bring men into a
wonderful mammering. If he should speak of their accustomed behavior, it
should appertain nothing at all to ye matter in hand: neither does he reprove
the Egyptians for their womanish hearts, but rather tells them they shall be so
terrified, that they shall become timorous like women. For they not only
esteemed of themselves as of a warlike people, able to wage battle, but would
take it in hand themselves without any provocation thereunto, and were also
helpful unto other nations. For we see that many profane authors tell
sundry things of the facts of the Egyptians, and stand much upon their
commendation. Howsoever then they were more nice and delicate then any other
people, yet they were desirous to be esteemed a valarous and warlike people.

But now in so sudden a change we may see an admirable judgment of God. And
therefore he adds that the shaking of the Lords hand shall be the cause of
this fear: by which words he shows that the Lord will order and take all this
war in hand, so as the Egyptians shall never be able to stand, in regard they
shall not have to do with men, but with God himself. Now this which Isaiah
pronounces against Egypt ought also to be applied to other nations: for when
troubles arise, and wars are proclaimed, the judgment of God must be
acknowledged therein if men prove cowards and faint-hearted. For we see the
most warlike men sometimes to give place, showing themselves more delicate then
women: yea, to be overcome with little or no power, when God once smites their
hearts with trembling.

Verse. 17. And the land of Judah shall be a fear unto Egypt, every one that
makes mention of it shall be afraid thereat, because of the counsel of the
Lord of hosts, which he has determined upon it.
SOme expound it simply, that the land of Judah shall be a wonderment to the
Egyptians as well as other nations; comparing this place with Chap. 18.2.7.
where it is said, You shall be an astonishment, etc. But I think the Prophets
meaning is otherwise in this place: for his purpose is to show the cause why
the Lord will show such an example against the Egyptians, to wit, because they
had been the occasion of the destruction of the Jews. For they had turned them
from the confidence which they ought to have had in God: it being the custom
of Princes to solicit their neighbors, and offering them help, to the end they
may use them afterward in the like case. But God had forbidden the Jews to go
down into Egypt for any succor, Deuteronomy. 17.16. Yet did this wretched people
choose rather to yield to the solicitations of the Infidels which offered
themselves unto them, then to God: they are chastised therefore very justly.
Neither did the Egyptians escape unpunished, because they had given them
occasion of incredulity and distrust: for they were so sharply chastised that
they quaked for fear as often as they remembered the Jews.

We may gather a very profitable doctrine from hence, to wit, that all such
which shall alienate the Church from the true service of God, and from trusting
in his help, having given them offense either by fearing, or counselling them,
Such as shall be so wickedly minded as to withdraw Gods childr^ from his
service, or from trusting in him, shall be punished severely.
or by any allurements whatsoever, shall be punished and that severely. The
Prophets words are as much in effect then, as if one should say. That the very
look of a woman will make him to blush which has entised her to leaudnes,
when the filthiness of the fact shall come to light; and when God the auenger of
the marriage knot shall appear.

Verse. 18. And in that day shall five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan, and shall swear by the Lord of hosts: one shall be called
the City of destruction.
Having threatened the Egyptians, and laid forth the cause of Gods judgments,
he now comforts them, and promises them mercy: for he shows that all of them
in a manner shall be restored, and shall recover a prosperous and flourishing
estate again. For of six Cities, says he, five shall be saved, so as one
only shall perish. He had before threatened an horrible judgment to fall upon
the whole kingdom, so as if any shall consider the former prophecy well, he
can comprehend nothing therein but a state utterly past recovery. He
promises then that they shall be restored by a special favor of God. So that
this is to be taken as an increase of the Churches restoration, or as a full
measure of Gods grace after the redeemer is sent.

The manner of speech is somewhat obscure: but if we examine it well, there is
little or no difficulty at all in the sense. For his meaning is, that the sixth
part of the Cities shall only perish, and that the rest shall continue safe.
The most difficulty is in the word Haheres: some read it Hacheres; that is to
say, of the Sun: but they deceive themselves by taking one letter for
another. Those who expound it of the Sun, think that the Prophet spoke of
Heliopolis: but it suits not well with the scope of the text: because he not
only promises that five Cities shall be restored (for that had been no great
matter) but says in general, that of six towns or cities, five shall
remain untouched: and doubtless there were many Cities in Egypt.

I let pass the fables of the old writers, and of those who have affirmed,
that it contained twenty thousand Cities. Yet it must not be denied, but there
were a great number in a Country so renowned and well peopled; in a Kingdom
that flourished as it did, and was so frequented, and in so sweet and well
tempered an air. Let us put the case then, that there were a thousand Cities,
or a few more. He says, that the sixth part only shall perish, and that the
rest shall be restored: so as the number of the destroyed, shall be little in
comparison. Now it appears sufficiently by that which follows anon after,
that this restoration is to be understood of the worship and service of God.

By the word lip, he understands the tongue; taking a part for the whole:
meaning thereby, to show the agreement that the Egyptians should have with the
people of God, and the faith whereby they should make profession of his name.
By the tongue, he also notes out by a figurative manner of speech, a
confession. For in regard there was but one tongue only which acknowledged and
called upon the true God, to wit, of this people that dwelt in the land of
Canaan; it thereby appears sufficiently, that by this word tongue, we must
also understand their consent in religion. To speak the same or diverse
language, whereby either agreement or discord are signified; are phrases of
speech very frequent in the Scripture. But let us observe that every consent is
not sufficient: for example; if men should agree together to retain a worship
of their own devising and approbation, ought they not to come and consent to
that truth which was revealed to the fathers? Neither does he only say, that
the Egyptians should speak one and the same language; but the language of
Canaan: for they were to change their speech, and to use yt which Gold had
sanctified: not that the pronunciation of this language was more holy; but it
is commended, because it contains the doctrine of truth. We are to observe
this diligently, to the end we may learn the true manner of consenting. We
ought to labor for a ^onsent in religion, always provided that the condition
be good.
We ought to seek agreement by all means; but let us beware that the conditions
be good whereby it is procured: for it is not lawful to seek a mean between
both, as the destroyers of true religion do, which yet would be taken for
makers of pacifications. Away with such light and double tongues; let the truth
be retained, which has no other foundation but the word of God. Let them that
draw near to it, speak with us: and whosoever falsifieth that, let him avoid,
and choose a language fitting his own humor: but let us continue firm and
constant in this truth. The Egyptians then cannot speak the language of
Canaan, unless they first of all forsake their own; that is to say, all
superstitions.

Some refer this to Ptolemeus, his time, but without any good ground: because
we may gather from the verses following, that the Prophet speaks of the pure
religion and true worship of God. And first of all under the figure Synecdoche,
he teaches that the speech shall be holy, taking one only kind thereof; to
wit, that they shall profess themselves to be Gods servants. by swearing by
his name. It may be read, They shall swear in the Lord, or, by the Lord;
because the letter Lamed, often signifies By. If we read it, In the Lord; oath
is a part of Gods worship, the whole is hereby signified, by taking a part for
the whole. To swear also by the name of God, is often taken to bear witness
that he is the true

His meaning is in a word, that they shall foundly give their names to Christ.
If faith in the heart bring not forth an open profession, it will surely prove
but a cold opinion in stead of faith.
Hence we may gather, that we must make an open profession of our faith, if we
mean to yield God his true service: and if any will keep his faith shut up in
his heart, such a one shall be sure to have but a cold opinion in stead of
faith; because true faith brings forth a frank confession, and so inflames us
inwardly, that we shall neither will nor choose, but make that known to others
which we carry in the closet of our hearts. Every knee shall bow before me,
and every tongue shall swear by my name, says the Lord: Isai. 45.23. Where
faith is then, there ought also to be the outward worship and the confession of
the mouth: Romans 10.9.10. Holy things must not be applied to profa^e uses.
We must in like manner observe, that the things which appertain to Gods
service, ought not to be applied to profane uses: it is the profanation of an
oath then, to swear by any other thing then by, the Lord. For it is written,
Thou shall swear by my name: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Do we not contemn and defile his
holy name, if we mix Saints or any other creature in our oaths? Let us note
here also with what reverence we ought to take an oath: How we ought to swear.
for if we thereby make profession of Gods honor, ought we not to come
thereunto with fear and humility? Afterward, where he says in the end of
the verse, that every sixth City shall be destroyed, the meaning is, that all
such as turn not unto God to serve him shall perish, without hope of
restitution: this is the reason why he opposes the Cities of Egypt which
should begin to acknowledge God, against those that are appointed to confusion.
Nothing but ruin to be expected, where the service of God is wanting.
Where the service of God is wanting then, there we can expect nothing but
utter ruin: for the word Here Is signifies cursing and execration, after which
follows ruin and eternal death.

Verse. 19. In that day shall the Altar of the Lord be in the midst of the
land of Egypt, and a pillar by the border thereof unto the Lord.
HE continues on still that which he spoke in the former verse, and expresses
more fully the renument of Fgypt, because true religion shall flourish there,
the pure service of God shall be established, and all superstitions shall fall
to the ground. Now he uses this word Altar, to represent Gods worship, as by
the sign thereof; because sacrifices and oblations were exercises of piety.
By the midst of Egypt he vndersta^ds the principal, part of all the
kingdom, as if he should say, in the mids of the kingdom, or in the most
excellent part of it. As touching the word pillar, we may not think he speaks
of Images that represents the shape of Saints, or men, but memorials of the
fear of God: or his meaning is, that they shall be as signs or landmarks,
like to those which bound our the ends and limits of kingdoms: and that after
this manner there should be signs set up, whereby all men might know that God
governed this people. When men are truly turned unto God from their idolatry,
they testify it by some public sign.
And do we not see it ordinarily fall out, that when a people is truly
converted unto God, having once forsaken and detested their Idols and
superstitions, how they openly set up signs of true religion, so as all may
know that God is purely worshipped there?

Josephus tells how Onias Onias.
abused this place, when he fled to Ptolemeus Philometor: for he persuaded him
that it should be a very profitable course to set up an Altar in the Country,
upon which the Jews, that dwelt there, might offer sacrifice: and alleged
this text, affirming, that this prophecy ought now to be fulfilled. And in the
end this wicked Priest made the King believe it to be true, although the Jews
openly gainsaid him: for the King regarded his own benefit; and this bad
fellow, who had been deposed from his office, meant to obtain new credit and
favor. So by this means what opposition soever there was, yet could not this
wicked counsel be hindered. But Isaiah under these figurative signs plainly
describes the pure worship of God which was then in use: for he has respect to
his own time, and to those with whom he had to deal. Onias then did wickedlie
pervert this place to serve his own turn.

Papists wresters of Scripture.
But the popish Doctors are no less impudent at this day, in drawing in a place
of Malachie by the hair, as it were, to maintain the sacrifice of the Mass.
For where he says, Mal. 1.11.
It shall come to pass that incense shall be every where offered unto God: from
thence they conclude, that there are some sacrifices differing from the ancient
sacrifices: for neither oxen nor other beasts are to be sacrificed; therefore
it is the Mass, say they. Truly a very trim argument. We may easily discern
that Malachie speaks there of the service of God, The place of Malachi truly
expounded.
noting it under one of the shadows of the Law, as Isaiah does in this place:
and we ought to mark these kinds of speech diligently, which the Prophets are
wont to use very often.

The Papists argument out of Malachi for the sacrifice of the Mass, answered
by another place out of Joel.
This then may be plainly explaned by another place in Joel, which we will
allege by way of example, Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
says he, your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams, Joel 2.28. S. Peter tells how this prophecy was fulfilled when the
Apostles being inspired with the holy Ghost, spoke diverse tongues: for whereas
they were unlearned before, they then began to be fit to teach the heaue^lie
mysteries, Act. 2. We read nothing there of dreams. The Apostle the^ seems
to allege this place very unfitly: but it appeeres that Joel mean to
signify nothing else in this place but Prophecy; and uses the word dreams
and to s^^ns for ornament sake, because the Lord in times past did make his
mind known to the Prophets by this means, Numb. 12.6. He also had respect to
the custom used at that tim^, because the Jews would hardly have understood
what the gifts of the holy Ghost meant, seeing it was a thing as yet unknown
unto them: for being, nourished up under rudiments of the Law, they could
aspire no higher then to the sacrifices and ceremonies; or whether the signs
and sacraments led them.

The Prophets lisped to them then as unto babes or children, to whom we use not
to speak of higher matters then that which they may be able by little and
little to comprehend by custom. This doctrine therefore will give us the
meaning of many texts, the obscurity whereof we might otherwise be held a
long while in doubt of. It plainly appeeres that the Prophet speaks of Christ
his kingdom, so that the things whereof he speaks, were not fulfilled till
his coming. The shadows must be taken away, that we may behold the truth of
things; and so by the Altar we understand the pure and true invocation of Gods
name. But yet the Prophet therewithal shows by these outward signs, that the
pure service of God can not be preserved without the public exercises of
religion, the manner whereof must not be disposed according to our will. Let
men's inventions cease then, that God alone may be heard in this matter.

Verse. 20. And it shall be for a sign, and for a witness unto the Lord of
hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the
oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior, and a great man, and shall
deliver them.
WE cannot offer any acceptable service unto God, Draw me, and I will run
after thee: Cant. 1. I shall run the way of thy Command ets, when thou have
s^t mine heart at large: Psalm. 119.
unless he prevent us by his grace. For who will dedicate himself to his
obedience, that is not drawn first by the sweet taste of his goodness, to
embrace him with a right affection? He must needs call us first then to
himself, before we can call upon him: and all access is shut up against us,
till he have first of all allured us to come unto him. He said before, that
they should be subdued by diverse afflictions, to the end that they might be
subjected to God: he now repeates the very same thing; for men will never
renounce neither themselves nor their vanities, till they are brought to
teachablenesse by strong hand. Notwithstanding he by and by adds another kind
of summons; to wit, they shall go familiarly unto God, after they have tasted
of his loving kindness. For the cry whereof he speaks, proceeds from faith;
because they would never betake themselves to this refuge, unless they were
allured thereunto by the taste of his mercy. Christ promised.
And whereas he promises to send them a Savior, by whose hand the Egyptians
shall be delivered; it can be meant of none but of Christ; because Egypt was not
delivered from her miseries, but in regard that the Gospel was first of all
preached there.

We read what sundry changes this Country endured by the space of four
hundred years, insomuch as it was almost utterly destroyed and laid waste by
foreign and civil wars: but when it seemed to be at the last cast, as they
say, behold, it was converted to the Lord, and delivered out of the hands of
tyrants and enemies. Thus Jesus Christ delivered this Country, when he began to
make himself known unto it. We in like manner ought to be thus disposed to
know and serve God, Whence we are to expect deliverance out of troubles.
that when we shall be diverse ways afflicted, we may know that our salvation
consists in him alone. And would to God the world had learned this lesson at
this day, seeing it is in such disquietnesse, that it seems near to
destruction. For what end of these troubles can it look for, but utter ruin,
unless by repentance it acknowledges that it has been justly punished for
the own impieties? God helps us, but it is through Christ.
And when it is added, To deliver them; we are to gather from hence a very
profitable doctrine; to wit, that God helps us by Jesus Christ; through whose
power he has assisted his own, even from the beginning: for he was the
perpetual mediator; and by his intercession all good things have been obtained
at the hands of God the Father. Who being now come and revealed, let us know
that we can obtain nothing of the Father, but by his means.

Verse. 21. And the Lord shall be known of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians
Isay.
shall know the Lord in that day, and do sacrifice and oblations, and shall
vow vows unto the Lord and perform them.
ISaiah adds now that which was the principal: for the Lord can neither be
served, nor called upon, unless w^e first kno^ him to be our Father. As says
Saint Paul; How shall they call upon him whom they know not Romans 10.14. No
salvation wi hout s^uing knowledge.
For we cannot be partakers of Gods gifts to our salvation, unless the true
knowledge which is by faith go before. He has good reason therefore to add
knowledge, as the foundation of all religion, or the key which opens the
kingdom of heaven unto us. Which knowledge we cannot have, but by doctrine:
whence we may conclude, that God reiects all new found services; for he cannot
approve of that which is void of that knowledge, which proceeds from the
hearing of the true and pure doctrine. Men shall never be able to settle a
right form of Gods service then, if they only bring that which themselves
have devised. Note.
These places are worthy to be well observed; for therein the holy Ghost shows
us what true adoration and invocation is; namely, having banished all the
inventions of men, whereunto they obstinately stick, we should suffer our
selves to be taught by the word of God; and if we once be furnished with the
authority thereof, let us freely and openly condemn whatsoever the world
extolleth and admireth. Whereas he says again, that Egypt shall know; it is a
repetition of some weight: Why this word Knowledge is twis^ repeated.
for this knowledge is of so great importance, that it ought not to be slightly
passed over, because it holds the chiefest place; without which there is no
true worship of God.

And they shall sacrifice.] This place must be expounded like the former, where
he mentioned the Altar. For to what end should sacrifices serve, when Christ is
manifested? Under this shadow then, he mentions the confession of faith and
prayer, which followed the preaching of the Gospel. Now under this word he
comprehends whatsoever was offered to God, as beasts, bread, all sorts of
fruits, and whatsoever served to the acknowledgement of Gods goodness. The
difference between the old Testament and the new.
But the difference between the old Testament and the new, is to be noted; and
under these shadows and ceremonies, we are to understand that reasonable
service whereof Saint Paul speaks in the Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 12.
verse. 1.

That which is added of vowe^, is also a part of God his service. The Jews
were wont by this word vow, but Gods service, unto which the Egyptians should
give themselves after they had received ye knowledge of the truth. But he
mentions those exercises of piety, by which the Jews made profession of the
true religion. From hence the Papists draw an argument to prove that we must
fulfill our vows to God: The Papists argument out of this place touching their
vows, answered.
but seeing their vows a^e made at random, and without any discretion, this
place gives the^ no warrant for the maintenance of their error. For Isaiah
foretells what the Egyptians should do after they had embraced and followed the
doctrine of salvation. Psalm. 76.12. Eccle. 5.3.
So in like manner when David exhorts the people to vow, and to pay their
vows, they think it makes for them: but he means not that they should
therefore make rash or unlawful vows. Gods word must be our rule in vowing.
For the rule of right vowing stands always in force, beyond which we must
not pass; to wit, Gods word, by which we are taught what he requires of us,
and what we should vow and fulfill.

There was never any liberty given us to vow whatsoever we list: the reason
is, because we give our selves the raines too much, and suffer our selves to
rush against God in all things, being more impudent in this behalf then if we
had to deal with men. Now ye see the cause why it was needful that men should
be restrained by some bridle, even to the end they might not give themselves
ouer-great liberty in Gods service and religion. Seeing it is thus, we may all
see that God approues of nothing but that which his Law confirms, and reiects
all things else as a strange and superstitious worship. What soever then any
man voweth of his own head without warrant from Gods word, can not be sound:
Note.
and if he fulfill it, he sins double, Vows of Monks.
as the vows of Monks are, what may we think of the rest? They vow
perpetual Chastity, as if it were granted to all in a like measure: now we
know this gift is rare, neither is it promised to all; no not to those who
otherwise are endued with great and excellent graces.

Genesis 11.29. and 25.1.
Abraham was of an excellent faith, and constancy, of singular meekenes, and
holiness, yet had he not this gift. Christ himself testifies that it is not
given to all, even then when his Apostles so highly commended single life,
Math. 19.6.10.11.12. and S. Paul says the like, 1. Cor. 7.7.9. He then which
has not this gift of continency, and yet vows it, does ill, Presumption in
any to vow single life.
and shall be justly punished for his presumption. Hence have come those
infinite shameful examples, whereby God has justly punished such pride in
the Papacy. They vow poverty also; Wilful poverty.
as if it were unlawful for them to enjoy any thing of their own; yet do
they abound in wealth above all men: is not this a plain mocking of God?
Papists vows of obedience mere rebellion.
As touching the obedience which they vow, it is nothing else but mere
rebellion: for they shake off Christ's yoke, to subject themselves to men.
Others vow pilgrimages, Pilgrimages.
to eat no flesh, to keep certain days, and other things full of
superstitions. Others vow unto God fond and doltish toys, as if they had to
deal with a little child: for we are ashamed to make such promises unto men,
amongst whom nothing is confirmed unless both parties be first agreed between
themselves, and do allow of one another fact. Note.
Surely we should much less enterprise ought in Gods service, unless we have
good warrant for our deed out of his holy word. What service will you call
that where the statutes of God are nothing accounted of, and where the will of
man only takes place? Can this be acceptable unto God, think we? Nay, shall it
not rather be termed superstition, which S. Paul so much detesteth? Coloss.
2.23. Those which make such vows then do brag in vain that they serve God
therein, as if this place any thing at all favored their conceit, because the
Lord detesteth such worship.

Verse. 22. Wherefore the Lord shall smite Egypt, he shall smite and heal it:
for he shall return unto the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and
shall heal them.
NOw the Prophet concludes that which he had said before, to wit, that the
chastisement whereof he spoke should be profitable to the Egyptians, because it
should be as a preparatiue to bring the^ to repentance: as if he should say,
The affliction wherewith the Lord shall smite Egypt, shall turn to the
singular benefit and good thereof. Those who read, He shall smite with an
incurable wound, do interpret this place amiss, and do much diminish the
Prophets meaning: for he shows that the wounds shall be profitable, because
God will use them as a means to bring them home. Whence we are to gather, that
we should never refuse to be chastised of the Lord, seeing he does it for our
great good; in regard that impunitie ingenders a greater license to commit
sin. And because men are wonderfully prone in giving themselves the raines
whilst God spares them; therefore he himself, is feign to prevent the
mischief as we say: which he does by chastisements and afflictions, that he
might thereby provoke and prick us forward to repentance and amendment of life.
Lo here an excellent example set before us in Egypt, who found grace and
mercy at Gods hands, although she was stuffed with superstitions and impiety,
and surmounted all other nations in idolatry.

But note the means how; to wit, by turning unto God: for this is the
exposition of the former member: Conversion a kind of resurrection from
e^ernal death.
as if he should have said, God shall heal the Egy^tians, because they shall
convert. Let us gather from hence, that conversion is as it were a resurrection
from eternal death; for we are but dead all the while we remain unconverted:
but being once converted, we enter into favor with God, and are delivered from
hell. Repentance merits not remission of s^nnes.
Not that we merit this grace by our repentance; but because by this means the
Lord raises us as it were from death to life. To this repentance there is a
promise added: whence we gather, that our requests are not in vain, when we
crave pardon for our sins: provided that our repentance be not hypocritical.

Now when the Lord says, that he will be merciful to the Egyptians; he
therewithal shows, that they shall obtain favor immediately after they be
once converted. Conversion and invocation go always hand in hand.
It shall be a true con^ersion then, when calling upon the name of God shall
follow it. But this invocation cannot be without faith; for the wicked
themselves may have some knowledge of their sins; yet none of them will have
their recourse to Gods mercy, neither shall they ever be truly reconciled unto
him, unless they be touched at the heart with the true feeling of that
repentance which is joined with faith: Romans 10.14.

The word Healing, taken here in a double sense.
And I will heal.] He repeates not that which he said; to wit, the Lord shall
smite Egypt, and heal it; but he promises to heal it in another
signification, that is, the Lord shall heal all their diseases. For as soon as
we be reconciled unto God, he finds nothing in us that deserves to be
punished. Do not chastisements come for sins? Where God forgiues the sin,
there he usually remits the outward punishment.
But sins being pardoned, so are also the corrections which they have
deserved. And if so be we are chastised, it is a sign that our repentance is
not yet such as it ought to be. To be short, let us keep in mind this order
which the Prophet corrections. Secondly, they are healed, because they are
delivered from eternal Thirdly, being brought to the knowledge of their
sins, they ^^ke pardon. gracious corrections cease, having once obtained
pardon of the Lord. Now I think there is no man which ought not to acknowledge
these things which Isaiah pronounces here of the Egyptians in himself, in
whose person God sets as it were a type and an example before the whole world.

Verse. 23. In that day shall there be a path from Egypt to Ashur; and Ashur
shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into Ashur: Or, love.
so the Egyptians shall worship with Ashur.
NOw the Prophet shows how it shall come to pass that the Lord will shed this
his bounty forth every where: as if he should say, This largess shall not be
shut up in some corner, neither shall it be felt of one people alone, as it was
wont to be. Now he speaks here of two nations which were the sworn enemies
of the Church, and therefore seemed to be the furthest off from Gods kingdom
of all others. For a man might have had much more hope of nations further off,
in regard that these two made war, as you would say then, upon God himself,
and persecuted his Church of set purpose. Note here the patience and bounty of
the Lord our God.
Oh Lord! if it be so that he shows himself thus merciful to the capital
enemies of his Church, that passing by their sins, he adopts them for his
children, what will he then do to other Nations? Thus ye see a manifest
vocation of the Gentiles, contained in this prophecy.

When he says, The way shall be open, and there shall be a mutual access,
so as one shall go to another; he therein notes their brotherly conference.
We know that the Egyptians had wars with the Assyrians almost continually;
so as they hated one another deadly. Now the Prophet proclames here, that God
shall turn their hearts, and reconcile them one one another in such sort, that
they shall trade and eraffique one with the other; and the passages which in
times past were shut up, shall now be set open. We are to note that in this
place then, which we have observed before in the second Chapter; that is, Men
being reconciled unto God, ough^ to nourish brotherly kindness be^ween
themselves.
when men are reconciled unto God, they ought to nourish brotherly kindness
between themselves; for all strifes, debates, enuies, and grudgings, ought to
cease with us, when God is at one with us. Is it not to be meruelled at then,
when he says, that the way is open to go out of Egypt into Assyrir? But all
this doubtless ought to be referred to the Kingdom of Christ, seeing we read
not that the Egyptians had this agreement with the Assyrians till they came to
the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Shall love.] This member may be translated, They shall serve, or worship God:
but because this word God, is not here expressed, it may be referred to the
Assyrians, and indeed the Hebrew particle ^^th, leads us to think so. Thus
you may expound it then; Those which in times past burned with a desire to do
hurt, shall change their minds, and in stead thereof, shall desire to do
good. In a word, you shall see in them the fruit of true repentance; because
whereas they had wont to spoil one another by often wars, they shall now
take delight and pleasure in one another company. And this sense will suit
well to the scope of the Prophets words. And yet I reject not the other
interpretation which is followed of the most; to wit, that those who erewhiles
worshipped many gods, shall now acknowledge but one God only, and shall make
one confession of faith. Thus it shall be free for every one to follow which
of the two expositions he likes best. But if the l^st be received, the
Prophet then m^kes ^his brotherly love to flow from the fear of God, as the
river from the fountain.

Verse. 24. And in that day shall Israel be the Or, a third.
third with Egypt and Ashur Or, shall be.
, even a blessing in the midst of the land.
NOw Isaiah sets down the conclusion of the promise here, which he had
touched; namely, that the Egyptians and the Assyrians shall be blessed as well
as Israel. For before, the grace of God was shut up as it were in Israel, in
regard the Lord had made a covenant with this people only, and had spread out
his cord upon Jacob; as Moses speaks Deuteronomy. 32.9. And David says, God has not
dealt so with every nation, neither had they known his judgments: Psalm.
147.20. To be short, the blessing of God abode in Judea only: but here he
says, that it shall be communicated to the Egyptians and Assyrians: under
which two names he comprehends all nations besides. They are not named here
by way of honor; but in regard they had been the perpetual enemies of God,
they seemed so much the further estranged from him, and to have less hope of
favor then any others. Wherefore howsoever he adopted to himself the children
of Abraham only, yet now he is content to be called the father of all nations,
indifferently. Some translate, Israe^ shall be the third; which I approve not:
for in as much as the nowne is of the feminine gender, it should be joined
with the word ^era^hah: and this word blessing, is as much to say, as example,
or mirror of blessing.

Verse. 25. For the Lord of hosts shall bless it saying; Blessed be my people,
Egypt and Ashur, the work of mine hands, and Israel mine inheritance.
HE comes again to the reason and exposition of the former sentence: for he
teaches that the Assyrians and Egyptians shall be companions with the elect
people by the free goodness of God. And it is as much as if he had said;
Howsoever these titles appertain only to Israel, yet shall they be
transferred notwithstanding to another people, whom the Lord shall adopt to
himself. Now there is a mutual corespondency between God and his people, so
as those whom he pronounces to be his people with his own mouth, may also
answer, and by good right say, that he is their God. This privilege is
indifferently granted both to the Egyptians and Assyrians. But although the
Prophet meant to make these strangers companions with the Jews, which were the
houshold-people of God, yet he distinguishes their degrees by special marks.
For in calling the Egyptians Gods people, he means that they are partakers of
that honor which God vouchsafed only to the Jews. He adornes the Assyrians
with the proper title given to the Church, saying, that they are the work of
his hands.

The Church (as we have said elsewhere) is called the work, or workmanship of
God Ephesians. 2.10. because the faithful are reformed by the spirit of
regeneration, to the end they may bear the image of God. Thus by the work of
the hands, means not our creation, The meaning of this phrase, The work of
mine hands. If our new birth be the workmanship of God, ought we to attribute
any thing to our selves?
as we are made men, but regeneration, as we are created unto newness of
life; that so being separated from the world, we may be made new creatures.
Whence we perceive, that in the matter of our new life, we ought to attribute
nothing unto our selves, because we are altogether the workmanship of God. But
when the Prophet speaks of Israel, he adornes him with his pre-eminence; to
wit, that he is the heritage of God: to the end he might still retain the
right and honor of the first borne among his new brethren. For this word
heritage, has a greater emphasis in it then we think commonly of. For
questionless that same covenant which God made first with them, gave them such
a privilege, as could not be disanulled by their unthankfulness; because the
gifts and callings of God, are without repentance: as Saint Paul teaches, Romans
11.29. Ephesians. 2.12. Which shows, that they are the first borne in Gods house.
The Jews.
Howsoever then that the grace of God be now shed forth and spread abroad
further of, yet cease they not to hold the first degre^, not by their merit,
but by the steadfastness of the promise.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, (when Sargon King of Ashur
sent him) and had fought against Ashdod and taken it.
IN the former Chapter Isaiah prophesied of that calamity threatened against
the Egyptians, therewithal promising them Gods mercy: now repeating again
the same argument, he shows that Israel shall be confounded by this
chastisement of Egypt, because they put their confidence in them. He also
ioines the Ethiopians with him. Whence we may conjecture that the Ethiopians
were joined in league with the Egyptians: which I have touched heretofore, and
shall touch it again in the 37. Chapter. First, The time of this prophecy.
we are to note press the Jews in such wise then, that they were constreined
to seek help of other nations. 2. King. 18.^7.
The holy history witnesses, that Tartan was one of the Captains of
Senacherib: for which cause we must needs acknowledge that this Sargon was
Senacherib, who (as we Rabsache. Tartan, on the other side, laid siege against
Ashdod, Tartan, Rabsaris, and Rabsache.
2 King. 18.13. and 17. Now in the 17. verse of the 18. Chapter there are three
Captains named: whence we rightly collect, that Sennacheribs camp at that
time was divided into three parts, that so at one instant all being amazed and
troubled, and some put to their shifts, the rest might have no opportunity to
aid and succor one another. The Jews therefore had no other refuge but to
seek for help of strangers. The Prophet in the mean while is sent from God to
tell them in flat terms, that it is but in vain for them to depend upon the
succor of the Egyptians, who were already pursued even by Gods immediate hand:
and so far was it off that they should be helpful to others, that they were
scarce able to defend themselves against their enemies. Thus the Jews were to
know for certain, that they were justly punished for their infidelity,
because they left God, to flee for help to the Egyptians.

The drift and ^ope of this prophecy.
We are here then to observe the drift and scope of the text: for it is not
Gods meaning to admonish the Egyptians, but to correct the infedelitie of his
people: which infidelity often carried them away to false and perverse hopes.
That the Prophet might teach them therefore to rest upon God alone, he here
sets before them what issue and success they should have from these vain
helps which they so greedily sought after. Now this admonition doubtless was
very seasonable, because the Egyptians had now begun to hinder the passage of
the Assyrians, and had constreined them to return from whence they came: which
was the best news the Jews could possibly hear tell of. But to the end they
might not rejoice too much in these goodly beginnings, he threatens that this
succor shall turn into smoke, because the Ethiopians and Egyptians shall in
short space be overcome to their great disgrace and confusion.

Verse. 2. At the same time spoke the Lord by the hand of Isaiah the son of
Amoz, saying, Go^, and lose the sackcloth from thy loins, and put off thy
shoe from thy foot; and he did so, walking naked and barefoot.
TO the end the Lord might confirm this prophecy by some external sign, he
commands Isaiah to walk naked. For if the Prophet had done this of his own
head, he had justly deserved to have been mocked for his labor: but in regard
he did it at Gods bidding, there is nothing to be seen in him which is not
worthy of admiration, yea, of great fear. Under this nakedness, and such other
signs, there are weighty matters included: besides, God never did any thing
either immediately by himself, neither yet by any of his servants, but the
reason of it is forthwith declared. Thus Isaiah walks not naked only, but
shows what his drift is, that is to say, why the Lord enioined him to do it;
otherwise the false Prophets might imitate the servants of God, changing
themselves into diverse fearful forms to dazzle the eyes of simple people, and
so get estimation: but such signs are naught worth, because God is not the
author of them. Papists ready to set up new Ceremonies, in stead of true
Sacraments. Wh^t rule must be opposed against popish Ceremonies.
Which we are diligently to observe, in regard of the Papists, who are ready
to advance and set up new Ceremonies in stead of true Sacraments. This is the
rule which we must oppose against them, to wit, if these Ceremonies of theirs
be of God, then ought we to receive them: if not, then is it lawful for us to
reject them; nay, we can in no wise, approve of them, but we therein offer
wrong unto God, because mortal men do then vsurp that authority which unto
him belongs.

Besides, God imposes not, When God imposes any Ceremony, he adds his word
unto it.
nor sets signs before us without the word: for what Sacrament would it be if
we should only behold the bare sign? It is the doctrine only which makes the
Sacrament. Let us know then that there is nothing but plain deceit when the
word goes not before. The Papists do therefore fondly impose the name of
Sacrament to their vain Ceremonies, when they are not able to confirm them by
the pure Scriptures. Well, the Lord has so joined these things together, that
none can separate the^, but withal they offer violence to the order which he
has instituted.

Now in that Isaiah is commanded to loose the sackcloth, the most of the
interpreters gather that ye Prophet was at that time clothed with a mourning
weed, in regard that he bewailed the calamity of Israel: for sackcloth was a
mourning garment, as appears by that which is said in Joel, Chap. 1.13. They
say then that this was done, that in bearing upon him the garments of the
guilty or condemned, he might ask pardon of God: or, that it could not be
that his apparel and countenance should testify gladness, because his heart
was in heaviness. And indeed it was impossible but he must needs be sore
afflicted in beholding so great and horrible calamities.

Some think it was his ordinary apparel, in regard that the Prophets used to
wear a mantle, as testifies Zachariah 13.4. But this is too weak a
conjecture; neither has it any show of reason. It is more likely that he was
clothed with sackcloth, to express his sorrow. For those of Iudeah were become
so senseless, that they cared not a whit; neither thought they that this
misery should ever be able to come near them: no nor then when their poor
brethren were miserably afflicted and scattered before their eyes: nay, they
rather thought themselves out of all danger, and made a mock at the words of
the Prophets, who threatened and foretold their ruin. This was the cause why
Micha also complained, Mich. 1.11.
that none bewailed the calamity of Israel.

Some also ask whether this was a thing done indeed, or rather whether it were
not a bare and naked v^sion, which he was to set forth to the people. Whether
the Prophet stripped himself naked, or not.
The most received opinion is, that the Prophet never stripped himself naked,
but that it was showed him by way of vision only, and that but once. Their
reason is, because he was not able to endure to go naked the space of three
whole years, Verse. 3.
both in regard of the heat and cold, and of other encumbrances occasioned by
the time. But what hurt is it if we should say that the Prophet covered
himself in his house, and abroad also; only that he showed this spectacle of
nakedness to the people, when he was to perform his prophetical office? For I
am not much moved with that reason, that he could not endure the heat nor
cold, because God who had enjoined him to do it, When God inioynes us any
service, he therewithal furnishes us with ability to perform the same.
was also able to arm and preserve him when he did it. But they bring an
other reason; to wit, that nakedness had been unbeseeming a Prophet? I
answer, that this nakedness was no more dishonest, then circumcision; which
spectacle, (in the opinion of profane men) was the most ridiculous thing that
could be imagined, seeing the privy members were then discovered. I do not
think, neither would I any should, that the Prophet stripped himself so
naked, but that he coueuered those uncomely parts which would have given but a
foul and deformed spectacle to the beholders. It was sufficient that the
people were taught what the Lord meant hereby, and that they might be moved
with it, as a thing extraordinary.

That also which moves me to be of this judgment, is that which is said here,
By the hand, or, in giving commission: for albeit this manner of speech be often
found elsewhere, yet we never meet with it in any place, but it imports some
hidden vehemency, by which the effect it self is noted out. The Prophet then
sets himself before God, and in the midst of the Citizens, as the herald of
the calamity that was to come; and that not by word only, but even by a
visible sign also. It is to be observed in like manner, that it is not noted
in the text in vain, that Isaiah did so.

Master Caluins judgment touching the Prophets going naked.
Thus have you mine opinion; to wit, that the Prophet went naked as often as he
preached: only showing those parts of his body, which might be seen without
blushing. As touching the sackcloth, although private men were wont to confess
their sins in time of trouble in that manner; yet it is probable that Isaiah
used this sign, both by reason of his office, as also to confirm his
doctrine, and the better to rouse the people out of their security. If at any
time it fall out that the Lord chastises either our selves, or our brethren,
he commands us not to change our raiment, neither is it needful: but we are
altogether cruel and inhumane, if the afflictions of our brethren, and the
subversion of the Church move us not. And if it be our parts to mourn, we
ought also to stir up others to do the like, and by our example, Heb. 13.
Romans 12.15, 16.
to provoke them to feel the calamity of the Church, that they may be touched
with some compassion.

Verse. 3. And the Lord said; Like as my servant Isaiah has walked naked and
barefoote three years, as a sign and wonder upon Egypt and Ethiopia;

4. So shall the King of Ashur take away the captivity of Egypt, and the
captivity of Ethiopia; both young men and old men, naked and barefoote, with
their buttockes uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.


THree years. nakedness, Isaiah his nakedness not to be considered barely in
it self, but the end wherefore it was enjoined him.
we are not barely to consider of it alone, but rather the mark and end which
the Lord had engraven in it: even as in the visible Sacraments, we ought to
behold the things which are invisible. These two words, captivity, and
carrying away, are collectiues, and are taken for the troop of the captives,
and those that were carried away out of the Country. Lastly, he says, that no
respect should be had of age: for the old should be led into captivity as well
as the young.

Verse. 5. And they shall fear and be ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation,
and of Egypt their glory.
HE now shows for whose sakes he foretold that these things should befall the
Egyptians and Ethiopians; to wit, to the end the Jews might learn to hope in
God in the midst of their afflictions, and might not call strangers to succor
them; which the Lord had forbidden. He calls them their expectation, because
the Jews always turned their eyes toward them, as often as they were pressed
with any incombrance, putting their trust in them. Psalm. 14.6. Job 6.
For we are wont to cast our eyes upon that, from whence we look for
succor: and thence it is that to look, is often taken among the Hebrews, to
hope. But they were to look unto God only: so that their wandering lightness
is here reproved. The like ought to happen unto us, and that justly; that
being made naked, and forsaken of all, we might be plunged in our own shame
and reproach; because we refuse the refuge which God has set before us, when he
calls us to himself, having suffered our selves to be seduced by Satan's
illusions.

Verse. 6. Then shall the inhabitants of this I Will, say in that day; Behold, such
is our expectation, whither we fled for help, to be delivered from the King
of Ashur: and how shall we be delivered?
HE calls not Jerusalem an I Will only, but the whole Country of Judea. They
think that this name is given unto it, because the Mediterraneum sea inuirons
it. For mine own part, I think he brings this similitude for another reason;
for it has but a little portion of the sea. But as an I Will is separate from the
dry lands: so had the Lord separated Judah from other Countries. For it was
separated from all those nations which were the deadly enemies of the Jews;
because there was a wall between them, as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.14. which
at the last was broken down at the coming of Christ. Moreover, Isaiah here
confirms his prophecy: as if he should say; Albeit you cannot now be moved
with my nakedness, yet you shall in time know by the effects, that these
things were not set before you in vain. And God is wont to constrain the
rebellious and intractable at the last, to confess their fault, that being
astonished, they might learn to dispute in themselves, how their hardness of
heart could possibly blind them so far.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The burden of the desert sea. As the whirlewindes in the south use to
pass from the wilderness, so shall it come from the horrible land.
The occasion of this prophecy against Caldea.
THE Prophet having taught the people to put no confidence in the Egyptians, but
in Gods mercy only; and having threatened them with the calamities which should
happen to those nations that succored them, whereupon they rested and relied:
he now adds a consolation for the encouragement of the faithful. For he
tells them that the Chaldeans, under whose power they were to be held captive,
shall be rewarded according to their deserts: whence the Jews were to gather,
that God had a care as touchi^g the wrongs which they sustained.

By the desert, he means the land of the Caldeans; not it was inhabited, but
because that the Jews had a desert on that side very near unto them; as if we
should take the Alps for Italy, in regard they are nearer unto us; as also
that it is our way by which we go into that Country. But the reason is to be
marked; for he describes not the nature of the Country, but tells the Jews
that the ruin of their enemies is at hand, and that it is as certain, as if
they saw it before their eyes; even as this desert was. Besides, we may note
that the Prophets are wont sometime^ to speak ambiguously and darkly of
Babylon; to the end the faithful only might understand such secret mysteries.
As for example, Jeremiah changes the name of the King.

Now he says, that this shall come from the South, because the south wind is
tempestuous, and is moved with storms and whirlewinds. Where he adds that
such tempests come from the desert; it is by way of amplification: for if any
tempest arises in a place inhabited and frequented, it will not be so
fearful as those which arise from the deserts. That he might express the
horror then of this discomfiture, he compares it to tempests which begin to
make a noise in the deserts first, and then take a violent course, and keep a
great and hideous thundering. Yet notwithstanding it seems the Prophet meant
to say, that even as the enemies ouerflowed from this side, as a tempest to
spoil the land of Iudeah: so presently after, there should be a whirlewind
raised for their overthrow. For it had not been enough to have spoken of the
ruin of Babylon; unless the Jews had therewithal been informed that it
proceeded from God.

We have showed the reason in the 18. Chapter, why he calls it an horrible or
terrible nation; to wit, because after so many examples of Gods wrath executed
upon it, it was a terror to all that beheld it, in regard of the deformity
thereof. For the circumstance of the place will not bear y^ it should be
called horrible, in regard of Gods power, which was the protection of it.
Although then that Babylon was taken and spoiled by the Medes and Persians,
Isaiah notwithstanding pronounces that the destruction thereof shall come to
the cares of Judah; because the Lord will by this means be avenged of the
outrages done unto his people, whose guardian he promised to be.

Verse. 2. A grievous vision was showed
the matter, or by reason of the distance of place; and afterward as the thing
approaches nearer, so we judge better of it. Now it is no wonder that matters
belonging to men should be referred either to the Prophets, or to the visions
of God: for we know that God takes unto him the affections of men, that he may
the better apply himself to our weakness.

Lastly, he saw a Lion: by which some think Darius should be signified, who
conquered and sacked Babylon, as it appears by the fi^th Chapter of Daniel:
Whereas the watchman says he is continually upon his watchtover day and
night, it serves to confirm the prophecy; as if he should say, nothing is
more certain then this vision: for those whom God sends to watch, are neither
blind, nor sleepie. In the mean while he exhorts and stirs up the faithful
by this example to be as attentive as himself; that by the light of the word
they may discover Gods power afar off.

Verse. 9. And behold, this man's Chariot comes with two horsemen. And he
answered and said, Babel is fallen, and all the Images of her gods has he
broken unto the ground.
BY this we plainly see that he brings not in the watchman of king Balihazar:
for this kind of speech fits not such a person; the Prophet then by Gods
commandment publishes what should fall out. Now this may be referred unto
Darius, and also unto God, as well as to the watchman; howbeit, there is no
great difference: for Darius being Gods servant in this behalf, it is no
absurdity to bring him in here as his Herald. There would be better show of
reason to apply it unto God, in regard that Darius thought nothing less then
that he was Gods servant, when he caused the Idols of the Babylonians to be
broken down. But the matter coheres better to refer it to the watchman, even
as if the Angel should add an interpretation to this prophecy.

There is a close opposition in this place between the living God, and dead
Idols. This phrase of speech also is to be noted, in that he calls them Images
of God. For the Babylonians knew well enough (which all Idolaters do in a
manner confess) that their Images were no Gods: notwithstanding, they
attributed unto them a divine power. But when men are come to that pass, they
turn the truth of God into a lie; yea, they utterly renounce him. But
occasion will be offered us hereafter, where we shall speak of this matter more
at large. We here see that the ruin of Babylon was as a just punishment for
her Idolatry: for the Prophet shows the cause thereof, when he says, that
God could not endure she should glory in her Idols.

Verse. 10. O my threshing, and the Or, the sons.
corn of my floor: that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts the God of
Israel, have I showed unto you.
BEcause the riches of this so mighty a Monarchy dazzled the eyes of all, by
the brightness thereof, it might be esteemed but a fabulous matter whatsoever
the Prophet foretold touching the destruction of it. That is the reason why he
draws the minds of the faithful unto God, that so they might know it is he
alone who took in hand to root Babylon out, and that such greatness should not
come to ruin at men's appetites, but by his power only. The threshing and
sons of the floor, are taken for one and the same thing: for it is an usual
phrase of speech among the Hebrews, who are wont to repeat one thing often.

This place is diligently to be noted, to correct a vice naturally grafted in
us; namely, when we measure Gods power by our own ell. For his counsel not
only far surpasses our weak reach, but we are also ill Judges, and
deprauers of his works: neither can we be brought to see the greatness of them
further forth then our own skill and wit stretches. But Gods infinite power
ought always to present it self before us: and then especially when our own
wit and reason is brought to the last cast: We must expect the restoration of
the church when it seems she is past recovery.
as when the Church is so oppressed with tyrants, that it seems past hope of
recovery, yet even then let us know that the Lord will bring them to nothing;
and by treading their pride under foot, and by breaking their power, will show
that it is his threshing. For y^ Prophet foretold this of no mean or common
person, but of the mightiest and most flourishing Monarchy of the world. By how
much the more then such are exalted, so much the sooner shall their destruction
come upon them, and the Lord shall send his threshers amongst them.

We are also to know that the example of this incredible ruin which the Lord
here sets before us, appertains to such as are partakers with them in their
sins. When he says he heard this of the Lord of hosts, it is as it were a
seal to ratify the prophecy: for he protests that he broached none of his
own conjectures, but received them of the Lord himself. Wherein we may note
that Gods servants ought to be furnished with this assurance, that they speak
in the name of God, as the Apostle Peter witnesses; Let him that speaks
(says he) speak as the words of God, 1. Pet. 4.11. For seducers will brag
much of the name of God, but his faithful servants are assured in their
consciences that they have published nothing but that which God has commanded
them. We may also observe that this confirmation was exceeding necessary,
because the whole world (as it were) quaked under the puissance of so mighty a
Monarchy.

But it is not without good cause that he adornes God with these two epithites,
calling him the Lord of hosts, and God of Israel. As touching the first, it is
true that it always agrees unto God: but doubtless the Prophet had a special
regard therein now unto the present matter; opposing the power of God against
all the forces of the Babylonians. For the Lord has not one host alone, but
infinite hosts for the bringing down of his enemies. He is called the God of
Israel, because he showed himself to be the protector and defense of his
people, in the destruction of the Babylonians: for the Jews were then set at
liberty, when this Monarchy was abolished. In a word, all things are done here
in savor of the Church; to which the Prophet has a special eye. For he
teaches not the Babylonians, who would have contemned these prophecies; but
the faithful, that they might be assured that God had a special care of them,
howsoever the Babylonians molested them, and had scattered them here and there.

Verse. 11. The burden of Dumah. He calls unto me out of Seir; Watchman, what
was in the night? watchman, what was in the night?
The cause of this prophecy against Dumah not certainly known.
IT appears by the 25. Chapter, verse. 14. of Genesis, that this people came of
Ismaels son, to whom this name is given: for which cause his successors were
called Dumeans. The certain cause of the destruction which is here denounced
against them, is not known: and this prophecy is so much the more obscure, by
reason ot the briefnesse of it. Yet we must always remember what I touched
before; The reason of it in respect of the Jews.
to wit, that the Jews were to be fortified against the horrible offenses
which were at hand. For when so many several changes fall our, especially if
the world be so moved, that all things are confused; we then begin to be
troubled, doubting in our selves whether things fall out by chance, or whether
they be governed by the providence of God. For this cause the Lord tells us,
that he is the author of this change, and renueth the face of the world; to
teach us that nothing is permanent here below, that so we might with our whole
heart aspire to that Kingdom of Christ which only is perpetual.

In regard then that these changes were near, it was needful the Jews should
be advertised of it aforehand, that when they saw them come to pass, these
things might be called to mind, that therein they might behold the providence
of God, and so gather increase of faith. Neither is it to be doubted but the
Jews were carried with diverse distractions of mind to and fro, in seeing the
world so shaken on all sides, and therefore sought by all means they might, to
avoid these waves and tempests. For it is our desire always to be in such a
place of safety, as we may be free from all danger of gunshot, as they say.
Some of them peradventure then might seek some other place of abode, the
better to provide for their own affairs: but when the mischief should press
them on every side, this might make them tarry at home; and admonished them
that they could find no better or safer habitation then in the company of the
faithful.

By this example also many might be advertised, who for fear of dangers,
separated themselves from the Church; thinking they could find none greater
out of it. The Jews then might be solicited with such thoughts: for we have
seen in the eight Chapter, that they had restless minds. Seeing then they
were thus in doubt, that they ran to strangers for succor; they might
easily be out of heart. And therefore as I take it, this is the principal
reason why Isaiah thus denounces the ruin of the Dumeans; namely, that the
Jews might willingly put themselves under Gods protection, and above all
things might recommend the safety of the Church unto him.

Let us hence learn to keep our selves in the lap of Gods Church, We ought to
keep our selves in the lap of Gods Church, though we see her suffer sundry
trials. 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
be it that we see her afflicted with diverse and sundry calamities; and let us
rather gladly sustain those loving chastisements which are proper to her
children, then to wander abroad to drink the lees and dregs which shall
strangle and choke the wicked. For if the children be thus chastised, what
shall become of the strangers and reprobates? It may be also that the Dumeans
molested Gods people, whilst their neighbors assailed them on all sides.

Of Seir.] It was a mountain of Idumea, as it appears, Genesis 14.6. And under
the name of this mountain, he comprehends the whole Kingdom. Now in this
place he represents, as in a glass, those things which had need of words of
vehemency. And seeing the Idumeans asked the watchman what was in the night?
it is very likely they were not far off, and were in hazard of the common
danger: for he brings them not in inquiring, as curious to know what news; but
they ask what the watch saw in the night: as when one inquires, then comes
another; and the third will come and do the like. Hereunto tends the
repetition, that it was not one alone that inquired, but many; as men are wont
to do when things are doubtful and perplexed, when every one affrighted in
himself, gives credit to nothing that is told them.

Verse. 12. The watchmen said; The morning comes, and also the night: if ye
will ask, enquire: return and come.
HIs meaning is, that this fear shall not last a day only, or some little
space: as if the watchman should answer, I will tell you that to morrow which I
told you to day; and if you fear now, you shall also fear to morrow. Now it
is a most miserable condition, when men are so troubled, as they hang in
suspense whether they shall live or die; it being that extreme curse, wherewith
the Lord threatens the wicked by Moses, wWo will warrant me life till the
evening? And when the evening is come, who will let me see the morning? Deuteronomy.
28.67. True it is, that the faithful are environed about with many dangers:
(...) this note of thankfulness, he aggrauates their crime; that in so great
light of the heavenly tru^th, they ceased not to stumble, as if they had been
utterly destitute of it.

Wh^t have thou to do here?] He now bends his speech to Jerusalem; not that
this destruction concerned that City alone, but because the whole land thought
themselves secured under the shadow of the Sanctuary, which was in it: as al^o
that the Jews might think what was like to befall them, if this City which
was so well furnished, should be thus dealt withal. He asks by way of
admiration, whence it comes that every one left his house, fleeing to the tops
thereof to save their lives. Now the roofes of the Jews houses were made
otherwise then ours are: and thence it is that Jesus Christ says; What I tell
you in the ear, that preach you on the house tops: Mat. 12.27. When the
inhabitants of Ierusal^m then fled to the tops of their houses, and left the
houses themselves to the wills of their enemies, it was a sign that they were
exceedingly fl^ghted. They might all get up thither to chase away their enemies
with darts and arrows: but his meaning rather is, that the enemy constrained
them to run up thither, because they were not only amassed at their coming,
but also fled for fear: yet so, as their flight should not save them.

Verse. 2. Thou that art full of noise, a City full of brute, a joyous City:
thy slain men Or, are not slain.
shall not be slain with sword, nor die in battle.
HIs meaning is, that it was peopled and full of inhabitants; because there is
great noise where many people are gathered together, neither can the fear
there be so great. Isaiah adds this by way of amplification; to wit, that
whereas being a sufficient number, they should have been upon the walls and
ramparts to defend the City, they like cowards gave place to the enemies, and
fled up to the tops of their houses. He therefore presses the Jews the more
nearly with these words, that they might duly weigh the judgment of God: for
when men's hearts are cast down with so great fear, it is certain that such
an astonishment is sent of God. It is as much the^ as if the Prophet had said;
Whence comes it that thou have no more courage to resist? Surely because the
Lo^d himself chaseth and pursues thee.

Now this doctrine is taken out of the 28. of Deuteronomie: for we have often
said, that the Prophets do many times borrow sentences out of Moses, to serve
their turn withal: only the difference is, that they apply that
particularly, which Moses spoke in general. The Prophet reprocheth the Jews
then with this their calamity very justly: for it was fit they should be
touched to the quick, to the end they might learn that all the trouble and
evils which they endured, happened to them in regard of their trespasses and
sins. For the Lord had promised them continual assistance: but being now left
of him, they were to confess themselves unworthy of his aid, and that they had
caused the Lord to recoile back from them by their rebellions.

The Lord never deceiues, neither promises he any thing in vain: but these
poor wretches are deprived of his love and favor by their own default: which
is yet better expressed by that interrogation which follows; What have thou
to do here? For it is as much as if by the present act, he showed that
Jerusalem is left dest^tute of her protector and defender: because this manner
of speech signifies as much as some strange and unwonted thing. And to the end
he might the better set forth the vengeance of God, he telle^ them that those
which were slain, died not like valiant men in battle; but that they died
only for want of heart and courage: for this womanish and timorous heart, was
a sure token to them that they were all left of God; whose assistance if they
had had, they should boldly and manfully have made resistance. So then he not
only affirms that this discomfiture was accompanied with shame and dishonor;
but he also attributes the want of heart and courage to resist to the wrath and
anger of God: neither is it to be doubted, but by the circumstance of this
their flight, he beats down their vain arrogancy and pride.

Verse. 3. All thy Princes shall flee together from the bow: they shall be
bound: all that shall be found in thee, shall be bound together, which have
fled from far.
THis ve^se is expounded diverse ways. The matter in it self is clear enough:
but there is some d^fficultie in the words. Now because the letter Men^
signifies Before; some expound the word Merachok They fled before others: who
notwithstanding were nearer unto danger, in regard they dwelt upon the borders
of the Country. Others thus, Although they were very far off from Jerusalem, yet
they ran away as men poss^ss^d with fe^re, who flee without stay, thinking
that they have the enemy always at their heels. But I take this sense to be
better agreeing; They ran far off: that is to say, those who fled to
Jerusalem, as to a Sanctuary, shall be taken and bound by the enemies.

Now Jerusalem was as the common City of re^uge for the whole Country of
Judea: and therefore after any war was begun, the inhabitants on all sides
drew themselves thither. But they were surprised, notwithstanding they thought
it such a place of safety. Some refer this to the siege of Senacherib: 2.
King. 18.13. 2. King. 39.15. 2. King. 24.12.
but I cannot be led by any means to expound it so, because he speaks of the
destruction of Jerusalem. But we know when it was besieged by Senacherib, the
Lord delivered it forthwith; neither was there any taken or bound, neither was
any slain there. These things fell out then a long time after the Prophets
death: and the holy history witnesses the same: as also that the Princes
determined to flee when this calamity happened: but neither their flight to
Jerusalem, nor their running away from it did them any good at all, because
they fell into the hands of the enemies.

In that he speaks expreslie of the Princes, it aggrauates the indignity of
the fact, for they should have been the foremost in ventring of their lives for
the safety of the people, no less then if they had bin their shields and
bucklers to fortify and defend them. Iere. 7.4.
of which they bragged in such wise, that they persuaded themselves they could
not be hurt by any power or forces whatsoever, though the whole world should
conspire their destruction. This prophecy therefore might seem very strange,
to wit, that they should become heartlesse, and betake them to their heels,
and yet should not escape this way neither.

Verse. 4. Therefore said I, Turn away from me: I will weep bitterly: labor
not to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
TO the end the Prophet might affect the hearts of the Jews the more with this
calamity he takes upon him the person of a mourner: and not that only, but
with bitter lamentation he bewailes the desolation of Gods Church. For this
place must not be expounded like the for^er, wherein he expressed and set forth
the sorrow and heaviness of foreign nations: But in regard he speaks here of
the afflictions of the Church whereof himself was a member, he has good cause
to mourn in good earnest, and to call upon others to lament with him. That
which happens to the Church then in general, ought no less to move us, then
if each of us felt the misery upon himself in particular: otherwise where
shall this sentence be verified, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up? Psalm.
69.10. Now the Prophet mournes not

We may easily gather from that which is added, that the Prophet spoke that
with his mouth which he felt in his heart when he says, I will weep bitterly
for the daughter of my people: for himself being one of Abraham's offspring, he
could not but be touched to the quick with this common calamity, and therefore
testifies, yt he has just cause to mourn. He calls the daughter the
assembly of the people, according to ye usual phrase. We ought to be
tho^owlie touched with sorrow for the Churches a^fliction, unless we will
p^oue our selves yron-hearted.
Whence we may note, that when the Church is afflicted we ought to be moved
with compassion by the example of the Prophet, unless we be more then iron
hearted. For we are utterly unworthy to be numbered among the children of
God, or to be accounted among the communion of Saints, unless our selves,
with all we enjoy, be in such wise consecrated unto her, that nothing can
separate us by any means from her. Therefore in seeing the Church so many
ways, and with such diverse calamities afflicted at this day, and an infinite
number of souls to perish, whom Jesus Christ has redeemed with his precious
blood, must we not needs be cruel and barbarous if we be moved with no sorrow
at all? Especially the Ministers of the word ought to be thorowlie touched
with the feeling of this sorrow: for as they are held for the watchmen, and
therefore can see further off, so also ought they to sigh when they perceive
the signs of a scattering of the sheep to be at hand.

Now the Prophets public tears served (as we have said) to break the hearts
of the people: for he had to do with men of such obstinacy, as could not
easily be brought to lament. There is a place almost like unto this in
Jeremiah, where he bewailes the destruction and scattering of the people,
saying, that his soul fainted with sorrow, Iere. 4.31. And in another place,
Who will grant that my head might be filled with waters, and that mine eyes
might be a fountain of tears to weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people? Iere. 9.1. Iere. 9.1.
When the Prophets perceived they labored in vain to break the hard hearts of
this people, surely they could not choose but be overwhelmed with grief and
sorrow, and therefore they endeavored by all means to mollify y^ hearts of the
obstinate, that if it were possible they might be bowed and brought back again
into the right way.

Verse. 5. For it is a day of trouble, and of ruin and of perplexity by the
Lord of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the City: and a crying
unto the mountains.
HE again signifies that the Lord is the Author of this fearful judgment:
Though it be often told us that God is the author of our afflictions, yet we
forget it when we should put this knowledge in practice.
and to the end the Jews might not gaze here and there, wondering that the
enemies should get the upper hand, he tells them plainly that they fight
against God himself. Now albeit we often meet with this doctrine in the holy
Scriptures, yet notwithstanding it is no way superfluous, neither can it be so
often repeated but we forget it when we are to practice it: thence it is that
we humble not our selves before our Judge, but cast our eyes rather upon men
and external means, then upon God, who would easily remedy our evils.

By day, he means a time prefixed, according to the usual prase of the
Scripture; because it seems that God yields over his right for a time, when he
winkes at men's wickedness: but he forthwith recouers it again in that season
that himself has appointed. Now it is not for naught that he names the valley
of vision again: for the Jews thought themselves secured from all dangers,
because it pleased God to inlighten them by his word. But because they did
unthankfully reject the doctrine thereof, it was but a vain confidence, to
think the bare inioying of it should any way profit them: for the Lord not
only punishes the infidelity of those that are out of the Church, but that
also of the Church it self. Nay, rather he begins to manifest his anger
against it first; for he will not endure to have his graces abused, nor that
men should boast of his titles in vain. That which is added touching.

The cry of the mountain, it may be referred to God, to the Caldeans, and to
those also which fled; because the vanquishers raised up a cry to augment the
terror: but the vanquished either cried for mercy and fidelity, or else
testified their sorrow by tears and weepings. The singular number may also be
taken for the plural, or else it is meant of that side of the City in which
the Temple was built. Both expositions agree to the text; and there cried from
the mountain of Zion, neighbor mountains, when they pilled and destroyed the
City: or that

Verse. 6. And Elam bare the quiver in a man's chariot with horsemen: and Kir
uncovered the shield.
THe expositours are of opinion that this is a continued speech, and that the
Prophet denounces the same judgment against the Jews, that he had done
before. But when I consider all things advisedly, I am enforced to be of the
contrary opinion: for I think the Prophet vpbraides the Jews with their
obstinacy and rebellion, See the exposition of the eleventh verse, for that
gives light to this.
for that they repented not, albeit the Lord had chastised them: and thus he
repeates the history of the time past, to put them in remembrance that God his
chastisements had done them no good. Thus should these things be distinguished
from the former. In the other verses he foretold what should happen to the
Jews: but now he shows that they are justly punished, and that they have
deserved these violent blows wherewithal the Lord smites them.

Now I have translated this Hebrew conjunction Vau, by way of opposition; it
being often taken in this sense. Those who think the Prophet threatens in the
time to come, retain the proper sense: as if the Prophet having made mention
of God, should by and by add the executioners of his vengeance. But I have
already showed what exposition I have approved; and it shall appear hereafter
by the course of the text, that mine opinion is not without good reason. In
that he names the Elamits, and the Kirenians, it agrees better, as I take it,
to the Assyrians, then to the Babylonians. For although these nations did never
make war upon the Jews by their own instinct; yet is it very likely that they
were in wages with the King of Assyria, and occupied a place in his host, when
he besieged Jerusalem. Now we have said already, that by the Elamits are meant
the Esterne people: and under the name of Kir, it is certain that the Prophet
comprehends the Kirenians. And because they bare shields, he says, they
discovered them; because they drew them forth of their cases, when they entered
into the battle. Whereas some translate, In the chariot of horsemen; I reject
it not: yet had I rather render the words of the Prophet, word for word: for I
think he means a chariot of war. They used then two sorts of chariots; one
served to bear the baggage;

Verse. 7. Or, and that it came to pass, etc.
And thy chief valleys were full of Chariots: and the horsemen set themselves
in array against the gates.
IF this be a threat, it should be expounded in the time to come; to wit, And
it shall come to pass. But because the words following are put in the time
past, and that it appears the Prophet speaks of things already fallen out, I
have not been afraid to appropriate this beginning to that which is by and by
added.

The chief of the valleys, is taken for fair and fruitful. Now he puts the
Jews in mind of these distresses, into which they were brought by Senacherib
whilst he besieged them, and whilst the enemies were before the gates of the
City: for then ought they to have fled unto God for succor. But then did
these poor Jews run so much the further away from him, and the more
shamefully did they manifest their rebellion herein, showing themselves utterly
desperate. Therefore is it that he vpbraides them with this obstinate
rebellion.

Verse. 8. And he Or, carried away.
discovered the covering of Judah: and thou did look in that day to the
armor of the house of the forest.
HE shows in what anguish the Jews were when they were thus hardly besieged.
Some refer this speech unto God, others to the enemies, but I had rather take
it indefinitlie: for he has carried away, is a phrase of speech used of the
Hebrews, that is, the covering of Judah was carried away. By the word covering,
all almost understand the Temple, or the name of God it self, under which the
Jews falsely bragged. But for mine own part I take it more simply for their
Armorie, wherein they shut up (as in a most secret place) their instruments and
furniture for the war. For he calls it not a covering, as if these things
were not discovered to all, but because they were laid up in a place pur apart
or consecrate. And thus he sets that forth which we see to happen in great
hurly burlies, for then every one runs to his weapon, bringing out the
munitions for war which were hidden before.

The latter member is joined with this, to wit, that they then searched
diligently every place where they might get weapons in such an extreme
necessity, because the furniture for war had been hid a long time whilst
they inioyed peace. Now the holy history witnesses that Solomon had built
this house of the forest, 1. King. 7.2.
that all the armor and instruments of war might be laid up there. The change
of the person in this word thou, darkens not the sense, but rather confirms
that which I have said, to wit, that the Prophet recites after what manner the
Jews were let in making preparations to defend the City.

Verse. 9. And ye have seen the breaches of the city of David, for they were
many: and ye gathered the waters of the lower poole.
HE co^tinues forth his discourse, for whilst matters go well, and that all
things are in quiet, men care not greatly neither for munition, nor for
warlike furniture: nothing but necessity awakens men, Necessity is it which
commonly awakens us.
and makes them careful: peace and rest makes us become lazy and slothful.
As long then as they thought themselves free from gunshot, they neglected to
make up the breaches of the walls: but when the drum once stroke up, then they
gave themselves to the care of these things, and to take order for letting the
enemy from getting passage. By the City of David, he means the midst of
the City, which was divided into two parts, which we may see in the City of
David. The Temple also was fortified, so as the City was divided as it were
into three. Now Isaiah meant to say that the Jews had almost lost all hope of
saving the City when they thus retired into the middlemost, which was
strongger then all the rest. And it appears very well by the holy history
that their case was very desperate. Thus we may also gather, that the
prophesies were not gathered in order, so as they which put them into one
volume did not stand much upon the circumstance of the time. He adds, the
waters were gathered for their necessity, that the necessities of those which
were besieged might be supplied therewith, and thus the poole served them for a
Cisterne.

Verse. 10. And ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye
broken down to fortify the wall.
HIs meaning is, that they viewed the City narrowly and on every side, that
no house nor building might annoy the defense of it. Others say that the houses
were numbered that they might have watchmen out of them: but the first
exposition seems the sit, for it is confirmed by that which is added
after, that there were houses broken down to repair the walls of the City.
We make no ^eckning of these things in the time of peace: and oftentimes men of
mean estate will build houses even upon the very ramparts, therefore they must
be pulled down in time of war, that from thence they may houses were so
near the walls.

Verse. 11. And have also made a ditch between the two walls for the waters of
the old poole, and have not looked to the maker thereof, neither had respect
unto him that formed it. Or, long ago.

THe first part of this verse is conioined forsook that which was the
principal. For whereas they should first have had their recourse unto God,
they neglected it, in contriuing of ditches, ramparts, walls, and other
defenses of war, and yet did their chief defense all this while rest in God.
Now then it appears that that which I said in the beginning is true, to wit,
that he forctels not here the destruction of the Jews, but only puts them in
mind of that they had felt in former time: that from thence he might take
occasion to show how justly the Lord was angry with them, because no
chastisement nor correction whatsoever could amend them. For their extreme
dangers into which they were fallen, ought to have admonished them of their
impiety and contempt of God, but they became so much the more hardened. And
yet there is scarcely any man

From hence let us gather, that it is a sign of a desperate impiety, when men
amend not for the rods and scourges which are laid

To him that made it.] He closely confesses by these words, yt God absolutely
condemns not ye care we have to resist our enemies, and to avoid dangers; but
that false confidence which we put in external means. What course we ought to
keep in the time of peril.
For our inconsiderate hastiness is justly condemned of disloyalty and high
treason; when we forsake God, to fly unto swords and spears, to fortresses
and bulwarks. Let us learn then to fly to him alone when dangers inuiron us
on all sides; and let us run with all the powers of our soul, Prou. 18.10
to the assured fortress of his holy name. This being done, then is it lawful
to use those means which he gives us: but all things will work to our
destruction, unless we first of all put the hope of our safety in his
protection.

He calls God the workman and maker of Jerusalem, because he had his
habitation there, and would there be called upon. Now seeing this city was the
image of the church, this title also belongs to us: for the Lord is called the
Creator of the Church in a special regard. For howsoever this title
appertains to the creation of the whole world; The first creation belongs to
all: the second peculiar to the elect only.
yet this second creation whereby he delivers us from death by regenerating and
sanctifying us, is a benefit which is peculiar to the elect: others have no
part of this. Now this title imports not a sudden act; but such a one as is
constant and perpetual: neither is the Church created once, to be left by and
by; but the Lord defends and conserues it even unto the end: Thou will not
despise the work of thine hands, says the Psalmist: so Paul testifies, Psalm.
138.8. Phil. 1.6.
that he which has begun a good work, will accomplish it unto the day of
Christ.

And besides, this title contains in it a wonderful consolation: A
consolation.
for if God be the maker, then need we not to fear, if so be we depend upon
his power and goodness. But we cannot cast our eyes upon him, unless we be
endued with true humility and confidence; that being dispossessed of all
haughtiness, and so brought to nothing, we be ready to attribute the whole
glory to him alone. Now this cannot be done, unless herewithall we be fully
persuaded that our salvation is in his hand, being assured yt we cannot perish;
no not although a thousand deaths should compass us about. Well, their fault
then was the greater, in regard the prerogative of this City, which had been
approved by so many evident signs, could not yet provoke the Jews to commit
themselves unto Gods protection. As if he should say; What folly is it for you
to think to keep the City, when you despise the workman that made it?

Long ago.] The Hebrew word signifies as well distance of place, as length of
time. If we refer it to the place, the sense will be, that the Jews are
double unthankful that they lo^ked not unto G^d; no not a far off. Wherein
we are to note, that we ought not only to look unto God when he is near
unto us, but also when it seems he is far distant from us. Now we think
him absent when we feel not his present help, and when he assists us not as
soon as we stand in need. To be short, The nature of hope described.
he shows what is the nature of true hope; for it is a gross and carnal kind
of looking unto God, when we acknowledge his providence no further then we c^n
see it before our eyes; Hope must mount above the skies.
hope you know must mount above the skies. I grant the Lord is always properly
and truly present; but he is thought absent and far off in regard of the
weakness of our sight. This must be construed then according to our sense,
and not as the thing is indeed. Wherefore albeit that he seems to be absent in
these calamities wherewith the Church is now afflicted, yet let us lift up our
minds unto him; let us awaken our hearts, and shake off all sloth, that so we
may give our selves to the calling upon his name. But the other sense agrees
better; to wit, that they looked not unto God who created and made his Church;
not yesterday, or the day before it, but a great while since; as one who showed
himself the maker of it many ages off. He is called then the ancient maker of
his Church: because that if the Jews would but have called to mind the long
progress of time; they should have known him to have been a perpetual
conseruer of his work; wherein their ingratitude is yet the less excusable.

Verse. 12. And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call unto weeping and
mourning, and to baldness, and girding with sackcloth.
THe Prophet further amplifies this wicked rebellion of the people. For this
circumstance cuts off all replies: for in the midst of such extreme dangers,
they had despised the holy exhortations of the Prophes, and had rejected the
favor of God, when he was ready to have healed and restored them to their
former happiness. Here we see a sign of desperate malice, when men are so
besotted that they proudly despise instruction and correction, kicking
obstinatlie against the spur^e: then (I say) may we evidently perceive that
they are given up into a reprobate sense. Whereas he says the Lord called
them, we may expound it two ways: for although he should not speak at all,
yet he calls us sufficiently by his rods and chastisements. Put the case we
had no Scripture at all, no Prophets nor Teachers, and that there were none to
admonish us: yet does God notwithstanding instruct us by afflictions and
calamities, so as we may easily conclude that every chastisement is a summons
to repentance. Every chastisement a summons to repentance.
But doubtless the Prophet meant to express somewhat more, to wit, that in
despising the holy admonitions which were sent unto them, they were not
ashamed to rise up as it were even against God himself, who after a fatherly
manner beckned them unto him. There is yet greater weight in that he says, it
was in the day of affliction, wherein the danger pressed hard upon them: for
they were admonished both by words and blows. The signs of Gods anger
appeared, the Prophets cried without ceasing, and yet they became never the
better.

In that he names sackcloth, and plucking of their hair, Repentance consists
not in outward Ceremonies, but in the heart.
he notes out repentance by the signs of it: for it consists neither in
sackcloth, in ashes, nor in any external thing, but it consists in the heart.
Those who repent in good earnest, and are displeased with themselves, outward
signs, whereby we give testimony of our conversion: now the Jews used such
gestures and customs at that time when they meant to show signs of
repentance. Isaiah means then that they were called to repentance, to the end
they should first humble themselves before God, and then that they should
therewithal show testimonies of that displeasure they had conceived in
themselves before men. The signs indeed alone are nothing, seeing conversion
begins at the heart: and to this purpose Joel says, Rent your hearts, These
outward testimonies of repentance are not acceptable unto God in themselves.
and not your clothes: not that he would have these signs neglected; but he
shows that they were not sufficient nor acceptable unto God of themselves. Let
us hence gather what is our duty when the signs of Gods anger appear unto
us, namely, that our repentance ought not only to be known unto God, but also
to men.

The ceremonies indeed are indifferent; neither have we any commandment to put
on sackcloth nor to pluck off our hair, Wherein the truth of these signs
consists.
but we ought willingly and in good earnest to put the truth of these signs
in practice: to wit,

Yet are we by the way, How farforth these outward testimonies ar profitable.
to note the profit of these outward signs of repentance, to wit, that they
serve as goades to prick us forward to the acknowledgement of our guiltiness,
and to the lothing and detesting of our sin. And thus as they are spurs to
quicken us to this duty, they may be called causes of repentance: and as they
are signs, they may be called effects. For the tokens of our condemnation that
we bear upon us, provoke us to a more through acknowledgement that we are
sinners and guilty persons: and they are also effects; because if repentance
went not before, we should never be brought to use them of a sincere affection.

Verse. 13. And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,
eating flesh and drinking wine, eating and drinking, for tomorrow we shall die.
THe Prophet condemns not joy simply: for we see that Saint Paul himself
exhorts the faithful to rejoice with a true joy; to wit, in the Lord: Phil.
4.4. But he here reproues that joy which is contrary to that sorrow which
proceeds of repentance; whereof also the same Apostle speaks in the seventh
Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians: for indeed, none can be
touched with repentance, nor with the true feeling of Gods wrath; but being
sorrowful, he willingly afflicts himself. The joy then opposite to this
sorrow, is naught; Luke 6.25. Joel 1.14. and 2.12.
because it proceeds from a brutish blockishnesse, and is justly reproved,
because the Lord accurseth it.

Hence it appears then sufficiently wherefore the Lord vpbraides them with
the killing of oxen, and butchering of sheep: for this is not evil in it
self, neither does it displease God: but because fasting is a solemn part of
repentance which we show before men; it is therefore a sign of obstinacy and
contempt of God, to kill beasts, and to make great merriments when we ought
rather to fast. Thus do men despise Gods threatenings, and flatter themselves in
their vices: and this is the sum of Isaiahs speech.

But the Papists are worthily reputed ridiculous, Papists ridiculous.
who think this place warrants abstine^ce from flesh. Why did they not as well
forbid wine also, seeing the Prophet speaks of that too? But they are so far
from abstaining from wine, Isaiah condemn^^ not ^he vs^ of meats and drinks
but the abuse
that contrariwise they easily permit men for want of flesh, to recompense the
same with taking in of their liquor. But let these toys pass. For Isaiah
condemns neither the use of flesh nor wine simply, but the abuse; the
dissolution and pride also whereby men so harden themselves, that with an
obstinate heart they reject al Gods threatenings, and judge whatsoever the
Prophets say to be but fables.

We are to observe this point diligently: for albeit we put not on sackcloth,
nor cover our selves always with ashes; yet if true repentance be wrought in
us, we shall manifest the same by such fruits as it necessarily brings forth in
them that have it. In a word, as he had described repentance by the signs, so
he now sets forth their inward obstinacy and hardness of heart, by the
outward testimonies of it. For even as we witness our sorrow for sin by
abstinence and other exercises; so by our d^ssolutio^s and superfluities, we
show evident signs of a stiff neck, by which we provoke Gods wrath more and
more against us: as we read they did in the days of Noah, Genesis 6.5. Luke
17.27. Therefore after the Prophet had taxed the excess and intemperancie of
the people in general; he names eating and drinking, as the special: wherein
the Jews wholly ouerflowed: as if by this means they had been able to give God
the repulle, and to tread his threatenings under foot.

For to morrow we shall die.] This particle shows sufficiently why the
Prophet so sharply rebuked them for drinking wine, and eating of flesh; to
wit, because they scoffed and turned all the Prophets threats into jests and
matter of derision. Some think that S. Paul in alleging almost the very same
words in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 15. had respect to this
place: but I am not of their opinion. For he there recites the phrase of speech
which Epicures used; who holding it as a principle to spend their time in
iollitie whilst it lasted, never thought of life eternal: and therefore they
said; we must be merry, and take our pleasure whilst life indureth. But Isaiah
in this place brings in the wicked, who proudly contemned the Prophets
menacings; neither could they endure that any should forewarne them of
afflictions, banishments, slaughters, and ruins. For in scorn they took up
the Prophets words, and at their banquets would say in derision; Ho, we shall
die to morrow: These Prophets foretell a speedy destruction that is ready to
overtake us: well, let us yet rejoice and make good cheer one day more.

Thus obstinate minds cannot be touched with any remorse at all, but rather
lift up themselves against God and his Prophets, and so much the more ouerflow
in all dissolutions and disorders. Truly it was a monstrous fury in them,
thus to vomit forth these blasphemies in disdain, indignation, and despite,
which ought not only to have rent their hearts, but to have shaken even heaven
and earth also. But it were to be wished, we at this day had not many such
examples: for God no sooner threatens, but the most part spew out their poison,
or else scoff at all things which proceed out of Gods sacred and blessed mouth.

Verse. 14. And it was declared in the ears of the Lord of hosts: Or, if this
iniquity shall be pardoned.
Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the
Lord of hosts.
AS if he should say; Do you think to play the bedlems, and not be punished
for it, seeing God by this means seeks to draw you to repentance? But some
may imagine that the Prophet only repeates the same thing he had said before:
for doubtless all things are naked and manifest in his sight. But he adds
this as an alarm to awaken the blockishnes of ye wicked, who never durst
advance themselves thus proudly against God, but that they think they can
beguil^ him: for whosoever knows he has God for a witness of his doings,
ought of necessity therewithal to confess that the same God must be his
Judge. It follows therefore, that the wicked in their cups, do quite and
clean bereave God of his power. What marvel is it then, if they be summoned to
appear before his tribunal seat, to the end they may know that there they
must give an account.

It is a terrible threatening when he says that this wickedness shall never
be pardoned. Now the particle conditional, If, contains a negative in the
Hebrew tongue: as if the Lord should say; Think me not to be true, think me
not to be God, if I be not avenged of so execrable an impiety. The cause why
the Hebrews conceal something in their oaths, Oaths must be used with fear
and trembling.
is to accustom us to be modest and sober in this behalf: for we therein
crave that God would judge and be avenged of us, if we lie. We had need of
some bridle therefore to restrain us from making oaths rashly. The sum of
the Prophets speech is to teach us, that nothing is more displeasing unto God
then obstinacy, whereby we treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, as the
Apostle says, Romans 2.5. and deprive our selves of all hope of perdition.

Verse. 15. Thus says the Lord God of hosts; Go get thee to the treasurer, to
Shebna the steward of the house, and say.
THis prophecy is particularly addressed against one man. For having spoken to
all the people before, he now turns his speech to Shebna, Shebna.
whom he will mention again in the 37. Chapter. The Prophet gives him two
titles, to wit, of Scribe, or Chancellor; and steward of the house: and
whereas he gives the title of steward here, he will call him by the name of
Chancellor in the other place. And therefore some are of opinion touching
these words, that he was put from his office of stewardship, and that Eliakim
was put in his room. But this is uncertain: yet we may conjecture by the
Prophets words, that Shebna was so carried away with envy, that he endeavored
to supplant Eliakim. It is no less probable that this prophecy was written
after Jerusalem was miraculously delivered, and Senacheribs host discomfited.
In the mean while, many things doubtless happened that are unknown to us:
and not unlike but this perfidious wretch being in some credit, did his worst
to suppress Eliakim. For it appears by the history o^ the second book of
Kings, Chap. 19.2. that Shebna was one of the principal Secretaries, whom we
now call Chancellor. But there is yet a little more difficulty in the word
Socen: for some think it signifies a Treasurer, because the verb Sacan
signifies to lock: but seeing he calls him Chancellor in an other place, I
think he was not Treasurer. Besides, the Prophet does sufficiently witness,
that this man had such cammand in his hands, that others in comparison of him
were little esteemed. Now this authority and dignity could not well agree to
a Treasurer: and therefore as I take it, the Prophet meant some thing else. For
seeing this verb signifies some times to entertain, and to warm; it seems
the foresaid word is taken for one that sustaineth and vpholdeth, whom we in
our common speech call an entertainer.

It is also certain that this Shebna had intelligence with the enemy. In a
word, he was a treacherous and subtle fellow: for he held secret amity with
the Egyptians and Assyrians, and complotted mischieuously with them, to the end
he might make sure on all sides, for upholding his own authority. Others
think it was a name of some of his predecessors, and that he was called
Socnite, because of the City wherein he was borne: for they say he was an
Egyptian. I reject not this opinion, but the other pleases me better; the
reason is, because he played the Ambodexter in pleasing both parts; thinking by
this fetch to hold his own, whatsoever should fall out.

It may be clearly discerned, that the particle Hazzeh, is put for contempt:
as if he should say; Go to that same cunning and subtle fellow that works
upon the vantage, holding with the hare, and running with the hounds, as they
say. This word Socen, is taken in that sense which I have touched before in the
first book of the Kings, Chap. 1.2. where there is speech of a young virgin
that should be brought to the King to cherish him. Notwithstanding, if any had
rather take it for a man that hurts, and wrongs men, I mislike it not, because
the verb also signifies to impouerish.

You shall find this verse further expounded in the 17. verse.
Verse. 16. What have thou to do here? and whom have thou here, that thou
should here hew thee out a sepulcher, as he that heweth out a sepulcher in
an high place, or that graueth an habitation for himself in a rock?
THis Shebna caused a sepulcher to be built in Jerusalem, as if there he must
of necessity always live, and there be buried also. The Prophet therefore
asks to what purpose he had prepared himself so rich and sumptuous a tomb in
so high a place above others, as those are wont to do, which mean to eternize
their remembrance in this world. Now he seems to tax the ambition of a
stranger, and one unknown, for desiring to be thus honorably buried out of
his own country: and yet in the mean while, complotted with the enemy to
destroy Judea. What greater folly could be imagined, then to erect a sepulcher
in that land, whose ruin and destruction he practiced? And thererefore he
adds,

Verse. 17. Behold the Lord will carry thee away with Or, a notable shaking.
a great captivity, Or, thou shall be wholly covered.
and will surely cover thee.
AS if he should say; Thou shall be driven hence out of this place into a far
Country, where thou shall die ignominiously. It is better to translate the
Hebrew word Gaber, in the genitive; namely, thou shall be driven hence with the
casting out of a man. Now because this word also signifies a valiant and strong
man; some expound. Thou shall be driven hence with a sure and strong shaking.
Others take it in the vocative, O man; as if he should say to Shebna by way of
derision, O glorious fellow, that braggest so much of thy greatness, it cannot
be but thou take thy self for some petty God! But the first reading fits
best. And yet the expositours consent not in this behalf: for besides mine
exposition, they have brought an other; to wit, That men shall be carried away
further off, then the women. But I rather think he alludes to Shebnaes pride,
who purposed to build so sumptuous a sepulcher, that after his death he might
be thought some excellent and worthy personage. As if he should say; Thou will
be taken for a noble man after thou art dead; but I will ennoble thee after
another manner: I will carry thee hence with a notable captivity into a far
Country, where thou shall be strangely buried.

But first let us note in this word, Intertainer, how much a double heart and a
deceiuer, is displeasing unto God, who above all things recommends simplicity
and plain dealing unto us. Shebna was called the Provost, because the glory
of his prosperous estate did dazzle his eyes, in regard he was advanced above
others: which often befalles them, who being proud and puffed up with their
greatness, fear no adversity at all; as if they were exempt out of the
common order of men. But the Lord shows us, that he will be the Judge of such
fellows.

We must also consider that Isaiah could not publish this prophecy without
incurring great ill will; especially in regard he directs it to a man so proud,
and in so high place. Yet durst he not refuse this charge, neither made he any
difficulty to tell this man his own, and to threaten him as God had bidden
him.

As touching a sepulcher, we know that the care of burying the dead is not
utterly to be condemned: A care ought to b^ had touching ou^ bu^^all.
and albeit to be deprived of burial, be a matter of no great consequence, as
one says; yet it is ^n honest thing to be interred, neither ought it to be
despised. It was not the Prophets meaning then (...) r^proue Shebna for his
care to be honestly ^^^ed; but his ambition, in making himself so sumptuous a
tomb: and h^rein he taxes his desire and affectation of vain glory.

There is yet one thing more to be observed in Shebna: for in as much as he
was minded to deliver the City into the Assyrians hand by treason, he thought
to reign for ever: hoping by that means to receive the gou^rnement of the
Kingdom of the enemies, Shebnaes p^litike plot.
as a reward of his treachery; if they became the stronger; and if it happened
they had the repul^e, he yet notwithstanding looked to continue in his dignity
and authority always.

But this will be the better understood by the words themselves; What have thou
to do here? For he was a stranger borne. I deny not but he might well have
obtained fellowship with the people of God; Shebna a stranger and a tr^^ or to
God his Church.
yet in regard he was both a traitor and a stranger, he had no part nor portion
in this region nor City, which God had spoecially assigned unto his chosen.
The Prophet asks him then; Whence art thou? Thou art linked with the people of
God neither by blood nor affinity; and yet thou will not only reign in this
Country whilst thou live, but thou art also plotting how to stablish thy
seat here, after thy death. Thou will deliver us into the hands of the
Assyrians, and meanest to turn out the true Lords: so as thy self, which art
but a stranger, mindest to enjoy this land, in which thou have not right to one
pike of dust. Ambi^ion (...) thing exceeding odiou^ unto God.
Hence we may gather, that this ambition is exceedingly odious unto God, when
men are not content with the honors wherewith they were glutted whil^st they
lived; but they must build them perpetual monuments of their name in the world
when they are gone. For they cover to be exalted after their death, and to
live again as it were in the mouths of men: and albeit things by death are
abolished; yet are they besotted notwithstanding with this foolish hope, that
their memory shall endure for ever. But the Lord auengeth himself of their
pride and presumption, causing that which they erected for a witness and
remembrance of their glory, to turn to their dishonor and ignominy. For
their very name is so accursed, that men can neither hear nor see any mention
thereof, but it is with detestation. Nay, it sometimes falls out, that the
Lord suffers them not to be buried in their tombs, but sends them to the
gallows, and to the ravens; of which we have many examples in the histories:
Host. 7.10.
neither want we some spectacles hereof even in our own times.

But as often as I read this place, a like example unto this comes to my mind,
and is the nearest in affin^tie to it of all others; to wit, of one Thomas
Moore, Thomas Moore Lord Chancellor of England, and a sworn enemy of the
Gospel.
who had such an office as this Shebna had. For (as it is well known) he was
Chancellor to the King of England: he was a sworn enemy of the Gospel, and
persecuted the faithful with fire and faggot. This man also meant to get
himself a name, and to set up a monument of his cruelty and impiety. To
which end he caused the praises of his virtues, to be engraven in a fair
sepulcher which was built in most stately manner. Then he sent his Epitaph,
which himself had made, to Erasmus, Erasmus.
to Basil, to get it printed; and withal, sent him a palfrey for a present. So
covetous was he of glory, that he meant to taste the renown and the praises
in his life time, which he thought should have lasted when he was dead.
Amongst other praises, this was the chiefest; that he had been a great
persecutor of the Lutherans: Moore a great persecuter of the Lutherans.
that is to say, of Gods children. But what became of him? He is first of all
accused of treason, then condemned, and lastly beheaded: and thus in stead of a
tomb, he had a scaffold. How God is wont to meet with the proud enemies of
his Church.
But the Lord in the end will chase them out, and deprive them of all
possession: so as they shall not have one foot of ground to be buried in. An
infinite number of such examples are extant every where in histories. I grant
it falls not out thus always, but such examples as the Lord sets before us,
ought to draw our thoughts further off, to the end we may consider of his
judgments against tyrants and infidels; who when they think to exalt
themselves to the highest estate of honor, are made famous by some notable
kind of death, that so their infamy may be admirable to posterity. He then
opposes as it were under hand, that shame which was to follow, to that glory
of this sumptuous tomb which Shebna caused to be made.

Verse. 18. He will surely roll and turn thee like a ball in a large Country:
there shall thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of
thy Lords house.
ISai^h conrtinues the very same speech still, in which he derided the pride
of Shebna, who had been at such cost in building his sepulcher. For this verse
depends upon the first member of the verse before going, and as he said there,
the Lord shall carry thee hence with a notable shaking: so also he says now,
he will cast thee as a bowl in a plain place. By this similitude his meaning
is, that nothing shall hinder the Lord to carry Shebna away into a far
Country, how steadie soever he takes his strength to be. And in as much as he
had bin so careful of his toombe, and had appointed it out; as if he had been
most certain of the manner of his death, Isaiah tells him, that he shall not
die in Jerusalem, but in a strange Country, whither he shall be driven.

By the word chariot, he comprehends all the glory and dignity of Shebna: as
if he should say; This ignominy shall be famous among strangers. Thus the
Lord scorns the furious pride of those which think only of the world,
iudgeing of their happiness according to the glory of things earthly and
transitory. He also calls it the shame of thy Kings house, either because he
had polluted that holy place, which was as the sanctuary of God; or else
because Ezechias had been unadvised in promoting him so highly. And to the end
the outward appearance of his dignity might not obscure this prophecy, Isaiah
expressly notes, that the place which Shebna occupied, augmenteth and makes his
wickedness the more detestable. Princes must beware who^ they advance.
And therefore Princes had need to be careful how they establish officers,
unless they mean to make themselves and their houses, matter of derision and
scorn.

Verse. 19. And I will drive thee from thy Or, estate.
station: and out of thy dwelling will he destroy thee.
HE pronounces no new thing here, but concludes the former prophecy, albeit
he will mention Shebna again in the last verse: but now he comprehends that
in a brief sum, which he had said heretofore. Now Shebna thought nothing
less, then not to have a sure abode in Jerusalem; even as if it had been
impossible for him to be driven thence, whatsoever had happened: but ye Lord
tells him, that he will thrust and drive him thence into a far Country. And
thus is the Lord wont to overthrow the thoughts of the wicked; who thinking to
rest upon their policies and subtle wits, order the Commonwealth at their
pleasures. And I will, etc.
The change of the person, shows that the Prophet speaks sometimes in the
person of God, and another while in his own.

Verse. 20. And in that day will I call my servant Eliakim, the son of
Hilkiah.
Eliakim.
IT is not certainly known in what time Eliakim was put into Shebnaes place:
for in the 37. Chapter, verse 2. we shall see that Eliakim was the steward of
the Kings house, at that time when Shebna was Chancellor. Now it is hard to
affirm certainly, whether any change happened during this time. Yet it is
most likely, as I have touched heretofore, that Eliakim was deposed from his
estate, by the cunning dealing of this wicked Shebna, whose incklings were then
disclosed and punished when he made his triumphs: and being banished Judea, he
fled to the Assyrians, and there received the reward of his treachery. Which
usually befalles those that are traitorous; who when they are unable to
perform that which they have promised, become hateful and odious to them whom
they have deceived. For as they have been rash and bold in promising; so is it
of necessity that they be found false and perfidious. The Jews say, that in
the end he was quartered for his treason: but this is not approved by any
history. But to let that hang in suspense, it is certain notwithstanding,
that he was banished and expulsed into a foreign Country, and there died
shamefully; and not in Jerusalem. Now it is very likely that after his
banishment, Eliakim was placed in his room.

I will call. All Magistrates o^dained of God.
] It is most certain that all P^inces and Magistrates are called by the Lord:
yea, even such as are heathen and unbelieving; for all power, as Saint Paul
says, is of God: Romans 13.1. But the Prophet speaks here of a particular
vocation, whereby the Lord manifests his goodness toward his people, when he
gives them such governors; as this people might acknowledge that God himself
meant to be ruler over them by their ministry: Rulers ought to execute the
charge which God has committed unto them with all faithfulness.
who also for their parts ought to be well assured, that the end wherefore God
has put them in that place, is to execute that office faithfully, which is
committed unto them. Shebna was called indeed for a time, but as he was Gods
rod: because he thought nothing less then to serve God in that place. But it
was far otherwise with Eliakim: for he acknowledged himself the servant of
God, Note this difference.
and willingly obeyed his holy calling. So that, I will call him then,
signifies as much as if he should have said; I will give a sign to my
servant, whereby he shall know that it is I who have put him into this estate
of honor. A particular relation between the Lord and the servant.
There is here then a particular relation between the Lord and the servant;
which at no hand belongs to the unbelievers, because they serve their own
imaginations and wicked lusts: but Eliakim acknowledged the Lord, and served
him truly. To be short, this mark puts a difference between the true servant
of God, and the froward and hypocritical, who climbes to honor by evil
practices.

Verse. 21. And with thy garments will I clothe him, and with thy girdle will I
strengthen him: thy power also will I commit into his hand, and he shall be a
father of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the house of Judah.
He now more plainly expounds that which he had set down briefly in the
former verse; to wit, that Shebna shall be deposed by Gods just judgment, to
the end Eliakim may succeed him. Doubtless God by his providence disposes of
all the changes which happen in the world: for as Job says, he girdes the
loins of Kings with a girdle, and loses it again when it pleases him: Job
12.18. It was pleasantly said in old time of the Emperors of Rome; That it was
the tragedy of Kings: for as players that represent some great personage upon
the stage, having ended their part, in stead of Kings become poor snakes, as
they were before: so these being dejected from their high estate, are now and
then led to shameful deaths. And yet is it most certain, that things were not
then thus confused by hap hazard, neither yet by men's devices only, nor by the
violence of men of war; but by the counsel of God which ouerruleth all. The
Prophet affirms then, that men shall see a special note of Gods

By the garments and girdle, are understood part of that attire which belong to
Magistrates. The girdle was a kingly ornament: and no doubt but the chief
governors ware it by a special privilege of honor. But in Rome the Pretors
used such a kind of ornament ordinarily. Job also says (as we alleged
before) that God loses off the girdle from Kings, when they are stripped out
of their dignities. Now the Prophet foretold this, to the end every one might
not only behold the admirable counsel and providence of God in this example;
but to the end they might also know, that this wretched fellow, who was thus
advanced by unlawful means, was justly deposed.

Hose. 13.11
And he shall be a father.] No doubt but heathen Magistrates are established by
God; but so, as it is in his wrath: that is to say, when we are unworthy he
himself should bear rule father, because he shall be endued with the Spirit
of God. In the mean while he admonishes all the faithful, that it was their
duties to sigh earnestly after the advancement of Eliakim, in regard his
preferment should tend to the common good of the Church. Good Magistrates ought
to be fathers of the Country.
By the name of father, he teaches what is the duty of a good Magistrate: and
the very profane authors have affirmed as much; to wit, that a good King is in
stead of a father. And when they would flatter tyrants which oppressed the
Commonwealth, nature it self put this title of honor into their mouths, to
call them fathers of the Country. So likewise when the Philosophers say that a
family is an image of a kingdom, they mean that a King ought to be a father
to his subjects. The ancient titles also which they gave kings witnesses the
same: as for example, Abimelec: Genesis 20.2.
that is to say, My father the King: and such other like. Whereby is showed,
that the kingly power cannot be separated from the affection of a father. Let
them then which would be esteemed true and lawful Princes, and would be taken
for Gods servants, let them, I say, show themselves fathers of the people.

Verse. 22. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: so
he shall open, and no man shall shut, and he shall shut, and no man shall
open.
THis is a figurative kind of speech; and therefore we shall not need to
seek out an allegorical sense of it, as many do: for this phrase is taken
from the usual dealings of men. The keys of the house are given to such as
are appointed the distributers of necessary things; so as they open and shut
at their pleasure. The house of David, signifies the kingly house: and this was
a common speech among the people, because a promise was made to David, 2. Sam.
7.12. Psalm. 132.11
that his kingdom should last for ever: this is the reason why it was usually
called the house of David. The word key is put in the singular number for many
keys. Now albeit they were wont to bear the keys in their hands; yet it is
said here, that they were laid upon his shoulder; because he was to undergo an
heavy burden. And yet he means nothing else, but that the tuition and
government of the house is committed into Eliakims hands, to order it as he
thinks best. We also know, that to give the keys, signifies as much as to
put one into possession. Some refer this unto Christ, but with what reason I
see not: for the Prophet here compares two men together; namely, Shebna and
Eliakim. Shebna was banished, and Eliakim was placed in his room: wherein does
this concern Jesus Christ? For Eliakim was no figure of him; neither does the
Prophet describe some hidden mystery here, but borrowes a similitude from the
dealings of men; as if one should give the keys to some steward placed over
his house, (as has been said.) There is also the same reason to be given of
it, where Christ calls the office of teaching, The keys of the Kingdom of
heaven: Mat. 16.19
those therefore that weary themselves to find out some secret and hidden
mystery in this place, which is so plain and manifest, show themselves but
too sottish and ridiculous, seeing there is no need at all of any such
devices. Why so? Because the Ministers open heaven by the preaching of the
word, and bring men to Christ, who is the only way. He takes the keys in this
place therefore, for the government of the Kings house, in regard the chief
trust of it was committed to Eliakim in his time.

Verse. 23. And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be
for the throne of glory to his fathers house.
We must supply a particle of similitude here, and therefore I have put this
word As, in the text. By faithful, he means a sure and firm place; for this
word is derived of the word Truth, which is always accompanied with
steadfastness and assurance. And for that cause the Hebrews take Truth for a
thing sure and certain. The Prophet uses an elegant similitude, out of which
the faithful Magistrates (who are but a few) ought to gather a singular
consolation. For thus they may conclude with themselves, that they are not
only raised by the Lord to this degree of honor, but that they are confirmed
and fastened in it, as if they were fixed thereunto by his immediate hand. And
to say the truth, look where the fear of God bears sway, there must needs
be steadfastness. For the power and thrones of Kings, is established by
justice; as Solomon says, Pro. 16.16. Neither does it serve to comfort Princes
only, to the end they may be able to pass through all dangers with a resolute
mind: but also that they may execute their office constantly, and without
distraction, so as they need not quail nor faint for any cause, nor to fear
any danger.

But alas how few are there that taste this doctrine truly? All are almost
like Jeroboam, thinking that religion ought to stoop to them, which they like
and allow of no further then they see it to be for their benefit: nay they
stick not at all to disguise and alter it at their pleasure: as for God and
his true religion, they set the care thereof in the last place. What wonder is
it then that they are always in fear of themselves in their affairs, b^ing
never at peace and quiet: for they seldom or never set any time apart to
think upon him, from whom proceeds all strength and power. The cause of
treasons.
Thence come treasons, thence arise cruelties, avarice, violence, and all
manner of frauds and oppressions, wherein Princes now ouerflowe more
impudently then any other.

Yet are there some, in whom we may perceive that which is said here touching
Eliakim: the Lord keeps, maintains, and blesses the duties of equity and
justice, wherewith he has adorned them. If God seem to bless tyrants in
suffering them to flourish for a time, much more such as are nursing fathers to
his Church.
For if he suffer the very tyrants to reign for a time, in regard they observe
some form of government: how much more will he bless Princes, when with a
good and upright heart they maintain truth and equity, and promote Gods true
worship and service? He that is the perpetual maintainer of justice, will he
not defend and establish such a Prince more and more?

Verse. 24. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house,
even of the nephews and posterity; of small vessels, from the vessels of the
cups, even to all the instruments of music.
THis is as much as if he said, that Eliakim shall discharge his duty in good
sort; so as he shall not deal negligently in it. Whence we gather, Princes are
not advanced to live idly. Dominion an heavy burden if men perform their
duties.
that God aduanceth not Princes unto honor, to the end they should be idle,
and give the reins to their lusts and affections. For dominion and authority
is a burden of great weight and labor, if so be men perform their duties as
they ought to do: far from the practice of these dumb idolles, who think
God has lifted them up into the seat of honor, to no other end but to fare
deliciously, and to wallow themselves at their ease in all manner of pleasures.
But if a Prince will execute his office aright, he must prepare himself to
undergo much turmoile. Neither must we think that this similitude of the
nail, should not suit well in regard of government: for hereby is signified,
Government a burden full of business.
a burden full of businesses and troubles. I also know well enough, that
similitudes agree not always in every thing, but in the special drift whereat
they aim.

Now in that he speaks of the house of his father; doubtless Eliakim was of
the royal blood. And therefore by successors, I not only understand his next
kinsfolks; but the whole family of David. He then shall have the charge of
all that shall be in the Kings house. When he adds the childrens children; he
therewithal teaches, that this government shall be of long continuance; so
as it shall not last one man's life only, but it shall be extended to those
that shall come a long time after. Princes should not only care for the
welfare of the Church for their own times, but for the posterity after them.
For good Princes not only profit the Church and Commonwealth for their own
time, but those also which come after them, to whom they leave such wholesome
laws, ordinances, statutes, and marks of good and just government; that the
successors dare not (albeit they be wicked) break out into all licenciousnesse
at the first; yea they are compelled in despite of them, to retain something
that is good for modesties sake. This he shows shall come to pass in
Eliakim, whose government shall be so upright, that his very successors shall
feel some fruit of it.

From the smalest vessels.] Under a figure he shows that justice shall be
administered with equity, and the right advanced: and it is as much as if he
had said, that Eliakim shall not only deal well with the great ones; but that
he shall have respect to the meanest also. But because this is very rare in a
Prince, he is much more worthy of praise, then if he should only favor the
rich and mighty. For the rich have means enough to keep themselves from
hurt; but the weakest are put to the walls, as they say; and the poor are a
pray and spoil to others: and who is it almost that will defend the innocence
of their cause? By vessels, the Hebrews understand all manner of instruments:
and this signification extends very far. When he mentio^s Or, b^gpipes.
instruments of music, he explaines that which he had said in a word: for
this serves to the exposition of the word small or little: as if he should
say, There is nothing so little or contemptible, which he will not have care of.

Verse. 25. And in that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is
fastened in the sure place depart, and shall be broken and fall: and the burden
that was upon it shall be cut off; for the Lord has spoken it.
THis might seem to contradict that which has been said heretofore: but he
speaks no longer now of Eliakim, but returns again to Shebna, who should be
put out of his office; as Isaiah had foretold. Otherwise what way or means
were there left for Eliakim to come to this honor, unless Shebna were put
out? But he had laid his plot in such exquisite manner, that he never imagined
any man whatsoever should be able to supplant him. Thus when he took
himself to be in best case, and furnished with many means, so as it seemed
he was furthest out of danger; even then must he be turned out of all, and
Eliakim must succeed him. In that he calls it a faithful or sure place, it
must be understood as in regard of men; who think that things fortified on
every side, must needs continue always: but God with his only blast
overthrows all these munitions. He speaks then by way of granting, when he
says, that this was a sure and stable place. Whence we are to gather, how
fondly such glory and trust in their greatness, who are advanced into high
places of honor, seeing they may be stripped out of all, and abased in the
twinkling of an eye.

It follows. And the burden.] When the wicked begin once to fall, It is not
safe to serve such masters as are not Gods servants.
then those who were vpheld by their authority, must needs fall together with
them. For is it not good reason that such as were brethren in evil with them,
and had furthered this wretch as far as they could, that they should also
partake with him in his punishment? Very hard it is for them then, who shroud
themselves under the protection of the wicked, and employing all their means
for their service; that such should not also therewithal be guilty of their
wicked courses: and be it they should be guiltless, (which yet falls out very
seldom, or rather indeedd never) yet notwithstanding they are justly punished,
because they have placed their hopes in the wicked, as in a sure fortress, and
have wholly relied upon their command and authority.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The burden of Tire. Howl ye ships of Tarshish: for it is
destroyed, so that there is none house: none shall come from the land of
Chittim: it is revealed unto them.
Tire was a very rich City, and greatly renowned in regard of the traffic
which all nations had with it, as also in regard of the towns of war and
Cities habitable which it built: as Carthage, which imitated the Roman Empire;
Vtique, Leptis, Gades, and other Cities, who all sent their presents to Tire;
hereby protesting, that they acknowledged this to be the mother City. But
Isaiah threatens it with destruction, The cause of this prophecy.
because it wronged the people of God; as we may gather out of Ezechiel, 26.2.
For we are chiefly to consider the cause of this destruction, in regard it is
the Prophets meaning to reveal Gods fatherly love to his elect and chosen
people, who meant to set himself against all their enemies. Some think that
this should be referred to the siege of Alexander, Alexander.
who took Tire with great difficulty. But this supposition is too weak,
because Isaiah mentions Chittim, under which name the Hebrews not only
comprehend the Macedonians, but other nations also, as the Greeks, and all
those which are beyond the seas. Now King Nebuchadnezzer used the help not
only of the soldiers of his own Country in this siege, but other strangers
also which he had called from among the Greeks and other places. Besides, the
Greeks are spoken of for another respect, as we shall see by and by after;
namely, because in time to come, they should not bring their ships any more to
Tire, to trade there. Yet the end of this Chapter gives me occasion to be of a
contrary opinion, because Isaiah speaks there of the restoration of Tire,
which was never repaired after Alexander the Great took it by force. Moreover,
when I confer Ezechiels words with these, me thinks they make but one
prophecy. He speaks not then of Alexander, but of Nebucha^nezz^r; and so
doubtless it is to be expounded. Add hereunto, that in the time of Ez^chiel
and Isaiah, this City was under the command of a king: but when Alexander took
it, the histories say, it was brought into the form of a Commonwealth. And if
we shall consider the end of the prophecy, we shall be sufficiently confirmed
in this opinion: for his purpose was to comfort the Jews, by threatening an
inevitable punishment to the Tyrians, of whom they had been afflicted. For it
had been a thing very unreasonable, for the Lord to have chastised other
nations, and that these in the mean while which had been no less enemies,
should have escaped scotfree, or should have bin smitten five hundred years
after. All these conjectures then lead us to expound this place of
Nebuchadnezer.

Howl.] He inricheth the declaration of the ruin of this City with diverse
figures: and it is his custom so to speak, that he might get the more
authority to his prophecy. For to deliver such a thing in a plain speech,
would have been but cold; neither would it have been sufficiently effectual to
comfort the hearts of those, who a long time had been weak and faint: and
therefore he sets it forth before them, as it were in fresh and lively colors.
And first he shows that the destruction shall be very great, in regard that
even the regions far off shall feel it: and he commands the ships to howl,
because they shall have no employment when Tire shall be destroyed. Now he
especially names the ships of the Cilicians, because they being neighbors,
used to traffi^ue much and often with the Tyrians: and the Hebrews call
Cilicia, Tarshish. Neither could it possibly be, but the destruction of Tire,
must bring great detriment to this Country; not only in that the usual
tr^ffiques ceased for a time, but also in regard that the Merchants goods,
together with their books of accounts, were carried away, and scattered here
and there; as it usually falls out when the houses of rich men are rifled.

Where I have translated, they shall come no more; others expound it, There
shall be no house remaining, by which you may enter: but I take it I have
faithfully rendered the Prophets meaning: not as if he thought that all passage
should be taken from the Cilicians and Greeks; but he meant rather to say,
that they shall go no more to Tire, as they were wont in times past, because
the mart there should cease. Those who think the Prophet speaks of the
discomfiture made by Alexander, divide the clause of the verse, F om the land
Cihttim and conioyne it thus, This was revealed unto them from the land of
Chittim. But I rather render it thus; They shall come no more from the land of
Chittim: that is to say, that the Greeks might neither go nor come, as they
were wont. For by Chittim, the Hebrews understand the Greeks and Eastern
people: and it is as if he should have said; The traffic of the Greeks
shall cease, so as their ships shall no more arrive there. And under it, he
also comprehends the Egyptians, Cilicians, Italians, and other nations.

When he says; This was revealed unto them: we may fitly understand it as
well of the

Verse. 2. Be still, ye that dwell in the Isles: the Merchants of Zidon, and
such as pass over the sea, have replenished thee.
He sets forth the ruin of Tire more at large. Now there is here a change
touching the number, in the word Isles: for albeit he speaks in the singular
number, yet he understands thereby ye Isles of the Mediterraneu^ sea, and the
people y^ dwell beyond the sea; but chiefly the borderers which sailed often to
Tire, and usually traded there. He commands them to hold their peace; and to be
still, because they shall no more travail thither. His meaning is, that they
should be still, as men confounded; in regard of the great calamity which
should befall the^, in such wise, as they should not dare to utter one word.
For it could not be but those nations which traded there, must lose much, when
a City so replenished with merchandise was sacked. As for example; if Venice
or Antwerp should be now destroyed, would it not redound to the great of many
nations?

The Prophet makes special mention of the Sidonians; The cause why the Prophet
mentions the Sidonians.
not only because they were neighbors, but because these two cities had both
one beginning. Zidon was greatly renowned; but yet it was much less in
quantity then Tire. It stood upon the edge of the sea, and was two hundred A
Stade con^aines the measure of six score and five paces, which was the length
of a race, when they ran for a price or wager.
stades in distance from it. Now they seemed so near one to an other, and so
lincked together in merchandise, that the Poets often take the one for the
other. We need not doubt then but the Zidonians gained much more then others,
in selling and exchanging their commodities: first in regard they were
neighbors: and secondly, because of their continual trading. For the wealth
of the Tyrians so flowed in upon them, that they were carried upon their wings,
after the common proverb. Thence is it therefore that their loss must be much
greater then any others, in this destruction of Tire. And that is the cause why
the Prophet bids Zidon to be ashamed in the fourth verse. He adds, which
replenished thee: speaking either of all in general, or because it was filled
with the glut and multitude of men, in regard that strangers came thither from
diverse Countries far remote from them, or else because those which travailed
for gain, did therewithal enrich the City.

Verse. 3. The seed of Nilus growing by the abundance of waters, and the
harvest of the river was her revenues: and she was a mart of the nations.
THe Prophets meaning is, that the riches of Tire shall not deliver it from
destruction. He therefore sets forth the rich estate thereof so highly, to the
end every one might know, first Gods iudgenent; and secondly, manifest, in
regard that her destruction came suddenly, when she thought on no such matter.
Moreover, he describes the wealthinesse of Tire elegantly: for because Nilus
furnished her with corn and other necessary provisions, and that great
quantity of wheat was sent thither out of Egypt; the Prophet says, she had
her fields as it were, and her seed growing in the stream of Nilu^. The
Venetians use to say; A proverb of the Veneti^ns.
Their revenue is in the sea; because nothing grows upon the land: but they
get all provision of victuals by their trade of merchandise. And the Prophet
says the same of the Tyrians: for it was almost impossible they should want
food, because Nilus furnished them therewith in great abundance. But he takes
this prop away from them as a vain hope; for they shall destitute them
utterly. Isaiah therefore, as has been said, describes these things, that all
might the better perceive the vengeance and wrath of God fallen upon her.

Verse. 4. Be ashamed thou Zidon: for the sea has spoken, even the strength of
the sea, saying; I have not travailed nor brought forth children, neither
nourished young men, nor brought up virgins.
THis verse is added by way of amplification. We have told you the cause why he
spoke of Zidon thus in particular before. See verse. 2.
Now calls Tire, Sea, by way of excellency, as if she alone reigned in the
midst it. That which is by and by added, I have not conceived, is spoken in
the person of Tire: and thus he pleasantly derides Tire, who bragged of her
Towns: for Tire begat or built other Cities very renowned. She was in old
time much spoken of (says Pliny) for the Cities which she built; Plin. lib.
5. cap. 19.
to wit, Leptis, Vtique, and this Carthage, the imitatrix of the Roman Empire;
meaning to rule over all the world; and Gades also, which was built upon the
sea. Now all her wealth consisted in purple and scarlet. The Prophet then
brings in the City of Tire, lamenting her ancient glory and excellency:
Alas, I am now no longer a mother; and what has it profited me that I have
nourished so many children, and brought forth so many Cities? For Carthage
Carthage.
was wont to send presents to Tire every year, by way of homage: and therein
acknowledged her for her mother. Thus it seems that Tyrus surmounted all other
Cities in dignity, seeing Carthage, which was the second after the Roman
Empire, did in some sort submit it self unto her. But the Lord took all these
ornaments from her in a moment, in such wise, that she laments, as if she had
never had children.

Verse. 5. When the fame comes to the Egyptians, they shall be sorry concerning
the rumor of Tyrus.
BY this verse he signifies, that this fall of Tyrus shall touch the Egyptians
also: and thus the exposition which we follow, is confirmed; to wit, that
these things ought to be referred to the first sacking of it. For those of
Tire were in league with the Egyptians, and both of them had their King: not as
in the time of Alexander, at what time Tire was a free City, and lived under
her own laws. Now he could no way better express the society that was
between them of Tire and the Egyptians: and the reason why he shows that the
Egyptians shall have their part in this destruction is, because they had
solicited the Jews to rebel, and had turned them away from trusting in God.
Those were open enemies: these under pretense of friendship, God will punish as
well the secret as the open enemies of his Church.
entertained poisonfull hatreds. Both of them are justly punished.

Verse. 6. Go ye over to Tarshish: howl ye that dwell in the Isles.
HE speaks not only to the Tyrians, but also to the strangers who were in
league with them, in regard of their commerce: now he commands that they get
them to some other place, and to seek out other havens. And he names Cilicia,
which was opposite to Tire: as if he should say, This port which has been so
much frequented, shall hereafter be so forsaken, that the ships shall sail
into an other quarter, quite an other way. For when Merchants see a port
broken, or a mart abolished, they are wont to seek out others. He puts one I Will
for many, as we have expounded before; because the change of the number is a
thing common among the Hebrews: and against these Isles he threatens, that they
shall howl; because their maintenance depended upon this trade of merchandise.
Besides, their books of reckonings and accounts were mingled here and there.

Verse. 7. Is not this that your glorious City? her antiquity is of ancient
days: her own feet shall lead her a far off to be a soiourner.
THe Prophet aduanceth his style, and insults yet further against Tire. He
disdaines her pride, in that she gloried in the antiquity of her name: he is
bold the^ we see to confirm his speech, which to any man's reason might seem
incredible. For who doubts but that this prophecy was scorned: first, the
power and strength of Tire was invincible, and her wealth as a wall of brass.
Well, Isaiah is so much the more bold and confident, and denounces a certain
destruction to befall her: and albeit she was the most ancient amongst other
Cities, No stength able to match the power of the Almighty.
and in regard thereof, every one applauded her: yet all this should not
prevent her certain ruin and downfall.

Now profane histories do fetch the original of Tire, from time almost out of
mind, and that so darkely and obscurely indeed, that a man can scarcely
understand their meaning: Phenicians.
yet they say, that the Pheniciens built it: so as they which glory of
antiquity, may call themselves children of the earth. But the Prophet to this
antiquity opposes banishment; showing that when the Lord is purposed to
correct this people, they must needs stoop. For to go whither the feet
leads one, signifies nothing else but to wander and run hither and thither.
Although his meaning also is, that they shall wander thus destitute of their
riches also; and in their exile, shall be in want of all things: so as they
shall not have so much as an horse or wagon to carry themselves, or any thing
of theirs upon. Poverty joined with banishment, must needs be dolorous.
Now when poverty is joined with banishment, it is a very woeful condition:
for a man will easily bear his banishment, if he have wherewith to live, and
maintain his estate: but to dwell in a strange Country as unknown, with
poverty, is a misery of miseries. And that he may heap up her afflictions
to the full, he adds, that she must go into a far Country: now the
further one is exiled, the harder the banishment is.

Verse. 8. Who has decreed this against Tyrus, Or, crowning.
(that crowns men) whose Merchants are Princes, Or, whose factors.
whose Chapmen are the noble of the world?
THe Prophet adornes this City with this title, who enriched many; as we may
easily gather from the drift of the text. For when he calls her Merchants
Kings, he sufficiently shows, that by the word crowning, under a similitude he
means the magnificence of Kings. And thus their opinon is refuted, who refer
this prophecy to other Cities. The sum is, that Tyrus enriched her Citizens,
as if she created every one of them Kings and Princes. Some think this verse
is to be added thus; as if the Prophet should represent the person of a man
astonished with the destruction of Tire, to make others afraid: as if he should
say; Is it possible that Tire should be so soon brought low, where there is
such abundance of riches, such might, means, munitions; yea where there is so
great glory and majesty? And that he should then at an instant pause a while,
as men are wont to do in things unlooked for. But it is better to join the
verse following to this, which takes away all difficulty; seeing the Prophet
himself forthwith answers this question, by which he meant to stir up his
auditors to the better attention. For he might plainly have said; These things
are done by the counsel of the Lord: but in regard we are drowsy, secure,
and senseless hearts would easily have ouerslipped this without observation:
therefore he awakens their spitirs by this interrogation; to the end all might
know that he speaks of no common thing, that therewithal they might take the
matter the more to heart. And indeed, by how much the more the judgments of
God are above the reach of common sense, so much the more are they worthy to be
admired.

He spoke to Egypt before, Chap. 19. in the same terms, showing that her
destruction should not be sorted with common and ordinary changes. Now because
it was incredible that Tire could be ruinated by men; See verse. 9.
therefore the Prophet well concludes, that God himself shall be the author
of it. And therefore he calls it the mother and nurse of Kings; that he might
cause Gods judgment to shine so much the more clearly: for had it been a
City vnrenowned, fewer words would have sufficed touching the destruction of
it: but being adorned with so high titles, who could imagine that this could
otherwise come to pass, but by the counsel and decree of God? He calls the
Merchants Princes: as at this day the Merchants of Venice Merchants of Venice.
think themselves to surmount Princes in dignity, Kings only excepted: yea,
and the factors also take themselves for no less then good Gentlemen. I have
heard also that there are factors at Antwerpe, Factors of Antwerpe.
who fear not to spend more then the richest Gentlemen's substance can bear.
Now we are wont to ask questions, when nothing can be answered, but what we
please: which also is a sign of courage and boldness.

Verse. 9. The Lord of hosts has decreed this, to Or, profane
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt, all them that be
glorious in the earth.
The pride.] Or, the haughtiness: A rare thing to find an humble heart in an
haughty mind.
for we may read it both ways, because haughtiness begets pride; for it is
very rare to find humility of spirit in a haughty mind. Notwithstanding it
is better to read it pride, which is enough of it self to provoke God to take
vengeance, when men under pretense of their excellency, advance themselves
above measure. To profane, and dishonor, are takn for one and the same thing:
because those who are exalted to honor, seem to be as men consecrate and set
apart, conceiting I wot not what greatness of themselves; as if they were now
quite exempt out of the common rank of men. Note.
But God no sooner strips such of their dignity, and brings them down, but he
forthwith makes them vile and contemptible. Let us therefore learn from this
place, so to consider of Gods providence, that we give that praise to his
infinite power, which belongs unto it for his so just a government. So then,
albeit the justice whereby it pleases God to moderate his actions always
appears not unto us; yet ought we not therefore to separate his power from
his justice. In the mean while, for as much as the Scriptures plainly show,
and often set before us the end why God does this or that; we ought to be wise
in observing the causes of his works.

Now this invention of Gods absolute power, God absolute power.
which the Schoolmen have forged, is a most execrable blasphemy: for it is
all one as (...) the days of a king to David, it is too frivolous, for he
takes it for the age of a man, as the Psalmist shows: The age of a man, says
he, is often limited to threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.10. But why
mentions he a king rather then some other man? It is because Tire had a king,
and therefore he counts the years by his life. This served much therefore to
confirm the certentie of this prophecy, for the Prophet could not know these
things by any humane conjectures. By the song of the harlot, he under a fit
similitude means merchandise, not that merchandising is to be condemned in it
self, for it is profitable and necessary for a Common wealth: but he taxes
the deceits and guile wherewith it abounds, so as it may very well be
compared to the art of harlotrie.

Verse. 16. Take an harp, and go about the City (thou harlot that have been
forgotten) make sweet melody, sing mo song's that thou may be remembered.
HE compares Tire to an harlot, who having passed all her youth in whoredoms
and filthiness, at last becoming old (by reason whereof all forsake and despise
her) yet can she not forget her first gain, nor her wicked prancks, but
desires to revive and refresh her old spirits. And that she may the better draw
men out of all parts of the City unto her, she goes singing, and playing upon
Instruments, to delight her companions. For such whores become mad as it were
when they see themselves despised because of their age: we see also that the
Poet Horace flouts an harlot called Lydia for the fame cause. Horace. Lydia, an
harlot.
So Tire, being destroyed and as it were buried in oblivion, shall again pluck
up her courage, using all her wits and devises to recover her first estate.

By the harp and the sweet melody he understands the deceits, craft,
entisments and flatteries which are used in merchandise, by which Merchants
serve their turns to inueigle men, and to snare them in their nets. In a word,
he shows by what means the Cities which consist of merchandise become rich,
to wit, by crafty and unlawful shifts. For this cause it is that the Prophet
says, Tire shall tickle men's ears with her sweet melody.

He further bids her to double her songs, as if he should say, add deceit to
deceit, and flattery to flattery, till thou have drawn every one unto thee:
steal into men's minds again, and recover thy first fame. To be short, even as
an old harlot deuiseth means how she may get into favor again with men by
painting, trimming, and decking her self in fine apparel; also with musical
Instruments and loue-songs: so Tire shall rise and enrich her self again by
the same means wherewith she gat wealth before: not that he counsels or gives
Tire license by these words to enrich her self this way, but continues on his
prophecy.

Verse. 17. And at the end of seventy years shall the Lord visit Tyrus, Or,
but.
and she shall return to her wages, and shall commit fornication with all the
kingdoms of the earth that are in the world.
ALthough Tyrus shall seem to be utterly destroyed when God shall afflict
her, yet the Prophet shows that she shall obtain mercy, for after her
calamities she shall be restored to her first glory. But it is rightly said
that such a restoration shall be brought to pass by the work of the Lord,
for otherwise Tire must of necessity feel that which Malachie pronounces
against the Idumeans, to wit, that the Lord would overthrow and cast down all
that which they built and set up, Mala. 1.4. They had never recovered their
first estate then unless the Lord himself had been the author of it.

Now from hence we may gather a very profitable doctrine, to wit, yt albeit God
be a just and severe Judge against ye wicked, yet he gives place to his mercy,
and is never so sharp in making the wound, but he is as gentle in asswaging yt
smart of it, and in the end takes it clean away. Now if he be such a one
toward the godless and reprobates, what a one will he be to those whom he
has adopted in Christ Jesus for his children, upon whom he will power out his
goodness? When Kingdoms then are restored, when Cities are peopled afresh, and
that men recover their liberties, all comes to pass by the only providence of
God, who casts down the highest things when it pleases him, and on a sudden
sets up and plants that which he had cast down.

That which follows, to wit, and she shall return, should be read, But she
shall return: for the meaning is, that Tyrus shall not become the better nor
the wiser by such a tedious chastisement, but shall by and by return to her
old bias again, for in these words he taxes her ingratitude. We every day
behold such examples, for there is almost no corner in the world in which the
Lord has not set the print of his judgments. Sometimes he gives those whom he
has corrected a breathing time; but do they become ever the better? No, the
Prophet says then that Tire shall be such a one, she shall be never a whit
reformed, but shall rather return to her vomit again; she shall play the
harlot as she was wont to do. It is not to be doubted but he speaks of her
merchandising, but he continues on his similitude which he had taken up before,
not meaning thereby utterly to condemn the trade of Merchants, as we have
said, but because amongst so many corruptions as men have mingled therewith, it
very fitly resembles the prancks of harlots, for it is replenished with so
much cunning, secret packing, Subtle conueiances among Merchants.
and such subtle conueyances (as we may now see in the world) that it seems
it was only devised to snare and beguile the simple. How many new and unknown
practices do they invent every day to gain and take up on Usury? Prophet
has taken up such a similitude; whereby he meant to show, that Tyrus should be
no less deceitful in the trade of merchandise, then she was before.

Verse. 18. Or, but in the end.
Yet here occupying and her wages shall be holy unto the Lord: it shall not be
laid up nor kept in store; but her merchandise shall be for them that dwell
before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and to have durable clothing.
THis was an other favor of God toward Tire. After she was restored, she yet
converted not to the Lord, but went on in her subtle dealings: for which she
deserved utterly to perish. And indeed she was miserably punished when
Alexander took her by force: yet notwithstanding the kingdom of Jesus Christ
was set up there, as S. Luke witnesses, Acts 21.4. This verse then must be
opposed to the former: as if he should say; Yet shall the merchandise of Tire
be consecrated to the Lord. Here we have a wonderful example of Gods
goodness, which shined even into this vile brothelhouse, and as you would say,
even into hell. This restoration of Tire then must be attributed to the
bounty of the Lord: but this first benefit was nothing in comparison of the
second, when the Lord sanctified and set it a part for himself. But will some
say, Genesis 17.1.
For the Lord detests such offerings; because he requires a pure conscience,
and innocent hands: Psalm. 24.4. Now in regard of this question, many trouble
themselves about the exposition of this place, but to small purpose: the time
to come; namely, after her repentance and conversion. She shall not then
gather treasures, and heap up wealth by hook and by crook, but shall employ
them in the service of God, and lay out the profit of her trading, for the
comfort of the faithful in their need. Now albeit he has used an unseemly
word, it is in regard of the time: signifying that she shall forget her wicked
practices, and shall change her old customs.

They shall not be laid up.] Thus in few words he describes the repentance of
Tire, which although in times past, was addicted to covetousness; yet being
converted to Christ, she shall not study to hoord up riches, but shall employ
them for the relief of the poor and other good uses. This ought to be the
fruit of repentance, as S. Paul admonishes; Let him that stole, steal no
more; but let him rather labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he
may be able to give to him that needs: Ephesians. 4.28. Whereas the Tyrians then in
times past devoured riches on all sides, with an insatiable desire: Isaiah
says, that now they shall be ready to give as fast out, because their
inordinate desire of gain shall cease. This is then a note of charity to
help

He adds the right way of doing good, to wit, they shall bestow their goods
upon the servants of God. Now albeit he comprehends all the faithful, yet has
he a special respect to the Priests and Levites, of whom, some sacrificed,
some made ready the beasts that were to be sacrificed, and others watched: in
a word, all were ready to do their office; and for that cause it is said,
that they dwelt before the Lord. The like, by as good right, is to be said of
all the Ministers of the Church. Moreover, in as much as all the faithful, of
what condition soever they be, belong unto the sanctuary of the Lord, and are
made one royal Priesthood by Christ, to dwell before him: I willingly refer
these words to all the household of faith, of whom we ought to be most
careful: for S. Paul gives us so in charge, and would have them relieved
before any other: Gal. 6.10. For if the common bond of nature ought to move us
to hold an estimation of our own flesh, Chap. 58.7.
how much more should the union of Christ's members which is much more holy and
straight, then all the bonds of nature, move and provoke us thereunto?

We ought also to observe in this phrase of speech, to dwell before the Lord,
an other point: for albeit we have not now the Arc of the covenant, yet by the
benefit of Christ, we approach nearer unto God then the Levites in old time did.
And therefore we are commanded to walk before him no otherwise then if he
looked upon us; to the end we may in all good conscience give our selves to
holiness and righteousness; for we are charged to walk always as in his
sight, and to behold him as one that viewes all our ways, that so we may keep
justice and judgment.

That they may eat their fill.] The Prophet means, that we ought to sustain
our brethren much more largely and liberally then men are wont to do: because
we are wonderful niggards and pinchpennies, when we are moved to relieve the
poor. There are very few that will venture their alms for nothing, and give
with a frank and willing heart: for they think that that which they give to
others, is lost, and is but a lessening of their stock. The Lord therefore
greatly commends a cheerful heart, Romans 12.8. the rather to correct this vice
of niggardliness: and albeit the place in the Romans be chiefly directed to
the Deacons, yet it ought to be applied to all. An other sentence also must be
kept in mind, which testifies that God loves a cheerful giver: 2. Cor. 9.7.
Let us also note that the Prophet affirms, that whatsoever is given to the
poor, is consecrated unto God: which the holy Ghost also in an other place
teaches; With such sacrifices God is pleased: Heb. 13.10. For he never
commanded men to offer sacrifices, as if they benefit him; no, he needed them
not; but he only appointed them these exercises of piety under the law: now,
under the Gospel he commands us to distribute something to our neighbors of
that we possess; testifying that whatsoever we employ for the relief of our
brethren, is to him a sacrifice of a sweet smell. And it ought greatly to
kindle the love of bounty and liberality in us, when we hear that our alms
are so highly commended, and that our hands together with our gifts are
consecrated unto God.

THE XXIIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty, and he makes it waste: he
turns it vpside down, and scatters the Inhabitants thereof.
THis prophecy as I take it, is as it were ye shutting up of all those things
which have bin described from the thirteenth Chapter unto this, wherein Isaiah
has not only foretold the ruin of the Jews and Israelites, but also of the
Moabites, Assyrians, Egyptians, and others. In a word, he here comprehends all
in a short sum, as if he had viewed all the neighbor countries that were
known to the Jews. Some refer this to the Israelites, others to the Jews,
thinking the Prophet speaks of their destruction: but seeing he makes mention
of the world, I can not be drawn to take this place in any other sense, but
that he now in a few words comprehends all that which he has said of many
particulars, and those belonging to diverse times. Whereas he in the next verse
makes mention of the Priest, it contradicts this that I say nothing at all,
although it might thereby seem that these things should only appertain unto
the people of God: for albeit he speaks of all nations, yet the Jews always
deserving to be preferred in the first place, Isaiah was to regard them
chiefly and principally, because it was theirs by right. For he speaks of
others accidentally as you would say: no marvel then if having touched them,
he mentions his own people in a particular manner.

Others understand this place of the whole world in general; yet so as they
refer it to the last day: which me thinks is too strict: for the Prophet
having threatened the Jews and other nations, in the end adds a consolation,
to wit, that the Lord will once again raise up his Church, making her to
flourish more then ever it did: now how can this agree to the last Judgment?
By the word earth, I think the Prophet means not the whole world, but those
regions which were well known to the Jews: as for example, if we at this day
should speak of things which happen in the world, we should hardly pass
beyond Europe, much less should we think of that which is done in India,
because the parts on this side is our world as it were. In the same Isaiah
speaks of the earth, and of the Inhabitants of the Countries adjoining, which
he, and those to whom he spoke, knew. To conclude, we may limit this world
whereof the Prophet speaks in this place, within the confines or bounds of the
Assyrians, Egyptians, Moabites, and other nations, as if he should say,
Hitherunto I have spoken of diverse calamities which then were like to fall upon
many people, and do yet threaten many others in particular: but now behold the
conclusion, The Lord will spoil and overthrow the face of the earth, with all
the beauty of it.

Others expound the verb Bolkah, he opens the earth, that the enemies may the
more easily enter into it: but I had rather expound it, He vncouers the earth,
because they use to say, The earth is covered or clothed all the while great
multitudes of people inhabit it; as also when it abounds with beasts and
fruits: contrariwise, it is said to be uncovered and made bare when it has
lost her inhabitants, for so she is stripped of her garment, even as if a man
should be stripped out of his coats and other apparel. Now this was to happen
to the Assyrians, Egyptians, and other nations which he mentioned before, as
well as to the Jews, and therefore he wraps them up altogether in one
judgment.

Verse. 2. Or, and the p^iest shall be like the people, etc. (...)
And there shall be like people, like priest, and like servant, like master,
like maid, like mistress, like buyer, like seller, like lender, like borower,
Or, the borower, like the lender.
like giver, like taker to usury.
ANd there shall be like priest.] By these words he signifies an utter ruin,
where all order, government, and policy shall cease: for whilst any
Commonwealth flourishes, there is always a certain difference between the
people and the priests: well then, he notes an horrible confusion. Now under
this word priest, he puts the particular for the general, taking a part for
the whole, which is a thing very usual in the Scriptures; although we may take
the word Cohenim for those which are placed in any dignity whatsoever: because
the Hebrews sometimes give this name to Princes, but specially to such as are
of the blood Royal: notwithstanding I willingly receive the figure Synecdoche
before mentioned. Now sithence the Prophet puts this confusion of estates among
the catalogue of Gods curses, showing that when they be thus turned topsie
turuie, it proceeds from his fearful indignation: Good order in a
Commonwe^lth, a singular testimony of Gods favor.
we ought on the contrary to gather how well-pleasing policy, and the well
ordering of all things is unto God; as also what a great favor we receive from
him when such good order is preserved and continued amongst us. For it being
gone, our life differs nothing from that of brute Our sins the cause of all
disorders in Commonwealths.
when he confounds estates, depriues us of the word, and of judgment seats:
which being once put down, the comfort of our life therewithal is fallen to
the ground.

We may also observe hence, that the Lord in executing his judgments, spares
not men's persons, of what calling soever they be. What an holy calling was the
priesthood which the Lord had consecrated to himself, and adorned after a
glorious manner? How much did the people also glory in it; as if the
continuance thereof had been unchangeable, and to have endured for ever? Yet
notwithstanding even this honorable order of men, is wrapped in amongst the
judgments of God; because he respects no persons. Nay, the more favors we
have received from him, and the greater our advancement is, the more severely
will he correct us, if we prove unthankful, and abuse his benefits.

To this appertains that which is here added touching masters and servants,
buyers and sellers: for we know that these callings are lawful, and are not
iumbled together, unless it be when God smites his people in justice; as we
have said before: for in a State well managed, men put a difference between
the master and the servant. Neither can a Commonwealth long stand without
buying and selling: now to make the poor equal with the rich, what is it else
but to overthrow all humane society? We have the Prophets meaning then, The
confusion of estates in a kingdom, a forerunner of very strange alterations.
as if he should say; All policy shall be abolished, because in these ruins,
the rich should be brought into extreme poverty. To conclude, he here sets
sorth an horrible destruction, after which shall ensue a wonderful change.

Verse. 3. The earth shall be clean emptied and utterly spoiled: for the Lord
has spoken this word.
HE confirms that which he said before: and withal admonishes them, that
these changes shall not fall out by haphazard, as they say; but that it shall
come to pass by the providence and work of the Lord. He said expressly in the
first verse, that the Lord was determined to empty the earth: now he tells
the^, that it shall so come to pass, adding a reason of it; to wit, because
God had spoken the word: and therefore it could not be called back again.

Verse. 4. The earth lamenteth and fades away, the world is feebled and
decayed; the Or, high.
proud people of the world are weakened.
THe Prophet holds on his speech still: for all these words serve to lay forth
the manner of the ruin of the whole earth; that is to say, so much as was
known to the Jews. Now he sets out this judgment of God, under borrowed
speeches more familiarly, that he might awaken the drowsy; as he is wont to
do.

By the high people, we may understand those which were more excellent then
others: for that was a matter of greater wonder, then if some people of a base
condition had been destroyed. Notwithstanding, if any be pleased to expound it
particularly of the Jews, I will not gainesay them: for albeit the Assyrians
and Egyptians exceeded them in riches and power; yet notwithstanding the Jews
were higher then they, in regard that God had adopted them for his own. Yet
the other exposition pleases me better: for so his meaning is; that God will
not only punish them of mean estate, but those also that are advanced to
honor and dignity above others.

Verse. 5. The earth also deceives, because of the inhabitants thereof: for
they transgressed the laws, they changed the ordinances, and brake the
everlasting covenant.
OThers translate, The earth is polluted; because the verb Caneph, signifies
to be wicked: both senses may agree, but the verse following requires that we
expound it; The earth deceives. For he seems to amplify it further by and
by after, when he says, Verse. 6.
that the curse has devoured the earth. There is no great hardness in the
word Tacath, whether we translate it Under, or, Because of her inhabitants. Now
there is a mutual traffic, as it were, between the earth, and those that
labor in it: so as she ought to render the^ that which she has received into
her bowels, with usury; for otherwise she deceiues them: but she yields a
reason why she deceiues, when she lays the blame upon the inhabitants: for
themselves have made her barren by their wickedness. Men's sins the cause of
the earths barrenness.
Our sin is the cause why the earth sustaines us not, nor brings forth her
increase as God has ordained by the course of nature. His will is, that she
should be a mother unto us, to the end she may yield us food: now if she change
her nature and course, or degenerates from her fruitfulness; let us impute
that to our own wickedness, because we our selves overthrow that order which
God has set: for otherwise the earth would never deceive, but would always
render us that which she ought. The cause is by and by added, why the earth is
become unfaithful and deceiues her inhabitants: for is it not good reason they
should be defrauded of their provision of food, that will defraud God, their
Father and sustainer of his honor? Now he taxes the revolt of his nation
here in a particular manner: for their fault was much more heinous, and less
excusable, then all the sins of those which were never taught in God his
school.

Th^rah is transferred to the law, because it signifies doctrine: but it is
here put in the plural number, and signifies all the doctrine that is
comprehended in the law. Now because the Law consists as well in Commandments
as promises, the Prophet adds two other words or parts of it, to make his
meaning the more plain.

Chok, signifies an Ordinance, and by it some understand the Ceremonies, others
Manners. We may translate it Instructions: for I take it not only for
Ceremonies, but for all things that belong to the rules of good Berith, which
signifies a bargain or covenant. This word is to be restrained to the
covenants whereby the Lord adopting his people, promised to be their God. He
reprocheth their unthankfulness then, because that albeit the Lord had
manifested himself unto them diverse ways, and had given them singular
testimonies of his love, yet were they rebellious and wanton, transgressing his
laws, and violating his holy covenant.

The rule of a well ordered life described.
for it is contained in the Law, which we must precisely follow if we will
approve our doings unto God, if we turn from it to the right hand or to the
left, we are guilty of transgression. We may also observe that God would not
only have us to think upon his Laws and Commandments in his word, but also
upon his Covenant: The principal part of the word consists in the promises.
for the principal part of the word consists in the promises by which he
adopts and receives us for his people. Now it is not to be doubted but in these
variety of words the Prophet meant to amplify the matter: as if he should
say, You are wholly corrupt, nothing remains sound amongst you.

Why he calls it an everlasting covenant.
He calls it the everlasting covenant, because it ought to be perpetual,
inviolable, and to endure for ever, for it ought to continue always from the
father to the son, that the memory of it might never be lost, but might be
preserved steadfast in all ages. He lays forth their disloyalty then and
malice, in that they durst violate the Covenant made between God and them, and
overthrow the things which the Lord would have kept sure and steadfast. This was
odious: no marvel then if the earth avenge her self of such an impiety, by
denying men their sustenance.

Verse. 6. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth, and the Inhabitants
thereof are desolate: wherefore the Inhabitants thereof are burned up, and few
men are left.
OThers translate Forswearing: but because this word also signifies to curse,
I doubt not but it is taken here for cursing, the Prophet having an eye to
those curses which Moses denounces in the Law against the wicked that
transgress it: Leuit. 26.16 Deuteronomy. 28.15.
Isaiah testifies then that all the calamities which should come to pass,
proceeded from the curse of God. We know that the earth was cursed because of
the transgression of the first man, so as it brought forth thistles and briers
in stead of good fruits, Genesis 3.17.18. and yet notwithstanding the Lord has
so moderated this curse, that it cease not to yield men food, although in
regard of their unthankfulness they be unworthy of it. The cause why the earth
is cu^sed.
If we then cease not to offend God, adding sin unto sin; is it not good
reason that we should feel this curse to prick us to the quick, and that the
earth should wax barren and unfruitful?

I think the verb Asham, should rather be taken to desolate, then to
transgress; and the scope of ye text also leads us unto it, therefore I have
translated, they are desolate: unless any had rather take the conjunction for
a particle of showing the cause, in this sense, The earth being cursed of God,
is withered, because the inhabitants thereof are wicked. The verb Charu may be
taken by way of similitude, which I approve best of, to wit, that those whom
the wrath of God has devoured, were burned, for destruction is often compared
to the burning of fire.

Now whereas in the end he adds, that a few men shall be left, thence we may
perceive, that this prophecy can not be expounded of the last Judgment: for
the Prophet rather foretells and confirms the certentie of those calamities
which he had threatened to befall sundry nations, that by this means the
faithful being now ready to endure many afflictions, might fear, and be
drawn to repentance.

Verse. 7. The wine fails, the vine has no might: all that were of merry
heart, do mourn.

8. The mirth of tabrets cease: the noise of them that rejoice ends: the
joy of the harp cease.


HE continues on the same matter still, but in a more particular manner,
foretelling the desolation that should happen to the land of Judea. Now he
uses a large description, that he might ^ouch them the nearer to the quick,
and wound them with the sense of Gods judgment. He also taxes their excess,
intemperancie, and wantonness, because that in so great abundance of all things
they rebelled against God.

But this ingratitude is not the sin of the Jews only, nor of that age
alone, Woeful eff^cts proceeding from so gracious a cause.
but it may be seen every where, that the more men are glutted with the
blessings of God, the more proudly they advance themselves against him, and
give themselves the raines too much. For this cause the Prophet reproues the^,
as if he should say, Hitherunto you have plunged your selves in delights and
pleasures, but the Lord is determined to cut you short. Now Isaiah speaks of
the thing to come, as if it were already present, the better to paint it out
as it were before their eyes.

Verse. 9. The shall not drink wine with Or, with songs.
mirth: strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.
IT is not a thing evil in it self to drink wine; for God has ordained it
for man's use: but the Prophet here describes the banquets of drunkards, in
which nothing is to be seen but excess, dissolutions, and dishonest songs.
Moreover, Abuse of Gods benefits pulles want into our houses.
because they had abused their abundance, he threatens them with want; which
men draw into their houses, when they abuse Gods bounty by their riot. He
adds further, that if they shall drink strong drink, it shall be bitter unto
them: Sorrow causes sweet things to become bitter to our taste.
for sorrow makes us feel no taste either in meat or drink. The sum is,
that God will deprive them of the use of wine, notwithstanding they have
plenty; because the sorrow wherewith they shall be overwhelmed, will cause
them to lose all taste and savor therein. Strong drink shall be bitter: that
is to say, you shall not enjoy there pleasures and delights, in which you have
soaked your selves, any longer.

Verse. 10. The City of vanity is broken donwe: every house is shut up.
I Willingly agree, that this be particularly referred to the destruction of
Jerusalem; although from the scope of the text we may gather, that it also
extends it self to other Cities; because he will by and by summon the nations
in the plural number, to appear before the judgment seat of God. But in
regard that Isaiah principally respected his Citizens; we may well take it,
that this City of vanity is Jerusalem: either because there was no true
virtue in it, or because it was destroyed.

We may refer the word T^hu, the destruction it self, or to the sins by
which they had provoked the wrath of God against them. If we refer it to
their iniquities; his City wherein there is nothing but disorder: and this
sense pleases me best, albeit The houses shut up, signify that there shall
be great solitariness: for this is added only to exemplify the desolation
of this City.

Verse 11. There is a crying for wine in the streets: all joy is darkened; the
mirth of the world is gone away.
HIs meaning is, there shall be great scarcity of wine. Now where want and
famine is, there are innumerable complaints; not only in corners, but in
public places also. He expresses these complaints and lamentations then; but
withal he taxes their excess and intemperancie, in that they contented not
themselves with things necessary, but soked themselves in an ouerflowing of
drunkenness and all voluptuousness. For we should supply an antithesis that
is wanting here; to wit, You hitherunto abounded in wine and good cheer,
through which you have taken occasion to wax wanton and proud against God: you
shall therefore be justly deprived of them, so that in steed of your rioting,
shall be heard cries and sighings.

We must also note a similitude in this second member: for as we are wont to
say, A proverb.
Joy then shines in her brightest colors, when we have matter of joy: the
Prophet therefore says, that it is darkened; because sorrow is as a cloud put
between. To rejoice, is a thing lawful in it self, as also to drink:
neither does the Prophet reprove it; only that immoderate and inordinate joy:
for men seldom keep compass, by reason of that lawlesnesse which is in them.
For as much as the Jews then had proudly given up themselves to all
dissoluteness of life, he sets Gods just judgment before them: for joy is
then justly cut off from us, When joy is justly cut off from us.
when we know not how to entertain the benefits of God with thankfulness, nor
know not how to rejoice in him. He is enforced then to take our delights and
pleasures from us, and then to compel us to mourn and sigh.

Verse. 12. In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with
destruction.
BY an elegant manner of speech he describes the destruction of Jerusalem, or
of many other Cities together. The beauty and perfection of Cities, The
beauty of Cities.
consists in the multitude of inhabitants: they are therefore called deserts,
when none are left to dwell in them. Now the Prophet tauntingly says, that
destruction shall dwell in the City. True it is that some translate the word
Shammah, Desolation: but both the words come all to one sense. He makes mention
of the gates, because a man might perceive by them, whether the City were full
of people or no; for thither they all came, and there justice was administered.
First then he speaks of the whole City in general; and then notes one
particular gates: but if they be empty, the desolation must needs be great
thorowout the City.

Verse. 13 Surely thus shall it be in the midst of the earth among the
people, as the shaking of an Olive tree, Chap. 17.6.
and as the grapes when the vintage is ended.
IN as much as this sentence comes in between the threathings and the
consolation, it seems he should only speak to the elect, and not to all the
people indifferently: unless we will say that he describes that scattering
whereby the Jews were divided as it were into many nations. But because this
should be too strict and harsh, I expound it simply, that some hope is left to
the other forelorne nations. God in wrath remembers mercy.
And truly this prophecy does indeed properly belong to Christ, through
whom it is no marvel if the Gentiles have some part of the promise of
salvation. The Prophet has already used this similitude, Chapter 17.6. but
there he only mentioned the church of the Jews, telling them that a small
remnant should still remain of the holy seed, lest the faithful might think
the Church utterly rooted out. For as when an olive tree is shaken there will
always be some left here and there, and likewise grapes upon the vine, so
should there remain an after gathering as it were of the faithful in that
great destruction wherewith the Church should be oppressed. But in this place
he extends this promise unto other parts of the world, according as they should
partake in the same grace, by the means of Christ. Yet he therewithal adds a
menace or threatening, as if he should say, the earth shall be left bare of her
Inhabitants, even as trees and vines are of their fruit.

Verse. 14. They shall lift up their voice: they shall shout for the
magnificence of the Lord: they shall rejoice from the sea.
HE now goes on and amplifies the consolation which he touched before: for as
he said in the tenth Chapter, verse. 22. that of this great multitude there
should remain a little handful which should cover the whole earth; so now he
shows that this small number of the faithful which shall be left of this
great vintage, shall rejoice notwithstanding, and sound the same so loud, that
it should be heard unto the furthest regions. This is done by the preaching of
the Gospel: for as touching the estate of Judea, it seemed to be overthrown,
in regard that the politic government was abolished: wars without, and
seditions within, had so wasted it, that it was impossible ever to be
recovered. The rest of the world also was no less dumb in vttring these
praises of God, then deaf in hearing the sound thereof. Now because the Jews
were the first fruits of ye believers, I willingly grant that they be placed in
the first rank.

A Consolation, fitting the times of the Churches desolation.
Hence we gather a singular Consolation, to wit, that the Lord in a moment can
restore his Church unto a most flourishing estate, yea and create it of nothing;
for out of death he draws life even as often as it pleases him. But is it not
a wonder and above the order of nature that so small a remnant in lifting up
their voice, See verse. 16.
should be heard so far off? for where few are, there is silence; and great
noise is wont to be where great multitudes are gathered together. This then is
the work of God which far surmounts nature, and whatsoever faculty else is
in man: otherwise it seems the Prophet should contradict himself; to wit,
that all Judea should be wasted, and all the world brought to nothing, and yet
that their cry should be heard every where. This in it self is incredible, or
rather ridiculous, if we measure the thing by carnal sense: it is therefore,
as we have said, to be ascribed wholly to the admirable power and work of God.

By their cry he not only means the voice of gladness which is expressed by
mirth and rejoicing, Faith the ground of true joy.
but he also comprehends under it trust and confidence, because they shall
freely, boldly, and with a loud voice publish the praises of the Lord. Now
herewithall he admonishes the faithful that it is their duty to cause Gods
graces in them to be magnified, and not their own. By the Sea, Gods mercies
must not be concealed.
it is well enough known that the Jews mean the regions far off, which lie
beyond the same.

Verse. 15. Wherefore praise ye the Lord in the valleys, even the name of the
Lord God of Israel, in the yles of the sea.
GOds benefits ought to provoke us to give him thanks, which we then testify,
when we utter forth his praises. What thanks shall I render unto the Lord,
says David, Psalm. 116.
for all the benefits he has bestowed upon me? I will even take the cup of
thanksgiving for his salvation, and call upon his name. This order the Prophet
keeps in this place: for having spoken of the restoration of the Church, he
forthwith exhorts us to offer the sacrifice of praise. By the valleys, he
means those Countries that are scattered and divided as it were from the rest:
for those which are environed with mountains, are distinct and several
naturally. Thence it is that the inhabitants of the valleys are rude and
barbarous, because they seldom converse with others. It is then as if the
Prophet should have said, There is no corner of the world be it never so
obscure and entangled, but the praises of God shall be heard there.

He has expressed the God of Israel, ^o signify that all nations should call
upon the name of the true God. For though all men have a certain knowledge of
God, and that some seed of religion be rooted in their hearts, yet when the
question is of worshipping the true God in a right manner, it either vanishes
to nothing, or else they easily fall to Idolatry and superstitions. Now the
Prophet here speaks of the true religion which should be spread through the
world: whence yet again it appears, that he prophesies of the kingdom of
Christ, under whose reign the sincere truth was revealed to foreign and
profane nations.

Verse. 16. From the uttermost part of the earth we have heard praises, even
glory to the just. And I said, My leannee, my leanness, woe is me: the
transgressors have offended: yea, the transgressors have grieuouslie offended.
THis verse contains two sentences, which in apperance seem to cross one
another: for the first conteines a joyful argument of Gods praises; and
presently he breaks out into lamentations: wherein he bewailes the disloyal
behavior of the wicked, who made shipwreck of all religion and godliness. As
touching the praises of God, we have already said, that he can neither be
praised nor called upon, till he have made himself known unto us by giving
us some taste of his goodness, whereby we may conceive good hope and assurance
of salvation. From thence come these sentences of David, Lord, Psalm. 6.6.
who shall praise thee in the grave? In death who shall confess thee? For as
long as we only feel the wrath of God, we cannot utter his praises: and
therefore when the Prophet says, they shall be heard; he gives us to
understand, that the Gospel shall be published thorowout the world, to the end
men may acknowledge God for their Father, and wholly give over themselves to
set forth his praises.

It is to be noted that he says from the ends of the earth; because the
praises of God were then bounded within Judea, and were not heard far off:
but afterward, they sounded every where. When he adds, glory to the just:
some take it as belonging to the person of all the faithful in general; as if
the meaning were, that God shall be glorified, beccause of his justice. Others
read it together thus; We have heard glory given to the just God. Those who
think the Heralds of these praises are called just, do gather a good sense;
but they consider not the word glory: or at the least they are constrained to
put the word Rejoicing, in the stead of it. Whereas he puts the verb, we have
heard, in the preter-perfect tence, and not in the future; I make no doubt but
he meant to revive the hearts of the faithful by this consolation; to wit, We
shall again hear the praises of God: for it imports more then if he had said,
The praises of God shall be heard. He also speaks in the first person, that
he might comprehend the whole body of the Church, and so draws the faithful
to a more diligent attention. We often find the epithet Just, in the
Scripture, which he here applies unto God: but it belongs unto him after
another sort then it does unto men; who are called just, in regard of that
righteousness which is communicated unto them: for God is called just, by the
effects; because he is the fountain of it. Let us now see then the substance
of this congratulation and thanksgiving; Where the imputation of Christ's
righteousness is felt, there must the praises of God needs sound forth.
to wit, we praise this just God, because we have life and salvation, by the
imputation of this justice unto us. Where the justice of God is felt then,
there must praises and thanks needs follow.

But how incredible did these things seem when the Prophet foretold them? for
the Lord was only known and praised in Judea. Their destruction is denounced,
and then follows the publishing of Gods word and praises, which should sound
thorowout the world. Now how could these things come to pass, when the people
of God were destroyed? Surely we may well conclude, that few at that time
believed these prophecies. But now that these things are come to pass, is it
not our duties to admire so great a miracle? The Jews were not only
scattered, but almost brought to nothing; yet notwithstanding one small sparkle
has been sufficient to give light to the whole world: so as whosoever has
been truly enlightened therewith, has made bold and constant profession of
the truth.

My bowels.] This place is diversely expounded: for some translate the word
Razi, Secret, others translate, Leanness. Those who turn it, Secret, think
the Prophet meant that a double secret was revealed to him; to wit, that the
Lord was purposed to reward the good, and to be avenged on the wicked. For
whilst men look to the outward appearance, and see the wicked have all they
can wish, and the godly overwhelmed with miseries; they are troubled and doubt
in themselves, whether the matters of this present life are governed by the
hand of God, or whether all things are guided by Fortune. But such thoughts are
nothing but the seeds of impiety; as Solomon shows, Eccles. 8.11. This
therefore made the Psalmist enter in the sanctuary of God, to consider of this
thing, rather then to consult with flesh and blood about it: Psalm. 73.17. Now
if we follow this interpretation, the sense will be; Although the just seem
to have lost all their labor: yet this secret do I retain in my breast, that
it shall be well with them notwithstanding in the latter end: and albeit the
wicked think to escape, yet am I assured they shall not go scotfree. But in
regard this subtlety seems far fetched, I had rather expound it more
simply: and seeing the particle of expressing anguish, is also by and by added;
who should let me to think, but that Isaiah speaks here of the just, or of
their reward?

Others expound it Leanness; as if he should say; I languish and am even
dried up with sorrow: for as the prosperity and flourishing estate of the
people, did as it were batton him; so their miserable and woeful estate was his
leanness. For the Prophet here sustaines and represents the person of the
whole stock of the Jews: and because the Lord had cut it off, he had just
cause to bewail the leanness of it. This interpretation has some
probability, as I have said; because Isaiah had good cause to lament the
diminishing of his people, which he saw was at hand. And we know, that when
the grace of God began to be published in all places, then the Jews
decreased; yea the successors of Abraham were as good as extinguished.

But let us see whether the Prophet has not a further drift then to the
reiection of his own nation, so as he rather bewailes the inward evils
wherewith he foresaw ye Church should be afflicted. For we may well affirm
that the Hebrew word which others have translated Secret, signifies also
whatsoever is within the body. And thus it is an exclamation, to wit, my
inward parts, or my bowels pain me: neither is it any absurdity to supply a
verb, in a passionate and vehement speech. When the Lord plants his Church it
seems to flourish and to be out of all peril: but when her own bowels, that
is to say, her children trouble her, then is she the most grieved: hypocrites
advance themselves, which touches her nearer then all the malice of those that
are without. To this appertains these complaints, Alas, Alas! for that
doubtless was the Prophets meaning, to the end the faithful might not think
their felicity consisted in the things of this life, but might rather know
that they were to sustain continual combats: yea even then when they
imagined nothing could hinder them from inioying most sweet peace and
tranquillity. His meaning is then to express an extreme passion of sorrow
wherewith ye Church should be inwardly touched, that is to say, even in her
bowels: and so much the more cause had she to lament, because she could not
avoid it. A true saying.
For as one says, The Church can not flee from her home enemies, neither can
she rid her self of them. This is the cause why the Prophet wants words to
express his misery.

When he speaks in the next place of the disloyal, it is a sufficient
confirmation of this exposition. We have too much experience, and shall feel
more and more every day how great and woeful this calamity is. Whence came
Popery and all the filthy puddle, but from this inward plague? It is an
impostume bred in the bowels of the Church, The bane of the Church bred within
her own bowels.
which at length has broken forth and annoyed us with the corruption and
stinch of it. Whence is it also yt in these beginnings of ye Church, which is
but now in the swaddling clouts as it were, we see the true doctrine corrupted,
the discipline Discipline.
adulterated, not only by the common people, but by them also which from their
good example ought to be guides unto others? Is it not because the Church has
always been subject to this evil?

Verse. 17. Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, o Inhabitant of the
earth.

18. And he that flees from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit,
and he that comes up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the
windows from an high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.


THe Prophet here expostulates with the people because of their sins. See
verse 14.15.16.
Before he said, that not one, but many nations far remote, should have cause
to sing; now he comes to doctrine: for I think this should be severed from
the former, because Isaiah threatens the wicked again, to the end they might
know that in the greatest felicity of the Church they should continue to be
accursed. For such are wont falsely to challenge unto themselves the promises of
God, when as they appertain nothing at all unto them: this is the cause why
the Prophets are wont to mingle threatenings with consolations. It may be for
ought we know that the Prophet made this sermon apart, upon some other
occasion. For neither did the Prophets themselves, nor other learned men for
them distinguish the Chapters: we have diverse times seen sundry sentences
joined together which should be separate; and many separated which should be
joined. What was the cause thereof but ignorance? Be it as you will; the
Prophet directs his speech again to the wicked, and threatens them with an
horrible judgment.

Now this description of fear, pit, and snare, is set before them to work
upon their affections: for had he in one word told them that destruction was at
hand, they would have bin little moved with it. But the doubt is whether he
speaks to the Jews only, or no: for mine own part, I mean not to contend
much about it; and yet it is most likely unto me, that it appertains also to
other nations, yea even to the whole earth, See verse. 1.4.
whereof he had prophesied before. By the earth, we understand those regions
which were known to the Jews, as we touched in another place. Verse 1.
The sense then is, The sense of this place.
Thou shall be pressed with so many miseries, that thou shall not know which
way to turn thee: as also it is written in Amos, He which flies for fear of
the Lion, shall meet a Bear, Amos 5.19. And if he go into his house, when he
leanes against the wall, a serpent shall bite him. And in the 15. Chapter of
this book Isaiah told us, that Lions should be sent against those Moabites
that escaped the war. For God has a storehouse of infinite plagues
wherewith to punish the wicked. God has a storehouse of infinite plagues
wherewith to punish the wicked.
It is as much therefore as if the Prophet had said, Be it known unto you,
that you can no way wind your selves out of Gods hands: for he has mo ways
then one to avenge himself upon you for your iniquities; and has skill enough
to snare them that think by subtletie to steal away in the dark from him. He
that scapes the sword shall be vexed with famine, and if he die not of that, he
shall be pressed with some other, even as if nets were every where spread to
catch you.

The reason which is added in the latter end of the 18. verse confirms this
exposition, to wit, that they can no way prevent Gods vengeance. Why so? for
all things are at his beck from the highest heavens, to the lowest depths of
the earth. Some are of opinion that the Prophet alludes to the deluge; but as I
think the very meaning is, that Gods wrath shall be revealed both from above,
and below; as if he should say, The Lord will arm heaven and earth on his side
to execute his wrath upon the sons of men, that which way soever they turn
their eyes, they may see nothing but ruin and destruction.

Verse. 19. The earth is utterly broken down: the earth is clean dissolved:
the earth is moved exceedingly.

20. The earth shall reele to and fro like a drunken man, and shall be removed
as a tent, and the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it; so that it shall
fall, and rise no more.


A carelesnes rooted in our flesh, which begets a contempt of God.
and of this, every one of us has too woeful experience, both in himself and
in others. That the Prophet then might rowse up those that were drowsy and
rocked asleep in their sins, he garnisheth his words, (not as one affecting
eloquence, to procure credit unto himself) but to gain attention of his
hearers, and to cause the same to sink the deeper into their hearts.

Now this doctrine ought to be restrained to the wicked; not that the faithful
were exempt from these calamities, for they often suffer with others: but
having their recourse unto God, and resting themselves wholly upon him, they
are not so appalled, but they get the victory over all assaults whatsoever.
But the wicked, which despise the judgments of God, and take a raging liberty
of sinning to themselves, shall always be vexed and terrified without any ease
or rest.

Where he says, the earth shall be shaken; it is not meant, as though it
should be carried out of one place into some other: but this, as we have said,
is to be referred unto men: and it is as if he had said; There shall be neither
kingdom nor government. In a word, his meaning is, to set forth those changes
whereof he spoke in the tenth Chapter.

Now it is not without cause that he says, the earth is laden with iniquity;
Our selves the authors of our own evils.
for thereby we perceive, that God is never displeased with men, but we our
selves are the authors and no recovery: and some are of opinion, that this was
spoken to the Jews, whose commonwealth was utterly abolished; so as being
scattered here and there, they were scacely reputed or held for men of like
condition with others. But I extend it further; to wit, that the calamities
shall be so great in the world, that it should never be restored to his first
beauty: for men labor tooth and nail to resist adversities, and are
foolehardy upon a false confidence. When they have endured some corrections,
Men are ready enough to feed themselves with vain hopes.
they think leave shall be given them to take breath; feeding themselves with
a vain assurance, which the Prophet labors to deprive them of; to the end
their fond hopes might not beguile them. It is also to be noted, that this
general sentence takes not away the exception which Isaiah spoke of before,
verse. 13.

Verse. 21. And in that day shall the Lord visit the host above, that is on
high; even the Kings of the world that are upon the earth.
THis place has troubled many men's heads; so as every one has descanted upon
it diversely. Some think it to be meant of the Sun and stars: others, of
the devils, Psalm. 139.
Whither shall I go from thy presence? whither shall I flee from thy Spirit?
if I go up into heaven thou art there: if I take the wings of the morning, and
fly to the uttermost parts of the sea, yet thither will thou pursue me.

For Isaiah calls Kings and Princes, the host from above, by way of
similitude; and himself so expounds it clearly, when he adds, Upon the kings
of the earth. For I am not of the mind that the words should be severed, as if
he spoke of diverse things; but it is rather the repetition of the same thing
again, so as the latter expounds the former: unless any had rather expound it
thus; He will come in visitation upon the kingdoms of the earth; yea, even
upon them which seem the highest exalted above the common condition of men.
Some are so advanced above others, that they seem petty Gods rather then men.
Now the word visit, must be referred to the punishment, as it appears
sufficiently by the text.

Verse. 22. And they shall be gathered together as the prisoners in the pit: and
they shall be shut up in the prison; and after many days shall they be
visited.
He continues on his purpose in the beginning of the verse, using a phrase of
speech by way of similitude; for all were not prisoners: but the Lord brought
them all into servitude, as if one should keep his enemies in safe custody
which he had subdued. The Prophet brings in the Lord then like a Conqueror,
which holds his enemies in prison. For men are wont to lay them fast, whom they
have taken. We know that men flee the presence of God, and despise him all ye
while he spares, or gives the^ any truce: for this cause Isaiah says, that
they shall be shut up in prison by heaps, that so their rejoicing in their
multitudes might cease.

Where he says, they shall be visited after many days, we are not to take it
simply as a promise, but as a threatening also included under it; and that in
this sense, O ye Jews you have a long time dallied with your God by your
rebellion, and have prolonged your trading in sin too long; so, God will now
prolong his chastisements till he have in the end brought you (though very
late) to a sight of your misdeeds. And this course we see the Judges of the
earth often take with malefactors with whom they are displeased: they admit
the^ not to their presence the first day, but humble them first by throwing
them into stinking dungeons, Simile.
and into misery, that they may thereby break the pride of their hearts.

God is said to visit the world two ways.
But God is said to visit the world two ways, first, in punishing the wicked,
secondly, when after some chastisements he shows his elect some tokens of his
fatherly kindness. The word visit in this place is taken, To behold: and thus
the Prophet mitigates the rigor of his menace or threatening. For the hearts of
the faithful in these cases have need of comfort, lest they should quail, and
be discouraged: The cause why the Prophets are wont so often to mingle
consolations with their denunciatio^s.
in regard of them therefore it is that the Prophets are wont to mingle
consolations after their denunciations of judgments. Seeing these things
served then to cheer up the faithful, no doubt but they were specially
directed to the Jews, among whom faith had her special residence, in regard
that it appeared in none but them. But yet we are once again to observe these
words, after many days, for this is added to exercise the faith of Gods
children: we often run headlong in our desires, and would have God accomplish
his promises by and by: we grudge that he delays so long, and wax so impatient
that we can no longer endure. But we must learn in humility to wait and look
long for the salvation and mercy of our God, and not be discontented how long
soever he defer, for certainly he will come, and he will not tarry. But
herewithall we must note, that God speaks not here of all, for as we have
seen in the 13. verse, he was determined to save but a few: and this ought so
much the more to whet our appetites, to the end after we have been long
exercised under sundry calamities, we may meet the Lord that smites us by
unfeigned repentance.

Verse. 23. Then the Moon shall be abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when the
Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem: and glory shall be
Or, even in the presence of his etc.
before his ancient men.
MAny think that the Prophet uses this vehemency against the Jews, as if he
said, The Sun, Moon, and Stars are ashamed of your incredulity, so that
you are a detestation not to men only, but even to the insensible creatures:
but this seems utterly wide from the Prophets purpose. I make no doubt but he
continues on that consolation which he touched in the former verse; as if he
should say, When the Lord shall visit his people, and purge his Church, he will
establish such a glorious kingdom, that it shall darken the light of the Sun
and Stars. And this manner of speech is very usual among the Prophets, we
also have seen it before in this prophecy. Now Isaiah speaks not here alone
of the head, but also of the whole body of the Church: when the Lord then
shall settle his kingdom upon mount Zion, his glory in the restoration of
the people shall be so great, that that which seems bright and glorious in
men's eyes, being compared with this, shall be but darkness. And the better to
express it, he names the greatest lights in the firmament.

Some improperlie draw the verb To reign, to Gods vengeance: for albeit God
reigns when he judges the world, yet this manner of speech linked thus
together, God shall reign in Mount Zion, always notes mercy and salvation.
For he speaks of the restoration of the Church: whence we gather, that these
things are not accomplished but in Christ.

In mentioning of the Ancients he uses a figure called Synecdoche, a figure
often used in scripture, taking the chief part of the Church for the whole
body, and yet not without a special cause. The ancient men, Priests, and
governing Elders.
are here taken then not only for the Priests, but for those governors which
have the oversight of manners and discipline, to wit, such as ought with wisdom
and discretion to govern others. And under these names he comprehends all the
people, not only because they represent the whole body, the common people
being hid as it were under the shadow of their wings: but also that the
faithful might have good hope of a future restoring, otherwise it were to
little purpose that a scattered multitude should be left like a crased body,
or a confused lump.

It is not without cause that the particle, even before his ancient men, is
added, to the end the Jews might know that Gods power should be glorious: not
that it can be comprehended with the eyes of flesh, but by faith: for he so
reigns, that we effectually feel his strength in our weakness. And if we
apprehend not this, we shall never receive any comfort.

In stead of glory, some read gloriously, others glorious: I had rather take
it in the substantive, although it be not much material as touching the sense.
For he shows how great Gods glory and magnificence should be when Christ's
kingdom shall be set up: all glory then must be turned into darkness, that his
glory alone may shine and surmount all things. Whence it follows, that God
then inioyes that which belongs unto him in ye midst of us, and that honor
which none ought to deprive him of, when all creatures are brought within
compass, and that he alone shines, and is the light of our eyes.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. O Lord, thou art my God: I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name:
for thou have done wonderful things, according to the counsels of old, with a
stable truth.
HItherunto Isaiah has prophesied of Gods judgments, which hung not over the
head of one people alone, but almost of the whole world. Now it was impossible
that the consideration of so many calamities which he foresaw would fall upon
them, should not work great sorrow and trouble of mind in him. For those that
are of an upright heart, desire that all the world might be saved. And as they
thirst after Gods glory, so they cannot but love all the works of his hands: by
how much the more then a man is possessed with the true fear of God, the more
nearly is he touched to the quick with the feeling of his judgments. In the
mean while, the wicked are besotted when he manifests the same, and will not
be moved for any terrors whatsoever: the godly on the contrary quake at the
least sign of his displeasure. If we have experience of this, what think we
the Prophet felt, who saw all these calamities which he foretold, before his
eyes as in a glass? For the Ministers of the word must needs be much more
effectually affected with the sight of such things, then the common sort, that
the same may be as it were a seal unto them of the truth of their doctrine.

The Lord then having set these horrible desolations before the Prophet as in a
table, it was necessary, that being moved with sorrow and grief, he should
turn his eyes unto the Lord; for otherwise he might have been entangled with
confused passions, and great disquietnesse of mind. And therefore being
assured that the Lord would provide for his Church in the midst of these
tempests, and that he would gather in those under the wings of his power,
which before were scattered far off, he takes courage unto him. We see then
that Isaiah continues constant in his vocation, without being daunted or any
way discouraged: but rather relying always upon the assurance of obtaining
mercy; and therefore he continues to celebrate the praises of the Lord his God.

By this we may see, that this thanksgiving depends upon the former prophecies;
and that Isaiah respects not that which he has foretold alone, but also what
end the Lord aimed at, in this execution: that is to say, why he afflicted so
many nations with such diversities of punishments; namely, that he might bring
under those which were before unruly, and ouerflowed in a brutish sensuality;
who as they had no fear of God before their eyes; so had they no sense of
religion or godliness at all.

Thou art my God.] Being perplexed and confounded in himself, he suddenly
turns his thoughts unto God, as we have said. Whence we may gather a very
profitable doctrine; to wit, that when our minds are tossed to and fro with
diverse cogitations, What ought to be our refuge in time of deep distresses.
in regard of the many miseries and calamities which daily happen; that we by
and by flee unto God, resting our selves upon his only providence: for we
shall be at our wits end even for the wagging of a straw, if we have not this
doctrine for our refuge, by sustaining our hearts therewith. But the better to
see the Prophets meaning, we may well add a particle aduersatiue here, in
this sense; Although I be now oppressed with many temptations on every side,
yet will I still acknowledge thee to be my God. The assurance of Gods savor
gives us ample matter of joy and reioicing, even in the greatest troubles.
And thus he voweth to give unto God that praise, which unto him appertains;
which none of us can do, unless an assured persuasion of Gods grace do
reign and bear sway in our hearts: from whence springs that joy, which
affords us exceeding ample matter of praises, when being certain of our
salvation, we are assured that the Lord is our God. For all those that are not
carried with an affection to magnify Gods goodness in the midst of their
sorrows, know not what faith is, The faithful may be daunted for a time, but
faith gets the victory.
neither yet did they ever taste the sweetness of his mercy: for if we have a
sure confidence in God, we must of necessity extol his name with joy and
gladness of heart.

A wonderful thing.] The singular number is put for the plural. Now the
Prophet rests not in the contemplation of present things, but rather looks to
the end of them: for you shall have even profane men that will be affected at
the wonderful events of things which fall out in the government of the world,
and will stand amazed thereat; as no doubt the Tyrians, Sidonians, Babylonians,
and Moabites did. Who they are that profit by the view of Gods works.
But none could benefit themselves by this sight, but such as therewithal had
a taste and feeling of Gods wisdom and goodness: for without that, men do
rather scorn and despise such works, then apprehend the excellency of them:
because they look not to the end that God aims at; to wit, 2. Cor. 4.6.
that by drawing light out of darkness, he is wont after a wonderful manner,
How God is wont to deal with his Church.
to raise up and revive his Church in the midst of death; orders and
disposes rightly and to good use, those things which the wit of man conceiues
to be exceedingly confused.

But the better to set forth the commendation of Gods providence, he adds, The
counsels ordained of old: as if he should say, Nothing falls out suddenly, or
at random, in respect of God. And indeed, albeit to us it often seems he
does things utterly at unawares, yet is it most certain that he has
foreseen and appointed all of the^ so to come to pass before the creation of
the world. By these words then the Prophet meant to say, that all the wonders
which happen beyond the expectation of men, flow from the order of this
moderation which God keeps in the government and disposition of all things from
the beginning, unto the end.

Now because we are not able to attain to his secret counsels, and that our
wits can not mount so high, we must be brought to the manifestation of that
which for the present is hidden from us, and is above our reach, till such time
as the Lord discover the same unto us by his word: by which he applies himself
to our weakness, because his secret counsel is incomprehensible. Isaiah
therefore descends by and by from these hidden ordinances of God to the
doctrine of the word and the promises therein contained, Isai^h descends from
G^ds secret will to his revealed will.
which doubtless he comprehends under the word Truth. For this repetition
should be to little purpose unless he had had some relation in this word: for
after God has by it revealed his counsel unto us, then he properly appears
to be true if we believe and credit his sayings. Thus then the Prophet commends
the stablenes and certentie of the word when he calls it a stable truth, as if
he should say, All things which God pronounces, and proceed from him, is
stable and immovable.

Verse. 2. For thou have made of a City an heap, of a strong City a ruin:
even the palace of strangers of a City, it shall never be built.
SOme refer this to Jerusalem: but I rather think it to be a change of the
number only, which is a thing very usual among the Prophets: for Isaiah
speaks not of one City alone, but of many, which he foretells should be laid
upon heaps. Whereas others take it, that Jerusalem served for a palace to the
Romans, they come nothing nigh the Prophets meaning; which will plainly
appear if we call to mind what has been said before, to wit, that the Prophet
busies not himself in thinking of the scourges wherewith God has afflicted
diverse nations, but rather aims at the end and issue of them. For by them the
Lord purposed to subdue and tame the pride and rebellion of men, whom he could
never have subdued unto himself, unless they had been smitten with diverse
calamities. Moreover, Isaiah says not only that strangers shall inhabit the
surprised Cities, out of which they were driven that dwelt in them: for so that
which he by and by adds would not agree, to wit, that the palace shall be no
more a City: but his meaning is, that vagabonds who should have no place of
abode at all, shall find sufficient room there, because the inhabitants shall
betake them to their heels. Now because Armon signifies goodly houses, he
says by way of derision, that thieves shall dwell there as in Palaces, in
regard of the great space which should lie waste like unto a desert.

Verse. 3. Therefore shall the mighty people give glory unto thee: the City
of the strong nations shall fear thee.
SEe here the end, whereof I have spoken in the first verse: for if the Lord
should destroy the world, no fruit would come of it, such a desolation could
engender nothing but horror; neither would it ever bring us nearer unto God to
praise him: nay contrariwise we must needs remain as blocks when we only feel
his wrath: for praises proceed from the feeling of his favor and goodness. It is
all one then as if he had said, Lord, thou will not only smite and afflict, but
wilt also effect, that ye wounds which thou make shall not be without fruit.
For by them thou will beat down the pride of men, to the end that those which
in times past were strangers from thee, may now stoop under thine obedience.
Hence we learn how necessary chastisements be, The necessity of afflictions.
for by them we are taught to glorify God; whereas prosperity puffs us up in
such wise that we dishonor him, and think we may do what we list: we also
run out and range over all the fields when God deals lovingly with us.

The Prophet adds the word fear, to show, that this praise consists neither
in words nor outward gestures, We must rejoice in trembling. Psalm. 2.11. and
5.7.
but in the sound and sincere affection of the heart. Whence we gather, that
he here speaks of the whole worship of God. Now because many think
themselves well discharged when they have made confession with their lips only,
Isaiah the better to expound his own meaning adds, The nation shall fear
thee. Now in calling them strong and mighty, by such epithites he means the
pride and loftines of those who are puffed up with their prosperity: for they
exalt themselves against God, so as they cannot possibly be humbled and
brought down, unless they be quite stripped of all things. You see now
whether our thoughts are to retire in ye calamities which we see to fall out
daily: men's pride must needs be repressed and abated, that they may be prepared
to embrace holy doctrine, and to walk in sound obedience. Whilst they are
besotted with their riches and vain hopes, they fear not to contemn the
judgments of God, and hold him out at the staves end, as they say.

Verse. 4. For thou have been a strength to the poor, even a strength to the
needy in his trouble, a refuge against the tempest, a shadow against the
heat: for the blast of the mighty is like a storm against the wall.
BEhold here the fruit of conversion. How? The Lord raises us from death,
delivers us from the grave, by stretching out his hand from heaven to pluck us
out of the jaws of hell. Our first entrance unto God.
This is the first entrance he gives us, for he finds nothing but our misery
for his mercy to work upon. We must therefore feel our selves poor and
helpless, before we can see what need we have of his power: yea, it is
necessary that we be stripped of all confidence and self trust, before he will
reveal his strength in us. For this cause he fits and frames us by rods and
chastisements, as by instrustions, to come to the feeling of his favor and
assistance. It is not without good cause then that Isaiah deckes this
description with so many similitudes: for he thereby meets with many and
great temptations, under which weak man would never be able to stand, were he
not fortified and sustained with such props.

And therefore he says, that God will be strength to the poor, a refuge
against the tempest, and a shadow against the heat: for what dangers soever be
fall us, the Lord will defend his own against them, and will arm us with all
kinds of armor to resist them. Genesis 8.1. Exodus 15.10. 1. Kin. 19.11. 2. King.
7.
The Spirit in this place, as in many others, signifies wind, and it is taken
for a violent storm wherewith the wicked are carried to rush against the
children of God: for they not only threaten and terrify, but also spit out
fire it self, as to consume them all. Hereunto appertains that which is added
of the tempest, or, ouerflowing against the wall: by which figure his meaning
is, that the wicked run with such force, when they have liberty to do
evil, that they overthrow whatsoever stands in their way: for it is a greater
matter to break down and overthrow walls, then if water should only spread
it self over the earth.

Verse. 5. Thou shall bring down the noise of the strangers, as the heat in a
dry place: he will bring down the song of the mighty, as the heat in the
shadow in a cloud.
IF the Lord were not on our side, when violent men set themselves against us,
we should be utterly swallowed up: for we see how great the rage of the
wicked is. Alas, if they be able to ouerturne stone walls, how can a poor man
be able to stand against them? This is added then to set forth the godnesse of
almighty God, that we might know in what an ill case we should be in, if God
did not succor us. The expositours take the similitude two ways: some think
that as the vehement heat burns up the fields, which of themselves are dry and
barren; so the wrath of God shall consume and burn up the wicked: others
translate, As the heat; and then the sense is; Howsoever the wicked rely upon
their power, and therefore are thus boisterous, the Lord notwithstanding will
bring them down in a moment, as if they were surprised with heat in a dry
place.

But I take the sense to be otherwise: for having showed how great the rage of
the wicked is against the faithful, he adds Lord thou will humble them. But
how? He alludes unto the deluge; which similitude he used before, Chap. 24.18.
Thou will bring down their heat, says he, which otherwise must needs
consume us: even as the rain falling from heaven, cooles the heat which would
burn up the fields for want of moisture. And thus the text hangs well
together; whereas the other exposition is constrained, and offers violence to
the very letter, as they say.

The latter part of the verse is expounded diverse ways: some translate the
word Zemir, Seed: others, a Root: as if the Prophet had said, The Lord will
not only cut off the wicked, but will pluck them up by the very roots. This
were probable, if the similitude of heat would bear it: and therefore those
who turn it song, cry, or, waste; in my judgment, do come nearest the
Prophets meaning, albeit they touch it not fully. Well, he confirms the former
sentence; to wit, that the violence or cry of the wicked, who proudly exalt
themselves, shall suddenly fall, even as the heat of the Sun when any rain
follows: which is signified by the shadow of the cloud.

Verse. 6. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all the
people a feast of fat things, even a feast of fined wines and of fat things
full of marowe, of wines fined and purified.
THey also diversely interpret this place: for some think the Prophet threatens
the Jews, and that in such sort, as if he called diverse nations to the feast:
which phrase of speech is often found in other places; because it is said, that
the Lord feeds the wicked far against the day of slaughter. They think then
that the Gentiles are called to the banquet, the Jews being made their pray:
as if the Lord should say; I have prepared a goodly banquet for the Gentiles;
to wit, the Romans shall sack and spoil the Jews. But as I think, this
sense cannot stand, neither shall there need any long refutation, when I shall
have acquainted you with the true meaning. Others expound it, as if Isaiah
should speak of Gods wrath thus; The Lord will make a feast to all people, he
will make them drink the cup of his wrath, till they be drunken therewith. But
the Prophet meant nothing less: for he goes on still to set forth the grace of
God, which should be manifested at the coming of Christ. Using the very same
similitude with that in the 22. Psalm, verse. 26. where David describes the
Kingdom of Christ, saying; that the poor as well as the rich, shall partake
of this banquet, and shall eat their fill: by which, he signifies that no
nation shall be exempt from having part in this benefit. At the first, The
Jews were first feasted alone.
it seemed that the Lord only feasted the Jews, because they alone were his
adopted people, and entertained at this banquet as those of his own household:
but now he accepts of the Gentiles also, But now the Gentiles are partakers
thereof with them.
and sheds forth his graces upon all nations. There is here then a close
opposition when he says to all people, for formerlie he was known but to one
nation.

The feast of fat things is to be understood of fat beasts. Some translate the
word Shemanim, lees, or dregs, but very improperlie: for by this word he means
old wines, which we commonly call old store, which are better then ordinary,
but specially in ye East, where they bear their age best. He calls the
liquors wherein no lees appear, neat and fined wines. To be short, it
appears sufficiently that neither Jews nor Gentiles are threatened in this
place, but that both of them rather are invited to a goodly banquet. This may
the better be understood by the words of Christ himself, where he compares the
kingdom of heaven to a Marriage feast which the King prepared for his son,
Math. 22.2.
unto which all were indifferently called, because they which were bidden
before would not come. For mine own part, I make no question but Isaiah
speaks here of the preaching of the Gospel. Therefore in as much as the
doctrine thereof came from the mountain of Zion, he says, that all nations
shall come to feast there: for when God offered the heavenly food wherewith men's
souls are fed, unto all the world; it was as if he had erected a table for all
comers.

The Lord now daily inuiteth us to fill and enrich our souls with all good
things: and to that end he raises up faithful teachers, Mountain, albeit
Gods messengers come not from Mount Zion to give us food, yet by this word we
are to understand the Church, out of which none can partake of these benefits;
for such dainties are not to be found in the streets nor hie ways; this table
is not spread every where, neither does every place afford us this banquet. The
Church is the place then where we must come to keep this feast. Now the
Prophet notes this mountain especially, in regard God was there worshipped,
and no where else: yea both these revelations, as also the Gospel came from
thence. Whereas he says this banquet shall be sumptuous and royally furnished,
it appertains to the praise of the doctrine of the Gospel; for it is a
spiritual food to nourish and refresh our souls, yea, so wholesome and
excellent, that we need seek no further.

Verse. 7. And he will destroy in this mountain the covering that covers all
people, and the veil that is spread over all nations.
THe interpreters also vary upon this place, for some by the word covering
understand the shame wherewith the faithful are so covered in this world, that
the glory of God seems not to shine in them: as if he should say, Albeit the
faithful be overwhelmed with many disgraces, yet the Lord will deliver them
from them all, and make their estate glorious. I let pass other expositions:
but the true meaning as I think is, that the Lord here promises to take away
that veil which held them in ignorance and blindness. These obscurities then
were scattered and driven away by the light of the Gospel. The light of the
Gospel scatters the darkness of ignorance.
Now he says that this shall be done in the mountain of Zion, whence the
light of the word in very deed shined thorowout the world, as we have seen
heretofore. Chap. 2.3.


This text then must be referred to the kingdom of Christ: Mal. 4.2. Christ
the Sun of righteousness.
for the light shined not upon all men till Christ the sun of righteousness
arose, who took away all vailes, couerings and wrappings. Here we have then
another commendation or praise of the Gospel, to wit, that all darkness shall
be dispersed by the light thereof, yea and all vailes of error shall be taken
from our eyes. Whence it follows that we are enwrapped and blinded with
darkness of ignorance till we be enlightened with the doctrine of the Gospel,
We remain in darkness and in the shadow of death till the light of the Gospel
shines upon us.
which only is of force to give both light and life, and perfectly to frame us
new. This place also confirms the calling of us Gentiles: for the Jews are
not only bidden to this banquet, but all nations, who before were overwhelmed
as it were in all manner of errors and superstitions.

Verse. 8. He will destroy death for ever: and the Lord will wipe away the
tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people will he take away out of
the earth: for the Lord has spoken it.
THe Prophet goes on still with the matter in hand, for in sum, he promises
that there shall be perfect felicity under the kingdom of Christ. And the
better to express it, he uses many figures very fitting and agreeable for his
present purpose. Wherein true happiness consists.
True felicity stands not in earthly nor transitory things, but in that
which can not be taken from us by death: for in the chiefest delights the
pleasure thereof is much diminished, because they can not last always. He
ioines two things together then which make happiness full and complete: first,
that a man may live ever (for glorious: for otherwise the woeful oppression of
the people which they endured might have seemed to contradict this prophecy.
Paul complains, that he and the chief pillars of the Church in his time were
gazing-stocks unto all the world sustaining all sorts of reproaches, being
esteemed no better then the ofscouring and refuse of the same. In what time, or
when are these things fulfilled then? These and the like promises must be
applied not only to the beginnings, but to the whole progress of Christ's
kingdom. Luke 21.28. Romans 8.23. Acts 3.21. Ephesians. 4.10. Psa. 126.5.
and I do expressly say to his whole Kingdom, because we must not only
consider the beginnings of it, but also the end and full accomplishment
thereof. So that we are to stretch these promises unto the second coming of
Christ; which for this cause is called the day of redemption; and of
restoration; in regard that those things which as now seem confused, shall
then be restored to full perfection, and shall put on a new form.

I grant that it appertained also to the deliverance from Babylon; but in as
much as that was but the beginning and entrance into this, it is certain that
this promise must be prolonged till the last day. Let us bend all our senses
and hopes unto that then, and we may be well assured that the Lord in the end
will perfect all things in us, after we have finished our course. Be it that we
now sow in tears, we shall then doubtless reap with joy and gladness. Let
us not fear the scorns nor threats of the mighty ones; for God uses this as
a means by which in the end he will bring us unto eternal glory. As we have
tasted the beginnings of this happiness, so must our hope hold ou till we see
the accomplishme^t thereof in the last day.
And seeing we have here already tasted the beginnings of this felicity and
happiness, as soon as God adopteth us, and that we begin to bear the image
of Christ; let us with constancy and patience wait the accomplishment thereof
till the last day.

But in regard the matter might seem incredible after so many horrible
calamities, Isaiah tells them that this proceeded not from God. For after the
Temple was that the Lord is the author of this my message: The word of the Lord
a solid foundation for our faith to rest upon.
in him therefore repose all your thoghts, and not upon me: rest your faith on
him, who never was, nor never will be found false of his word: Tit. 1.2.

Verse. 9. And in that day shall men say; Lo, this is our God: we have waited
for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him: we
will rejoice and be glad in his salvation.
ANd they shall say.] The verb is indefinit, and should be translated, He
shall say: but because he speaks of that which All, and not one or two, should
say: I had rather turn it, Men shall say. This is a very good conclusion,
seeing thereby they show that these benefits of God are not stinted nor scanted
to a few; but that men both receive and feel them by effect. His meaning is
then, that God prepares not this banquet (mentioned verse. 6.) in vain; in
regard men are satisfied therewith, and rejoice with an eternal joy. For this
gladsome voice which he foretells should be public, is a real sign and
testimony) as you would say) of Gods grace. This place ought to be diligently
observed of us; for the Prophet therein shows, that there shall be such a
manifestation, that it shall retain men's minds in the word of God, so as they
shall wholly rest in it, without any doubting at all.

But if these things appertain to Christ's Kingdom, as they do indeed, we
receive great fruit thereby. What? Christians have now that certain truth, in
which they may boldly rest; unless they forget themselves, and reject the
grace of God. For it is manifested unto all, and has taken from them all
occasion of doubting; so as they may safely boast, that they truly know what
his will is: yea, we may say, and that truly, as Jesus Christ said to the
woman of Samaria, We worship that which we know: John 4.22. Therefore, in as
much as we are assured by the Gospel, What use we are to make of this
certentie of truth, now revealed unto us in the Gospel.
of that grace which is offered us in Jesus Christ, we wander not any more in
uncertain conjectures, as many do, but we embrace God and his pure service;
so as we boldly bid adieu to all humane inventions.

The opposition also is to be noted between the little and obscure knowledge
which the Fathers had under the Law, and that fullness of knowledge which
shines now in the Gospel: for albeit God vouchsafed the people of old, the
light of his heavenly truth; yet it did appear more familiarly by Christ, as
it is said in the first of S. John, verse. 14.18. The Prophet therefore now
extols and sets forth that assured confidence which the only Son of God
revealing his Father, has brought unto us at his coming. Besides, as in this
behalf we have a much greater prerogative then the ancient people had, in
regard that the reconciliation made by Christ, sets the Lord more at one with
us: so God cannot be otherwise known but in Christ, God cannot be known but
in Christ
who is his lively image, and the engraven form of his substance: Heb. 1.3. He
that knows not the Son, Ioh. 14 7.
the same knows not the Father. Howsoever the Turks, Jews, and other
infidels boast, Turks and Jews not acknowledging God in Christ, worship their
own imaginations in stead of God.
that they worship God the Creator of heaven and earth; yet in so doing, they
worship naught but the device of their own brain. And albeit they be
obstinate, yet they follow nothing but uncertain and false opinions, in stead
of the truth: they grope in darkness, and worship their own imaginations in
stead of God. In a word, All religions out of Christ detestable.
all religion out of Christ is false and deceitful; all services are
detestable, and ought boldly to be condemned.

But it is not without cause that the Prophet uses these two words, Behold,
this is, etc. For therein he testifies, that God is surely present, and a
little after, in mentioning faith, Note also, that the Prophet doubles his
speech, This is our God, This is the Lord.
and assurance, he sets forth the constancy of those who worship God in
Christ. It is certain that we can not comprehend the Lord in his Majesty, for
he dwells in light which no man can attain unto, the which would certainly
ouerwhelme us, if we should presume to aspire thereunto. And therefore he
applies himself to our weakness, communicating himself unto us in Jesus
Christ, by whom he makes us partakers of his wisdom, righteousness, and all
other his benefits.

This is also an excellent point, for in calling Christ the God of the
faithful, he gives him the title of The eternal: whence we gather,

We have waited for him.] Now he expresses that constancy and perseverance
which those should have that have once embraced God in Christ: for this was not
to be a temporary knowledge, but such, as wherein we must steadfastly
persevere unto the end. Now Isaiah speaks in the person of the ancient Church
which then had her proper seat only among the Jews. And therefore contemning
all other gods which were worshipped in other places, he confidentlie affirms
that he only which was manifested unto Abraham, Genesis 15.1. Exodus 20.
and published in the Law by the ministry of Moses, is the true God: for other
nations which were plunged in darkness and ignorance waited not for him: in
regard that this waiting proceeds from faith, which is accompanied with
patience; and faith is never separate from the word. He admonishes the
faithful then that their salvation hangs upon expectation and hope, because the
promises of God were somewhat deferred till Christ's coming. Furthermore we
have also to consider what the condition of these times were, for it seemed
that Gods promise was either disanulled; or that he had rejected the posterity
of Abraham. Truly, howsoever they beheld the promise a far off, yet God did
in no sort reveal himself unto them at that time: it was needful therefore
that they should be endued with a wonderful patience, to sustain so heavy
afflictions and temptations. This is the cause why he commands them to wait
patiently for the coming of Christ, for then they should perfectly feel how
near the Lord is to the^ that serve him.

Now this very doctrine ought to quiet and calm our troubled spirits at this
day, to the end we may wait for the Lord with a sure and invincible hope;
although our salvation be yet hidden, and that we say of him when he seems to
be far off, Behold him. Let us learn also in the midst of the greatest
confusions, to discern him by this mark, This is the Lord. For the words
the^selu^s, although he speaks in the time past, to wit, We have reioiced, and
are glad, yet the words import a continual act: and a little before he spoke
in the time to come, He will save us. The sum is, that Christ will never
disappoint those that are his, of their hope, provided that they call upon him
with calm and quiet affections. Christ never disappoints his of their hope, if
with calm affections they call upon him.


Verse. 10. For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab
shall be threshed under him, even as straw is threshed in Or, in the dunghill.
Madmenah.
I Doubt not but the Prophets intent in the beginning of this verse is to
comfort the Jews: who wanting this, might have thought that God had utterly
forsaken and cast them off. For whereas some expound it of the affliction which
the Lord would bring upon the Jews, I see no reason of it at all. But it is
rather as if the Prophet should say, The Lord will always assist his Church. I
know well that the hand of the Lord is also said to rest upon the reprobate,
when without ceasing he continues to press them with his vengeance till he
have utterly overthrown them: but hand in this place is rather taken for
succor, then for corrections: for the verb, shall rest, signifies a perpetual
watch and defense.

Hence we gather a very profitable doctrine, to wit, A doctrine of singular
fruit.
that albeit God do shed forth infinite store of his benefits over all the
earth, so as the unbelievers themselves have their part of them, yet
notwithstanding his hand helps not continually, Gods continual help proper
only to his Church.
neither does it rest any where but upon his holy Mountain, that is to say,
upon his Church where he is served and worshipped. We are also to observe, that
Jerusalem was brought under the rod before she felt these graces: The Prophets
mingle consolatio^s with denuntiatio^s.
for before he denounced the judgments of God against her; and now he adds a
consolation thereunto.

In the second part of the verse he redoubles this mercy of God as it were.
Why? Because in correcting the enemies of his Church he testifies how dear and
precious the salvation thereof is unto him. The Jews had scarcely any greater
enemies unto them then the Moabites, as may be seen thorowout the books of
the Prophets; notwithstanding there was some alliance between them. Now under
the name of the Moabites he co^prehends all the enemies of ye Church, but
specially those with whom they had any affinity, which commonly prove the
worst of all. He shows then, that albeit for a time they played rex, and
oppressed the Church by tyranny, yet themselves at last should be brought
down. His purpose in this is to prevent the worst, lest the faithful should
be discouraged in adversity, thinking their case miserable whilst the wicked
every way triumphed over them: for the threshing whereof he here speaks,
shall follow soon after. If we therefore at this day see the Church of God
afflicted and troubled by those that in show have some acquaintance and league
with us, yea such as take upon them the name and title of the Church, yet let
us sustain and comfort our hearts by this promise.

Whereas we have turned the Hebrew word Madmena, a Dunghill; some take it to be
the name of a City; whereof Jeremiah makes mention, Chap. 48.2. But what if
we say, that the Prophet alludes to this City, which stood (as it is very
likely, in a fat and fertile soil, and that he thus gauls and presses the
Moabites the more? as if he should say; Even as straw is threshed in their
fields, so the Lord will thresh the Moabites. I reject not the other
interpretations; yet I see no inconvenience if we say, that he had respect to
the fruitfulness of the land in which this City stood. And in reading it so,
I have not feared to follow the common consent.

Verse. 11. And he shall stretch out his hand in the midst of them, (as he
that swimmeth stretches them out to swim) and with the strength of his
hands shall he bring down their pride.
NOw the Prophet both expounds and confirms the former sentence; yet it is by
way of another similitude: whereby he gives them to understand, that the Lord
will stretch out his hand into the very midst of Moabs Country, and will not
lightly touch some corners or out places thereof. Some expound this similitude
thus; Even as men stretch forth their arms in swimming, so the Lord will
chastise the Moabites on this side and on that.

Others think he speaks of inflicting manifold punishments upon them: as if
he should say; The Lord will not correct the Moabites once only, but will be
revenged on them the second, yea the third time, for the cruelty which they
exercised upon his children. But we may expound this similitude another way;
They that swim we know use not to cast themselves in violently, but they go
gently to work, and spread out their arms very softly; and yet in the mean
while, they cut and pass through the water: So the Lord will not often use his
greatest forces to confound the wicked, but will easily, without weapons or
great tumults, bring the^ to destruction, how valiant or well furnished soever
they seemed to be. This exposition of the similitude pleases me best, because
it does in nothing deprave the former sense, and gives us to understand, that
God oftentimes brings the wicked to nothing by his power, although he do not
ever and anon thunder from heaven in the sight of all the world. Whereas he
says, he will do this in the midst of it; he shows that there is no corner
so close, into which this vengeance of God shall not pierce.

Verse. 12. The defense also of the height of thy walls shall he bring down
and lay low, and cast them to the ground, even to the dust.
NOw he directs his speech against the Country of Moab. Moab was well
fortified and swelled with pride, in regard of their walls and bulwarks:
therefore he says, that the high towers, and other strong and impregnable
places should serve them to no purpose. They of old used another kind of
fortification then we do now at this day, as is well known. It is not without
cause that he here uses three words for the better expressing of his own
meaning; to wit, I will bring down, lay low, and cast to the ground: for it
was needful that this pride of the Moabites wherewith they were puffed up,
should be beaten down, because they were become intolerable; as we have
seen in the 15. Chapter, verse. 6. The Prophet then derides them: as if he
should say; Oh, it seems the Lord cannot bring down this height of yours, in
which you so much glory. The particle, To the dust, is as much as if he had
said; He will not only race to the ground, but will bring it to dust, that
there shall not remain so much as any mention of the old ruins. This place
contains in it therefore an excellent and very apt consolation: A consolation.
for our enemies at this day are so bold, that they despise not men alone, but
even God himself: they are so proud, and so puffed up in regard of their
power, that they think themselves invincible. But it is our parts to oppose
this sentence of the Prophet against them and all their forces and munitions;
to wit, the Lord will easily bring all these things to naught. Let Patience
have her perfect work.
In the mean while, we must patiently bear the hurt that comes unto us by
reason of their power and strength, until the certain and prefixed time of
their ruin approaches.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: We have a
strong City, salvation shall God set for the walls and bulwarks.
THe Prophet begins again in this place to show, that God will hold the people
in his protection, after their return out of captivity, and that Jerusalem
shall be insafetie under his custody, no less then if it were compassed about
with fortresses, tamparts, ditches, and double walls; so as the enemies should
enter no ways to hurt it. But the time is to be noted when this song was
published. The Prophet had foretold what calamities should fall upon the
Church, which as yet were nothing near, but came to pass after his death.
Doubtless the people might have despaired in their captivity, if these
promises had not vpheld them. To the end the Jews then might have some
assurance of their deliverance, and in the midst of death might epsy life
approaching: the Prophet composed this song before the troubles happened: why?
that they might learn betimes to bear their miseries patiently, and to hope
for better things. For it was not penned only (as I think) for a thanksgiving
which the Jews should sing after their deliverance; but also that in their
captivity it self, they might confirm their hearts with confidence of future
comfort, and might teach their children to hope for it, leaving these promises
as it were from hand to hand, to their posterity, although for the present
they seemed but dead men.

We have told you in the 5. Chapter, why the Prophet composed these and the
like songs in verse; to wit, that every one might the better remember them by
daily recording of them. Although they wept then in Babylon, and were almost
overwhelmed with sorrow, as these words show, How shall we sing the Lords song
in a strange land? Psalm. 137.4.
yet they were to hope, that after their return into Judea, they should give
thanks to the Lord, and sing forth his praises. The Prophet therefore shows
them their deliverance a far off, that they might cheerfully wait for it.

A strong City.] By these words the Prophet promises an ample and full
restoration of Jerusalem, and of the people. How so? God will not only
redeem the captives, and gather together the dispersed, but he will also keep
them safe and sound, after he has brought them home. But the faithful
notwithstanding forthwith saw the destruction both of the City and Temple: 2.
Kin. 25.9. 2. Chr. 36.19. Chap. 22.
and being come home, they could perceive nothing but those fearful ruins
which Isaiah had foretold. It was needful then that they should behold this
restoration of Jerusalem by the eye of faith, as from an high beacon or turret.

Now after these things, the Prophet shows what the strength of this City
shall be; namely, The protection of God shall be in stead of walls, towers,
ditches, and forts: as if he should say; Let other Cities trust in their
defenses; God only shall be the best defense that we can imagine. I reject not
their advice who say we should read; He has set walls and bulwarks for
salvation: but in regard the Prophets words being simply understood, contain
in them a more ample and stable doctrine, what need is there to wrest in a
constrained exposition, when the true and natural sense runs very well; to
wit, that Gods protection is more sufficient then all defenses? according as it
is said, Psalm. 63. Thy goodness, Lord, is better then life: for as David there
confesses, that he rests in greater seuritie under the shadow of Gods wings,
then if he were furnished with all the succors the world could afford him: so
in like manner Isaiah says in this place, that there shall be just occasion
of security, when God shall undertake the safeguard of his people.

Now in as much as this promise extends it self to the whole course of our
redemption, we must here observe also, that he is at this day the protector of
his Church: and that his defense therefore who keeps it, is stronger then if
it were compassed about with humane helps. Gods sole protection of his Church,
stronger the^ all humane helps.
If we therefore mean to rest safely, let us dwell in the Church. And albeit
we be destituted of outward munitions, yet let us content our selves with the
Lord and his undoubted salvation, which is far more excellent then all
worldly fortresses.

Verse. 2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation that keeps the
truth, may enter in.
NO doubt but many despised this song when Isaiah first published it: for in
his time Jerusalem was full of bad companions, and the number of the godly were
very few. But after the Prophets death, they were chastised for their impiety;
for then they had some inckling that the Prophet had not foretold these things
in vain. For whilst the wicked are in prosperity, they fear nothing, and
bear themselves in hand, that they cannot be tamed. And thus the Jews thought
they could never be driven out of Judea, nor led captives: nay, they imagined
they should dwell there ever. It was needful therefore that all occasion of
swelling pride should be taken away from them: hereunto tend the Prophets
words, when he says, that the inhabitants of the new City shall be unlike the
first: for they shall be faithful and just.

Moreover, this promise might have seemed ridiculous; because those which were
banished and led into captivity, had no matter at all to rejoice of. Therefore
after the destruction of the Temple and the City, and the overthrow of all
estates, they might object, where are those gates which he commands us to open?
or where are those people that should enter in at them? And yet
notwithstanding, God is always as good as his word, howsoever our passions
boil within us. What course we are to take when the Church is in a confused
state. Chap. 25.1.
we see these things came to pass; neither was there any thing foretold, which
the Lord did not perform and accomplish. We ought therefore to set these
ancient histories before our eyes, to arm our selves with the examples
contained in them, and in the midst of this confused estate in which we now
see the Church to be, to hope notwithstanding that the Lord will restore it.

When the Prophet mentions the just nation that keeps the truth; he not
only shows (as I have said heretofore) who they are to whom this promise
appertains; but therewithal, the fruit of that should come by this
chastisement: for the Church being once purged from her filthinesses, her
righteousness and holiness should shine so much the more right. For when the
Prophet wrote this song, the wicked reigned, and the good were very thin
sown, and those also were mingled amongst the multitude, as the wheat in the
chafe. It was needful therefore that this great troop, who had neither
religion nor any fear of God should be cut off: to the end the Lord might
gather in the remnant of his Church. See now how the Lord recompensed this
ruin of Jerusalem. For whereas her citizens were before defiled with impiety,
now they were consecrated anew unto God; else it had been to little purpose for
them to have recovered a flourishing outward estate, if newnes of life, piety
and vprightnes had not also flourished amongst them. Now as the Prophet in these
words sets forth the grace of God, so he also exhorts these redeemed people
therewithal to give themselves to integrity of life. In a word, he testifies
that these promises shall stand hypocrites in no stead, for the gates shall not
be set open for them, but only for the just and holy.

I grant the Church has always been like the corne-floore, The Church has
always been like the corn floor. Math. 3.12.
wherein there is chafe mingled amongst the good corn, or rather the wheat is
covered with chafe: yet it is not to be doubted but the Church was purged in
better measure then it was before, when the Jews returned home out of
captivity. For it could not be but those which came back again were led with
a good and zealous affection

Some distinguish this sentence thus, The just nation before God, and the
upright before men. But I take it more simply, to wit; After the Prophet has
mentioned the righteous nation, he by and by shows that this justice consists
in the integrity of that heart which is without fraud or guile: for nothing is
more contrary to justice then hypocrisy. Now albeit the man can not be found
who has so well profited as to keep justice in every respect perfectly, yet
we may say that Gods children, who aspire unto this vprightnes with their whole
hearts, are notwithstanding keepers of it. They that aspire to vprightnes of
heart are keepers of justice.
Unless any had rather understand it thus, that true justice is here set forth
under one of the parts by the figure Synecdoche, to wit, when men walk simply
and plainly one with another, having first of all abandoned all naughty* and
wicked practices.

Citizens he meant to have in his Church; for of wolfes he can make lambs, as
we have seen in the 11. Chapter. But whilst we live in this world, we are
always far off from that perfection which God requires, and therefore we
ought daily to aim still unto it: but the Lord esteems us only according to
that good work which he has begun in us, The Lord accounts of us according to
that which himself has wrought in us.
and accounts us just after he has once brought us into the paths of justice.
For when he has begun to correct and change our hypocrisy, he does
therewithal call us faithful and upright.

Verse. 3. Or, It is an assured thought: thou will keep peace, peace I say, for
they trusted in thee.
By an assured purpose thou will preserve perfect peace, because they trusted in
thee.
BEcause the Hebrew word Ieiser signifies a thing made, created, or a thought,
some translate thus, Thou will keep peace with an assured foundation: as if
the Prophet meant, that those who continue constant in the tempests of this
world, because they rest upon God, shall always continue in safety. Others
turn it, Thou will keep peace by an assured purpose, which comes almost to
the same sense, to wit, that those who have fixed their hearts upon God alone
shall be happy and blessed at the last. For God promises not to be the
protector of his Saints further then they quietly rest upon his good
pleasure, without wavering. But because the Prophet in one word says, It is a
stable or steadfast decree, let the readers consider, if this be not more fitly
applied unto God: so as the sense will be, The peace of the Church is built
upon the eternal and immutable counsel of God. For the very principal point
is, that the faithful stay themselves upon this heavenly decree, lest they
should be shaken by so many changes as daily fall out in the world.

It is sure that we ought always to hope steadfastly in God, to the end we
may evermore feel his faithfulness in keeping us: it is requisite also that the
faithful be never turned aside for any doubtful or perplexed accident, but
ought to stick close to God only: notwithstanding the fittest sense, and that
which agrees best with the Prophets words is, that God has purposed by an
assured and immutable decree that all those which hope in him shall enjoy
everlasting peace. For if this steadfast purpose should be taken for the settled
constancy of the faithful, it were in vain for the Prophet to add that
reason to his speech which follows, for they trusted in thee. Again, both
kinds of speech would be improper, to say that a continual peace should be
forethought of in the conceit. But this agrees very well, that God will never
deceive us of our hope when we trust in him: Why? Because he has decreed to
keep us for ever. Wence it follows, that seeing the Church depends not upon
the brittle estate of the world, it is not therefore shaken nor tossed up and
down by the sundry changes which fall out every day; but is stayed upon a
rock firm and immovable: to wit, the constant decree of God; so as it can
never be moved.

And thus, as I take it, here is a close opposition between the settled purpose
of God, and our unsettled and wavering thoughts: A close opposition between
Gods settled purpose, and our wavering thoghts
for it happens ever and anon, that any new assault drives our thoughts hither
and thither; yea there is not the least change which brings not his doubtings
with it. It is good therefore we should hold this principle; to wit, that we
do amiss to measure Gods immutable counsel by our tottering devices: for it
is said, as we shall see Chap. 55. That as far as the heavens are higher then
the earth, so much higher are my thoughts from yours, O ye house of Israel,
says the Lord. First then, let us hold this for certain, that our salvation
is not subject to change; because the counsel of God remains sure. Our
salvation not subject to change, because the counsel of God remains sure.
Therefore it is the Prophet repeates it, Thou will keep peace, peace I say:
thereby showing, that it shall continue and last for ever. Now by the word
peace, he not only means peace of conscience, By peace, is meant both inward
and outward felicity.
but all kind of felicity: as if he should say; Gods grace alone shall
suffice to maintain you in all happiness and prosperity.

Verse. 4. Trust in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord God is strength for
evermore.
SOme read the second member of the verse; Hope in the strong God, Lord of the
worlds: but in regard the word Tsur, is not always put for an epithet, but
signifies Strength, I reject that exposition, because it is constrained;
neither suits it to the matter in hand, as we shall see anon. There is also as
little steadfastness in their curiosity, who from hence would prove the
Divinity of Christ: as if the Prophet should say; The Lord Jehovah is in the
Lord Iah. For Isaiah has put the name of God twice, only to amplify his
power. He therefore exhorts the people to repose themselves upon God: first
then he laid down doctrine; and in this verse he comes to exhortation.
Doctrine laid down in the 3. verse. in this he comes to exhortation. Doctrine
and exhortation must go together.
For it were in vain to tell us our peace is in the hand of God, and that he
will faithfully keep it, unless after such instructions and doctrines, we
were stirred up and provoked to have our parts therein by exhortations.

Now he not only wills us to hope, but to persevere in it: this sentence
therefore belongs properly to the faithful, who have already learned what it
is to hope in God. And yet they have need to be daily confirmed, because they
are weak, and ready oftentimes to slip, according to the sundry occasions of
distrust with which they have to fight.

He commands us not barely to trust in the Lord then, but that we persevere
constantly in hope and assurance for ever. The reason which he adds likewise
is to be noted; to wit, that as Gods power, We must not only trust, but it
must continue for ever. Our faith ought to answer Gods power.
which is the object of faith, indures for ever; so our faith should still
look to this perpetuity. For when the Prophet speaks of the power and
strength of God, he means not any idle power, but such as is effectual and
operative: showing and manifesting it self really in us, following and
bringing to a good end that which it has begun. We must always fix the eyes
of our faith upon Gods nature.
And yet this doctrine has a further scope; to wit, it teaches us at all
times to consider the nature of God. For as soon as we do but turn our eyes
in the least measure aside, we can see nothing but that which is earthly and
vanishing: and must we not then be forthwith out of heart? Faith therefore
ought to surmount the world with continual increases: why? because the truth,
justice, and goodness of God is not temporal and vanishing, but God always
continues like himself.

Verse. 5. For he will bring down them that dwell on high: the high City will
he abase; even unto the ground will he cast it down, and bring it unto dust.

6. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps
of the needy.


NOw he more fully shows what this power of God is, whereof he spoke; to wit,
even that whereof we shall have experience, and that for our good. These two
sentences then depend one upon another thus; to wit, That the proud are cast
down by the power of God, who stablisheth the humble and those that are
despised, in their stead. For whereas in the first place he teaches that the
proud shall be brought down: Verse. 5.
it would not suffice for giving a full and perfect consolation, unless he had
also added, Verse. 6.
that the poor and humble should be exalted to have the dominion over them.
This we know by experience, that God is wont to work powerfully for our
salvation; and this gives us matter and occasion of good hope.

By the high places, he means all manner of munitions and defenses, (for in
old time they were wont to build Cities in high places) as also their glory
and riches. His meaning is then, that there shall be no fortress so strong,
which shall let God to abase and bring down the wicked. Towers and Castles are
not displeasing unto God in themselves; but because it often falls out, that
the strong and mighty brag and glory in them: therefore this dwelling on high,
is often taken for pride it self. Now it is not to be doubted but he speaks
here of the wicked, who with their forces, wealth, and treasures, think
themselves able to make their party good against God. Chap. 13.1.
He also comforts the Jews (as we have said) in regard they might be
terrified and despair in themselves, by seeing Babylons power to be
invincible, unless God had vpheld them by this particular promise. As if he
should have said; You need not fear either the greatness or power of the
Babylonians: why? for it shall easily be brought down, and shall not be
able to resist the power of the most high.

Verse. 7. Or, vprightnesses are the path of the just.
The way of the just is righteousness: thou will make equal the righteous path
of the just.
HE praises not the justice of the faithful here, as some have falsely
imagined: but only teaches that God by his singular blessing will give them an
happy and prosperous success thorowout the whole course of their lives. But
because in the beginning of the verse he had said only in a word, That the way
of the just is plain and equal: in the second part he expounds himself more
clearly; attributing it unto the grace of God that they persevere thus in
their good course unto the end, even as it were through a smooth and plain
field. For in the verb, to make equal, there is a similitude, namely, that God
will poise as with just and equal weights and balance those things which in
themselves were very unequal.

There is some ambiguitie in the Hebrew word Iashar, because it may be
attributed as well to God, as to the way. Some therefore translate, Thou which
art just wilt make the way of the righteous equal: and God is thus called in
other places. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 25.8.9.
The allusion also would be very fitting to say, that the vprightnesses of
which he speaks proceed from God, in regard that he only is upright or just:
notwithstanding the other reading seems less constreined.

In sum, the Prophet promises that God will have care of the just, and that
in such wise, as he will lead them by the hand. For we often think that all
things run confusedly together here below whilst the ungodly are at their
ease, and the good in the mean time are oppressed. Yea and albeit the holy
Scripture teaches, and so often confirms it unto us that God has care of his
Church, yet notwithstanding it is an hard matter to keep our thoughts steadie,
but we by and by waver when we see all things which the wicked take in hand to
prosper. And yet it is most certain that God by his balance poiseth the ways
of the just how uneven or ragged soever the same seem to be: yea, he has
given his Angels charge to keep those that are his, that they should not
stumble or hurt their foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.11. otherwise there is not
the least offense which would not easily overthrow them and make them quail:
much less should they be able to pass through so many briars and thorns; such
crooked by-waies; dangerous gulphs, and streit passages, unless the Lord
should draw them out, and in the end deliver them.

Let us therefore learn to commend our safety into the hands of God, and to
follow him for our guide: and in thus doing we shall be well directed; yea we
shall always escape, although we were environed on every side with ambushes,
the cunning devices and the innumerable dangerous plots either of Satan, or the
wicked which are his instruments. And have not we sufficient proof of that
which the Prophet here says? Are not our ways made plain and smooth in the
midst of the deepest gulphs, so as our course can not be stopped nor slacked by
any hindrances whatsoever? Truly experience it self teaches, Our help stands
only in the name of God.
that if we were not conducted and governed by Gods hand, it were but in vain
for us to attempt to walk through such unknown passages: for alas such is our
weakness, that we would stumble at the least stone we should meet withal in
the way. Satan and the wicked on the other side would not only entangle and
entrap us in many of their nets; neither would they think it sufficient to
cast some small stumbling blocks in our way: but one while they would drive us
upon the rocks, another while into bottomless depths of miseries, out of which
the whole world with all the power it has could by no means escape.

Let us acknowledge then how necessary it is for us to look for our direction
from heaven: yea, let us confess with Jeremiah, O Lord, I know that the way of
man is not in himself: and that it is not in man to walk, nor direct his own
steps, Iere. 10.23. Let us not be puffed up then with vain confidences as if
we had the events of things at our beck. Neither let us boast that we will do
this or that, Iam. 4.13. Prou. 16.1.
like those rash heads who think themselves able to accomplish all their lusts:
for if we have not so much power as to move our tongues to give an answer;
much less can we of our selves bring greater enterprises to pass. It is in
vain for men then to purpose, determine, and to dispose of their ways,
unless God guide them by his hand.

But this his hand he reaches forth to the just, and of them he has a
special care. To whom God reaches his directing hand.
For if so be the providence of God extends it self generally over all
creatures; and that he prouides for the necessities of the young Ravens,
Sparrowes, and the least worm that creepes upon the ground: much more has he
a fatherly care of the faithful to deliver them out of the dangers and
streits into which they are plunged.

Verse. 8. Also we O Lord have waited for thee in the way of thy judgments: the
desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
THis verse conteines a most excellent doctrine, without which the former
things might seem to have been spoken in vain: for the Prophet having said
that God will be our leader all our lives long, so as we shall never err nor
stumble; and yet in the mean while we see our selves brought into so many
extremities, that in our judgments all these promises are merely vain: when
(I say) he thus exercises our patience, it stands us upon to wrestle
manfully, and yet to hope in him notwithstanding. Of this the Prophet here
gives us warning, namely, that although we always see not this smooth and
goodly plain; and that the way is not made so even under our feet but that we
must press through many streits, yet must we still give place unto hope and
patience. Though Gods promised assistance comes not when we would, yet must we
still give way unto hope and patience.


By the way of the judgments, he means adversities: for so this word is often
taken in A note to discern true Christians from hypocrites.
for whilst hypocrites enjoy all things at their desire, they bless God, and
highly extol him; but in adversity, they murmr and blaspheme him; thereby
plainly showing, that they never trusted in him at all; and therefore they
serve God no longer then he Also, therefore has great weight in it; for it is
as much as if the Prophet had said, The faithful serve God cheerfully, not
only when he uses them gently, but even then also, when he deals roughly
with them: neither faint they utterly, because they are sustained by hope.
Wherein co^sists the true trial of sound godliness then? Truly in this, that
we trust in God, not only when he filles us abundantly with his benefits, A
trial of a sound heart.
but then also when he withdrawes the light of his countenance; yea, when he
afflicts us, and shows us nothing but the signs of his wrath and heavy
displeasure.

Let us learn therefore to apply this doctrine to our use, as often as the
calamities of this present life do press us: and let us not cease to hope in
him, although all things seem utterly desperate. If he should kill me (says
Job) yet would I trust in him: Job 13.17. And David protests, that he will not
fear, though he should walk through the valley of the shadow of death. Why so?
because he knew that God was with him: Psalm. 23.4.

In thy name.] In these words the Prophet meant to show from whence this
magnanimity of mind in the faithful proceeds; which suffers them neither to
faint nor to fall under the greatest assaults: surely it is in respect that
being loosed from those profane desires, wherein the wicked are entangled, they
even in their greatest distresses wherewith they are compassed about, have
freedom and liberty of spirit to send forth their groans and cries boldly
into the presence of God. Naturally I confess our desires are disordered, and
the cares of this life do as it were glue us to the earth; our thoughts float
up and down, or else are so besotted, that they cannot freely aspire unto God.
The essence of God in like manner is hidden from us, whereby we wax the more
slow and dull in seeking of him. For these respects therefore the Prophet
brings us back from this hidden and incomprehensible essence of God, to his
name. As if he should say; Content your selves with that manifestation of him
which you find in his word: for there he sets before us as much as is
expedient; to wit, his justice, wisdom, and goodness; yea and his very self
also.

It is not without cause also that he adds this word remembrance: for thereby
he shows, that the first apprehension or thought of Gods name suffices not;
but that we ought to meditate thereon continually; because without this help,
all light of doctrine Meditation a special help to maintain
would by and by vanish. For the truth is, the light of true doctrine.
the right and sound knowledge of God must needs inflame our hearts with a
desire after him: yea, more then that, it prouokes us to an insatiable thirst
after profiting, Knowledge and meditation must go together.
even as often as we remember him. The knowledge of God then goes before: and in
the second place we ought to exercise our selves much in the meditation of it:
for it is not enough once to

Verse. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit
within me will I seek thee in the morning: for seeing thy judgments are in
the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness.
SEe yet a more ample exposition of the former sentence: for before, speaking
in the person of all the faithful, he said, that the desire of their souls
was to the name of God: but now he brings in himself speaking; My soul has
desired thee, says he. As if he should say; All the powers of my soul are
busied in seeking of thee and thy name.

The word Nephesh, is often taken for the vital spirit: but because the
Prophet uses two sundry words here, I so distinguish them, How soul and
spirit is taken here. The understanding and will, two principal parts of man's
soul.
as that the soul shall signify the desire and the will; and the spirit, the
intellectiue part. For we know that the understanding and will, are the two
principal parts of man's soul: and God will have both of them; as good reason
is he should. And hereunto appertains that Commandment, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength: Matthew. 22.37. The Prophet teaches then, that all the faculties of
his soul were bent, and led him to seek and desire the Lord.

Others take this word spirit, for the regenerate part: and thus by the soul,
they understand the natural man; and by the spirit, the grace of God, which is
supernatural. But this cannot stand: for the natural man never seeks unto
God; yea, and we know by experience what strife we have in our selves when we
aspire unto God; as also with what great difficulty we wind our selves out of
this repugnancie. This interpretation then needs no long refutation, seeing it
manifestly crosses the very text of holy Scripture. Moreover, it sufficiently
appears by many places, that these words, Spirit and Soul, import as much as
understanding and heart.

By night, the holy Ghost often means adversities; which are compared unto
darkness: and obscurity. But in this place I expound it a little otherwise: In
what sense the word night is taken in this place.
as if the Prophet should say; There is no time so unfitting and inconvenient,
which I take not to call upon thee, and to seek unto thee. This exposition
differs not much from the first, yet it is somewhat more general: for the
night seems to be ordained for rest, in which all the desires and travels of
men cease; Where is the practice of this duty become in these days? See Psalm.
119.55. and 62.
so as there is little difference between sleep and death. But when it was
time to take rest and to be quiet, then the Prophet says, he awaked to seek
GOD, so as no occasion could hinder him from it.

The meaning whereof is not as if those which sleep can have any settled or
stable thoughts: but sleep it self being a part of our course whilst we seek
God, though we lie as in a trance without uttering any word, yet then we may be
said to praise him by faith and hope. But the Prophet speaks not of sleep
here properly, but rather by way of similitude, as it further appears
plainly by the member following, where the morning is opposed to the night:
and thus he notes out a continual course.

In the next place we are to consider of the reason which he yields of his so
doing when he says, that the Inhabitants of the earth shall learn
righteousness by the judgments of God: signifying thereby that men are
instructed and taught to fear God by his rods wherewith he smites them. For in
prosperity they forget him, Psalm. 73.
so as their eyes stand out for fatnes: they rejoice and keep a coil, and can
not abide to be brought into any good order. The Lord therefore is feign to
repress their pride, and to teach them how to bow under his hand. Lastly the
Prop^et here confesses that himself and the rest of the faithful were
prepared by the corrections of the Almighty to kiss the rod, and to submit
themselves to his government; and to put themselves under his protection: for
unless the Lord maintain his own right and authority over us with an
outstretched arm, none of us all will willingly frame our minds aright to do
him service.

Verse. 10. Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn
righteousness: in the land of vprightnes he will do wickedlie, and will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord.
THe Prophet opposes this sentence to the former: for he had said that when
the faithful are afflicted, or see others in the like case, that they cease
not for all that to rest in the assurance of Gods favor, and to hope
constantly in his help. Now on the contrary he says that ye wicked can not
be brought to love God, albeit he labor to draw and knit them unto him by all
sorts of his benefits: nay rather they become the worse, although he show
himself most gracious toward them. It may seem then at the first blush that
this verse should be contrary to the former: for it was there said that the
justice of God is known upon earth, even then whilst he himself shows that
he is Judge of the world, and executes vengeance upon the iniquities of men.
The wicked are bettered neither by corrections nor benefits.
But here he says, that the wicked can not be allured nor drawn by any means
to serve God: and so far is it off that they are any thing the better for the
stripes which they receive, that they wax worse and worse, and that whilst he
lades the^ daily with his benefits: for it is out of controversy that all make
not a right use of afflictions. Exodus 7.13.
What use I pray you made Pharaoh of the plagues wherewith God smote him? did
not the blows which he felt make his heart the more hard?

But howsoever he spoke generally of the inhabitants of the earth before, yet
he only and properly meant Gods elect. I deny not but this benefit redounds
sometime to hypocrites also, to wit, that they are now and then touched with
the feeling of Gods Majesty: yea and they are often restrained from breaking
out even for fear of the whip. Notwithstanding because the Prophet here
describes the fruits of true repentance, it must needs be that he should only
mean the children of God when he speaks of the inhabitants of the earth.

Now some read this verse by an interrogation thus, Shall the wicked obtain
favor? or, Wherefore should the wicked obtain favor? As if the Prophet meant
to say, that they were unworthy to taste of Gods mercy. But for mine own
part I rather think that the wicked will never be taught to do well, albeit
God should allure them thereunto by pouring out all his benefits upon them. The
Prophet therefore here restraines that which he said before in general terms.
And when he says that they do wickedlie in the land of vprightnes, he therein
further amplifies the unworthiness of this ingratitude. It was enough and too
much that they had already abused Gods benefits, and made themselves more
obstinate thereby: but they made their sin above measure sinful when they
dealt thus wickedlie in the land which God had hallowed. Now he speaks only of
Judea; albeit we may also apply it to other Countries wherein God is now
worshipped: But at that time Isaiah could give this title to none other,
because there was no knowledge of God but in Judea. For this cause he calls
Judea the land of vprightnes: and thus I interpret it, because the Prophet
uses the word Necochoth, which is of the femenin gender, and can no way be
referred to men.

This land was adorned with this title in regard How far this land of
vprightnes may now be said to extend it self.
the land of vprightnes therefore is wheresoever his name is called upon: and
thus we deserve a double condemnation if we yield not testimonies of true
thankfulness by giving our selves to piety and good works when God p^ouokes us
thereunto by so many of his benefits.

Where he adds, that the reprobates shall see the majesty of God; it is not
to lessen the fault, but rather to augment and increase it: for it is a foolish
and wicked ingratitude in men to be careless of Gods glory, which plainly
shines before their eyes. The wicked then are no way excusable: for although
God proclaim his name diverse ways; yet in this so clear a sunshine they see
nothing. Questionless there want not evident signs at all times by which the
Lord manifests both his glory and greatness: but their number is very small
who take it to heart, as we have seen before, Chap. 5.19.

The Lord not only sets forth his majesty and glory by his ordinary works
in nature, but also by certain signs and worthy documents, wherein he fully
instructs us as touching his justice, wisdom, and goodness. The wicked shut
their eyes at it, and perceive it not, albeit they be very quick and sharp
sighted in other matters. This frowardness and peruersitie the Prophet now
reproues. Others think he threatens the reprobates here, as if they were
unworthy to behold the works of God. Which although it be true, yet seeing
this member is joined to the rest, the Prophet still reproues the sottishness
of those, who are so far off from making benefit of the works of God, that
rather they become the more senseless by them. For which cause it should not
seem strange unto us at this day, if there be few which come to repentance,
albeit Gods justice manifests it self so diversely: for infidelity is always
blind, when it should behold the works of God. Infidelity always blind when
it should behold the works of God.


Verse. 11. O Lord, they will not behold thine high hand: but they shall see it,
and be confounded with the zeal of thy people; and the fire of thine enemies
shall devour them.
THis is an exposition of the former sentence: for he enters into no new
discourse, but expounds that at large, which he had said before in few words.
He said in the other verse, that the wicked would not behold the majesty of
the Lord: now he shows that this magnificence of the Lord is the same which
appears in his works. For the Prophet sends us not to the hidden majesty of
God, which we cannot behold with our eyes; but brings us to his works, which
he here represents by a figure, under this word hand. Well, he accuses the
wicked once again, showing that they have nothing to allege for their
defense; neither can they cover themselves under any pretense of ignorance: for
albeit they were stark blind, yet was the hand of God made manifest enough; so
as nothing could hinder them from seeing of it, but their own gross
unthankfulness, or rather wilful sottishness. For many have skill enough to
plead ignorance, affirming that they perceive not these works: but he tells
such, that God, hand is stretched forth; not only in such wise that it may be
discerned of a small number, but also far and near.

They shall see it and be confounded.] He makes it very apparent, that this
beholding is not the same whereof he spoke before, when he said, that the
wicked saw not the majesty of the Lord: for they saw it well enough, but they
regarded it not. Notwithstanding, at the last they shall see it, although too
late, and to their great disadvantage. For having a long time abused the
patience of God, in showing themselves obstinate and rebellious, God may well
suffer the wicked to take their swinge for a while, but in the end he paies
them home. Heb. 12.17.
they shall be constrained in the end to take knowledge of his judgments. Thus
albeit Caine, Esau, and the like (who repented their sins too late) fled from
Gods presence, yet in despite of their teeth they were made both to see and
feel that he was their Judge: Genesis 4.13. and 27.38.

Thus he often draws some remorse as it were even from those that despise him,
to the end he might cause his power to shine clearly: but such apprehensions
bring them no profit at all. The Prophet then so threatens the wicked, whose
blindness he has rebuked, that he therewithal takes from them all pretext
of ignorance; plainly telling them, that the time shall come, wherein they
shall know with whom they have to do, and shall then well perceive that this
majesty and high hand of God which they rejected and made light of, ought not
in any sort to be contemned. For they ouerflow in all riot and dissolution
with their eyes shut, they flout and mock, thinking God will never call them
to judgment: yea, which more is, the miseries and afflictions of the
faithful, are things wherein they take great delight. Thus they look upon us
with disdain, as if they were out of all danger, hardening their hearts more
and more: but in the end, they shall know that the servants of God have not
served him in vain. Now that he might the better show that this beholding of
God, should not only be unprofitable, but also hurtful to the wicked, he
says, that they shall be confounded, when they shall see the blessing of God
upon his people, wherein they shall have neither part nor portion.

In the next place he further augments the sharpness of the punishment, in
regard that these ungodly ones shall not only be consumed with envy, when
they shall see the children of God delivered from these miseries, and exalted
into glory; but they shall also be stricken with no less an evil, to wit, the
fire of the enemies shall devour them. The zeal of the people then in this
place, signifies the indignation wherewith the reprobates shall be inflamed
when they shall compare the condition of the faithful with theirs.

He calls that the fire of the enemies wherewith God consumes his
adversaries; taking this word fire, for Gods vengeance: for it must not be
taken here for that visible fire wherewith things are consumed in this world;
neither yet for lightning only; but by a figure it is taken for a cruel
torment: for so by this word the holy Ghost is wont often to note out the
extreme wrath of the Lord. Yet I deny not but the Prophet alludes to the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorah. Genesis 19.24. Deus. 32.22 Job 20.26. and 22.20.


Verse. 12. Lord unto us thou will ordain peace: for thou also have wrought all
our works for us.
THis tends to the consolation of the faithful. As if he should say; We see
what will fall upon the heads of the wicked, for thou will cast them out of the
company of thy children, and wilt consume them with fire as thine enemies: but
we shall have an happy and blessed estate. The verb Shaphat, which signifies to
Ordain among the Hebrews, is as much to say, as to Establish: as if he should
say; Thou will hold and preserve us in peace continually. The wicked indeed
enjoy a kind of peace, but it lasts not long: our peace is seated and
established in the Lord, and has such a foundation as shall endure for ever.
Now by the word peace, he means a settled and lasting felicity. Hence let us
conclude then, that the children of God which trust in him, are fully blessed:
for the life of the wicked is more then miserable, albeit it be soaked in much
deliciousness and pleasures, as those that have all things at their wish.
There is no assured nor stable peace then, but in the fatherly love of our God.

By works, he means all the good which God does to his chosen: as if he
should say; All our affairs and actions: all things which we use for our
benefit in this world, in a word whatsoever, we put our hands unto. Those then
who have alleged this place, to overthrow the doctrine of free will, did not
well understand the Prophets meaning. I grant it is God only that works,
whatsoever is good in us; so as all our uprightness proceeds only from his
Spirit: but the Prophet meant simply to teach here, that we receive all the
good things which we enjoy, only from the hand of God; He that has begun a
good work in us, will perfect it unto the end. Phil. 1.6.
and thence concludes, that this favor shall never cease, till we be come to
full and perfect happiness.

Moreover, seeing God is author of all blessings, we ought especially to be
mindful of those which are chief and principal: for if we ought to
acknowledge that the things which serve for our maintenance in this life, are
the gifts of God; much more ought we so to do in things appertaining to the
salvation of the soul. If so be then we owe thankfulness for his liberality
in small things, how much more should we acknowledge his goodness in things
that are high and excellent? But what need have we to object this text against
the Papists, to refute their doctrine of free will, seeing they may be easily
answered by other places: yea, we have infinite testimonies beside^ which are
much more evident.

Thus it seems then that the Prophet stirs up the peoples minds to
thankfulness: for he commands them so to admire the goodness of God in his
benefits, that they confess all things they have to be his gift. We have here
then a very fruitful doctrine; to wit, Benefits received of God in times past,
ought to encourage us to hope for the like in time to come
that the faithful are to conceive an assured hope of Gods goodness for the
time to come, by considering what benefits they have received from him in times
past; and thence to conclude, that he will undoubtedly have care over them
hereafter. Have we then at any time had experience of Gods mercy toward us?
Let us learn to trust in him for ever: and seeing it has pleased him to show
himself so bountiful and ready to do us good, let us boldly and constantly
settle our hearts in this truth; to wit, that he will never fail us.

All the faithful have done thus; and this way have they confirmed themselves
in the faith: for see how David speaks, Psalm. 138.8. Thou Lord wilt not
forsake the work of thine own hands. And Saint Paul says; He which has
begun a good work in you, will perfect the same: Phil. 1, 6. Likewise the
Patriarch Jacob says; Lord, I am less then all thy mercies and truth which
thou have showed thy servant: but thou said; I will do thee good, etc. Genesis
32.10, 11, 12. For God is not like to men; that is, to be weary in well doing,
or to be drawn dry by too much giving; but the more good he has done us, so
much the stronger ought our hope to be, and to receive daily increases.

Verse. 13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have ruled us: but we will
remember thee only and thy name.
THis verse contains a complaint which the faithful make, because they were
oppressed under the tyranny of the wicked. Thus this song is composed to
comfort the

He speaks therefore in the name and person of all the faithful, who in
appearance seemed to be rejected of God, but therewithal professing, that they
were his people, and so consequently, did put their confidence in him. But had
they not great cause to mourn thus, when they were in bondage under the
tyranny of other rulers besides the Lord himself, who once had gathered them
in under the wings of his protection? Hence therefore it follows, that if they
had not been estranged from him, they had never fallen into so wretched a
condition, as to be exposed to the merciless tyranny of their enemies. But it
should seem by this, which God himself exercises; notwithstanding that they
rule in his name: David himself was a King, having a diverse government from
that which God exercises, yet so, that he was Gods min^ster notwithstanding
for the common good and salvation of all the people that were c^mmitted to his
charge; and likewise maintained the true Religion, which these tyrants desired
wholly to overthrow. The like also did justly befall the Jews, who had well
deserved to be subdued under the cruelty of Infidels, seeing they refused to
obey God who used the^ so lovingly.

God, and the faithful Kings who governed the people tyrants who at the last
oppressed them under unjust laws. This will the better appear by a like place
out of Ezechiel, I have (says he) given them good laws by the which they
might live: but because they have not observed my judgments, and have cast my
statutes behind their backs; profaning mine ordinances, and setting their eyes
toward the Idols of their fathers: It is just with God to m^ke us serve cruel
Lords, when we will not yield willing obedience to his laws.
therefore I also gave the^ statutes which were not good, and judgments in
which they should not live, Ezech. 20.24. Now in regard they might have prosred
and been happy by Gods blessing in times past if they had yielded their
obedience to his word: therefore Ezechiel threatens them, that Tyrants shall
rule over them, and in spite of their teeth shall cause them to submit
themselves to their cruel edicts and laws: yea and that without bringing any
profit or reward at all unto them.

Isaiah in this place bewailes the like misery: reigned over us we had much
ado to content our selves servitude; and therein are justly punished for our
wickedness. The faithful also which live under the Papacy; or such as are
forced to yield in any sort to wicked laws and constitutions full of
superstition, may well take up the like complaint: for they are under such an
authority as is against God: The slavery of such as are under the tyranny of
the Roman Antichrist.
they are oppressed under more then a barbarous servitude which binds not the
body only, but leads them to the flaying of their souls.

But we will remember thee only.] It seems this particle should be opposed to
the former thus, Albeit these profane Lords would turn and withdraw us from
under thy government, yet will we hold our selves fast unto it, because we
assuredly know our selves to belong to thee. But there may be gathered from
hence a more ample doctrine, to wit, that although carnal reason is ready to
say that such as are made a pray to their enemies, and cruelly vexed under
their tyranny, are forsaken of God: yet the Jews cease not therefore still to
rejoice in him; notwithstanding they saw him nothing near unto them: for the
only remembrance of his name sustained them; and did sweetly feed and nourish
their hope. Thus there is an opposition of great weight between the
remembrance of Gods name, A singular grace of God it is to cleave fast unto him
when he seems to forsake us.
and the present feeling of his favor: for it is a rare and singular grace of
God constantly to cleave unto him, when he seems to be absent and far off
from us.

Others translate, In thee, and in thy name: but here is no such conjunction.
To let that pass therefore, A Consolation fitting our times.
this place affords unto us such consolation as is exceeding necessary for our
times, wherein the perverse unthankfulness of men by casting off the sweet yoke
of God, have drawn upon themselves a grievous and cruel slavery: neither are
we to wonder if we see this tyranny already exercised even in many places
where the name of God is called upon. The faithful, I say, must not therefore
be discouraged; only let them rest their hopes upon this consolation, to wit,
God will never utterly forsake those whose whole joy and delight consists in
the remembrance of his name. Let them not fear then, I say, at any hand to
profess this their confidence before all men. What confidence? Truly that they
had rather die ten times then once to recoile back from God, Better to die
often then once to revolt.
and so to darken his glory. For whosoever he be that through fear gives
place to men, They that sin against conscience for fear of men, never yet
tasted in truth how gracious the Lord is.
let him know for a truth that he has not as yet rightly tasted how gracious
the Lord is. Whilst we enjoy the free use of Gods word then, let us
diligently exercise our selves in it, that so we may arm our selves therewith
against the time of need, to the end the world may know that we have not
studied it as in a dream.

Verse. 14. Or, being dead they etc:
The dead shall not live, Or, being slain they shall not etc.
neither shall the dead arise, Or, for this cause thou have etc.
because thou have visited and scattered them, and destroyed all their memory.
THe Prophet comes again to speak of the woeful end of the wicked, whose
prosperous estate often disquiets and dismaies us, as we may see in the 37.
Psalm. and in the 73.17. That our eyes then may not be dazeled in the beholding
of present things, the Prophet threatens that their end shall be most woeful.
Others expound this place of the faithful, who seem so to die in the eyes of
the world, as if they should never rise again: but it is very clear that he
here speaks of the wicked and reprobates, which will evidently appear by the
contrary to this, which is added in the 19. verse. For we have in this place
an opposition between the resurrection of the good, and the bad, whose estates
would be little differing one from another, unless it should appear that the
one sort were judged to eternal death, Every judgment that lights upon a
reprobate in this life, is a seal unto him of his endless torment in the life
to come.
and the other to a blessed and an everlasting life. Nay the wicked are not
simply condemned to eternal perdition, but all the judgments of God which
befall them in this life, are as it were the beginnings and seals unto them of
their endless torment, for they can not be relieved by any consolation at all.
Why so? Because they inwardly feel that God is their enemy.

Whereas we have translated Slain; others read it Giants: but seeing the word
Rephaim, in many places of the Scriptures is taken for the slain, Psalm. 88.10.
Prou. 2.18. and 9.18. and 21.16.
it will agree best if we take it so here; otherwise the opposition would not
be fitting.

That which follows; For this cause have thou visited them; is put here by way
of exposition: for he shows why the reprobates perish without hope of any
restoration; to wit, because God has determined to cast them away. Now what
can they expect from Gods wrath which is inflamed against them, but death and
perdition?

Verse. 15. Thou have increased the nation, O Lord; thou have increased the
nation: thou art made glorious: thou have enlarged all the coasts of the
earth.
THis verse is diversely expounded: for some think the Prophet shows how the
faithful are not pressed with one affliction alone, but are plunged over head
and ears as it were in extreme miseries, and yet can see no issue out of them.
Others expound it more simply thus; O Lord; thou have enriched thy people with
many benefits: and so they think that the Prophet mentions those blessings
which God bestowed upon his people diverse ways: as if he should say; Thy
people, Lord, have felt by experience, how liberal thou art by the infinite
benefits which thou have bestowed upon them. But when I consider that which by
and by follows, where he says, thou have enlarged; that is to say, thou have
caused thy kingdom to spread, which was once shut up within very narrow
bounds; I had rather join these two things together; for so the latter member
expounds the former; and that also which follows, to wit, that God shall be
glorified, agrees very well. For we know that Gods glory shines in nothing
more, then in the advancement and enlargement of his Church. Gods glory shines
in nothing more, then in the enlargement of his Church.


It is as much then as if he had said; Lord, thou had in times past but a
little handful of people, but now thou have multiplied and increased them. For
the Gentiles were adopted and joined to the Jews, on condition that they both
should make but one people. And thus the Lord added an infinite number to them;
for the children of Abraham were gathered out of all nations. We must therefore
supply in this place an addition of a greater number, and not of benefits; in
this sense, Thou did not content thy self Lord, with that small number which
once thou did enjoy: and therefore thou gatheredst unto thy self a people
without number out of all the quarters of the world.

Now this belongs to Christ's Kingdom, which was euey where established by the
preaching of the Gospel: and the Prophet now extols and notes out Gods mercy
touching this increasing and multiplication by the word enlarged. I grant this
phrase straieth not much from our common manner of speech, when we use to
speak of the enlarging of a dominion, or of an inheritance: yet it is not the
Prophets meaning to say, that the land shall become greater, but that it had
larger bounds, and a more free habitation by means of the mutual society of
the inhabitants after the pure worship of God was published every where: for
the discords which were between the Jews and Gentiles straightened their
dwellings, and made them less free then otherwise they would have been. We
have here then a promise touching the vocation of the Gentiles; A promise in
this verse, touching the vocation of the Gentiles.
which ought greatly to have comforted the faithful in their exile, and in that
miserable scattering and banishment from the Church: for howsoever they saw
themselves wonderfully diminished and weakened, yet they might without all
peradventure, assure themselves that they should not only increase to an
infinite number; but that strange nations also, and those that were far
remote, should be added unto them.

Verse. 16. Lord, in trouble they have visited thee: they powered out a prayer
when thy chastening was upon them.
THis may be well expounded of those hypocrites who never seek unto God,
unless they be constrained thereunto by miseries and calamities. But seeing
the Lord also instructs the faithful by his rods and chastisements, Verse. 8.9.
Three ends of afflictions.
as the Prophet has heretofore showed: therefore I had rather refer these
things simply unto them. First, to the end they may

Thus Isaiah then speaks here in the person of the Church; Isaiah speaks here
in the person of the Church.
that so, whenever the faithful should read this sentence, they might
acknowledge that they were nearer unto God in their afflictions, then when they
abounded in all things which their hearts could wish; We are nearer God in
afflictions, then when we enjoy all that our hearts can wish.
for then commonly we wax proud and forgetful: such is the frowardness of our
nature. Is it not needful then that we should be tamed and brought under by
force of arms? This meditation is very profitable to correct the bitterness
of our troubles: for when we know what benefit redounds to us by them, it makes
us less to abhor them.

The word Lachash, (which we have translated Prayer) signifies, To murmr. We
are not to take this sentence then for a well framed prayer; but for such a
one, as testifies that the heart is pent up in great dolours, as those who
feel such anguish, that they can scarcely open their teeth to utter their
perplexed thoughts. He therefore speaks of such a prayer as is pure and far
from all counterfetting: for when Gods servants are under heavy afflictions,
they study how to breathe out their sighs, as witnesses of their extreme
griefs. In time of prosperity, men can speak with open mouth; but in
adversity, they are smitten down, they dare not open their lips: showing the
conceptions of their hearts, rather with inward groans, then with words. Thence
proceed those sighs which cannot be expressed, whereof S. Paul speaks, Romans
8.26. The Prophet then pronounces this of the faithful, to whom indeed this
doctrine ought to be restrained: for albeit inward garboiles do now and then
force out groans even from the very reprobates; yet they are hardened more and
more, and become so much the more fierce and obstinate.

Verse. 17. Like as a woman with child, that draws near to the travail, is
in sorrow, and cries in her pains, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.

18. We have conceived, we have borne in pain, as though we should have
brought forth wind: there was no help in the earth; neither did the
inhabitants of the world fall.


TWo things are to be noted here principally. women in travail; wherein their
pains are unspeakable, as it is well enough known. The afflictions of the
faithful therefore, he says, causes them to cast forth very bitter and loud
cries. Whence we gather, that the Prophet speaks not here only of that sorrow
which proceeds from the suffering of outward griefs and discommodities; but
rather respects those horrible vexations which sharply wound, and with
incredible vehemency assailes the hearts and spirits of the godly, Sight of
Gods anger the chief cause of grief. See Prou. 18.14.
when they feel that God is angry with them, their consciences also checking
them. No bodily pain therefore may be compared with the grief of the Spirit,
which is most lively expressed by the particle before thee.

no end, the condition of the faithful is far worse then is the condition of
women in travail. For being once delivered from their sorrows and griefs,
they rejoice in seeing the fruit which they have brought forth; John 16.21.
yea they forget all the pains which they endured: but he says here, that ye
faithful are in continual travail. Why so? Because they still are assaulted
with new pangs and travails; and when they think the birth is near, then
they bring forth nothing but sorrows and anguish, which is expressed by the
word wind: to wit, they saw no appearance of any deliverance or ease of their
sorrows. For so he forthwith expounds himself when he says, that there was
no help for them in the earth. That is to say, we see no succor at all.

He adds, that the inhabitants of the world did not fall: for the Hebrew word
Naphal, signifies to fall. Some affirm, it signifies to dwell. If we take it in
the latter signification, the sense will be; That the Jews shall not dwell; that
is, they shall not return into their Country; the inhabitants which inioyed
it, should not perish. But if we follow the common translation, this must be
referred to the wicked on this wise; The inhabitants of the world oppress us,
and yet they fall not. Why so? Because they have more then heart can wish. For
when the wicked flourish, as Solomon says, then Gods children must of
necessity sigh, and be like unto women in travail with child.

Yet let us not refuse even this hard condition, if we would have any place in
Gods Church. It is most certain that the common lot of all men is to bear
sundry and infinite calamities: and thence came the old proverb; It were best
of all never to have been borne; or being borne, to die quickly. But we see
that the faithful are tired with extreme miseries, and exercised therewith
above all others. For God means to try their faith, to the end they may serve
him, Why God corrects his children, and lets the wicked in the mean while run
riot.
having renounced their lusts, and the world also. Seeing the Lord then has
such a special care of them, he will chastise them; and in the mean while,
will suffer the wicked to run riot into all misorder.

Hence also we are admonished, that we must not only suffer one or two
calamities, and so an end, lest we should think our selves discharged after we
have endured some few assaults: for we must always be prepared to meet with
new trials. When the Lord takes up his children, he lets them not down
forthwith. For we must be content even then to bring forth the wind, when we
think ye hour of deliverance is come: our sorrows shall still increase, and
our throws shall overtake one another at every turn. We must hold out with
patience then in this combat, as long as God shall be pleased to exercise us
underneath it.

We will therefore follow the usual exposition, They fell not: for as the Lord
now and

By the Inhabitants of the world, he means the profane and unbelievers: for
he opposes the rest of the world to the country of Judea, which by way of
excellency he called the land, or the earth; verse 15. making mention of the
Inhabitants thereof apart.

Verse. 19. Thy dead men shall live: Or, my body.
even with my body shall they rise. Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for
thy dew is as the dew Or, of the meadow.
of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.
ISaiah still continues to speak of this Consolation, and turns his speech
unto God: and thus he shows that our best course is to bend all our senses
toward him, Our best course in affliction is, to gather in all our senses, and
fasten our minds upon God.
as often as we are to resist temptations. For we shall find nothing more
hurtful unto us then to utter words at randon, pleasing our selves in them:
for what do we else but roll our selves hither and thither, and at the last
plunge our selves into many errors? We can choose no way therefore that is more
safe then to draw near unto God, God only able to give our restless spirits
rest and relief.
who only is able to quiet our distressed consciences: which if we do not, we
must of necessity meet with many encumbrances, which will shake our faith.
Will you have the sum of this verse then? If God be the protector of his
servants, notwithstanding they be as good as dead, shall they not live even in
death it self, or rather shall they not have power to rise again although
they be altogether dead? Yes surely.

shall But we must in the mean while become as those that are dead, Col. 3.3.
Romans 8.23.24.
for our life is hidden, and as yet we can not see that which we hope for. Thus
then he only speaks of the dead; that is to say, of the condition of the
faithful which sit now in the shadow of death, in regard of the many
afflictions wherewith they are daily visited: whence we see that this can not
be restrained to the last resurrection. For we contrariwise affirm that the
reprobates are dead, The reprobates are dead whilst they live.
even whilst they live. Why? Because they never tasted of Gods fatherly love
in Christ, wherein the true life consists, and therefore they perish in their
brutish sottishnes. But because the faithful run unto God, therefore they
obtain life in the midst of their greatest dangers, yea, even in death it
self: but in regard they set this last resurrection before them as the end of
their hope; therefore it can not be said properly that they live, til that day
be come; that being then freed from all sorrows and corruption, they may
receive a sure life that never decaies. And therefore S. Paul very fitly
shows that it were to turn the order of things vpside down, if that the
faithful should live till such time as Christ who is the fountain of life
appeeres. Col. 3.3.4.
Therefore it is we said before that Isaiah here comprehends the whole kingdom
of Christ: for albeit we begin to feel the fruits of this consolation when we
enter into the Church, yet we wholly enjoy not the full measure thereof till
the day of the resurrection be come, wherein all things shall be perfectly
restored, The day of resurrection, the day of our refreshing. Mat. 25.32.
in which respect it is also called the day of restoration, Act. 3.21. Here
then we see the only remedy to mitigate the bitterness of all our griefs, to
wit, even to turn our eyes to the beholding of this day, in which God shall
separate the good from the bad.

As death then naturally deuoures and destroys all the race of Adam, so the
miseries to which they are subject in this world are forerunners of the same
death. All miseries are forerunners of death.
Their life therefore is but a kind of death; but in regard that by the
redemption wrought by Christ the curse of God is taken away both in these
beginnings of death, as also in death it self: Christ has by his death taken
away the curse both of these beginnings of death, as also of death it self.
therefore it is rightly said, That all those that are grafted into Christ's
body live, whilst they die, because all their evils are turned unto their
good, Romans 8.28. Whence it follows that they always come forth as those that
are more then conquerors, even out of the very jaws of death; and that till
they be fully and wholly knit unto their head. Would we then be esteemed in
the number of those that are dead in Christ, of whose life he is the sure
guardian? We must then lift up the eyes of our faith above the whole course of
nature.

But this is yet better expressed by the word body, or carcass, as if he should
say, this old rottennes which it seems has consumed the bodies of the
faithful, shall hinder the Lord nothing at all to make them rise up in full
beauty again. As touching the propriety of the Hebrew phrase, some translate
it, With my body: others, Which are my body. Others again, supply a
particle of similitude, As my body: but in regard the sense agrees well enough
without adding or deminishing, let us content our selves with that which the
words do plainly sound of themselves, and so had I rather take it by way of
application.

At the least this word is added of set purpose, so as the Prophet thereby
ioines himself to the whole body of the Church: and thus he places himself
in the number of those which being dead in the Lord, do notwithstanding wait
for a resurrection apart. And in that he mentions himself in particular, A
commendation of Isaiahs faith in God, and love to the Church.
it is that he might give the more authority unto his doctrine. For he thereby
shows that he spoke from the heart, uttering and testifying by this his
confession the fruit of his faith, according to that sentence, I believed,
therefore did I speak, Psalm. 116.10. 2. Cor. 4.13. otherwise the wicked and
profane may well discourse in words of Gods mercy, and of life eternal, and
yet in the mean while have no feeling at all of these things in their heart.
As did that false Prophet Balaam, who knew well enough that that which be spoke
was true; and yet for all that received no profit by his prophecies himself:
Number. 23.19. and 24.5.

But our Prophet speaks in this place far otherwise, for he professes, that
he is of their number who belonged to a better life: thus showing that he
willingly underwent the sorrows and calamities which God laid upon him for the
furtherance of his mortification; as one indeed that chose rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. Now thus he makes it clear to all the world, that he speaks not here
of things whic he knew not, or of that which he felt not; but of those things
which he learned by experience. Yea, he shows hereby, that his confidence was
so great, that he willingly ranged himself among a company of dead bodies,
which yet should (as he believed) be restored to life, choosing rather to be
accounted a rotten carcass, knowing himself to be a member of the Church,
then to be in his full strength out of the same. And this doubtless caused his
doctrine to be so much the more effectual: for he opposes it to the former
sentence, verse 14. in which he said, that the wicked should not live; because
all hope of (a joyful resurrection) was taken away from them.

If any object Isaiah speaks not here only of the resurrection; but of that
felicity which the faithful shall enjoy. I grant the wicked shall rise, but it
is to eternal perdition: their resurrection therefore shall be to their ruin
and death; whereas it shall bring happiness and glory to the just.

He calls the inhabitants of the dust, the faithful, who are humbled under
crosses and afflictions, who in life have death continually before their eyes.
Yet I deny not but they also enjoy the benefits of God even in this life: but
by this similitude the Prophet sets out their miserable condition, as those
that bear in their bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus: 2. Cor. 4.10. For it is
needful that their outward man should be beaten down and mortified, till at
the last it be brought to nothing, that so the inward man may be renewed daily:
2. Cor. 4.16. If we mean then to have any part or portion in this consolation,
let us willingly content our selves to lie down in the dust.

For this cause he commands the dead to arise and sing; which may seem to be
very unfitting for men in their case, there being nothing among them but a
sorrowful silence. In this therefore the Prophet shows an apparent difference
between the elect of God, An apparent difference between the elect and the
reprobate.
who arise by an heavenly power, albeit they be as good as rotten in their
graves, and lie buried in the dust; and the reprobates: for they being
separated from God and Christ, the fountain of life, wither away, whilst they
live, that so death may utterly devour them.

Now in that he promises to give them the deaw of the meddow; he thereby
inricheth his doctrine with a very elegant and fit similitude: for we all know
that the flowers do fade and die in winter, but especially in meddowes, for
they seem to be altogether dead, neither can a man be persuaded to the
contrary, that shall only behold the upper face of the earth; but the roots
notwithstanding lie hid underneath, which after they have sucked in the deaw
of the spring time, do again gather strength and life: so as the flowers
which before were withered away and dried, do then become fresh and green.

Thus the people shall gather new force after they shall be revived and
watered with this fruitful deaw of Gods grace, although for a time it seemed
they were wholly withered and gone. Sure these similitudes which are drawn
from such things as are familiarly known amongst us, have great force in them
to work upon our affections. What for^^ familiar similitudes have to work upon
our affections.
For if flowers or grass, which are wet with the deaw that falls upon them,
do sprout forth, and wax green; how much more shall we be revived if we be
watered with the quickening deawes of Gods grace? Why should not our bodies
receive new liveliness, albeit they were rotten before? Note.
Has not God as much care over us, as he has over the herbs? Is not the holy
Spirit of greater force then the deaw? Saint Paul I remember uses the like
similitude, 1. Cor. 15.36. where he speaks of the resurrection: but in regard
he applies his metaphor to another purpose, I think it not amiss to let it
pass for this time; because I would not willingly confound that place with
this. Let it suffice us that we have attained the true meaning of the Prophet.

In the end of the verse where I have translated, The earth shall cast forth
her dead: some translate it in the second person; Thou shall bring down the
land of Giants: or, Thou will bring down the Giants in the earth. I reject not
this interpretation, because the words may well bear this signification: but
as I take it, the first seems to agree best to the text, although the matter
be not much material, in regard of the substance. For this must be referred to
the consolation which we mentioned a little before.

Verse. 20. Come my people; enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors
after thee: hide thy self for a very little while, until the indignation
pass over.
IN this verse he exhorts the children of God unto patience, that they might
continue to bear their miseries and afflictions quietly, as also to remain
invincible against all the sharp temptations, which as it seemed should
ouerwhelme them. There was great need of this exhortation therefore: for the
pitiful case into which the poor people were soon after brought, seemed in
all outward appearance to be far off from the promise which was formerly
made unto them. The Prophet then like a tender hearted nurse, takes this
troubled people by the hand as it were, who otherwise knew not what shift to
make, and carries them aside into a secret place to lodge them in safety, till
these stirs and hurly burlies were appeased. Now whereas he calls them my
people, he speaks in the person of God, and not in his own.

By chambers, he means a quiet and peaceable state of conscience: to wit, when
with boldness of courage and confidence, we arm our selves with patience, in
waiting for the coming of the Lord: as Abacuk, who having foretold what
calamity should befall the Jews, professes that he stands all day upon his
watchtower: that is to say, in a place of safety, to expect the event in
patience and silence. Isaiah commands them to do the like here: as if he
should say; You that are the servants of the Lord, get you into your chambers,
or into some other sequestered place, when you feel your selves assaulted with
such temptations as you are not able to resist.

But for as much as it is not sufficient to be once well fortified against the
violence of garboiles and stirs, he therefore also commands them to shut the
door after them; which is to be referred to constancy and perseverance: as if
he should say; Look to it that the devil find not the least creuise open to
assail you: for he can easily enter into our hearts, if we give him but the
least advantage that is.

Whereas he bids them to hide themselves; his meaning is, that the faithful
should enjoy a secure freedom, if so be they were courageous in waiting for the
coming of the Lord: for albeit we ought to fight boldly and valiantly, 2. Cor.
12.9.
yet seeing the power of God is often manifested in our weakness, we cannot
possibly take a better course, then in all humility to run and shroud our
selves under his wings, that so he may save us from all inordinate fears and
terrors. Furthermore, in regard that we are given to boiling passions
naturally, and are ever and anon carried away with impatiency, if we feel not
Gods help at hand to succor us presently: therefore he says, that these
storms and tempests shall blow over, and continue but a while. We must make
account to fight every day against one temptation or other; We must make our
accounts to meet with new conflicts every day.
neither must we think to come to the end thereof as long as we live: and
this is it that makes our miseries seem so wonderful long and tedious unto
us. But if we compare them with that eternity wherein we shall enjoy happiness
without end; the meditation thereof will cause them to seem but as a moment.
As Saint Paul in a certain place shows, that the light afflictions which for
a short space we suffer in this world, are no way to be compared unto that
eternal weight of glory which shall be revealed in the world to come: Romans 8.8.
2. Cor. 4.7.

When the Prophet adds, until the indignation be past: he meant thereby to
remove all difficulties out of the minds of the faithful: and it is no less
then if he had promised them deliverance out of hand. Me thinks this word
indignation, simply considered in it self, signifies that affliction which
proceeds from the wrath of God. Others refer it unto the enemies of the
Church; which sense though I reject not, yet the first likes me better. For we
see how careful the Prophets are to insinuate into our minds, that no evil
befalles us, but by the hand of God, No evil befalles us but by the hand of
God.
and that he never sends the same without cause, but is first provoked
thereunto by our sins and offenses. Hence we learn that God will not be
angry with his Church for ever, but will cause his wrath to cease at the last,
God will not always retain his anger toward his Church, but will cause his
wrath at the length to cease. Mich. 7.18. Zac. 1.12, 13
even as we see it to fall out in storms and tempests: and this is the cause
why the faithful bear their crosses with the greater courage. For thus the
Church says, Mich. 7.9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, etc. Why so? She knew well that God meant her good in
chastising of her. Now our Prophet brings in the Lord speaking, (as I touched
before) to the end his exhortation might have the better authority.

Verse. 21. For behold the Lord comes out of his place to visit the iniquity
of the inhabitants of the earth against him: and the earth shall discover her
blood, and shall not hide her slain.
NO doubt but it is an heavy temptation to the faithful, when they see the
wicked exercise their rage against them, and in the mean while, that God
should hold his peace: for in so doing, they imagine he has forsaken them. The
Prophet then labors to prevent this temptation, and shows, that howsoever the
Lord has been silent for a while, yet he will in the end show himself in due
season, to give relief to his servants, and to punish the wrongs that have
been done him. Thus by the word of coming forth, he describes the Lord
reaching out his hand as it were to his children: as if the same had been
hidden before, in regard they felt not his help. For that is the cause why he
says, the Lord comes forth into sight; namely, to succor his Church, and to
execute his judgments upon her enemies: for in former time it seemed he had
kept himself close and altogether shut up in heaven. We may also very well
affirm, that Isaiah alludes to the sanctuary; which manner of speech is often
met withal in the books of the Prophets. Mich. 1.3. Abac. 3.13. Zach. 14.3.
As if he should say; Howsoever the profane nations despise the Arc of the
covenant, being seated in a very mean place; yet from thence shall the
faithful feel by good experience, how ready the power and favor of God is
pressed to succor them, and that he is not called upon in this holy place in
vain. In the mean while, we must hold this as a sure principle; that albeit
the wicked scorn the Temple, as if it were no better then some Country barn,
or some such like thing; yet even from thence will the Lord come forth, when he
sees the time fit to defend and to avenge his peoples quarrel upon all the
inhabitants of the world.

And this exposition suits better then if by the word place, we should expound
that he should come forth of heaven; for Isaiah meant to express somewhat
more. The Prophets when they make any mention of heaven they therewithal
present before us the glory and majesty of God: but our Prophet in this place
respects our capacity, that is to say, when we feel that God who in times
past seemed to be far off, and hidden out of our sight, does at the last
appear for our comfort. He also has used a particle demonstratiue, and a
participle of the present tence for the greater certentie of the matter; as
also to the end the faithful might not think much to bridle their passions by
patience till his coming forth.

Hitherunto appertains that which he ads touching the visiting of iniquity:
for it were contrary to his nature who is the Judge of all the world to suffer
wicked men to give over themselves to all wickedness without impunitie. There is
in the verb, to visit, a similitude well enough known: for we think that God
either sees not at all, or else is busied about some other matters when he
withholds or deferres the execution of his judgments be it never so little a
while.

These words also, against him, want not their weight: for it is often said
that when the wicked lay their ambushes they spread a net or dig a pit for
themselves. Psalm. 9.15. and 57.6.
The sense then is, that all the annoyances and oppressions which the wicked
bring upon the Church, shall in time fall upon their heads that have been the
contriuers thereof.

Lastly, there is also a very great vehemency in the word, shall disclose: for
now whilst the wicked shed and tread under foot innocent blood, the earth
seems as it were to suck and drink it into her womb: in the mean while it
seems the death of the faithful is quite and clean forgotten, and the
memory thereof raced out of men's minds for ever; yea, and yt God himself
utterly neglects it. These are men's imaginations, but the Lord witnesses the
contrary here. He calls the blood of the earth then, which the earth has
drunk in, as it is said Genesis 4.11. The earth has opened her mouth to receive
thy brothers blood, when the blood of Abel was shed. For the Lord in that place
amplifies and aggrauates the foulenes of the fact when he says, That the earth
is defiled with yt blood which was shed: and therefore he therein shows,
first, how precious the death of his A Consolation which we ought to have
continually before our eyes.
and set it always before our eyes when the wicked smite us, laughing and
sporting themselves whilst they vex us with all manner of outrages. For God in
the end will show that innocent blood has not cried in vain, because he can
never forget his Saints.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. In that day the Lord will visit Leuiathan that pearcing Serpent, and
Leuiathan that crooked Serpent, with his sore and great and mighty sword: and
will kill the Dragon that is in the sea.
THE Prophet speaks here of Gods judgment in general, and so comprehends
the whole kingdom of Satan. For having spoken before of the vengeance of God
against tyrants and unbelievers which had shed innocent blood, he now passes
on further, and publishes the edict it self. The word Leuiathan is diversely
expounded, but generally it signifies a serpent, or the whales and fishes of
the sea, which are as mo^sters in regard of their excessive greatness. Now
howsoever this description agrees to the king of Egypt, yet under this one kind
he meant to comprehend all the enemies of the Church.

For mine own part I make no question but by way of Allegory he speaks here
of Satan and his whole kingdom, describing it under the figure of some
monstrous beast, Genesis 3.1. Satan.
and therwithall also privily taxes the subtleties wherewith he couers his
deceitful baits. And thus he meant to prevent many doubts wherewith (as with
mighty billows) we are at every turn tossed to and fro, whilst God

But in the mean while the Prophet shows that neither his force nor fraud
shall be able to let the Lord from destroying both him and his kingdom.
Furthermore, it is not to be doubted but as he here speaks of Satan himself,
so likewise of all his imps Satan's imps.
and instruments by whom he gouerns his kingdom, and molests the Church of
God. Let it be granted that this kingdom be furnished with infinite policies,
and also with an invincible power, yet shall the Lord easily bring them all to
naught.

Which that we may the better conceive, the Prophet opposes against them the
mighty and sharp sword of the Lord, by which it will be no masterie for him to
slay his enemy how strong or subtle soever he be. We are to make account then
that we shall ever have to deal against Satan, The Church assailed on every
side with mighty and subtle enemies.
who like a roaring Lion seeks about whom he may devour: and the world on the
other side being like a Sea in which we are floting up and down, wherein every
moment diverse monsters assail us, indeuouring to sink our ship, and to cast
us away: neither is there any force left us, by which we may resist them,
unless the Lord be our help. And therefore by this description the Prophet
meant to set before us the dangerous estate in which we stand; seeing we have
(on every side) so many strong and furious enemies, being also full of fraud.
In regard whereof, we should be put to our shifts, and utterly undone, if God
prevented them not by opposing his invincible power against them for our
defense. Nothing but Gods sword is able to subdue Satan's kingdom.
For this wretched Kingdom of Satan can never be destroyed, but by the sword
of the Lord.

But we are to observe what he says in the beginning of the verse; to wit, In
that day. For thereby he means, that God permits Satan to uphold and continue
his Kingdom for a time; but so, that it shall down in the end; as Saint Paul
says, Rom 16.20. The Lord will shortly tread down Satan under your feet. And
thus by this promise we see, Our warfare is not yet accomplished.
that the time of our warfare is not yet accomplished, but that we must fight
valiantly till this enemy be wholly subdued: who yet will never cease to
assail us as long as we live, albeit he has bin put to the worst an hundred
times. Let us arm our selves then to wage battle with him continually, and to
bear off the violent blows, wherewith he will try whether our armor be of
proof or no: but that we may not be discouraged, let us always cast the eye
of our faith to this day, in which all his forces shall be dashed in pieces.

The epithites wherewith he sets out this Leuiathan in part, notes his cunning
and subtle policies; also in part his open cruelty: and thus he lets us see
that his strength is unable to be matched or overcome. For the word Beriach,
signifies a bolt or stake of iron: under which the Prophet by a figure meant to
note out a piercing power, either in regard Akal, which signifies to overthrow,
and is to be referred to his overthwart and crooked bowings and turnings.

Verse. 2. In that day sing of the vineyard of Or, to the red vine.
red wine.
NOw he shows that all this shall be done for the salvation of the Church. Why
so? Because the Lord prouides for the safety of all such as he has once
vouchsafed to receive under his protection. That the Church then may enjoy a
sure estate, Satan with all his retinue shall be brought to naught. And
hitherunto tend all the administrations of Gods vengeance upon his enemies;
namely; to show that he has care of his Church. Now albeit the Prophet
expresses not the word Church in this place; yet it is evident enough, that it
is she to whose heart the Lord speaks on this gracious manner. Nay this
figurative manner of speech has greater emphasis in it, then if he had in
plain words called them the people of Israel: for in as much as the
excellency of a vine, This word Vine, has great emphasis in this place.
consists chiefly in the placing and planting of it, and also depends upon the
continual dressing of it: if the Church be Gods vine, we thence gather, that
she cannot flourish, but by the continual similitude, he also expresses

Now he calls it a red vine: that is to say, very excellent. For red wine in
the Scriptures, signifies excellency, if we consider other places thereof
well. Now he says, that this song shall be sung in that day, in regard that
for a time the Church should be miserably wasted; so as it should become like
unto a desert, or a place untilled. But therewithal he foretells that after
this waste, she shall be restored, and filled with such plenty of excellent
fruit, that she shall have ample occasion to sing for joy.

Verse. 3. Or, I am the Lord that keeps it.
I the Lord do keep it: I will water it every moment: lest any assail, I
will keep it night and day.
IN this verse the Lord shows what care he has for this vine, and what
diligence he uses in dressing and keeping of it. As if he should say; I omit
no care nor pains that belongs to a good master of a family, who prouidently
prouides all things fit for his household in due season. Now he not only
shows what he will do when the time of joy and gladness shall come; but he
also tells what benefits the Jews had received from his hands before, that so
they might be put in the better hope for the time to come. But in the mean
while, we must supply a close opposition here, of the time which is between
these two: for God seemed utterly to neglect his Church, and that in such wise,
as it became like a desert. And hence it was that the vineyard of the Lord was
so spoiled and wasted, to wit, because the Lord left it for a time, and gave it
up as a pray into his enemies hands. Whence we gather, Our welfare soon
decaies, if God do but a little withdraw his hand.
that our welfare will soon decay, if the Lord do never so little withdraw
himself from us: as on the contrary, that all shall go well with us, as long
as he assists us.

Now he mentions two points wherein the Lord will show his diligence; to wit,
he will water his vine continually, and will also watch it, that it be not
ouerrunne watering of it, he comprehends whatsoever belongs to the dressing and
manuring of it: wherein he promises to leave no duty unperformed whereby the
good thereof may be procured. God will never cease to supply his Church with
necessary benefits.
The Lord promises therefore that he will likewise keep it, that no hurt be
done unto it, but that the fruits may have time to ripen; and may afterward be
reaped in their season. Howsoever this poor vine be subject then to many
inconveniences by reason of enemies and cruel beasts which will still be
assailing of it with great fury, yet God promises that he will interpose
himself for her defense, so as it shall be kept safe and sound from all
dangers. Now seeing he has appointed a certain day in which we shall sing
this song, Verse. 2.
let not our hearts quail if for a time he withdraw his help from us. Be it
that he leaves us to be spoiled and vexed for a little while, yet will he let
us see in the end that he has not forgotten us.

Verse. 4. Anger is not in me: who would set the briars and thorns against me
in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.
THis verse conteines a most sweet consolation in it. For the Prophet therein
shows the incredible love which God bears to his people; albeit they be of a
perverse and wicked spirit. God takes upon him here then (as we shall see
anon) the person of a loving father greatly offended, who is angry with his
son, yet so, that he must needs show how much he is inclined to pity and
compassion, because ye ardent love he bears to his son ouercomes all his
displeasure. God can not so hate his chosen, but he makes them feel his favor.
In a word, he shows that God can not so hate his chosen, but that he
therewithal will make them feel his fatherly love toward them, even in the
midst of his corrections wherewith he visits them. The Scripture is wont to
set forth God unto us many ways: for sometime David shows, Psalm. 18.26. For
he manifests himself in such wise unto us, as we give him occasion. And if he
show himself severe at any time, we may thank the hardness of our own hearts
for it.

But the Prophet speaks not here of all indifferently, but of the Church
only, to whom he will ever be a father, notwithstanding that he chastise and
correct her for her sins and iniquities. His Church shall continue safe then,
howsoever she be unworthy of such a benefit. This verse must be restrained to
the Church.
This sentence therefore must be restrained to the Church, that so there may be
a relation always had between God and his elect: whom he can not but dearly
love, although his anger be severe against the reprobate. Thus we see the
excellency of this Consolation: God can not be angry with his chosen.
for if we be sure that we are the called of God, we may boldly resolve that he
can not be angry with us: and to speak properly, it is impossible. Why so?
Because he loves us with such a constant affection, as he can never lose it. I
deny not but God at that time hated some even among this people, and yet he
calls them his beloved, because of his secret adoption. Now by how much the
more God showed himself good and gracious toward the people, by so much the
more were they all left without excuse that had provoked his wrath against them
by their rebellions. Neither need we doubt but he aggrauates their fault by
this circumsta^ce, to wit, that he is enforced to change his wonted affection
toward them in regard of their frowardnes. For having spoken of his mildnes,
he suddenly cries out, Who would set the Or (as others translate) who will
make me like the Who will set the briar against me, that I may fight as the
thorn against it. For there is no conjunction copulative between these two
words. But I willingly content my self with the first exposition, to wit,
that God wishes he might have to do with thorns and briars, which he would
quickly consume with the fire of his indignation. But if any fight rather with
thorns, then against his vine, which he is therefore constreined to spare,
because it is his inheritance.

That which follows after, J will go by steps through them, and burn them
does also confirm mine exposition: for burning belongs to thorns and briars;
all which the Lord would burn even as if he made war against them: and
therefore he shows, that he will carry himself more moderately, because he
has to do with his vine. Hence we gather, that if the Lord be not angry with
us, If God refrain his anger toward us, it is not for our merits, but for his
free election sake.
we are not to attribute it to our own merits or deserts, but to his own
free election. For in saying, who would set him, he apparently shows, that he
has just cause to make war upon us, and utterly to consume us; were it not for
the compassion he has to his Church. And we should also be like to thorns and
unbelievers, unless the Lord in his mercy, did vouchsafe to separate us from
amongst them, lest we should perish with them. If any would join these two
words, in battle, with these words, who would set? the sense also would not be
amiss.

Verse. 5. Or will he feel my strength, Or, let him make peace with me, let him
make peace with me.
that he may make peace with me, and be at one with me?
THe Hebrew particle is often disjunctive; and therefore this place is
expounded as if it had been said; Either let her feel my strength, or let her
make peace with me: that is to say, if she make not peace with me, then shall
she feel my strength, to her great loss. Others expound it a little
otherwise; Who will feel my strength? that is to say, who will repress it?
But I leave this interpretation, because it seems too much constrained;
contenting my self with that which is most received. The expositours think
then that God threatens the Jews, as one that assaies all means to bring them
home into the right way: for God must work upon us many ways, in respect we
are so accustomed to abuse his patience and goodness. And therefore he often
tertifies, that he will bring upon us the punishment of our ingratitude; which
it seems Isaiah does in this place: as if he should say; If this people will
not accept of my kindness, and repent, and so make peace with me, I assure
them they shall feel the weight of my hand, which hitherunto I have withholden
from them. There may another apt sense be also gathered hence, and yet somewhat
differing from this. As if the Lord should exhort the people to acknowledge his
power, by which they might be brought to seek peace with him: for whence
proceeds that brutish confidence, that we fear not the anger of God, but
because we reverence not his power as we ought to do?

Yet had I rather take it here by way of interrogation; which kind of reading
we often times meet with all; as thus: Will he feel my force that he may
make peace with me? Simile.
as if a father being in some perplexity and care for the good of his son,
should take up a sorrowful complaint on this manner; Will not this untoward
boy endure that I should do him good? I am at my wits end, I know not how to
deal with him; he will abide no rough handling: and yet he abuses my lenity.
What shall I do? Surely I will turn him out of doors, if I see no amendment:
and then I think he will feel how great the power of a father is, whereby I
have hitherto maintained him. For seeing he cannot bear kind usage, I will try
what severity will work. Will he not at length acknowledge what mine
authority is over him, and seek to be at one with me? Our mise^ies arise
from the want of feeling of the Lords goodness.
Now we shall the better understand this, if we consider that all our evils
arise from the want of being touched with the feeling of Gods goodness: for
could it once come into our minds how many benefits we have received from his
hands, it would suffice to withdraw us from all our our bad courses, and we
would forthwith seek to be reconciled unto him.

We may behold here then, Note how carfull the Lord is for our welfare.
how careful our heavenly Father is for our salvation, as one that would make
us feel both his power and goodness; that so perceiving the worth of them
both, we might partake in the fruits of both more and more. In a word, he would
graciously with us; must he not needs manifest his power and greatness, that
we being humbled by the same, and touched to the quick with his judgments, we
may with all meekness seek unto him, and gladly sue for pardon and favor at
his hands? now this is brought to pass when we convert unto him without
faining: Let us make our accounts that if we will make peace with God, we must
be at enmity with Satan and sin. Note Gods willingness to be at peace with
us.
for it cannot be that we should find favor in his sight, as long as we
please and flatter our selves in our vices. On the other side, if we make
peace with him, then must we make full account to be at enmity with Satan
and sin.

But the doubling of the words gives us most clearly to perceive, how desirous
the Lord is to be at one with us: for he might have said in a word, that he
is willing to make peace with us, and ready to forgive. When then he doubles
it twice, Let him make peace with me, I say, let him make peace with me: he
therein expresses with what a willing and ready mind, yea and with what
fervent desire he hastens to abolish all our iniquities.

Verse. 6. Hereafter Jacob shall take root, Israel shall flourish and grow, and
the world shall be filled with fruit.
NOw he shows by the effects, what this love is whereof he spoke in the
former verses. For the better understanding whereof, we must consider the
estate of this ancient people which was Gods heritage: not by their deserts,
but by the benefit of the free adoption. The Lord had just cause to be angry
with them, so far forth as to cast them wholly out of his sight, and to root
them clean out. But he refrained his anger, Verse. 2, 3.
because he had to do with his vine and inheritance. For his only meaning
was, that the people should acknowledge their fault, and by that means return
into favor with him. And this is the cause why he adds this promise to the
former, lest the people should despair, by being overmuch feared with this
power of God, from which these rods and chastisements were threatened to
proceed. It is an easy matter to slip into despair by the sight of Gods
judgments, unless some hope of mercy be left us.
For it is easy to slip into desperation by the sense of Gods judgment, if
there be not some hope left us of mercy.

Therefore he says, that Jacob shall take root again: as if he should say, I
have in deed wasted my Church, and brought her almost to nothing, yet shall she
recover her first flourishing estate, so as she shall fill the whole world; for
she shall increase more and more after she is reconciled unto me. Now this
similitude which is drawn from taking root, is very elegant, because we are
as good as plucked up by the roots whilst God is angry with us, for then we
are as good as dead and utterly cut off: but how soever the Lord afflicts his
Church, yet he never suffers the roots to die: God afflicts his Church, but he
never suffers her root to perish.
true it is they lie hid, but yet in time they shall revive and bring forth
fruit.

Whereas he says the world shall be filled with the fruit of these roots;
that was accomplished at the coming of Christ, who gathered and multiplied the
people of God by his Gospel: Ephesians. 2.14. Isa. 2.3.
for then Israel and the Gentiles were united into one body, and so the
difference was taken away which was between them in former time. Now we are
not ignorant that the Gospel, Ioh. 4.22.
and the whole fruit which it brought forth, proceeded first from the Jews.

Verse. 7. Has he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain
according to the slaughter of those that were slain by him?
HE confirms the former sentence, to wit, that they might see sure and evident
signs of Gods love and goodness even in his chastisements: for he is wont so to
correct his people that whilst he beats the^ down with his left hand, he
susteins them with his right. This verse is diversely expounded: some interpret
it thus, Have I smitten Israel, as his enemies have smitten him? The Assyrians
showed them no mercy, but vexed them with all rigor, but I have moderated my
wrath, and have not smitten them for their ruin: whereby I have well showed
that I was not their enemy. And yet me thinks the other exposition pleases me
better, which also is the most received, to wit, that a difference is here put
between the faithful and the wicked: God afflicts the elect and reprobate
both alike in this life, but after a diverse manner. Romans 9.22.
for the Lord punishes them both indifferently; but yet after a diverse manner.
For in punishing the reprobate he gives way to his anger, because he means to
root them out in regard they be vessels of his wrath ordained to destruction,
as those that have no taste nor feeling at all of his goodness: but when he
corrects his children, he moderates his anger, and aims at a contrary mark,
for he thereby means to work their amendment, and to draw them to himself,
that so in the end they may have a better and a more permanent estate.

of him which smote him. 2. Sam. 24.14.
It is better to fall into the hands of God, then into the hands of men: for
the Lord can never forget his covenant; wherein he has given his word to use
his Church with all loving and fatherly affection.

Verse. 8. In measure in the branches thereof will thou contend with it, or,
although he shall blow.
when he blows with his rough wind in the day of the east wind.
THis is the second proof of Gods mercy toward his elect; whom he judges
with the world, 1. Cor. 11.32.
lest they should be condemned with the world: for whilst he smites them, he
so moderates his blows, that he still has an eye to their weakness; so as he
will never correct them beyond measure. As touching the word measure, all the
expositors conclude that it signifies moderation: for otherwise we were never
able to bear Gods hand; but should be overwhelmed forthwith: but he holds an
even hand, and is also faithful, as S. Paul says, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able to bear, 1. Cor. 10.13. And thus Jeremiah Iere.
10.24.
desires the Lord to correct him in judgment, that is to say, in measure, that
so the blows might be proportionable to his infirmity. But the expositors
agree not in ye interpretation of these words, in the branches: for some
translate, In setting one of them against another by civil wars: Others,
that God will revenge their wickednesses by that sword which themselves have
drawn out and put into his hand. But I pass by both these expositions,
because I can not approve of them: that interpretation which I take to be the
most probable is theirs, who expound, In his buds, that is to say, In his
pla^ts, signifying, that the Lord will not only curse their goods, but their
persons also. For we know that Gods chastisements are of diverse kinds: the
lightest are those whereby he depriues us of outward things, which are
commonly termed the goods of fortune. Goods of fortune.
His meaning is then, that God will so chastise the faithful, as he will not
only touch them in their persons, but he will also deprive them of ordinary
food, to wit, of wheat, wine, oil, and other like commodities which the
earth brings forth: for the verb Shalach (whereof this word bud comes) signifies
to bring forth, sprout, or bud.

But I have another exposition which comes nearer the Prophets meaning; to wit,
that God contends with his Church in her buds or branches: for albeit he lops
off the branches, and cuts down the body of the tree also, yet he will not
suffer his wrath to consume the roots and all: but the tree shall spring,
because there is always some sap in the roots, which God will never suffer to
die nor decay. And this fits well with the sixth verse, where he promised that
Israel should take root, and bring forth fruit. He expounds that then which
he spoke before; to wit, in measure: that is to say; he will not pluck it up
by the roots: for the Lord will lop off that which appears on the outside of
the tree; to wit, the branches and the leaves; but he will keep the root
sound. As for the reprobates, he will utterly stub them up, and so mangle them
to pieces, that they shall never sprout more.

Whereas others have translated; He blew with his wind: I have thought it
better to say; Although he shall have blowed: for he continues the similitude
in which he alluded to the herbs and plants, which wither away when any
sharp wind blows upon them; yet it is but in the upper parts, because the
root lies always warm in the earth. So, albeit the Lord comes violently upon
the faithful, and disfigures them so, that they seem as good as brought to
nothing, yet is he wont to preserve some sap and seed within them.

Whereas the Prophet names the east wind; he respects the situation of Judea,
because that wind did much hurt there; as we may see by many other places. Now
we know that every Country has his particular wind, which is noisome unto it.
As for example; some have the the north-east wind; some the south wind: others
the east wind rising under the Sun, which is very hurtful; for it makes the
corn to shed, blasts and spoils al fruits; it shakes the trees, and leaves
nothing almost in the fields yt is good behind it. By this east wind then, some
understand that which is toward the Sun rising, being exceeding noisome to
many Countries.

Verse. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this
is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin: when he shall make all the
stones of the Altar as chalk stones broken in pieces, that the groves and
images may not stand up.
Having spoken of the chastisement of the people; he now begins in plainer
words to show, that the Lord will so provide for their salvation, by those rods
wherewith he corrected them, that they shall feel the fruit thereof. I grant
he spoke of this before, but now he expounds himself more clearly; to wit,
that all the afflictions wherewith God humbled them, In what sense it is said
that afflictions purge away sins. Object.
should serve as medicines to purge their sins, so as they should recover his
former favor.

But will some man say, are sins purged by afflictions, by which God corrects
us? If it be so, then it follows that they are satisfactions for sins; as
the Papists teach. For these two things depend one upon another; to wit, if God
correct us for our sins, that they may be done away; then if he sends no
affliction, it follows that there must be some satisfaction in stead of it.
Corrections are Gods medicines by which he cures our maladies.
in regard we are wont to abuse his patience and long suffering. Needful it is
therefore that he should force us to acknowledge our sins, and to bear
afflictions patiently: and thus afflictions are as purgations whereby our
wicked lusts are consumed, Psalm. 66.10.12. Psalm. 89.46.
even as if they had passed through the fire; which metaphor the Scripture is
often wont to use. But they can no way become satisfactions: I grant men may
be prepared by them to repentance.

Thus he teaches then that the faithful have none occasion at all to repine
against the hand that smote them; but rather to acknowledge that God uses this
as a means to procure their salvation; because otherwise they would not be
brought to taste how good and gracious he is. If any desire a shorter
distinction, we say in a word, that chastisements purge our sins mediately,
but not immediately, for they bring us to repentance; which in its order and
place, leads us to the obtaining of the forgiveness of sins.

Now whereas we have translated, Behold, all the fruit shall be, etc. others
read it in the genitive; Of the taking away: but I hold it better to read it
in the nominative case, in which it is. The word all, is often taken for great,
or abundant: he means then that there shall come a plentiful harvest as it
were, by these afflictions. To be short, Afflictions ought to be taken in good
part, in regard of the fruit they bring with them.
he would have this correction to be well taken, in regard of the profit which
it brings with it; that the faithful bearing of them patiently and quietly,
might thereby be purged from their corruptions, and brought into the way of
salvation.

But in the next place the Prophet expounds himself yet more clearly, where
he speaks of the abolishing of superstitions: for whilst Israel was in
prosperirie, they never thought of repentance: and truly it is given to men
naturally to wax extreme proud and stubburne, Prosperity begets pride in us
naturally.
when they enjoy ease and pleasure. He shows then that God meant together with
their chastisement, to purge their sins; because they had soothed up themselves
in their naughtiness before, whilst the Lord heaped up blessings upon them,
and caused them to feel his goodness and mercy: but now they should change
both their mind and their manners, acknowledging and confessing that they were
justly punished. Now the Prophet puts one kind here for all, to the end we
should comprehend the whole under this part: so as in a word he notes out the
abolishing of all Idolatry and superstition. For he mentions not the Altar
which was consecrated unto God, but that which themselves had dedicated to
their Idols. When the stones of it then should be broken, If sin be put away
when all Idolatry is banished: then whilst Idolatry remains sin must
needs be imputed.
the Idols overthrown, and dashed in pieces, so that no signs of Idolatry at
all were to be seen, even at that very instant should the sins of the people
be taken away.

Hence we learn that we can look for no pardon from the Lord unless we
forthwith repent us of our sins: for whosoever he be that flatters himself
in his filthiness, he shall assuredly pull down the wrath of God upon his own
head, which he cease not to inflame against him. Our iniquity then is taken
away when we are touched with a true feeling of repentance. In the second place
observe, that albeit repentance be an inward affection of the heart, yet it
stays not there, but brings forth fruits to the view of men. For it is in
vain to make men believe we fear God, unless we cause our light so to shine
before them by our outward works: for we can not separate the root from the
fruit. Thirdly we have to note, that the Prophet mentions Idolatry
principally in this place, because it is the fountain from whence all evils
flow. For whilst Gods pure worship and sincere religion florisheth, you shall
see the duties of charity necessarily to flow from thence: The forsaking of
God, the next way to tumble us headlong into the committing of all iniquities.
but we no sooner forsake God, but he forthwith lets us fall into all sorts of
vices. And this is the maine reason why he comprehends all kinds of
wickednesses under the name of Idolatry. Besides, we see that he not only
condemns Images and Idols, but whatsoever the Jews had invented without the
prescript rule of the law: whence it follows, that all will worship is
rejected of GOD. God reiects not Idolatry alone, but all will worship, all be
it be grounded upon never so good intents.
Where he adds in the end, that they shall no more arise or stand up: he
shows how odious a thing Idolatry is in Gods sight, seeing he will have the
very memory thereof to be quite abolished, so as afterward there should no
sign thereof be left at all. And yet the Prophet meant to express somewhat
more, to wit, that our repentance should be such, as that we ought to persevere
therein co^stantlie unto the end. For we call not that true repentance when men
are only moved upon some sudden passion to renounce and abolish their
superstitions, and then forthwith to suffer them to sprout and increase again,
which yet we see comes often to pass in many, who in the beginning seemed to
be consumed with zeal in an outward show, and within a while have grown key
cold again. But the Prophet here notes out such a constant zeal, True
repentance holds out to the end.
that those who have once begun to forsake and renounce their abominations,
hold out and persevere in a good course unto the end.

Verse. 10. Or, nevertheless.
Yet the defenced City shall be desolate, and the habitation shall be
forsaken, and left like a wilderness. There shall the Calfe feed, and there
shall he lie, Or, shall brouze upon the tops thereof.
and consume the branches thereof.
YEt.] Some take the Hebrew Conjunction Vau, for a particle of rendering the
cause; and some, as if it signified Otherwise: therefore it will bear a double
sense. If we interpret it For, then the Prophet should give a reason of that
which went before: but that is against the drift of the text; and besides, it
is utterly a very absurd exposition. Those who take it for Otherwise, have
the most likelihood: for this threat may well agree, If you repent not, look
to the issue; Your City which is so well fortified, shall be made like a
wilderness. But yet me thinks this is too constreined a sense. I had rather then
expound it, Notwithstanding, or nevertheless: for the Prophet meant to say,
that Jerusalem and the rest of the Cities of Judea should be destroyed: neither
could Jerusalem possibly escape, albeit God meant to spare his people. This
admonition was very requisite, because the faithful might have been discouraged
in seeing this holy City overthrown, and the Temple laid on heaps: but they
knew by the former prophesies that God had means enough in store to conserve his
Church, and the consideration thereof vpheld them. The Prophet then goes about
to prevent this temptation. And from hence learn, that we ought never to be
out of heart howsoever we be brought to a great exigent; and that the Lord
begins to handle us with all extremity. Now albeit this threatening may well
concern all Judea, yet I rather think that he speaks here principally of
Jerusalem, which was the Mother City of that country.

Whereas he adds that the Calfe shall feed there, it is a figurative manner of
speech much used among the Prophets as often as they mention the destruction of a
City: for they then forthwith show that the place shall be made pasture
ground. In which we have to observe what should move the Lord to execute such a
judgment as to put brute beasts to feed in that place which the Jews by their
wickedness had profaned. Surely he had adopted them to be his children, and
therefore it was their duties to have yielded subjection to so loving a father:
but in regard they had broken out into licentious behavior against him, and
had shaken off his yoke, The sins of a nation may so far provoke the Lord,
that where it was an habitation for men, it shall become an habitation for
beasts only.
it was just with the Lord as a punishment of their ingratitude, that the place
of their dwelling should now be inhabited by better inhabitants, taken from
among brute beasts, rather then men.

Whereas he says the tops, it is to augment the description of this waste and
desolation: as if he should say, There shall be such plenty of grass, that the
Calves shall only brouze upon the tenderest parts thereof. The word Saiph
signifies also a bow or branch: but because they naturally sprout up on high,
I take it here for the top, or end. We may also affirm that the Prophet
alludes to the fair show which the City had, it being in times past
beautified with fair and high buildings; but nothing should be seen there
(these houses being thrown down) but grass, and boughs of trees, wherewith
the calves being plentifully fed, should only for wantonness, browze upon the
tops thereof.

Verse. 11. When Or, his ha^uest shall dry.
the boughs of it are dry, they shall be broken: the women Or, shall come, and
shall set, etc.
come and set them on fire: for it is a people of none understanding; therefore
he that made them shall have no compassion of them; and he that formed them
shall have no mercy on them.
SOme think the Prophet has respect to the similitude of the vine, whereof
he spoke in the beginning of this Chapter; and therefore they translate, When
the branches shall die. I grant that the word Kesirah, is ambiguous: but
because the similitude of the harvest agrees better; as also that the Hebrew
word may be so expounded, therefore I had rather take it in this sense. And yet
I translate not, When the harvest shall be dried; but, When the harvest shall
dry. Now, To dry in this place signifies nothing else but to come to ripeness;
as if he should say, Before the crop be ripe it shall be cut down: and so the
Lord will deprive thee of that which thou thoughtest thou had sure enough in
thine hand. Where he says, the women shall come; his meaning is, that God
shall need no strong army of men to finish this business, but poor weak
women shall suffice: and thus he amplifies the indignity that shall be
offered them in this chastisement. For he threatens that the calamity shall be
full of shame and reproach, in regard that it is a greater disgrace to be
prayed upon and spoiled by the hands of silly women, who were never expert in
feats of arms, then by men who are soldiers by profession.

In the next place he shows the cause of this so great a calamity: for at
the first blush the Lord might seem too severe in suffering his chosen to be
so miserably vexed and scattered, without any succor. Why so? Because it is
contrary to his loving and fatherly disposition, to deal thus with his
children. But our Prophet shows, that God did not correct the Jews so
rigorously without good reason, for they were destitute of understanding, and
sound judgment. Prou. 1.7. Psalm. 111.10
It is not for nothing the^ that he says, ignorance was the cause of all their
miseries: for seeing true wisdom consists in the fear of God, does not the
holy Ghost justly condemn all them to be blind earthwormes, who despise God
to walk after their own inordinate lusts?

Ignorance excuses not.
And yet such a blindness cannot excuse nor free us from being guilty of
malice: for they that offend God, do it maliciously, notwithstanding they be
hoodwincked, in respect of the violences of their lusts: ignorance and malice
For ignorance is for the most part joined with malice.
then are joined together; yet so, that this ignorance proceeds from a corrupt
desire of the heart. Thence is it that the Hebrews call all sins generally
by the name of ignorances: and thus Moses says, Oh that they were wise! Deuteronomy.
32.29. Now every one may easily be drawn to subscribe to this, by considering
in himself with what crooked affections he is carried away: for being once
deprived of the light of holy doctrine, and destitute of understanding, the
devil sets us going with such a head strongnesse, that we neither fear Gods
hand, nor make any account of his holy word. And that he may set us over boots
and all, as they say, in the next place he strives to take away from us all
hope of pardon, which may be referred to the whole body of this people in
general. For albeit that a remna^t were preserved, yet the wrath of God ceased
not for all that to be inflamed against the whole multitude in general.

Whereas the Prophet calls God the maker and former of Israel; it is not meant
as in respect of the creation of heaven and earth; but because he made and
formed Israel his Church anew, by the work of regeneration: Ephesians. 2.10.
in which sense, Saint Paul says, that we are the workmanship of God: Chap.
17.7.
as we also have showed in another place. Now the reason that moved Isaiah to
speak thus, was to aggrauate and to amplify the measure of their
unthankfulness, to which they were grown: showing that they were justly
punished, because they dishonored and disreuerenced that God most shamefullie,
who had both formed and preserved them.

Verse. 12. And Or, yet notwithstanding.
in that day shall the Lord thresh from the channel of the river, unto the
river of Egypt: and ye shall be gathered one by one, O children of Israel.
IN this place the Prophet mitigates the sharpness of the former sentence: for
it was an horrible judgment of God upon this people, to be left destitute of
all hope of favor or mercy. The Hebrew particle Vau therefore, should be
translated as it was in the tenth verse; Notwithstanding, or, Nevertheless it
shall come to pass in that day. Also the Prophet uses a similitude, wherein
he compares the gathering of the Church to corn that is threshed; which is
afterward separated from the chafe. But what might move him to use this
similitude? The poor captives were so oppressed, that they appeared no
otherwise, then as corn that is hidden and scattered under the chafe. The
Lord was feign to divide that which was hidden under this confused heap then,
as with a fan. This similitude therefore of threshing out the corn, does very
fitly resemble this gathering.

By the channel of the river, unto the river, he means Euphrates and Nilus:
for the people were driven partly into Caldea or Assyria, and partly into
Egypt: for many fled into Egypt, when the rest were carried captive into
Babylon. Thus then he foretelles how the Lord will gather his people from all
quarters, not only from Caldea, and out of the whole

Verse. 4. For his glorious beauty shall be a fading flower, which is upon the
head of the valley of them that be fat, and as the hasty fruit before summer,
which while he that looks upon it while it is in his hand, he eats it.
It is not an easy matter to humble such as are besotted with the pleasures of
this life. Denis a tyrant of Sicilia.
He almost repeates the very same words which were in the first verse: for it
is not an easy matter to humble and terrify those that are besotted with the
pleasures of this life, whose eyes are hoodwincked by reason of abundance and
prosperity. For Denis the second, a tyrant of Sicilia, became so bewitched,
that he was ready to fall on his nose ever and anon, because he was an
excessive eater and drinker at great banquets: and thus men's minds are
intoxicated, through over much pampering of themselves with delicates, so as
they both forget God and themselves. The Prophet then repeates one and the same
thing twice, to these that were so blockish and dull of hearing: to the end
they might understand and believe that which otherwise would have seemed
incredible.

But he yet adornes his speech by another goodly similitude, which is very
fitting for his purpose; for fruits that are hastily ripe, are best esteemed,
in regard they come first, and give some hope of a future increase; but they
last not long, neither are they fit to keep. And besides, they are fit for none
but great bellied women, or for children; or else for youths, which being
inordinate in their appetites, devour them by and by. Now he says, that such
shall be the felicity of the Israelites: as if he should say; Your
prosperity wherein you so much rejoice, will not last very long, but will be
eaten up in an instant. Now look what Isaiah threatens to the kingdom of
Israel, the same belongs also to all the world. For men by their ingratitude,
are the cause that all the benefits which the Lord bestows upon them, cannot
come to ripeness. Why so? Because we abuse and corrupt them by our
naughtiness. Thence it is that we bring forth hasty fruits of small
continuance, which otherwise might last to nourish us a long space.

Verse. 5. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and
for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people.
Having spoken of the Kingdom of Israel; he comes now to speak of the Tribe
of Judah, and shows, that in the midst of this so fearful a judgment of
God, he will always cause his mercy to be felt. So that howsoever the ten
Tribes were gone and lost; yet the Lord would reserve a remnant which should be
consecrated unto him, that therein the crown and the diadem of his glory and
magnificence might be found: that is to say, The Church shall never be so
disfigured, but the Lord will find a means to deck her with beauty and honor,
Cant. 1.4.
the Church shall never be so mangled and disfigured, but that the Lord will
find a means to crown and deck her with honor and glory. And yet I extend
not this prophecy indifferently to all the Jews, but only to the elect, who
were miraculously preserved from death: for albeit he calls this one Tribe and
an half but a remnant, in respect of the other ten Tribes; yet we shall see
hereafter, that he puts a difference between those who were of the Tribe of
Judah only. Neither are we to wonder that the Prophet speaks thus diversely
of one and the same people: for remnant of people, in regard of the ten Tribes
which had revolted from the pure service of God, and had separated themselves
from the unity of faith: but if we shall consider them without comparison, and
shall view them as they were in themselves, apart from the rest, he had just
cause to tax their wickedness.

I am not ignorant that others are of a contrary judgment; the reason is,
because he by and by speaks of wine, verse. 7. and so they think this sentence
should be joined with the beginning of the Chapter thus; It may be the Lord
will spare the Jews; but how is it possible he should, seeing they are as bad
as the rest? Seeing then that they are guilty of the same sin of
unthankfulness, must they not needs share with them in their punishment? But
these expositours do not advisedly consider that the Prophet is about to set
forth a testimony of Gods singular favor, in that he did not cause his whole
indignation to fall at once upon all the race of Abraham: but albeit he
overthrew the Kingdom of Israel, yet he gave the Jews respite to see whether
they would repent or no. Now with the setting forth of Gods patience toward
them, he under hand amplifies the fault of this peoples ingratitude. For
should not they have learned wisdom by their brethrens harms? yes; the
calamity of the Israelites should surely have awakened them, and drawn them to
repen^^nce. But they past it over lightly, and never took it to heart. Were
they not unworthy of so many benefits then, that would take no benefit thereby?
Well, yet the Lord was pleased to conserve his Church even in the midst of
them.

Now you see the cause why he delivered Judah and the half Tribe of Benjamin,
out of yt calamity in which he wrapped the Israelites. Moreover, because Judah
was a very small Tribe, and was therefore contemned of their brethren the
Israelites, the Prophet affirms that there is glory and riches enough in God,
to supply all outward wants. Our true way unto happiness, is to place it
wholly in God.
By this place we are taught what is the true way unto salvation; even to place
our whole happiness in God himself: for we no sooner turn back to the
world, but we gather flowers which fade and wither, yea and vanish away by and
by. But alas this frenzy reigns in every place more then it should: for men
will seek to be happy without God: that is to say, without happiness it
self. Isaiah also shows, that no calamity, be it never so great, can any way
let God to enrich and adorn his Church. For when all things shall seem as
good as desperate, yet God lives still to crown his servants with glory. It is
to be noted also, that he promises the Church shall be beautified with a new
hew, even then when her multitude shall be diminished; that by this means the
faithful might never be dismayed in the most horrible waste that may befall
them.

Verse. 6. And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and
for strength unto them that turn away the battle in the gate.
THe Prophet shows the cause why the Lord will beautify the remnant with new
glory. For he propounds before them the estate of a right government, under
which a people is preserved: which consists in two things principally; that is
to say, Counsel and strength. By counsel and wisdom, affairs force and
munition are for the annoiance of the enemy abroad. Now for as much as
Kingdoms and Commonwealths uphold and maintain their estates by these two
means, therefore God promises the spirit of wisdom and strength unto his
people. Wisdom and strength are the Lords, Job 12.13. Psalm. 127.1.
And therewithal teaches them, that the gift of both these are in his own
hands, and that they are not to be sought elsewhere: for neither can the
Magistrates govern the City well, in giving to every one his due: neither can
the Captains and Leaders repulse the enemy, unless both be led and directed
by the Lord.

Verse. 7. But they have erred because of wine, and are out of the way by strong
drink: the Priest and the Prophet have erred by strong drink, they are
swallowed up with wine, they have gone astray through strong drink; they fail
in vision; they stumble in judgment.
He now directs his speech unto the profane despisers of God, who were Jews
only in name; and sets forth their ingratitude

He speaks here of wine and strong drink, by way of similitude: for I
understand not this place of the common sin of drunkenness, against which he
spoke in the first verse; but I rather think he means they were become like
unto drunkerds, in regard they were deprived of common sense and understanding.
If the word As, therefore be supplied to wine and strong drink, then the sense
will be the more plain and evident. I deny not but men wax worse then beasts,
by the excess of taking in meats and drinks: nay, questionless their
excess therein had sore dazeled the spirits of the Jews: but if we consider
well of the whole course of the text, it will be easy to see, that he
condemns their iniquity under a similitude.

Where he adds, the Priest and the Prophet; he continues the amplification of
their sin whereof we spoke before: so that the common people were not only
drunk, but even the Priests themselves, who should have been lights to have
given direction unto others: for they are compared to the salt of the earth, as
Christ teaches: now if they grow unsavory and graceless, what shall become
of the multitude? if the eye be dark, what shall become of the parts of the
whole body? Mat. 5. 13. and 6.23.

But the worst of all was, that they erred not only in open wickednesses, but
in vision and judgment also: whence we may gather; that the state of the Jews
was very desperate. And here have we a fair looking glass, wherein we may
take a through view of our selves. Is it not strange, that after so many
miseries and afflictions, which God has used to purge out our corruptions,
that the Church should yet notwithstanding be so impure? But such is our
frowardness, that we kick against the pricks: so that howsoever the Lord
endeavors by all means to correct our vices, yet we not only frustrate the
same by our rebellions, but daily gather new defilements to the former,
wherewith we were spotted before. It is no marvel then if men now adays are
so hardened and wax worse and worse, notwithstanding the Church has been so
many ways humbled: for Isaiah affirms, that the people in old time did the
like.

Now whereas the Lord overcame so great and execrable a villainy, by his
sovereign bounty, and did still preserve his Church; we must needs
acknowledge that this came to pass by his secret purpose, far besides the
expectation of any: for he shall prevail but little with us, if he only use
ordinary and common remedies.

From this place also it appeeres how sottish and childish the Papists are in
their brags, The sottishness of the Papists assertion, The Church cannot err,
discovered.
who have ever in their mouths the Church, the Church: and under the title of
their Priests, Bishops, Prelates, and their authority, resist the open and
manifest Scriptures: as if, forsooth, these holy orders could never err.
Indeed they would make us believe, that they have the holy Ghost shut up in
their brain, as if they were the body represe^tatiue of ye whole Church which
is never forsaken of God. But here we see what Isaiah says of the Prophets and
Priests of his time, whose calling was far more excellent then was the calling
of any (of their shauelings.) Doubtless if ever there were a true Church of
God, it was amongst the Jews: and the calling of the Priests of that time was
approved of by his word, for which these have not so much as a syllable. And
yet he shows that even they were no only corrupted in manners, but erred also
in vision and in judgment: and not only that, but the Prophets also, whom God
raised up extraordinarily to be helps unto the Priests in regard of their
negligence: even these became blind in their revelations, and in that holy
ministry of teaching and instructing the people. What is more vain then, then
under the pretext of a titularie office to exempt themselves from erring, when
as yet in the mean while they have not only forsaken the Lord and all true
religion, but have also trodden under foot all honesty, and yet are not ashamed
to defend their tyranny by all the means they can?

Verse. 8. For all their tables are full of filthy vomiting: no place is
clean.
HE goes on with the similitude, and represents out unto us as in a glass the
manners of such as are given to gluttony: for having once cast off all
humanity, they not only become like brute beasts, but plunge themselves into
all filthiness. Doubtless it is an odious and vile spectacle, to see tables
bestrawed with vomitings: and therefore Isaiah under this figure shows, that
the whole lives of these people were very noisome and unsavory. Yea we may
safely conjecture that the Prophet in a word meant to say, That things were
wholly corrupted and profaned amongst the Jews; so that if any one approached
but near to their tables, he should find nothing but drunkenness, and filthy
vomiting: that is to say, he that should observe their carriage, should see no
part thereof free from loathsome vices and impieties. And as for the doctrine,
which of all other was the most precious, truly that was so corrupt, that it
stanke no less then if it had been defiled with spewings and excrements. Now
it is not my purpose to soar aloft into allegories here, as some do.

Verse. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge? And whom shall he make to understand
the things that he hears? Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn
from the breasts.
THe Prophet in this place with great astonishment shows, that the peoples
disease is grown incurable, and that God had no more fit medicines left in
store to heal them, in regard he had but lost all the labor and cost which he
had spent to recover them. Truly, behold here the most sovereign remedy
that God can use, when he seeks to call such as are gone astray out of the
right way, never ceasing to call upon them that err, to that purpose: but when
this takes none effect; what hope is left of their recovery, that refuse to be
ordered by those means that should do them good? He complains then that God
is driven to his shifts (as it were) in regard the people were become so
senseless that they would not endure he should cure them: and therefore he
compares the Jews to little children lately wained, or to such as begin to
prattle, upon whom a man should lose his labor that should endeavor to teach
them any thing.

S. Peter for good cause exhorts the faithful to draw near, and as newborn
babes to suck in the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby:
1. Pet. 2.2. for a man will never show himself teachable unless he puts off
that rebellion which all of us have brought with us from our mothers wombs. But
the Prophet here condemns another kind of Childhood, to wit, when men be so
besotted in their vices that they meditate no more in the heavenly doctrine
then if they were become stark idiots. And therefore some fondly join this
verse and that place of S. Peter together: for they make the Prophet speak as
if the Lord should be brought in seeking such disciples as were emptied of all
pride; and were become like children lately weaned. But he rather complains
that his doctrine was published in vain, being propounded as a matter of
wonderment to fools and unwise, who yet are not children in malice, but in
understanding, as S. Paul says 1. Cor. 14.20. It will also appear by that
which follows in the text, that howsoever they could not comprehend his
doctrine, yet that God was not to be accused of over great severity if he
rejected them; and would no longer lose time in speaking as to deaf ears.

Verse. 10. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto
line, line unto line, there a little, and there a little.
THis verse sufficiently manifests that the Lord complains as one that had
lost all his labor, in teaching a people obstinate and unteachable. Simile.
For the case was all one as if a man should take upon him to instruct little
children, to whom he must repeat the letters over and over, who yet
immediately forget what was taught them. For although the Master should spend a
whole day in teaching them a letter, yet the next day he must begin his labor
afresh, and so the next to that likewise, and yet he shall gain nothing by it,
albeit he bestows all the pains and skill he has. Those who change the
Prophets words here, that they might not offend the ears of the readers, do by
an affected phrase of speech corrupt the sense, and cause his words to lose
that grace which otherwise is in them: for in repeating the same words, he
meant to signify a variable and continual repetition, which we know is very
troublesome. For it is a similitude drawn (as we have said) from little
children, whose memories the Master dares not charge with any great matter,
because they are incapable of it, but is feign to distill the first principles
into them as it were drop by drop. And for that cause he repeates the same
thing once, twice, yea, many times, and is still refreshing their memories with
their old lesson. In a word, such scholars must be always fed with milk,
until they be grown to more maturitie and ripenes of judgment.

The Prophet in like manner somewhat after a quipping manner of speech, uses
these words; here a little, and there a little. Those interpret it ill, as I
think, who read the word a little, line: as if the Prophet had had respect to
a building that goes up slowly, and is raised an end by lines, now a little,
and then alittle. For this had been an improper similitude, and too far
fetched, seeing he speaks here of childrens first rudiments. I confess
indeed that the same Hebrew word is used in the 18. Chapter, where I have
translated, From all parts, or, Line after line, and so in many other places:
but the circumstance of this text requires another sense, as also in Psalm.
19.4. Unless the word line, or measuring instrument should agree better there:
yet I deny not but under a figure it may well be taken for instruction, or
rule. For in as much as the rule or plummet which they use in buildings is
called by the same name, as we shall afterward see in this Chapter, it is no
marvel if it be referred to other rules.

Verse. 11. For with a stammering tongue, and with a strange language shall he
speak unto this people.
WHereas some supply, that it is as if one spoke, it is superfluous. I refer
this to God then, who, as the Prophet says, spoke in a strange language to
this barbarous people. This reprehension ought therefore to have pierced them
to the heart, in regard that by their own default they made him to slut and
stammer, who yet gives speech unto all. He threatens them not, but rather
accuses them of blockishnes, in that they made the heavenly doctrine to
become nothing else but a confused sound unto them, so as they received no
benefit by it, because they wittinglie stopped their ears against it. The
Prophet therefore compares their folly to a thing against nature, in that they
would not hear the voice of the Lord.

Verse. 12. Unto whom he said, This is the rest: give rest to him that is
weary: and this is the refreshing, but they would not hear.
SOme expound this sentence in many words thus, If any say unto them, This is
the rest, they will not hear: but this is of no force, neither does it make
that cohere^ce which it should. The Prophet rather shows why God became a
barbarian (as it were) to the Jews: to wit, because they wanted ears to hear
him; so that in effect he spoke as unto them that were deaf, for they would
not learn what this rest meant. But this deafnes proceeded from rebellion; for
they presumptuouslie rejected all wholesome doctrine with a settled malice. It
was a frowardness doubly inexcusable then, to reject that rest which was
offered them, which all men also naturally desire. They were too far gone
already in impiety

Hence we gather, that the unbelievers do willingly plunge themselves into a
miserable unquietness of mind as soon as God tenders his word unto them: What
an inestimable benefit Gods word brings, if our own infidelity deprived us
not of it.
for he allures all men to partake in this blessed rest. He shows us also the
mark, unto which if we level the whole course of our lives, true felicity
attends us; so as having once heard the heavenly doctrine, no man can run
astray, unless he will do it wittingly. Oh how amiable then ought this good
word of God to be in our eyes, seeing it brings us so inestimable a benefit
with it, when with rest and peace of conscience we may possess so perfect a
blessedness! All men naturally desire rest, yet few take the right way to enjoy
it.
All will in words affirm boldly, that nothing is better then to dwell in a
place of rest: and yet where is he that makes account of it when it is offered
him? Nay, all in a manner shun it, as if men had agreed with a common consent to
live in miserable perplexity, and continual trembling of heart. In the mean
while, none is to murmr and say, that he sins ignorantly: for what is more
clear and manifest then the doctrine of God? all excuses of men therefore are
but in vain. In a word, what is more absurd, then to lay the fault upon God,
as if he taught men either obscurely, or confusedly? Now as God here testifies
that he rest: so on the other side

Where it follows, Give rest to him that is weary, some expound it, as if God
required works of charity, if so be we will find favor in his sight: and
these works are here comprehended under a part for the whole. But as I think
the Prophet meant another thing: he rather shows what rest it is which God
affords us for the releeuing of our infirmity: We are convinced of great
ingratitude, if our own necessities can not quicken us up to seek the
remedies which God freely offers us.
and certainly we are convinced of over great ingratitude, if necessity, which
of it self is a sharp spur, cannot for all that quicken us forward to seek
this remedy. This sentence of the Prophet tends almost to the same end that the
words of Christ do, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that travel and are
heavy laden, and I will ease you. So that Isaiah sets the choice of two things
here before the Jews,

Moreover, in that he shows that this rest is prepared for those that are
weary and groan under the burden: we are taught, therein at the least, to
have our recourse unto the word of God, It is the property of Gods word to b
ing assured rest to our souls. See Ier. 6.16.
to the end we may obtain rest. By which we may be assured, and that by good
experience, that it is the property of this word, to quiet our boiling
passions, and to appease our distracted and amassed consciences. Whosoever he
be then that wanders in seeking rest out of the bounds of this word, shall
always be vexed, and shall surely tremble in continual fears: and good
reason, for they will be wise and happy without God. This, as we see, befalls
the Papists, who having scorned this peace, are therefore tossed to and fro all
their life time with horrible anxietie. For Satan turns end winds them, that
they are ever vexed with terrible astonishments, and yet can never find any
place of rest.

Verse. 13. Therefore shall the word of the Lord be unto them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line unto line, there a little,
and there a little, that they may go and fall backward, and be broken, and
be snared, and be taken.
ALbeit the Prophet repeates the same speech with the former, yet ye sense does
a little alter: for now he denounces the punishment of this so wilful a
deafness whereof he spoke. The judgment is, that God shall so dazzle their
wits, that they shall not only reap no fruit at all of the doctrine of
salvation, but an empty and unprofitable sound. In a word, from the former
verses he concludes, that seeing the word of God had in no sort profited the
Jews; that their unthankfulness should now be punished. Note that God may
continue his word in a nation, and in the mean while deprive them of the
benefit thereof.
Not that Gods word should be clean taken from them; but in wanting
understanding and a right judgment, they should groape for the way at noone
day, and should not find it. And thus God blindes the eyes, and hardens the
hearts of the reprobates more and more, when they are waxen incorrigible.

Saint Paul alleges this place when he reprehends the foolish conceit of
the Corinthians, who were so possessed with pride, that they admired none but
such as spoke unto them in strange languages, 1. Cor. 14.21. It being an usual
thing with the common people, to wonder at strange and unwonted things. But
this place of Paul is ill understood, by reason they have not well pondered the
Prophets words; which the Apostle very fitly applies to his purpose. For he
declares how the Corinthians were carried away with a foolish and unbridled
ambition, unreasonably affecting things altogether unprofitable; and thus were
become children, not in malice, but in judgment and understanding. By means
whereof, they pulled the curse of God wittingly upon themselves; wherewith the
Prophet had threatened the Jews in this place. And so it came to pass, that
the word of God was unto them precept upon precept, receiving no more fruit by
it, then if one had told them a long tale in a language they understood not.
Men are grown exceeding fond therefore, when they begin to throw themselves by
a vain affection into wilful blindness and benummednesse of spirit; with
which plague the Lord here threatens the obstinate and rebellious. Saint Paul
then expounds and cleeres this sentence of the Prophet very well; showing,
that such as abuse the doctrine of salvation, are unworthy to profit any thing
at all by it.

We had almost the like place to this in the eight Chapter, Chap. 8.16. Chap.
29.9, 10.
where our Prophet compared his doctrine to letters sealed up: and anon he will
liken it to a closed book. This falls out when the Lord depriues men of the
light of his spirit, and of sound judgment for their unthankfulness sake;
that seeing, they might not see; and hearing, they might not hear at all:
whereby he punishes them most justly. We ought to observe this well, for we
often take our selves to be great proficients, and to be exceeding happy that
we have the word of God amongst us: but what profit get we by it, unless our
understandings be fitted to conceive it, and our hearts framed to be directed
by it? For wanting this, We are in worse case in inioying the word, then if we
were utterly bereaved of it, unless we yield obedience thereunto.
we are more accursed, then if we had not the word at all. And therefore we
stand in need of a twofold grace: First, that God would inlighten us by his
word: secondly, that he would open our eyes, and dispose our affections to
embrace the obedience of it. Otherwise, the light of the Gospel shall stand us
in no more stead, then the light of the Sun does to the eyes of him that is
stark blind.

By this chastisement then we are admonished, Let us beware how we abuse Gods
word.
not to abuse the word of God by our profaneness; but to use it to that end
for which he has ordained it.

In the end of the verse he shows, what ruin is like to fall upon those that
profit not by this clear light of the word, even to be left without a guide,
and to stumble and fall; because they are departed out of the right way. But he
tells them their falls shall not be easy, for they shall be broken.

By the word snared, he uses an other similitude; to wit, that snares are
prepared for unbelievers, wherein they shall be hampered and led to
destruction. We have had the like speech in the eight Chapter, Chap. 8.16.
and almost expressed in the very same words: for there the Prophet handles the
same doctrine, as touching the blinding of the people, who by the hardness of
their hearts, had provoked God to anger. Now his purpose is here to show, that
such who take the bridle in their teeth, and will needs turn their backs and
be gone from the direction of the word, are very near to a ruinous downfall.
For stumbling blocks, against which they shall dash themselves in pieces,
snared and taken. In a word, they shall no way escape; for a mischief watches
for them at every turning, who will not walk in the paths which God shows
them; for either they shall fall and be broken before all men; or themselves
by privy wiles, shall entrap their own feet in the snare.

Verse. 14. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord ye scornful men, that rule
this people which is at Jerusalem.
He (further) amplifies that sharp reprehension which he used before, and
withal, adds a consolation to revive the hearts of the faithful. For as on
the one side he threatens the wicked with destruction; so yet on the other
side he leaves matter of consolation for the faithful, assuring the^ that
their salvation is dear and precious to God. Now by the word mockers, he
means those that were witty and malicious, who by their wily devices,
thought to escape the judgments of God: for the verb Luts, from whence this
word mockers is derived, signifies to cavil and to mock. Now he speaks not
here to common persons; but to the Princes and Magistrates, who thought
themselves wiser and more prudent then those that were under their government.
But they employed this dexterity of wit, in devising how they might play mock
holy day with God. It is not for naught the^ that the Prophet does tauntingly
accuse them, in calling them scorners. As if he should say, You think you
have such deep devices in your heads, that you can circumuent the Lord; but he
will not take it at your hands.

Surely the greatest conflicts which the Prophets had, were against the rulers
of the people: for howsoever all estates were horribly corrupted, yet they
being swollen with a false conceit of their own wisdom, were the most
obstinate and intractable of all others. This is to be seen at all times
almost: for albeit the common people be carried away with a violent
brutishness, yet do they not ouerflow into such impiety as the great ones,
Courtiers, and such other subtle heads do, who think to go beyond all men in
finenesse of wit. The Ministers of Gods word then had need to arm themselves
(with the sword of the Spirit) principally against such subtle enemies: for
there are none so dangerous, that not only hurt themselves, but lead others
also by their example, to become scoffers and despisers. And for the most part,
they dazzle the eyes of the meaner sort, by means of their authority and great
titles.

Is it not a fearful and prodigious thing, think you, when the governors of
the church are not only blind, but also labor to put out the eyes of others,
and imbolden them to despise God, to contemn his holy word, and to rent it in
pieces with their jests? yea, when they employ the uttermost of their wits and
skill to overthrow true religion. But we ought to bend our forces against such
kind of men, and that according to the Prophets example in this place, and not
to be outfaced in this fight, whatsoever they can say or do unto us. And
himself shows how such scorners should be used: that is, not much to trouble
our heads in devising how to instruct them, (for teaching will do them little
good) but we ought to rebuke them sharply, and to terrify them with Gods
judgments. The greatness of the offense is augmented in regard such had place
in Gods sanctuary, and thereby infected his chosen people with their vile
behavior.

Verse. 15. But ye have said; We have made a covenant with death, and with hell
are we at agreement: though a scourge run over, and pass through, it shall
not come at us: for we have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we
hid.
HEre the Prophet adds the reason wherefore he called them mockers; namely,
because they had cast off all fear of God. And he shows how they made
themselves believe, that (of all men) they should never be punished for their
transgressions, so as they grew the more brazen faced. And as if this had been
a sufficient warrant for them, they gave themselves the more freely to do
evil, and without any fear, pursued whatsoever their lusts led them unto. And
this is it that he means by their covenant with hell and with death: for they
audaciously scorned all the threatenings and plagues of God; because they took
themselves to be out of his gunshot.

By the word Kozeh, he signifies that which he said touching the word Berith,
which signifies a covenant: for he repeates one thing twice. This word Kozeh,
which signifies vision, is as much as we use to say, To understand: and it
seems there is a secret opposition in this place between the visions of the
Prophets, and those cunning devices which these wily ellowes delighted in. But
yet in the mean while it is certain, that these fine heads never came so far
as to brag thus, and to utter such words indeed; for that had been too
ridiculous, and little children might have laughed at them. Moreover, they
always studied doubtless how to get themselves all the credit they could
among the people, albeit they despised God, and rejected al wholesome
admonitio^s; they would not be so gross then to confess that they made
falsehood their refuge. But the Prophet observed their affections and outward
practice, and not their fair shows: and considered what was in their hearts
by their deeds, and not by their words. Now because men are wont to please
themselves in their vices, and with brazen faces, in despising Gods
threatenings, it proves by their practice that they have made a covenant with
death, which they nothing fear though God terrify them with it: therefore the
Prophet in general reproues this carnal confidence, which makes men forget
the remembrance of God and his judgments, whereby they wittinglie deceive
themselves as if they were able to escape his hands.

But especially he closes with these Lucianists Lucianists.
and mock-Gods, who think they are in nothing so wise as in deriding of God:
and the more they would cover their villainy, the louder ye Prophet cries out
with open mouth against them; as if (out of some dark corner) he should draw
all their deep and desperate thoughts into the light. After this sort I pray
you behold the wit, the cunning, and subtletie of these wise men of the world,
who being environed with miseries and ruin on every side, do yet think
themselves hidden in safety. Are they not well worthy therefore to seek
their salvation in lies, seeing they despise the salvation of God which
themselves scorn and deride? Indeed they cover their practices with cunning
deceits, and under goodly pretexts, and in the mean while take them for
nothing less then lies: but (whatsoever they imagine) the Prophet hits the
nail on the head (as we say) and calls them by their names.

A double Simile.
As touching this clause of a scourge running over, the Prophet under those
words comprehends scourge: and then resembles the same to a deluge, in regard
of the violence and vehemency thereof. Now these scoffers thought themselves
cock-sure in regard of being hurt by any such tempests, how sharp or furious
soever they were, and made full account to escape; albeit they ouerranne the
whole land: provided yt they were fortified with falsehood and with vanity
before hand. They could not but see what judgments and calamities men are
subject unto: but because they beheld not Gods hand in them, nor considered his
providence, but imputed whatsoever fell out to blind fortune, therefore they
sought remedies and leaning-stocks whereby they might secure themselves, and
keep back these scourges far off from them.

Verse. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will lay in Zion a
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that
believes shall not make have.
NOw Isaiah comforts the faithful, and threatens the wicked with their just
and deserved perdition. First, he sets down the consolation which concerned
the faithful, who were then in stead of a May Game to these Gallants. For we
see how the wicked are not ashamed at this day to deride our simplicity,
holding us no better then idiots, that in the midst of so many troubles and
bitter persecutions we still hope notwithstanding, that God will turn all to
the best for us. The Prophet soars up and relieues the hearts of ye good with
this consolation then against the insolency of the reprobate, to the end they
might go on cheerefullie and boldly, contemning all their flouts and mocks,
and might also be assured that their hope should not be in vain. The word
demonstratiue Behold, is put here for the greater assurance of the matter; as
if he should say, Albeit the unbelievers make no reckning of my words, nor give
any credit unto them, yet will I be as good as my promise for all that. The
pronoune I, is also of great weight, for the further confirmation of the
prophecy. Now for the words, first Bochan is put by way stone, and signifies,
Of proof; and may be taken as well in the active signification, as in the
passive, or for a stone upon which the whole building is to be framed and
ordered as to his rule: of for a tried stone. But the first exposition seems
to agree best, and the propriety of the Hebrew tongue requires that we
interpret it rather in the active signification. He calls it a tried stone
then, in regard of his effect, because the whole building was to be squared and
fitted upon this stone, otherwise of necessity the whole house must sink.

The word corner which he adds to it, signifies, foundation, or (if we may so
speak) a foundation fundamental: thus proceeding by little and little, and as
it were by degrees to the commendation of this stone. For he shows that it is
not a common stone, or such a one as is taken out of many which serve in the
building: but that it is a rare and excellent one; even such an one as bears
up all the weight thereof. It is a stone then; yet so as it filles the whole
corner: and is so the corner stone, that the whole building is laid upon it.
For as no man can lay any other foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. so must all the Church
and her members rest and be built upon it only.

Some translate the second part of the verse as if it were an exhortation, Let
not him that believes make have: but I rather take it in the future tence, in
regard it agrees best both with the scope of the text, as also because it is
approved of by the authority of S. Paul. I deny not but the Apostles followed
the Greek translation, and in using their liberty, were content to give the
sense of the place without looking curiously to the words: but they have in
nothing altered the sense, but have rather truly and naturally delivered the
same: respecting the drift to which it was rightly applied. As often then as
they allege a text out of the old testament, they diligently retain both
the end and use of it. The Apostle alleging this prophecy translated it
according to the Greek; Who soever believes, shall not be confounded, Romans
9.33. which agrees with the Prophet: for questionles his meaning was to say,
That he which believes, ought to be quiet and still; so as to desire nothing
besides; neither wavering in uncertainty, nor yet hasting to seek out new
remedies, but shall fully content himself in his faith only. The translation
is proper then as you see, in regard the word to have notes out feruencie, or
trembling. In a word, A commendation of faith, in regard of her effect.
the Prophet meant to commend faith by this inestimable fruit; because in it
we find assured rest and quiet. Whence it follows, that we shall always be in
unquietness and vexation of mind, until such time as we have attained it: for
no other haven remains for us to harbor in in safety, No peace without that
faith which is grounded upon the truth of God.
but ye truth of God, upon which, if our faith be firmly settled, we shall find
it the only means to set us in rest and tranquillity of mind. The same
Apostle in another place describes unto us the fruit of this faith, where he
says, That being justified thereby, we have peace with GOD, Romans 5.1.

Christ is this corner stone. Mat. 21.24. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.6.
Now the Apostles and Evangelists show that this stone is Christ himself: for
when he was sent into the world the Church was then truly built and settled.
For first, all the promises had their stedfastnes in him: secondly, men's
salvation rests upon him alone. Take away Jesus Christ then, and the Church
by and by falls and goes to ruin. It is evident by the very text it self
therefore that this is to be referred unto Christ, without whom we have no
assurance of salvation, but shall be in danger of utter ruin ever and anon.
Moreover, we have the authority of the Evangelists and Apostles; yea, the Holy
Ghost teaches the same plainly by their mouth and ministry.

But if we shall scan things a little better, it will be easy to see how these
things are applied unto Jesus Christ. Reasons to prove that this stone must
be Christ.
First it will be granted that Isaiah does nor for naught bring in the Lord
himself pronouncing this, to whom only it belongs to lay the foundation of his
Church, as has been showed before, and shall be touched again hereafter: and
besides, this sentence is often met with in the Psalms. For though all men
should lay their hands to this work, It is God himself that has builded his
Church upon this corner stone.
yet were they not able to lay the least stone aright: it is God alone then
that founds and builds his Church, howsoever for this purpose it pleases him
to use the ministry and labors of men. Of whom is it now, I pray you, that we
hold Jesus Christ, but of the Father? It was the heavenly Father then who did
and performed all these things, and appointed his only begotten son to be the
foundation of our salvation.

stone which God would put under it with his own hand.

He says, it shall be laid in Zion, in regard Christ was to come out thence.
Which also serves much for the confirmation of our faith; when we see that he
proceeded from that place which was so long before appointed unto him. But
Mount Zion now is every where, because the bounds of the Church are stretched
to the ends of the world. Now Christ is the true tried stone: for all the
building must be squared and proportioned upon him, so as we can not be the
building of God, unless we be fitted unto him. For which cause the Apostle
commands us to grow up in him which is the head, in whom all the body ought to
be knit and joined together, Ephesians. 4.15. for our faith must be wholly
proportioned to Christ, to the end he may be the rule of it. He is also the
corner stone, upon which not only a part of the house rests, but the whole
weight and substance of it: for none other foundation can any man lay, says S.
Paul, but that which is laid, to wit, Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.11. Now ye see
wherefore Isaiah leads us to this foundation when he brings in the Lord
promising the restoration of his Church: The Churches ruins can no way be
repaired but by Christ alone.
for there was such a woeful desolation, that it resembled a wast wilderness,
which could no way be brought into any good fashion but by Christ alone.

In that he is called a stone to stumble at: this is by accident: for the
unthankful who reject him by their own malice, find him to be that which he
would not be unto them. But of this we have spoken in the eight Chapter.

Verse. 17. Judgment will I also lay to the rule, and righteousness to the
balance, and the hail shall sweep away the vain confidence, and the waters
shall ouerflow the secret place.
IN regard the wast of the Church was such, as the faithful durst scarce hope
for a better estate, he shows that God has the means ready in his hand to
reform the Church anew. Another Simile.
And as before he used a similitude taken from building, so now also by another
he teaches that they needed not to fear as if God were not able in the end to
finish the good work of his building begun. When God begins to build his
Church, he will also finish the same.
In the mean while he does by the way tax the pride and insolency of such as
would be taken to be pillars of the Church; which yet as much as in them lay
took the next way to ouerturne it. The light of faith was almost put out: Gods
service was corrupted: so that there was a fearful deformity to be seen in
ye estate of this people, albeit they boasted themselves to be the royal
Priesthood. Which we see now fulfilled in the Papacy. For they stick not to
belch our glorious titles without any shame at all, albeit the lamentable
confusion (...) to flight in the valley of Baal-perazim by the pursuit of
David, 2. Sam. 5.20.25. 1. Chro. 14.11. Secondly, when the Amorites and other
enemies were discomfited in the valley of Gebeon by the Isralues, under the
leading of Joshua, who obtained such favor of the Lord that the Sun and
Moon stood still at his request, that he might have time the better to give
his enemies the foil, Josh. 10.10.

By the word of standing up, he notes out Gods power, because we think him
asleep, or sitting idle in heaven, when he lets the ungodly alone. at their
ease. It is said that he rises, or stands up then, when in all men's sight he
gives testimonies of his might, which especially appears when we behold what
great care he has over his Church. And albeit there were sundry respects
which caused the Lord in former times to lift up his hand against strangers
which were the enemies of his chosen, and now to proclaim open war against
the Jews: yet Isaiah applies these examples very fitly to his purpose, God
prouides no less for the safety of his Church by expelling her domestic^ll
enemies, then if he bent his power against strangers.
in regard the Lord prouides no less for the safety of his Church by chasing
the domestical enemies out of it, then if he bent his force and weapons of
artillery against aliants. He holds them then for no less then his enemies,
howsoever they have the face to profess themselves his friends and people.

Some think he calls this a strange work, because nothing agrees better to
Gods nature then to show mercy in pardoning sins: Strange, in regard he was
wont in former time to defend his people; it was therefore a rare and strange
work that he should now be so severe toward them to Strange for wonderful,
and a thing unheard of: for so we are wont to esteem those things that are
seldom seen among men, who as (we know) are much given to wonder at new and
strange accidents. It is as much then as if he had said, The Lord will not
punish you after a common and ordinary manner, In what sense this word strange
is taken in this place.
but so strangely, that whosoever sees or hears of it shall be astonished.

True it is that all the works of God are so many testimonies of his power,
yea, the least of them is sufficient to draw us into an admiration: but in
regard they are little respected because they are common, we think he works
nothing, unless it be by some extraordinary means. The Prophet therefore
sets before us the examples of old time, to the end men might know that
howsoever this was esteemed a wonderful and strange hand of God, yet it was no
new thing with him, seeing he has showed the like testimonies of his power
long since, and that no less great and unwonted. Yet I receive it for granted
and willingly agree thereunto, that the Prophet opposes the wicked Israelites
here, to the Philistims and Canaanites: As if he should say, The Lord was wont
to show miracles when he saved his people, but now he will do them for their
destruction: for seeing the Israelites have so far degenerated, they shall
feel the hand of God in their perdition, which their fathers felt in their
preservation.

Verse. 22. Now therefore be no mockers lest your bonds increase: for I have
heard of the Lord of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.
HE again aduertiseth these wicked ones whom before he had called scorners,
Verse. 14.
that their subtle devises, contempts, flouts and cauils should stand them in
no stead, because all their fetches should vanish into smoke: and herewithall
exhorts such unto repentance in whom there was yet left any hope of healing.
For this cause he repeates the same thing often, to try if he could awaken
them: for he affirms, if they will obstinatlie stand out, they shall do nothing
else but more and more weaue the web of their own ruin. Whereas some in stead
of bonds, translate Chastisements, it agrees not well with the context, which
conteines in it a very apt similitude, borrowed from nets. Simile.
For as the Fox that is taken in the net, or snare, fastens the knot the more
whilst he endeavors with struggling to escape, and to save himself: so the
wicked, the more they seek starting-holes, the further they work themselves
fast in the snare. They will needs be running out of Gods reach, and will kick
against the pricks, Simile.
like restie iades, who endeavor by all means to throw their rider: but what
get they in the end by such rebellion and stubbornnes? nothing but the harder
and heavier strokes.

By this we are taught how to proceed with wicked persons, but then
especially when we see them destitute of the fear of God: Truly we must
forthwith threaten them that they shall escape by none of their cunning shifts
or jests from that wrath of God which is ready to seize upon them. Hence also
we are admonished, that it is no good jesting with God, because he shows us
here as in a glass, and that from the beginning of the world, what the end of
such have been as have set light by Gods admonitions and warnings.

Now to the end this prophecy might the rather be believed, Isaiah shows that
he speaks nothing but that which was revealed to him by the Lord of hosts. The
word Calah signifies sometimes Perfection, sometimes Consumption, as was said
Chap. 10.23. but it is to be taken here for Consumption, because the Prophets
drift is to show that the Lord is determined quickly and wholly to root out
this sinful generation from off the earth. Two things are comprehended in this
verse then: first, that the world is near to a fearful earth to the land of
Judea, which I reject not.) Secondly, that the day is assigned, in which it
shall be done, and that it is also at hand. The word heard, is here taken for
revelation: and thus he says it was revealed unto him. For as the Lord
determined to use the ministry of his Prophets, so did he also reveal his
secrets unto them, that they might be the expositors of them. It is as much
then as if he had said; The whole world is filled with wicked impieties, the
reprobate rejoice in their rebellion, as if there were no God at all to punish
them: but he will show himself Judge and auenger thorowout the earth, or in
all the quarters of Judea; neither shall any part thereof be exempt from
calamities and affliction, in regard of the open contempt of God and his laws.
Now albeit Isaiah published these things in his time, yet they no less belong
to ours, then to his: for God will show himself to be always one and the
same, and has been wont to execute his judgments with like equity and
judgment.

Verse. 23. Hearken ye and hear my voice: hearken ye and hear my speech.
THe Prophet uses a preface, as if he meant to speak of a thing of great
importance: for we are not wont to call for audience, or to will the hearers to
give their attention, unless some matter of good consequence is to be
propounded. And yet it seems Isaiah speaks here of common things, as of
^illing, sowing, threshing, and such like. But the Prophet meant by this to
raise the minds of his auditors above these earthly matters: for speaking of
Gods judgments, and showing how great his wisdom is by which he gouernes the
world, albeit the wicked sort think that all things go upon wheels at a
venture, his desire was to teach and express an high mystery by familiar
similitudes, High mysteries are sometimes expressed by common and familiar
similitudes.
such as were well enough known to all.

We often complain, as if God altogether wincked at the practices of the
wicked, because he thunders not down upon them at our pleasures: but the
Prophet tells us that God ordaines nothing but that which is lawful and
right. The drift of this preface.
This preface then has this drift; namely, to teach men how foole-hardy they
be to set God to school, in that they control his judgments, and interpret
them to the worst; the reason is, because he has set a schoolemistris before
them in the ordinary course of nature, in which they may behold these things
as clearly as in a glass. Behold here then a secret complaint against the
blindness of men, who stumble at the very noone day. He shows that they are
senseless and brutish, in not co^prehending the works of God that are so
apparent; and yet are so bold, as to subject that to their senses, and to
control that, which is high and hidden from them. For example, Saint Paul in
speaking of the resurrection, calls them fools which know not the power of
God in the seeds that are cast into the earth. 1. Cor. 15.36
Thou fool, says he, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die
first: so Isaiah here pronounces them senseless fools, who are not able to
comprehend the wisdom of God in so plain and evident things. To be short, he
affirms men to be witless and blind in beholding Gods works, when they are
to profit by them.

Verse. 24. Does the Plowman plow all the day to sow? Does he open and break
the clots of his ground?
THis place is usually expounded, as if God taxed the people of ingratitude, in
regard that he had played the part of an husbandman with his ground, and had
left no cost or pains vnbestowed; but yet had not received that fruit which he
expected. And thus the Jews expound it; whom both Greeks and Latins have
followed: but the Prophet meant another thing. For he ioynes this doctrine with
verse. 22. in which he had threatened that the destruction of Judah, or of the
whole earth was revealed unto him: and therefore now adds, that God does not
always stretch out his arm, neither does he ever keep one rate in punishing
the rebellions of man, but often times winkes thereat, and defets his
judgments for a time. This patience of the Lord the wicked abuse, taking the
greater liberty thereby to sin; as Solomon well shows; that is, Eccles.
8.11.
because all things fall out alike both to good and bad, and that the most
desperate wretches do prosper, when the faithful in the mean while are
subject to many miseries; yea often to greater then the very reprobates and
castawaies: In a word, when the ungodly perceive no difference (in outward
appearance) to be put between the godly and themselves, they either think
there is no God at all, or else that things are governed by the disposition of
blind fortune. Isaiah answers to this on this manner; Know you not that God
has the times and seasons in his own power, and that he has skill enough to
dispose of his matters in all ages? If the Plowman be not always plowing his
ground, nor breaking of his clots, is any man therefore to tax him of
ignorance? Is it not his wisdom rather that causes him for a time to cease?
The application of this similitude of the Plowman.
For what should a man do in turning up the ground continually, but trouble
himself to no purpose, unless it were to hinder the growth of his corn? Much
less may God be said then to do things at random, or without judgment; for
he knows how and when to perform his work.

Verse. 25. When he has made it plain, will he not then sow the fitches, and
sow cummin, and cast in wheat by measure, and the appointed barley and rye in
their place?

26. For his God does instruct him to have discretion, and does teach him.

27. For fitches shall not be threshed with a threshing instrument, neither
shall a cart wheel be turned about upon the Cummin, but the fitches are beaten
out with a staff, and Cummin with a rod.

28. Bread corn when it is threshed, he does not always thresh it, neither does
the wheel of his cart still make a noise, neither will he break it with the
teeth thereof.


NOw he speaks of the seed, whereof the Plowman puts not in as much as he
can; neither powers he it out by heaps, but views the ground, and then sowes
it with as much as is convenient: for otherwise, great heaps would lie and
rot, and there would not so much as one kirnell take root. Again, he mingles
not diverse seeds together, but reserues one part of his field for wheat,
another for fitches, and the rest for Cummin: all which he does by measure,
which is here understood by the word Shorah, which ought thus to be understood
as I take it, and not for good, or excellent, for he speaks here of
measuring. He says the like of reaping and threshing: for corn is not beaten
out all after one manner, but wheat is beaten out with the cart wheel, or
some ragged or toothed instrument: fitches with a rod, and Cummin with a
flaile. Now he speaks here after the custom of his Country: for wheat is
threshed in France only with a flaile, Prouence only excepted. To be short, his
meaning is, that every kind of grain is not beaten out after one fashion, but
every one has such an Instrument as fits the nature thereof. Also that the
Husbandman is not always threshing, but keeps a measure, lest otherwise he
should bruise the corn.

But who taught him this knowledge? Surely God only. If they then be so well
instructed, and so provident in these small things, what are we to think of
that great Master and keep a steadie hand and an even carriage fittest when to
execute his judgments? to wit, when to turn up the wicked, and to cause his
Plowe and Harrowes to pass over them? Does not he know the fittest time when
to thresh them out? yea, and how many blows, and with what kind of punishment
he is to strike men? Knows not he what is fittest for every time, and for every
person? Shall not he that has framed the whole order of nature, dispose of
things by equal proportion? Dare men be so foole-hardie to quarrel with him;
or to call his wisdom in question? In a word, the Prophets meaning is, that
no man ought rashly to censure the Lord, if he bring not the way of the wicked
upon his own head by and by: but rather that men are in this behalf to
repress their boldness, We are not to quarrel with the Lord, if he bring not
his judgments speedily upon the heads of the wicked, but ra her to repress
our boldness in this behalf.
seeing for the most part they mistake things even in small matters.

For if one that knows not what belongs to Husbandry should see a Plowman
driving his Plow over the fields, making furrows, and breaking the clods,
turning his oxen this way and that way, and following them at an inch, he would
surely laugh ye man to scorn, and it may be would think it a pretty sport for
little children: but the Plowman on the contrary knowing what he does, can
easily condemn and convince such an one of rashness and ignorance: for such as
are modest, will judge that these things were not done in vain, nor at randon,
albeit he knew not the reason. Would not a man think that the seed which is
cast into the ground were lost? An ignorant body would judge it to be so. And
yet if they should give such a sentence (as those that lack knowledge are
always the forwardest and boldest in giving their verdict) would not men of
understanding reprove and condemn such for their rashness, There is a place in
2. Tim. 2.19.20. which answers to Master Caluins exposition touching this text.
and that justly? Now if the case stands thus, how will the Lord deal with us
(think we) if we presume to control his works, which are so far above our
reach, and altogether incomprehe^sible. Judge we then by this, how much we
ought to flee all ouerweening: and on the other side, in what sobriety and
modesty we are to keep under all our thoughts. If we ought to judge modestly
of man's actions, much more of Gods.
For if it be our duties to walk in modesty with men, and not rashly to
condemn that whereof we are ignorant, ought we not much more to walk thus with
our God?

As often then as we shall think of the calamities wherewith the Church is so
many ways afflicted, let us not by and by cry out that God has cast her off,
as if because the wicked are let loose, therefore they shall presently have
their wills: but let us on the contrary assure our selves that the Lord will
provide a remedy for us when his time appointed is come; and in the mean
while let us reverently and heartily submit our selves under his just
judgments. Now if any be pleased by taking a narrower view of these words, to
gather, that some are punished sooner, some later, as being deferred for a
season: this will not only be found probable, but it is also fully agreed unto
by the Prophet. Hence then there is ministered unto us a singular consolation,
to wit, the Lord will so moderate his strokes, that at no hand he will bruise
or break in pieces those that are his servants. Indeed he destroys the wicked
and brings them to nothing; but he corrects his children, God destroys the
wicked, he only corrects his children.
that being thereby purged and tamed, they may be brought home into his garner.

Verse. 29. This also comes of the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in work.
SOme expound this place as if the Prophet should say, that this knowledge of
Husbandry comes of the Lord: but I rather think it to be the application of
the things that went before. For as he has set forth Gods wisdom in the
smallest matters, so would he now raise our minds higher, that we might learn
with the greater reverence to consider of his secret and wonderful judgments.
We may, and no doubt ought (by the way) to note, as touching that which is
contained in the 26. verse, that not Husbandry alone, but all other profitable
arts also are the gifts of God, All profitable sciences the gift of God.
who powers into their understandings, those artificial and cunning
inventions. Men therefore ought in no case to wax proud of them, or to
attribute the knowledge hereof unto themselves; as those of old time have done,
who being unthankful unto God, have deified those whom they thought to be the
deuisers of arts. Thence came the heaps of so many gods which the heathen
have forged unto themselves, out of the shop of their own brain. From out of
this workehouse have proceeded the great Ceres, Triptoleme, Mercury, and
infinite others more, so highly renowned by the words and writings of mem. But
our Prophet shows, that as these sciences were given them from God, so ought
they to be referred to his glory, as to him that is the only author and master
workman. And if this esteem be to be held of husbandry and other handicrafts,
what shall we say of the noble and liberal sciences; as of Physic, Law,
Astronomy, Geometry, Logic, and the like? Shall we not much more affirm,
that these are the gifts of God? If God be the author of handicrafts, much more
of Liberal arts.
Nay, shall we not both consider and acknowledge his goodness in the bestowing
of them, that so as well in the least, as in the greatest thereof, we may set
forth his honor and praise?

THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Ah Or, Ariel, Ariel, or woe be to, etc.
altar, altar of the City that David dwelt in: add year unto year: let them
kill lambs.
IT seems this should be another Sermon: in which Isaiah threatens Jerusalem.
He calls it Ariel, that is to say, the Altar of God; because the whole
strength of the City depended upon the Altar. For howsoever the Citizens
trusted in other means whereof they had great store; yet they chiefly relied
upon the Temple and the altar, more then upon any other defenses. They thought
themselves invincible indeed, by reason of their power and forces: but above
all, they held themselves in a fort utterly impregnable, in regard that the
Lord covered them under his wings. Now they imagined that God was with them as
long as they retained the Altar, and the sacrifices. Some think that the
Temple is here called Ariel, because it was proportioned like a lion; to wit,
broad before, and narrow behind: but I had rather understand it simply of the
Altar; and the rather, for that Ezechiel also gives it this name, Chap. 43.15.
This prophecy doubtless was directed to the whole City; but we must note the
Prophets drift, The Prophets drift.
which is to pluck away from the Jews this fond trust, because they thought
God would surely help them, as long as the Altar and sacrifices lasted. For
they bragged of them, as those who untruly persuaded themselves that they had
served God to the full, albeit their lives were vile and wicked.

In the next place he bends his speech against the City, which he adornes
with a goodly title, by calling it the City that David once dwelt in, and yet
only by way of yielding so much unto them: for he will afterward refute this
their vain pretext, so full of vanity.

Some by this word understand little Jerusalem; that is to say, the innermost
City, which was also compassed about with walls: for two Cities were
comprised in one as it were, because it was enlarged and extended the confines
thereof further off then at the beginning: but as I think this place should be
understood of the whole City. He mentions David, in regard they gloried as
much in his nam^, as if Gods blessing had bin continually tied to the palace
royal: for God indeed had promised that David's Kingdom should endure for
ever. 2. Sam 7.13. Psalm. 89.36.


Hence we may gather how sottish and ridiculous the Papists are now become,
who will needs lincke the Church to Saint Peter's chair; Papists ridiculous in
tying the Church to Saint Peter's chair.
and thus would make the world believe, that God can no wherere find a place to
dwell in, but in the chair of Rome. We dispute not with them now, whether
Peter was ever Bishop of Rome or no: but let us grant it were undoubtedly so,
yet dare they affi^me that Rome had at any time ye like promise that Jerusalem
had? Rome never had that promise made her, which God made to Jerusalem.
This is my rest, here will I do all, for I have a delight therein: Ps. 132.14.
But what if God had made them such a promise? do we not see how Isaiah
threatens Jerusalem; to wit, that God is driven thence, God is banished from
that place whence his word is excluded.
when his word was rejected, and his pure worship corrupted. What shall become
of Rome then that has no promise at all? Dare she compare with Jerusalem? If
God cursed that holy City which he had specially chosen; what will he say,
think you, to other Cities, who have overthrown all his holy laws and
ordinances?

Add year unto year. The Prophet ioynes this with the former, because the
Jews thought themselves clear aboard, as they say, when they had a little
breathing and respite given them: for the wicked imagine that there is a truce
between God and them, when they see no signs of his wrath likely to seize
upon them: for this cause they promise to themselves nothing but peace, peace;
whilst the Lord suffers them to enjoy ease and prosperity. Against such
security the Prophet threatens, that God is ready to execute his vengeance;
notwithstanding they offered their sacrifices ordinarily, and renewed them year
after year. Hence we may learn, that albeit the Lord defers his
chastisements, and the execution of his vengeance, yet we ought not therefore
to defer our repentance. For what if he spares and bears with us for a time,
has he therefore forgotten our sins? No such matter. Let us beware how we
build our peace then upon so slipperie a foundation. Let us at no hand abuse
his patience and long suffering, but let the same rather draw us to repentance,
and to the seeking of free reconciliation with him.

Verse. 2. But I will bring the Altar into distress: and there shall be
heaviness and sorrow; and it shall be unto me like an Altar.
I Think that the letter Vau, should be taken here for a particle
aduersatiue; as if he should say, Yet will I execute my judgments upon you,
and will avenge my quarrel, although it seem for a time, that in thus sparing
of you, I am at one with you. In the next place he threatens them with sorrow
and lamentation, in stead of their festiual days. Some think the word sorrow
to be an adjective: but I am not of their mind; for it is taken in the same
sense in the Lamentati^ns of Jeremiah, Chap. 2.5. The Prophet shows then that
the Lord will bring this City into such distress, that the Jews shall well
perceive they have not to do with men, but with God: so that howsoever the
Assyrians made war upon them, yet they should know to their cost, that God was
their chief Commander and Captain.

Where he adds, that it shall be to him like Ariel, it cannot agree to the
Temple only: for his meaning is, that the City and all shall be sprinkled
with the slaughter which the enemies shall make in Jerusalem; which he compares
to an altar, whereupon beasts are slain to be sacrificed: for as often as the
wicked are destinated to destruction, the Prophets compare the same to a
sacrifice. In a word, in that he alludes thus to the altar, he affirms that
the whole City shall be like Ariel, because it shall ouerflow with the blood
of the slain. Whence it is manifest enough, that an outward profession of Gods
worship, together with the external ceremonies and tokens of his favorable
presence are to little purpose, unless a francke and cheerful obedience be
joined therewith. And thus in taunting the hypocrites (who profanely presented
their beasts in sacrifice to God, as if by such means they thought to appease
his anger) he says, that all their labor is lost: for having polluted the
Temple and the Altar, he tells them that none can sacrifice rightly unto God,
but in killing and sacrificing those that were appointed to the slaughter
thorowout the City; as if he should say, You shall be murdered and killed in
every place. He calls this sacrifice a violent slaughter, by an improper
phrase of speech; because they refused to offer themselves willingly unto God.

Verse. 3. And I will besiege thee as a circle, and fight against thee on a
mount, and will cast up ramparts against thee.
BY the verb Chaddur, he alludes to the roundnesse of a ball; and signifies
as much as if in our usual speech we should say, I will compass him about:
and thus shows, that they can no way escape. Where it is added, I will fight
against thee on a mount, it concerns the second means by which a City is to
be taken: for they use to make incursions here and there, or to lay a standing
siege. Now he confirms the doctrine of the former verse, and shows that God
should be the chief Leader in this war, and that the Assyrians should
undertake nothing but by his commandment, notwithstanding themselves were
thrust forward with an inordinate lust and desire of reigning over the poor
Jews. For it was very requisite that this people should be fully persuaded,
that God was the author of all the calamities wherewith they were oppressed, to
the end they might thereby come to a narrow examination of their impieties. Now
the oftener we meet with this doctrine in the holy Scriptures; so much the
more careful ought we to be in imprinting the same well in our hearts: for
the blessed Spirit of God is not wont to repeat one thing again and again
without just cause.

Verse. 4. So shall thou be humbled, and shall speak out of the ground, and thy
speech shll be as out of the dust: thy voice also shall be out of the ground,
like him that has a spirit of divination, and thy talking shall whisper out of
the dust.
HE derides the pride of the Jews, who as long as they were in prosperity (as
hypocrites are wont to do) despised all admonitions and threatenings. The
Prophet therefore says, that they should one day be humbled: to wit, after
their pride shall be taken down. Not that they shall change their manners, but
because shame shall constrain them to turn their wonted mirth into mourning.
And therefore here must be a close opposition supplied: for he speaks to those
jolly fellows, who seemed to have the world at will, who with big looks
disdained every one, as if they had bin subject to no God at all. Nay, they
feared not to load him with blasphemies and injuries, and contemned his holy
word. This pride, says Isaiah, shall be brought down well enough, and this
intolerable arrogancy shall cease.

In the next words he expresses this further by a similitude, saying, that
they shall whisper and speak, as it were, out of the holes of the earth. For
he co^pares the voice of those which in times past was so loud and high, to the
speech of Coniurers, who give their answers out of some hollow cave dug
under the earth, mumbling out I know not what confused noise; for they speak
with no distinct voice. His meaning is then that these haughty ones shall be
like unto them.

Some expound this as if the Prophet meant to say, that their chastisement
should nothing profit them: but the text crosses that sense; and besides, he
will by and by show that the Jews should be brought to repentance. But first
of all he terrifies them, to the end he may beat down their pride, because
they did stoutly and rebelliouslie despise all the threatenings of the
Prophets. The humbling therefore whereof he speaks signifies nothing else but
that they should be covered with shame, in such wise, that they should not dare
to advance themselves, nor to utter forth their swelling words of vanity.

Verse. 5. Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust,
and the multitude of strong men shall be as chafe that passes away, and it
shall be in a moment even suddenly.
I Will first recite the opinions of others, and then that which to me seems
most probable. All (in a manner) do think that this should be spoken of the
enemies of the Jews; for they take the word Strangers for enemies, and so they
affirm that the multitude of those who should oppress the Jews shall be like
the dust, that is to say, infinite. But considering all things circumspectly,
I incline rather to another opinion, to wit, that the Prophet speaks by way of
contempt of the fortresses and garrisons whereupon the Jews relied. For they
had soldiers out of foreign Countries that were valiant under their pay. And
thus I interpret the word Aritsim, which properly signifies so much; neither
do I wonder a little that some of the Rabbis should take it for the heathen or
wicked. In regard the Jews then drew unto themselves diverse garrisons out of
strange Countries, they thought they were cock-sure, and out of danger. The
Prophet on the contrary threatens that their garrisons shall skirmish in vain,
notwithstanding their companies be many in number, for they shall be but as
dust or chafe, that is to say, like unprofitable ofscourings, so as they shall
have neither strength nor actiuitie. Hence may we observe, No wisdom nor
strength against the Lord.
that be our riches or abundance never so much, yet all shall turn to smoke as
soon as the Lord shall but blow upon it. The preparations which men make last
awhile it may be, but when the Lord shall once but lift up his hand, all
strength must vanish, and become like chafe.

In the end of the verse some expound, that a sound shall arise suddenly, and
as in a moment from the invasion of the enemies: but I rather refer this
word, shall be, to the time that this shall endure, which shall be but short,
as says the Prophet: for his meaning is, that these garrisons shall not hold out
long, but shall vanish away in a moment. Men shall boast but in vain therefore,
seeing God is their enemy.

Verse. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder and shaking,
and a great noise, a whirlewinde, and a tempest, and a flame of devouring fire.
HE adds the cause why all these multitudes of garrisons shall be like stubble,
setting it forth by a contrary similitude. For he opposes the wrath and
visitation of the Lord of hosts against these soldiers: For alas, how will
straw and stubble be able to resist the flame of a devouring fire? How shall
dust be able to abide the force of the whirlewind? His meaning is then that the
vengeance of God shall be so great, that no preparations shall be able to
withstand it. And in this sense me thinks the text concurres well; the parts
whereof would not answer proportionablie one to another if we should follow
another exposition. Now by this we learn, that our enemies which assail us
shall never attempt more against us then the Lord shall permit. If he
vvhirlewind; yea, he will consume them like a devouring flame, that leaves
nothing behind it.

Verse. 7. And the multitude of all the nations that fight against the Altar
shall be as a dream or vision by night: even all they that make the war
against it, and lay siege unto it.
I Expound this verse otherwise then some do, The first member of this seventh
verse is explaned in the verse following.
who think that the Prophet meant to comfort the faithful, which I confess
is not without great show of reason. And so it conteines a very excellent
doctrine, to wit, that the enemies shall be like those that dream, when the
Lord shall disappoint them of their hope, even whilst they imagined they were
sure of the pray. But this interpretation (for ought I see) seems not to agree
very well with the text. Sometime it falls out that a sentence sounds so
goodly in show, that we are drawn to such a liking of it that it steals from
us the true and natural meaning thereof, We must not easily be carried away to
like of such a sense of Scripture as steals from us the meaning of the Holy
Ghost, how goodly a show soever it seems to have.
so as we neither advisedly consider the text it self, nor yet take any great
pains to seek out the authors intent and purpose.

Let us see then whether the Prophets meaning be as they say, for seeing he
still continues to denounce threatenings in the verses following, I doubt not
but he prosecutes his speech in this place, which otherwise should be broken
off abruptly in this sentence. For he rebukes and taxes the Jews for their
obstinacy, in that they durst be so bold to despise God and all his
threatenings. To be short, he reprooues their false trust and confidence by a
very fit similitude, saying, that the enemy should suddenly come upon the
Jews even at that time when they thought themselves (...) hope of the
resurrection, Luk 10.27. Act. 23.8.
yea the doctrine of the immortality of souls was utterly abolished: how
could it be I pray you, but the people must become like beasts or swine? For
take away the hope of the eternal and blessed life from men, and what shall we
make of them? And yet it sufficiently appears by the testimonies of the
Evangelists, that such they were when our Lord Jesus Christ came into the
world. For at that time these things were truly accomplished, according as our
Prophet foretold; to let us see that these things were not uttered by him at
random, but that they assuredly came to pass, though the wicked no doubt in
his time made light account of his words.

Their incredulity and blindness therefore fully appeared when this true light
came to lighten the world; to wit, Jesus Christ the only light of truth, the
soul and spirit of the law, and the end whereat all the Prophets aimed. Then,
I say, the Jews especially had a veil laid over their eyes; which was figured
before in Moses, when the people could not endure to behold him, Exodus 34.30
because of the brightness of his countenance. But this is truly fulfilled in
Christ, to whom it appertains to take away and abolish this veil, as S. Paul
teaches, 2. Cor.. 3.16.

Until Christ then, the veil remained over their hearts untaken away in
reading of Moses: for they rejected Christ, to whom Moses ought to have been
referred. Now in this place under the word Moses, the whole law is to be
understood; which being referred to Christ, the true end thereof, this veil
shall then be taken away. These judgments of God we ought so to behold, that
we at this day acknowledge him to be the same Judge he was wont to be, and
that the same vengeance is prepared for us, if we give not ear to his holy
admonitions.

In that he expressly mentions them that are learned and ignorant, observe that
we comprehend not the mysteries of salvation by the quickness of our wits, or
because we have bin well trained up in schools; for this could not privilege
such from the imputation of being blind. Gods word then must be embraced with
our whole affection, if we mind to be freed from this vengeance, wherewith
not the rude and ignorant alone are threatened, but those also which are book
learned, as they say.

Verse. 13. Therefore the Lord said; Because this people come near unto me
with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their
heart far from me; and their fear toward me was taught by the precept of
men;
THe Prophet shows that the Lord shall have very just occasion to correct his
people thus severely, albeit it was an hard and horrible punishment, that their
minds should be so besotted by Gods revenging hand. But as men are bold and
rebellious, so they are easily drawn to plead with him, as if he dealt over
rigorously with them: the Prophet declares that God has performed the office
of a Judge; and that the cause thereof rested wholly in men, who stirred him up
by their impiety and rebellion. Also he shows

He notes their hypocrisy, Hypocrisy.
in telling them that they drew near with their mouth and lips: for so I
expound the verb Nagash, which I take to be most probable, although others
are of a contrary opinion: for which cause some translate, To shut up; others
To magnify ones self: but the That is, opposition.
antithete (to wit, the verb to withdraw) which is added by and by after,
shows that this is the true exposition, which also is most received.

But he taxes their superstitions Superstit^^^.
and idolatries, when he says, that their fear which they had, was taught by
the Commandments of men. Now these two things are for the most part joined
together. Nay, more then that, for hypocrisy is never without impiety or
superstition; Hypocrisy and superstition go commonly together.
and on the other side, impiety and superstition is always accompanied with
hypocrisy.

By the mouth and lips, The difference between true worshippers and false.
he means the external profession, which is common both to good and bad: but
they differ in this, that the wicked have only a vain outward show, thinking
themselves discharged, if they have opened their lips in Gods worship and
service: but the good present themselves before God in the truth of their
hearts, and in yielding him obedience with all their power, they acknowledge
and confusse how far off they are from performing their duties as they ought to
do.

He uses then the figure called Synecdoche, a thing very frequent in
Scriptures; when a part is taken for the whole. But he made choice of that
part which was very fit for his purpose; seeing men are wont to make most show
of godliness by the tongue and lips. The Prophet then comprehends all the
other parts of Gods worship, whereby hypocrites are wont to counterfeit and
deceive, for they are every way bent to lying and vanity.

We need seek no better expositor of these words then Jesus Christ, who upon
the speech of washing of hands, (wherewith the Pharisees reproved the Disciples,
because they had omitted so holy an act in their conceit) that he might
convince them of hypocrisy, says, Isaiah prophesied well of you, O ye
hypocrites, saying, This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is
far off from me: Matthew. 15.7, 8. To the lips and mouth therefore the Prophet
opposes the heart; the integrity whereof God chiefly requires of us. For if
we want that, he reiects all our works, carry they never so goodly a show in
the eyes of men. For as himself is a Spirit, Ioh. 4 23, 24
so also will he be adored and worshipped of us in heart and spirit: at which
end, if we begin not, we may do what we will in outward show, but it shall
every whit be accounted nothing else but vain ostentation.

Hence we may easily judge, what estimation the religion of popery ought to
have amongst us, who put all their service of God in ringing, With what
tru^pe^ies the Papists would seem to honor God.
piping, singing, mumblings, in setting up candles, in copes, censings,
crossings, and a thousand such fooleries: for we see that God not only reiects
these things, but also detesteth them.

Now for the second point: when God is served according to men's inventions, he
condemns this superstitious fear, albeit men endeavor to cover the same with a
fair pretext of religion, devotion, and fear. He gives a reason why this is
in vain; to wit, because this people was taught it by the precepts of man. For
I read the word Melummadah, (which signifies taught) passiuely; because the
Prophets meaning is, that all order is overthrown, if men's precepts (and not
the rules of Gods word) be taken for the right manner of his service. For the
Lord would have our fear, and the honor which we give him, to be squared
according to the rules of his word, and demands nothing but a sound obedience,
by which we dispose of our selves and all our actions, according to this rule,
without turning either to the right hand or unto the left. Whence it
sufficiently appears, that all those who are taught to serve God after men's
traditions, are not only senseless, but do also weary themselves in a
pernicious labor: for what do they else but provoke Gods wrath against them,
who cannot more plainly discover how much he hates these wilworships, then by
this so heavy a punishment?

Flesh and blood I grant thinks it strange that God not only makes none
account of this trash, but also severely punishes men's endeavors, who through
error and folly, take much pains to appease him. But we are not to wonder if
he maintains his own authority after this sort. Jesus Christ himself
expounds this place, saying; In vain do they serve me, teaching for doctrines
men's precepts: Matthew. 15.9.

Some would supply a conjunction thus; And precepts: as if the sense were not
otherwise clear enough. But it appears he meant another thing; to wit, that
they take a wrong course, who follow men's commandments for the rule of their
faith and life.

Verse. 14. Therefore behold, I will again do a marvelous work in this
place, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.
HE not only threatens the ignorant and common multitude with blindness, but
also the wise, who drew the people into an admiration of them. Now by this
punishment we may judge how odious and detestable this sin of hypocrisy is
(before God) How detestable the sin of hypocrisy is before God.
of which he spoke in the former verse. Is there any punishment more to be
feared then blindness and giddiness of spirit? Men commonly perceive not the
greatness of this mischief; and yet it is of all other the greatest and most
woeful. He speaks not of the rude ones then, but of the teachers themselves,
who ought to be in stead of eyes to the people. For the multitude are always
blind of themselves, as the rest of the common sort are: but if the eyes be
blind, what shall become of the rest of the parts of the body? If the light, as
Jesus Christ says, be turned into darkness, how great is that darkness?
Matthew. 6.23. This is added therefore by way of amplifying this judgment.

From this place also we may gather, how foolish and vain the boasting of the
Papists is, who think they have put all the world to silence, if they once
allege the authority of their Bishops, Doctors, and Priests of the
Apostolical Sea. The Papists think they have put all the world to silence, if
they but once mention the authority of their Bishops and the Apostolical Sea.
It may be they think they have better knowledge then the Jews. But whence
have they drawn it? They will say, from God. But we see the Prophet speaks
not here of the wise, among the Caldeans or Egyptians: but of that order of
Priesthood, which God himself had ordained: yea, of the Teachers and chief
heads, and of the standard bearers of the elect people, and of the only Church
of God in those times. In a word, of that high Priest who was a figure of the
Son of God, Christ Jesus. For under this name of the wise men, he
comprehends whatsoever was excellent and in account among the people.

Verse. 15. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord:
for their works are in darkness, and they say; Who sees us? and who knows
us?
THe Prophet once again sets himself against the wicked and profane
contemners of God, whom before he called mockers; Chap. 28.22.
who thought themselves wise in nothing more, then in setting light by the word
of the Lord. For religion was become a thing too base for them: and therefore
they shrouded themselves under their crafty inventions, as in a labyrinth; by
reason whereof, they boldly contemned all the admonitions and threatenings of
the Prophet: yea, not only that, but even the whole doctrine of salvation. It
sufficiently appears by this verse then, that this plague (which afterward
spread it self further) was then in the world; to wit, Hypocrites have used of
old to scorn both God and the prophecies.
hypocrites were wont pleasantly to scorn God in their hearts, and to despise
the prophecies. Isaiah cries out against them therefore, and calls them
Hammaamikim, that is to say, Diggers: even as if they dug themselves caves
and hiding places, thinking thereby to deceive Gods sight.

The words following of hiding their counsels may serve us for an exposition.
Some expound this verse as if the Prophet condemned the curiosity of such who
are too bold in diuing into the secret judgments of God: but this exposition
has no good foundation. The Prophet makes it clear enough of whom it is he
speaks, when he adds their scoffing speeches, in that they thought to commit
their wickedness so covertly and privily as if none were able to discover
them: now this hiding of their Counsels signifies nothing else but a bold
persuasion of escaping Gods hand. And thus the wicked obscure the light, by
putting their mists before it, lest their secret peruersitie should be espied.

Thence proceeds this shameless question of theirs, Who sees us? for albeit
they seemed in outward appearance to serve God, yet they thought themselves
able not only to put the Prophets to silence by their shifts and devices, but
even to overthrow the judgments of God. I grant they did not this openly, for
such will always hold an outward show of profession, that they may the better
deceive others thereby: but in their hearts they acknowledge no God, but that
which themselves have forged in the shop of their own brain. Hypocrites
acknowledge no God in their hearts, but what they have forged in their own
brain.
Isaiah then compares these subtle practices of the wicked, in which they so
much please and flatter themselves, to dens or caves, for they think
themselves to be so covered over with a veil that even God himself can
neither see nor surprise them in their wickedness.

Now in regard that the great ones are for the most part tainted with this
vice, I think the Prophet meant specially to tax them: for they think
themselves too too simple and dull witted, unless they can despise God, and
reject his Law, believing no more thereof then that which likes their own
humors. They dare not for shame reject Religion wholly, but are constreined
whether they will or no to subject themselves to some one worship or other. But
this they do only because they think it will bring them in some profit and
commodity; but are never touched inwardly with any true fear of God at all.

This impiety discouers it self in too many in these times, but especially
since the Gospel was revealed. We see how easily men might be brought to be
at one with God under the Papacy, for had not the Pope forged such a god as
would change his shape according to men's several dispositions? what man was
there amongst them that had not a device by himself to purge his sins; and
diverse services wherewith to appease his god? wherefore it is no marvel if
gross impieties appeared not then, seeing they were hidden under such
couerings; but now they be removed and taken away, men have plainly showed
what they were before.

In the mean while the evil whereof Isaiah complained in his time is no less
incident to those of our age: for men think that God sees never awhit when
they have put their shifts between, as if all things were not naked and bare
before his (all seeing) eyes, or as if any were able to hide themselves out of
his sight, or to deceive him. You see the cause then wherefore the Prophet for a
more ample declaration says, that their works were done in darkness, referring
it to the vain confidence wherewith the wicked are bewitched, who have their
sight so dazeled (notwithstanding the light before them) that in not seeing it,
they labor to flee from the presence of God. Nay, which is worse, they promise
themselves freedom from all punishment, and give themselves the raines to all
disorder, as if God lay so closely hid, that he could be no way able to find
them out.

Hereunto appertains that which they say, Who shall see us? Not that the
wicked utter such words with their mouths, as has been said, but because they
thought or spoke thus in their hearts, as their boldness and vain confidence
witnessed, for they were so plunged in iniquities, that they rejected all
admonitions, even as if they should never have had any thing to do before Gods
Judgment seat. The prophet then we see had to deal against such wicked ones,
who albeit in outward show they seemed to have some knowledge of God, yet they
denied him by their works, and persecuted the pure doctrine with all
extremity. Now thus to speak, what is it else but to affirm that God is not
the Judge of the world, and so to pluck him down from his throne of Judgment?
for he can not be known but by his word, which being once suppressed, or
rejected, it can not be but himself, who is the author of it, must also
therewithal be forsaken and rejected.

Verse. 16. Your turning of devices shall it not be esteemed as the potters
clay? for shall the work of him that made it say, he made me not? or the thing
formed say of him that fashioned it, he had none understanding?
THis verse is diversely expounded; and there is also some difficulty in
regard of two Hebrew particles, Im, and Ci. Im is often taken for an
interrogation, sometimes for an affirmation, which is the cause that some take
it for Truly. Moreover, they take the word Haphac for Subversion, as if he
should say, Your subversion shall be esteemed as the clay. Others, for Thought,
that is to say, for the counsels which are working in the brain. But the
exposition most received is, to take this word for Subversion or destruction:
as if he should say, It will be no more mastrie for me to root you out, then
for a potter to turn his clay in his hand: for you are like unto it, in regard
that I have formed you: yet because the Prophet seems to oppose the two
foresaid particles one to the other, I incline to another opinion, but so, that
I reject not the former exposition, which in it self conteines a very
profitable doctrine. Thus I understand it then, Your turning, or removing; that
is to say, the counsels and devices which run to and fro in your minds, shall
they not be esteemed as the potters clay? for is it not as if the vessel
should say to him that made it, Have thou formed me? See Chap. 55 9.
Your pride is strange therefore, for you do as if your selves were your own
Creators, and as if you had all things at your beck. But it is my proper office
to appoint what I think good: and if you dare usurp my right and authority,
be it known unto you, that you have forgotten your condition, no less then if
you thought your selves gods rather then men.

This diversity of expositions alters the Prophets meaning nothing at all;
whose purpose was to confirm the doctrine of the former verse: for he again
reproues these proud ones, who attributed so much power unto themselves, that
they would by no means be brought under Gods yoke, being in such wise
bewitched with a false opinion of their own wisdom, that they contemned all
good admonitions, as if they had been somes petty gods. Thus you see how it
is said, that they denied God that formed them: for whatsoever it be that men
attribute unto themselves, therein they rob God, and take away that honor
which belongs unto him.

The exposition should be a little differing in the first member only: those
which take the particle Im affirmatively, draw this sense; Certainly I will
break you, as if a potter should break the pot which he has made. But
because the Prophet had to deal against great ones, who sought couerts to hide
themselves from the Lord, I rather take it by way of an interrogation, as if he
should say; Are you such subtle headed fellows indeed, that by the turnings
and discourses which you plot in your minds, you think you can bring this and
that to pass, as the Potter does his clay, who by turning it upon his wheel,
makes it receive what shape it pleases him? But let every man choose which
sense he likes best: for mine own part, I have followed that which I think to
be most probable.

Verse. 17. Is it not yet but a little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into
Carmel? And Carmel shall be counted as a forest?
NOw the Lord shows that he will let these wicked ones see what they are: as
if he should say; You rock your selves asleep in your pride; but I will wake
you ere it be long. For men are wont to take liberty to themselves to do
evil, till they feel the heavy hand of God: for which cause, the Prophet
threatens that his iudgementts are ready to seize upon so brutish a boldness.
Under the names of Lebanon and Carmel, he meant to express a renewing of the
world as it were, and a change of things therein. But the doubt is, to what
end: in which regard, the expositors disagree much one from another: Libanus
being replenished with trees and forests, and Carmel being a fat Jews are
compared to Carmel, because they should become barren: and the Christians to
Lebanon, because they should bring forth great plenty of fruit. This opinion
has a goodly show, Men much delighted with unapt expositions.
and men are usually very much tickled and delighted with the like devices: but
we find a like place to this in the end of 32. Chapter, verse 5. which will
make it manifest, that the Prophet does here by way of comparison, set forth
the greatness of Gods favor: for when he shall begin to bless his people,
the abundance of all benefits shall be such, that Mount Carmel shall lose the
report that it had for fruitfulness. He says then, that he will make Lebanon
to be like Carmel: that is to say, of a woodland, it should be made pasturage
to sow corn in: so as they should gather as much fruit of plowed land, as if
their present estate being compared with that which it should be afterward, it
might well be esteemed barren and desert. But this manner of speech shall be
more fully expounded when we come to the 32. Chapter.

Others take Carmel for a noune appellatiue: but I had rather take it for a
proper noune: for his meaning is, that these so fruitful fields might well be
counted barren and desert, in comparison of this new and extraordinary
fruitfulness. Others expound it allegorically, and take Lebanon for the proud,
and Carmel for those of mean estate: which is too far fetched; and for mine
own part, I affect always to follow the most natural sense; and that is it
which I have touched before. Moreover, to the end the faithful might not be
discouraged, he descends from threatenings to mercy; assuring them that after
they shall have showed their obedience of faith in bearing the Cross, which
for a time was to be imposed upon them, they should behold a sudden change to
approach, which would cause them to rejoice. And yet in taking away this hope
from the wicked, he signifies that vengeance is then nearest unto them, when
they think least of it, and whilst they promise themselves all prosperity:
for when they shall say, peace, peace, then shall sudden destruction ouerwhelme
them, as S. Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Verse. 18. And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book: and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.
HE promises, as has been said, that the Church of God shall continue safe in
the midst of these storms: for albeit the world should be shaken with
infinite tempests, and laid on heaps, as if heaven and earth went together,
yet the Lord would conserve a little flock, and raise up his Church again, as
out of the midst of death. This place ought greatly to refresh the weary
spirits of the Saints, and to confirm their faith: for is it not a miracle of
miracles, that so small an handful of the faithful (amongst whom remains the
one and the same religion, worship, faith, and means of salvation) should be
conserved among so many wrackes of Empires which happened here and there?

But it seems that Isaiah contradicts himself; for before he foretold that
Gods people should be so besotted, that they should have none understanding:
verse. 11, 12. and now on the contrary he says, that the deaf shall hear,
and that the blind shall see. His meaning is then, that the Church must first
be chastised and purged; not after an ordinary or common fashion, but so
strangely, that she should seem as good as utterly extinct.

And therefore he says, In that day: that is to say, after God has punished
the wicked, and cleansed his Church, he will not only enrich the earth with
store of fruits, It is an happy thing when tempor^ll bl^ssings and inward
renouation go together. Men are not so fit to receive comfort in the day of
distress, as when the storm is over. Wherein the true means of the Churches
restoration co^sists.
but with the renewing of the face thereof, he will also restore hearing to the
deaf, and sight to the blind, to the end they may understand his law. For men
had neither eres to see, nor ears to hear withal, as long as so horrible a
judgment lasted: for all were so terrified and amassed, that none could
understand. But when the plagues and miseries should cease, then the Lord would
open the eyes of that yt were his, to the end they might see and embrace ye
goodness of God. For this is the true way to effect the restoration of the
Church; namely, in giving sight to the blind, and hearing to the deaf: which
Jesus Christ, as we know, not only effected upon men's bodies, but especially
upon their souls: John 9. We through Gods infinite mercy have had experience
hereof even in our times, who have been drawn out of that gross darkness of
ignorance into which we were plunged, and has brought us out into the true
light: Psalm. 40.
for our eyes have received sight, and our ears, which before were close
stopped up, have been opened to understand, because the Lord has pierced them,
to fit us for his service.

True it is that the blessing which he mentioned in the 17. verse, concerning
the renewing of the earth, was unto them a good testimony of their
reconciliation: but the illumination whereof he now speaks, is much more
excellent; All Gods benefits will turn to our ruin, without we be borne anew.
for without that, all the gifts of God will not only vanish away, but will
also turn to our ruin and destruction. Now the Lord justly attributes to
himself alone, so excellent and great a work: for it is not possible that
those which are blind and deaf, should recover their sight and hearing by
their own power. It appears therefore that this is promised in particular to
the elect only; because the greatest part of men do always lie wallowing and
weltering in darkness.

Verse. 19. Or, Then the, etc.
The meek in the Lord shall receive joy again; and the poor men shall
rejoice in the holy one of Israel.
THen the humble shall again be glad in the Lord.] I translate this place
thus: whereas others expound; The meek shall continue to rejoice: for the
Prophet speaks not of the continuance of joy, but rather of a new joy. As if
he should say; Notwithstanding they be heavy and sorrowful now, yet I will
give them cause of gladness, that they shall be once again filled with joy.

He speaks of the humble: in which, note that we are prepared by afflctions to
receive Gods grace: Afflictions prepares us to receive Gods grace.
for the Lord casts us down and humbles us, that he may afterward raise us
up. When he corrects his children then, we ought not to be discouraged; but
rather to meditate on this and the like sentences, and to hope still above hope.
And to conclude, that after we have suffered a little while, Heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
God will in the end give his Church joy and consolation. Moreover, we hence
gather that which I touched before; to wit, that the grace of illumination is
not common to all indifferently: for albeit all drank of the same cup of
affliction, All receive not benefit alike by afflictions.
yet affliction humbled but a few, to make them truly poor in spirit.

Verse. 20. For the cruel man shall cease, and the scornful men shall be
consumed: and all that hasted to iniquity shall be cut off.
NOw he expounds that more fully, which was said in the former verse; to wit,
that the restoration of the Church should consist in rearing up those that
were humbled, and in showing compassion to the poor. But first of all that
purgation of the Church whereof we have spoken, was necessary: for as long as
God defers to execute his judgments upon the wicked, that are mingled among
the good; they bear all the sway in the Church, all things are corrupt and out
of order, God is neither worshipped nor served as he ought, and religion it
self is trodden under foot. When the wicked then are either taken away, or
repressed, then the Church recouers her first beauty; and the faithful feeling
themselves disburthened of so many miseries and calamities, do begin to leap
for joy.

In the first place he calls the cruel, Artsim: which word is diversely
expounded: but the Prophet, as I think, makes a distinction between those who
were not ashamed to commit their wickedness openly; and such, who although
they had some show of goodness, yet in the mean while were no better then the
rest, because they despised God in their hearts. It may be also that he gives
them two differing titles, in regard that as thieves among men, they spoiled,
oppressed, and vexed, giving themselves leave to commit what them listed. And
thus they were not restrained by any fear or awe of God, because they esteemed
of religion but as a fable. He also comprehends other wickednesses in adding,
that they rose betimes to do evil: for he speaks not of the Caldeans or
Assyrians, but of such as would be held to be of the number of the faithful,
and boasted, that they were the children of Abraham.

Verse. 21. Which made a man to sin them in the gate, and made the just to
fall without cause.
WE have told you heretofore with whom the Prophet had to deal; namely, with
hypocrites, and profane contemners, who esteemed all the reprehensions and
threatenings of the Prophet but as wind, and had forged to themselves a god of
their own devising. For such who only sought liberty to live as they listed
in their lusts and wicked courses, were utterly unable to bear the sharp
reprofes of ye Prophets, neither would they be touched nor repressed by their
good wills. For which cause they were diligent in noting and observing their
words, either to snarle at them, or to wrest something or other to their
purpose. Neither do I doubt but he here taxes the wicked who were offended at
the plainnes of the Prophets, and with their sharp and vehement rebukes, as if
they meant to bring the necks of the people, princes, and priests under their
girdles.

gates were always replenished with people, the Prophets took opportunity
from thence to reprove all sorts, so as they spared not the Judges themselves.
For the matters of life and death at that time were in the hands of such wicked
and godles wretches, that it was needful to rebuke them very sharply. But in
stead of making any good use of these admonitions to come to amendment of life,
they became so much the worse, and raged against the Prophets, and laid snares
to catch them, for as Amos says, They hated him that reproved in the gate, and
abhorred him that spoke vprightlie, Amos 5.10.

This appertains to all, and especially to Judges and rulers in
Commonwealths, who are the most impatient, and will by no means abide the
least reproof. They love to reign as Kings, and would be so esteemed of
others also, albeit they be worse indeed then the meanest good subject.

The expositors agree not in the exposition of the verb Iekoshun, which
signifies to spread nets: for some take it to chide, others, to do wrong, as if
the Prophet accused the malepertnes of those who gave over themselves to
violence, and by means thereof banished such out of their presence as should
any way touch the^ in their reputations. But as I hope the readers will approve
of that reading which I have followed.

He also says that the just was overthrown without cause, for they did what
they could by craft and wicked practices to bring the just into hatred, as if
they had been the only wicked men in the world: but after they have borne their
scoffs and reproach for a while, their enemies at length shall come to
destruction. Verse. 20.
For this is the Consolation which the Lord gives the faithful, to wit, that
he will not suffer the wicked to escape so scot-free but they also shall snart
for it, and in the end shall be suppressed, howsoever for a time they had the
world at will. Let patience have her perfect work.
But we must have patience to wait for the accomplishment of these and the like
promises.

Verse. 22. Therefore says the Lord unto the house of Iaacob, even he that
redeemed Abraham: Iaacob shall not now be confounded, neither now shall his
face be pale.
THis is the conclusion of the former sentence, for he comforts the people, to
the end they should not despair in this poor and woeful estate into which
they should be brought. It is also needful to note the time unto which these
things ought to be referred, to wit, to the time of the captivity when the
Temple was overthrown, the sacrifices abolished, so as it seemed religion was
wholly rooted out, and all hope of deliverance taken from them. There was
great cause therefore why the hearts of the people should be sustained and
vpheld by these prophesies, to the end that the wrack and ruin of all things
being come upon them, they might have this planck (as it were) to save
themselves from Shipwreck, upon which if they kept themselves firmly, they
might by means thereof come safe to ye shore. By this let us be warned also to
embrace the like promises by faith, and when all things shall seem desperate,
yet let us rest upon them with our whole hearts.

Now he speaks of the house of Iaacob, in which we are to note, that the
virtue of Gods word is perpetual, and of such efficacy, that it brings forth
fruit as long as there is a people in the world which adores and stands in awe
of him. For there are always some whom God reserues, because he will not
suffer the race of the faithful to perish. Doubtless there is an end, and thy
hope shall not be cut off. Prou. 23.18. None that trust in him shall be
confounded. Psalm. 34.22.
Has the Lord spoken it then? let us believe him, and doubtless the time will
come in which we shall reap the fruit of our faith. For as his truth is firm
and stable in it self, so if we rest constantly upon him, we shall never be
destitute of comfort.

It is not without cause also that he adds, that God who now promises to be
merciful unto Iaacob, says, that he redeemed Abraham: for he therein brings
the people to the beginning of the Church, that considering Gods power, which
from time to time was manifested by so many famous examples, they might have no
occasion at all to call his truth into question. If so be then they gloried in
that they were the children of Abraham, Abraham's deliverances.
they were also therewithal to think from what place service of idols which
he and his father worshipped: redemption, he comprehends also all the benefits
which God bestowed upon him: for we see that Abraham was not redeemed only
once: that is, from extrem dangers and perils of death. Now if the Lord raised
up his Church in the only person of Abraham, and that in such a time as he had
lost all strength to beget any children to conserve the same after him; will
not the Lord preserve it for the time to come, when in man's judgment it was as
good as forlorn? A singular consolation.
What a miserable waste was there of the Church, at the coming of Christ? How
many enemies were there which opposed the same? Yet did he set up this his
kingdom in despite of them all: the Church flourished and made all the world to
wonder at the glory of it. Let us not doubt then but that the Lord will in his
due time manifest his power both in auenging himself upon the enemies of his
Church which oppress it, and in restoring of her to her first beauty.

When he says, Iaacob shall not be confounded; we often see that the faithful
are constrained to hang down their heads with shame, as Jeremy witnesses; I
will put my mouth in the dust: Lament. 3.29. Also Micha Mich. 7.16.
says; The time is come, in which the wise shall put their hands upon their
mouth, and lick the dust: for when the Lord corrects his people so sharply,
the faithful must needs be confounded therewith. But the Prophet afterward
shows, that this shall not endure for ever. Let us not despair then in
adversity: for albeit the wicked make us their laughing stocks, and lade us
with all the indignities in the world, Harken to this O thou troubled soul,
and know it for thy self. Job. 5.27.
yet will the Lord in the end draw us out of this shame and confusion of face.

Yet the Lord therewithal shows, that this favor belongs not unto such proud
ones, who either are obstinate, or oppose their hard heads against Gods blows
that he lays upon them; but that it only belongs unto the humble, who are
bowed with shame, walking humbly with their heads bowed down.

But may some object, Jacob shall not be confounded, seeing he was dead long
before? it seems he attributes some feeling to the dead, and then they know
what we do in this world: thence the Papists argue, that the dead know all
that we do. I answer, Jeremy says; That a voice was heard in Ramah, Rachel
weeping for her children and would not be comforted for them, because they were
not: Ier. 31.15. For in that place he sets forth the destruction of the Tribe
of Benjamin, by the lamentation of Rachel, which was the grandmother as it
were. So Isaiah brings in Iaacob covered with shame and confusion, in regard of
the vices and wickednesses of his posterity. For as a wise son is the glory
of his father, so a fool is an heaviness to his mother: Prou. 10.1. Although
mothers do cocker their children most, yet are they ashamed when they see them
offend. How much more fathers then, Simile.
whose love being guided by discretion, are chiefly careful for the well
ordering and instructing of their children. Must they not needs be much more
grieved, in seeing them wax wicked and dissolute? But the Prophet meant here to
touch the people to the quick, in setting Iaacob their father before them; who
being adorned with such rare graces of God, was now dishonored by his
successors: so as if himself had been present to have seen them, it would
have constrained him to blush for shame. He therefore taxes the
unthankfulness of the people, who in stead of honoring, dishonored their
father.

Verse. 23. Or, for when he shall se^* etc.
But when he sees his children, the work of mine hands in the midst of
him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one of Iaacob, and
shall fear the God of Israel.
THe particle Chi, is here to be read in its proper signification; to wit,
For; because the Prophet gives a reason why the shame of Israel should be taken
away: that is, he should have children raised up unto him again, as it were
from death to life. In that the Lord calls them the work of his hands; I
nothing doubt but he therein meant to express the admirable work of their
redemption: for he makes those new men, (as it were) whom he adopt^ and ioines
unto him for his children; as it is said, Psalm. 102.19. The people that shall
be created, shall praise the Lord: in which place the holy Ghost does in like
manner speak of the restoration of the Church. See chap. 4^.7.
For there is no mention here of that universal creation of mankind, under
which all good and bad are comprehended, as we have often said: but he now
brings us to the knowledge of his power, to the end we should not iudg^ of the
salvation of the Church, by viewing her present estate. Here therefore we must
note diverse oppositions: first, between the deformity of the Church, and her
beauty or excellency between glory and shame: secondly, between the people
of God, and other nations: thirdly, between the work of Gods hands, and the
work of men, (for the Church can no way be reestablished but by the only hand
of God:) fourthly, between her flourishing estate, and that miserable waste by
which she was pitifully rent in sunder before. For he calls the midst of
her a perfect restoration; by which the people shall be so reunited and joined
together, that she shall not only possess the borders of the land, but the
midst and the chief place thereof also. Lastly he shows what the end of our
redemption is, The end of our redemption noted.
when he says, That they shall sanctify his name: for we are all created to
the end Gods goodness may be magnified amongst us. But because the most part of
men do shun this end, God has chosen his Church, in which his praises do
sound and continue, as it is said in the Psalm 65.2. Praise waits for thee o
God in Zion. Praise waits for the Lord, but it is in Zion.
Now because many sheep in the flock grow corrupt, the Prophet assigns this
office to ye faithful, whom God miraculouslie had preserved.

Moreover, because the hypocrites honor God with their lips, and are far
from him in their hearts, as we have seen verse 13. Isaiah adds fear to
praises: showing by this, that praises are of no account with God, Praises are
of no account with God, unless they proceed from a reverent fear of his
Majesty.
unless we truly and with our whole hearts do subject our selves unto him:
neither yet, unless our whole life testifies for us that we take not up his
holy name fainedlie nor hypocriticallie.

Verse. 24. Then they that erred in spirit shall have understanding, and they
that murmured shall learn doctrine.
HE yet again repeates this promise which he touched in the 18. verse: for
whilst men's understandings are possessed with ignorance and blindness,
destruction besieges and enuirons them about, although they otherwise flow in
abundance of all worldly wealth. The Lord therefore minding to prepare for the
restoration of his Church, begins to clear and enlighten the understandings
of those who before erred in darkness by the light of his word. And this he does
by the secret instinct of the Holy Ghost: External teaching will be to little
purpose, unless God works inwardly in us by his holy Spirit.
for it is to little purpose to be taught by the external ministry, unless
he vouchsafe to teach us by his working inwardly in our hearts.

In the second member some translate detracters; others vagabonds: but the word
signifies, that those who resisted the Prophets before, and could not bear
their reproves, should now become teachable and obedient, and therefore I have
turned it murmurers. By this we see how admirable Gods mercy is, in that he
thus brings such home into the right way, which deserved no such favor: and not
only that, but makes them partakers of his greatest benefits. But let every one
lay this to his own heart: for which of us is it that has not sometimes or
other murmured against God, and despised his holy doctrine. Yea, if God should
not pacify our murmuring thoughts and affections by stilling and fitting them
for his service, the most of us would perish in our own follies.

THE XXX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel
but not of me; and cover with a covering, but not by my spirit, that they may
lay sin upon sin.
THE Prophet here denou^ceth a woe against the Jews, Certain reasons why the
Prophet denounces this woe against the Jews.
who being impatient in suffering the assaults wherewith the Assyrians and other
enemies pressed them, did straightway run down into Egypt to require help of
them. But this reprehension may seem somewhat too sharp, if we shall only
consider how lawful it is for the distressed and weak to ask help even of
the wicked; especially when they are unjustly vexed: for it is natural to
all men to seek protection and defense in time of danger. Nature teaches us
to seek relief in time of danger.
But if we look unto the first cause of this, we shall find that the fault
which the Jews committed in this behalf, was not small, nor yet The first
reason.
but rather a wicked rebellion for a man so to be the gouerner of himself,
that he despises and contemns to be under the yoke of Gods government. Now
the Lord had straightly forbidden them to have any familiarity, Exodus 13.17.
Deuteronomy. 17.16.
or to make any leagues with the Egyptians, Exodus 23.32. and 34.15. Deuteronomy. 17.2.
Two principal causes why God forbad the Israelites to have any familiarity
with the Egyptians.
of which there were two principal causes.

The first was general, and likewise had refere^ce to other nations, with whom
the Lord would not have his people to converse, nor to make any confederacies
with them, least they should be corrupted by the superstitions of the Gentiles.
For it often falls out (I know not how) that by little and little we learn
the vices of those with whom we converse and are familiar. And as we naturally
imitate their vices rather then their virtues, We sooner imitate others vices,
rather then their virtues.
so are we by and by infected therewith, and afterward the infection grows to
spread it self instantly. This is come to pass in this realm of France,
which has conuersed with other nations: France corrupted by having
conversation with other nations. Turks.
for having been too diligent in framing themselves to follow their evil
example, they have now fraughted themselves full of filthinesses. Yea, this
inordinate desire of leagues and confederacies has opened the door for the
Turks to enter into Asia, and now has given him passage into Europe: and
howsoever they still retain their wonted frugalitie in meats and drinks, yet
nothing remains to all countries which they have overcome by force, but the
villenies and pollutions which they have left behind the^. The same may well be
said of our country of France, by having familiarity with diverse other
nations.

The other cause was special and peculiar The second reason.
for the Lord having delivered them out of Egypt, meant that they should ever
retain the remembrance of so great a benefit, and for that end gave them in
charge to have no familiarity with the Egyptians, fearing lest if they should
fall into league with them, the memory of so famous a deliverance might
easily slip from them: by means whereof also, Exodus 13.3.8.14.
they might be in danger to lose that freedom, in continuing to be thankful
for the same, which thankfulness was enjoined them by God. Was it not an
unworthy thing then to entertain friendship with so profane a nation, and that
to the dishonor of the Almighty? But especially seeing it was his will that
his people should acknowledge him alone sufficient to preserve them in safety,
they should have relied upon this his promise, and freely have disclaimed all
other helps. You see then that it was a very horrible sin thus to defraud God
of the honor which to him belonged, and to labor after acquaintance from all
parts with all profane nations; for had they satisfied themselves with Gods
only protection, Verse 2.
they needed not to have bin so ready to run down imto Egypt.

They were therefore justly to be convinced of their infidelity, in that they
bestowed so much pains this way, and made such a stir in procuring their
help. Neither is it to be doubted, but that the Prophet also was the more
quick and sharp in speech against so sacrilegious a sin; because thereby
they bereaved God of the praise of his almighty power, in trotting thus up and
down to get succor at the hands of strangers: for which cause the holy Ghost
in an other place compares this lust to an inordinate love; yea to most brutish
whordomes. For Ezechiel Ezec. 16.26. Ier. 5.8.
shows that their conjunction with the Egyptians in this behalf, was no less
then if a man's wife in her excessive heat of lust, should not only run
after adulterers, but should even desire to have company with Asses and horses.

I grant our Prophet does not simply condemn al leagues with idolaters in this
place, but he respects that prohibition which was expressed in the very law of
God it self; Deuteronomy. 17.16. Exodus 13.17.
to wit, that they should have no association with the Egyptians at all. He is
thus moved to indignation against the Jews therefore, chiefly in regard of
this prohibition, because it could not be but Gods dishonor must of
necessity be joined with this their running down, as desperate men into Egypt.

This is the cause why he calls them perverse and ebellious children, which
phrase we have expounded in the first Chapter. Chap. 1.4.
His meaning is, that either they were men sunk deep in their obstinacy,
wittingly and willingly reuolting from God; or that they were so rooted in
obstinacy, that there was no soundness nor integrity left in them. In the
very entrance then he chrageth them that they were men given up to their own
counsels, and therewithal did cast off the Lord. Although some expound, To
spread the effusion or shedding; and that it agrees with the Prophets meaning:
yet others in mine own opinion, have turned it better; to wit, who cover the
seceret: and this reading I have followed. The reason is, because he speaks
here of counsels and privy plots, by which, in thinking to deceive the
Prophets, their meaning was indeed to flee from Gods presence.

Those which translate, That they may cover themselves with a covering, are
grossly mistaken: for albeit the Jews sought to the Egyptians for security;
yet does the Prophet rather aim at their wily plottings; of which I spoke
erewhile, and both the expositions come all to one sense.

Now he repeates one and the same thing by three phrases of speech: first,
that they covered secondly, that they and thirdly, that For those that are
carried away with a conceit of their own wit, do willingly give themselves to
cunning devices, whereby they may cover their infidelity and rebellion: and
for as much as it was not their meaning to obey Gods word, therefore they never
craved the direction of his Spirit. Thence comes that sorrowful and woeful
event: for it cannot be avoided, but those counsels and determinations which
the Lord gouernes not, must come to a miserable and fatal end. Counsels that
are not directed by God, must needs have a fatal end. They that take counsel
from Gods word, shall be sure to be directed by Gods Spirit.
What wisdom is there but that which proceeds out of his mouth? Let us seek
unto it then; that is to say, let us ask counsel of his word: so shall we
also have the direction and government of his Spirit, from whence proceeds
all wisdom and counsel.

But we are to note that the word and the Spirit are matched together: which
crosses those fantastical spirits, who leave the word forsooth, to aspire to
Oracles and secret revelations. And thus they would come unto God, but they
will not keep the Kings high way, as they say; nay, rather despising it. What
do they else then, but strive to fly without wings, as the proverb Proverb.
is? Let us therefore hold us fast to this principle, Principle.
that whatsoever we consult or enterprise in the whole course of our life,
without warrant from Gods word, will in the end deceive us, because we begin at
the wrong end; for that only ought to be our guide. And surely if we do but
well bethink us of our own ignorance, or rather our great brutishness, we
may easily be brought to confess that our madness is worthy to be condemned;
to wit, if we shall think our selves so wise as not to vouchsafe to inquire at
Gods mouth.

If any object, If we will yield our selves to be ruled by Gods word, he will
not suffer us long to linger in our doubtings.
that the word of God shall have the rule over our thoughts and actions, and
that we seek to square them according unto that; then may we be sure that God
will never suffer us to hang long in suspense, but will give us a way and
passage out of all difficulties and incombrances. And yet it may be we shall
wait long for the accomplishment of this work; but in the end it is certain
the Lord will deliver and draw us out of them all, if we be willing and ready
to obey him. Be it therefore that we are careful in laboring and seeking after
such means as may serve Gods providence: yet must we always nourish this
meditation in our breast, to wit, that we begin nothing, till we be assured that
the thing is well-pleasing Begin nothing till thou be assured that thou
take in hand is pleasing to the Lord.
and acceptable in his sight.

The Prophet we see then condemns the boldness of such who seek to succor
themselves by unlawful causes, thinking that way to prosper best, when they
use all means be it right or wrong, even as if they meant thereby to be their
own saviors. Now it is certain that this proceeds from infidelity and
distrust, because they think God to be insufficient to save them, unless they
yet run to seek help of strangers, although it be flatly forbidden them:
From thence comes those unlawful contracts and crafty conueyances, by means
whereof men think their affairs shall have better success, then if they
walked honestly and vprightlie one with another. We for our parts do see
infinite examples of this unbelief in all the parts of men's lives: for they
think themselves as good as undone, Men for the most part think themselves
undone, unless they live by unlawful means.
if they should make it their resolution to be content with the only blessing
of Almighty God, and to deal truly and justly with men.

But let us know that we are not only cast off and forsaken, but cursed of God,
as soon as we bend our selves to seek defense from unlawful helps. Let all
our enterprises, counsels and studies therefore begin at Gods revealed will. It
is our duty always to weigh with our selves what he commands or forbids, that
so being wholly devoted to his service, and to the obedience of his
Commandments, we may suffer our selves to be guided by his Spirit, which if we
refuse to do, then shall our presumption cost us the setting on, as they say.

He says, that they laid sin upon sin, because the Jews did nothing else
by their goodly preparations wherewith they thought to furnish themselves, but
dashed their foot against the same stone, and of one evil made twain, which
was too great already: for the fault is much more blame-worthie and to be
condemned when by unlawful shifts we labor to flee from under the hand of God.

A third reason.
But we are here to observe one thing more special as touching the Jews, who
by the help of the Egyptians would put the Assyrians to flight, and yet
themselves had called the Assyrians to help them against the Israelites and
Syrians. 2. King. 16.7. 2. King. 17.4 2. King. 18.21.
Asshur pressed the Jews very sore, and doubtless it was a just punishment of
God upon them for their incredulity, who sought for help of men rather then of
God. And this we see has been the practice of many others also, who have not
stuck to seek help even from the Turk. Well, the Jews were so far off from
repenting themselves of their sin, or acknowledging God to be just in the
punishment thereof: that they added sin to sin, as if the committing of one
offense had made amends for the committing of another. These are the causes
then why our Prophet deals so roughly with them: for those that go on so in
their wickedness, and do viole^tlie rush against God himself, and will not
suffer themselves to be brought into the right way, neither by admonitions nor
corrections, are worthy to be punished with the greater severity and rigor.

Verse. 2. Which walk forth to go down into Egypt, (and have not asked at my
mouth) to strengthen themselves with the strength of Pharoh, and trust in the
shadow of Egypt.
WE have told you before why the Prophet blames this descent, or going down.
But because so gross a rebellion did much amplify their sin, he once again
repeates it, that they did this without consulting with his mouth, nay expressly
against his inhibition. He also brings them to the fountain of this evil,
when he tells them that they did it to strengthen themselves, because they
relied upon the strength of the Egyptians. From hence then sprung that perverse
desire of theirs to make a league with them, in which they sufficiently showed
that they made slight account of Gods power, not much caring whether they
trusted in him or not; and thus made their impiety manifest to all the world.

But some might object, that men are Gods servants, It is lawful to use the
help of man, provided that we wholly depend upon God for a blessing. Deuteronomy.
17.16. Exodus 13.17.
I answer, man's help must be used, yet so, that in the mean while we rest and
depend upon the alone help of God. But there was a special cause to blame the
Jews, in regard they knew well that God had forbidden them to seek for any
help of the Egyptians: and therefore in this their fact they took so much from
God, as they attributed to Pharaoh and his host. It is not without cause
therefore that our Prophet does here make a flat opposition between Pharaoh and
God: How God and the creatures are said to fight one against another.
for the creatures are set as opposite against him in battle, either when they
exalt themselves against him, or when men abuse them, and trust in them, or
desire them more then is permitted unto them.

Verse. 3. But the strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame: and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt your confusion.
NOw he shows what the end of the wicked shall be that despised God and his
word, and followed such counsels as themselves liked: to wit, that all their
enterprises whatsoever should turn to their overthrow. He also threatens them
that they shall not not only be left frustrate of their hope, but that they
shall also go to seek that with great loss and confusion, which should bring
them nothing in the end but shame and sorrow.

This must be always the lot of the wicked, for howsoever for a time they
seem to be wholly at their ease, and that all things fall out according to
their desire; yet in the end the same things shall turn to their ruin. This
is the just reward of their presumption, when they dare to pass the bounds of
Gods word: for things attained by unlawful means, shall never bring profit to
the possessors. Things attained by unlawful means, shall never bring profi^
to the possessors.
He speaks of the strength of Pharaoh, by way of yielding or granting: as if
he should say; You verily think Pharaohs strength is your safety: but be
better advised, for it shall bring you nothing but shame and dishonor. The
shadow of Egypt under which you hope to shroud your selves, shall cause you to
be cast down with confusion of face. These two words of confusion and
ignominy, are to be taken both in one sense; but the latter is added by way of
amplification, because it carries greater weight with it then the former.

Verse. 4. For his Princes were at Zoan, and his Ambassadors came unto Hanes.
We may see by the Prophets words, that the Jews not only desired the aid
of the Egyptians, calling them to aid and succor them: but he expresses
somewhat more to wit, that they obtained not the same without great cost and
labor. For it could not be avoided, but they must needs make long iournies,
take much pains, and be at extraordinary charges, to go laden with their
presents to the furthest Cities of Egypt, which he here names. For they sent no
common persons on these ambassages, but Lords and great Princes. The
reprehension therefore is the sharper, because they had basely sought succor
of the Egyptians, trotting up and down like poor suitors. We are also to note
ye antithesis here which we spoke of before; to wit, that God was ready at
hand, and near to be found; so as they needed not to travel far, nor to be at
any great expenses to call upon his name: for he tied himself unto them by
this promise; This is my rest: Psalm. 132.14. and had told them that in that
place he would be found of them. But these poor wretches in despising God,
did rather choose to vex themselves, by running to the uttermost parts of the
world, then to enjoy that present help which was offered them within the walls
of their own City.

Verse. 5. They shall be ashamed of the people that cannot profit them, nor
help nor do them good; but shall be a shame and also a reproach.
HE confirms the former sentence: for it was a wonderful hard matter to
persuade the obstinate sort amongst the Jews, that all things which they took
in hand without the express warrant of Gods word, should turn to their
overthrow. Men may sometimes prosper in bad and evil courses, but it is to
make their downfall the greater in the end.
Now to the end they might be the more severely punished, God suffered them
sometimes to prosper in their wicked courses; that so, being more and more
seduced, they might in the end breaks their own necks: for it came to pass
by his just judgment, that Satan drew them on by little and little with his
sweet baits, till he had caught them fast in his nets. But in the end it was
evident that they were not only deprived of that succor which they expected,
but were also sharply corrected for their presumption and infidelity.

The Prophet threatens them then that the Egyptians shall not only deceive
them, (as it often falls out that the wicked either give us the slip when we
have most need, or do treacherously betray those whom they have set a gog
with fair promises) but that they should stand them in no stead, although they
did their best endeavors to keep that faith which they had promised. For let
men do the utmost they can for us, Men can do us no good further then it
pleases God to bless their endeavors for our good.
yet in as much as the issues of all things rests in the hands of God, we shall
receive no benefit thereby, unless God be pleased to add his blessing. When
the Prophet spoke this, it was very doubtful and hard to be believed, that
so mighty a people should be unable to give them help: but we ought to hold
it for a sure principle, A Principle.
that all the comforts which the world is able to set before us, shall turn
but to smoke, unless the Lord be favorable and merciful unto us.

Verse. 6. The burden of the beasts of the South in a land of trouble and
anguish, from whence shall come the young and old Lion, the Viper, and fiery
flying Serpent against them that shall bear their riches upon the shoulders of
the Coltes, and their treasures upon the bounches of the Camels, to a people
that cannot profit.
Having inueied against the consultations of the Jews, in seeking help from
the Egyptians, he now scorns them for the large expenses, and great pains
which they were at to bring this about: and therefore he denounces the same
curse which he did in the beginning of the Chapter; because they foolishly
busied themselves much in trangressing Gods commandment. He mentions the
South, because they passed through the South Country, wherein Egypt was situated
from Judea. And in regard of the way thereunto, he calls the beasts, and
speaks to them: the rather to shame men, who were become senseless, and would
hear no admonitions at all. He therefore shows that the effect of this
prophecy shall extend it self to the very brute beasts, seeing men did shut
their ears against it. For seeing this people did proudly contemn these
threatenings, the Prophet does for good cause direct his speech to the Horses
and Camels, who though they were destitute of reason, yet should they perceive
that God spoke not in vain.

Furthermore, the Prophet shows that Egypt (upon which this people thought to
build their perfect happiness) should prove a land of trouble and affliction,
even to the very beasts. The way was long and tedious, yet they spared no cost
to satisfy their inordinate lusts: yea they were so violently ouerswayed and
carried away therewith, that no distance of place, nor length of way could
possibly cool or abate the same.

Now Isaiah threatens them with a special judgment, (besides the former
encumbrances) which should catch hold upon them; to wit, that wild and cruel
beasts, that is, the young and old Lion, should meet them. Which was no new
nor extraordinary accident unto them that traveled between Judea and Egypt.
Therefore he here notes out some thing more rare and dangerous; to wit, that
besides the sore travail, discommodities, and charges which they should be at,
God in his justice would meet them with such misfortunes, that in the end they
should miserably perish. This doctrine ought to be applied unto us, who are too
much wedded to the very same vice: for as soon as any show of danger arises,
we by and by hasten to unlawful shifts, imagining that they shall do us
good, albeit we know they be condemned of God. Is it not great reason then,
that if we will needs partake with this people in their sin, that we also
should share with them in their punishment, unless we prevent the same by
repressing our stubburnnesse and unbelief by Gods word? We ought also to
observe and take heed of this folly, which caries us away in such wise, that
we care for no cost, nor refuse any pains whatsoever, to satisfy and
accomplish our over great fond and furious lust. Whilst we were captives under
the Papacy, we had too woeful experience hereof, trotting hither and thither,
Men will take great pains to fulfill their own lusts, but none at al in
yielding obedience to the Gospel.
and made long and wearisome pilgrimages to diverse Saints, when as yet the most
tedious iournies were easy and light unto us: but now when we should yield
obedience unto God, and bear the light yoke of Christ, we can endure no
pains at all.

Verse. 7. Or, Surely.
For the Egyptians are vanity, and they shall help in vain. Therefore have I
cried unto her: their strength is to sit still.
THis verse contains in it the exposition of the former sentence; for he
denounces and repeates but the same thing as it were; to wit, that the
Egyptians shall stand the Jews in no stead, albeit they weary their bodies,
and empty their purses never so much in seeking help at their hands. As if he
should say; Egypts strength shall be unprofitable unto you, notwithstanding
they should do their uttermost, and employ all their power to that end. Thus
the Jews should be utterly frustrated of their hopes, and to their great
grief should find themselves much deceived. The letter Vau, here signifies
For, or, Surely, as I have translated it.

In the next place he shows that the Jews have nothing to say for themselves,
in that they were thus giddy headed to run into Egypt, and that they were
utterly unworthy of pardon, in regard they would not repent, but wilfully and
wittingly posted down thither, albeit they had been admonished to tarry at
home. For I refer this crying unto Jerusalem, to the person of God: wherein he
complains that he did but lose his labor, in seeking to reclaim them by so
many and plain admonitions: therewithal showing, that it was not without good
cause that he had forewarned them to sit still; for he therein sought to
prevent the afflictions and calamities which otherwise he foresaw would surely
fall upon them. But whence, I pray you, sprang this unquietness? Truly from
this, that Jerusalem would not believe the word of the Lord. In a word, he
shows that mere rebellion of heart pricked them forward to trot into Egypt.
Why so? Because they might have lived in safety, if they would have tarried at
home.

The verb to cry, signifies that they were not only admonished by words, but
also by stripes: whence it appears, that their obstinacy and rebellion was
the greater. He takes sitting still here, to remain and to rest quietly in the
house: for he will show afterward, that it had been their parts to have been of
a quiet spirit. See now the fountain from whence this unquietness and
stirring, yea, this their madness and giddiness of head sprang. Oh! They
thought that the Lord was too weak for their defense, unless the strength of
Egypt were also added thereunto. For it is the property of infidelity, The
nature of infidelity.
to solicit the hearts of such as give not honor enough to the power of God,
to be in continual vexation of spirit, without any rest at all.

Verse. 8. Now go, and write it before them in a table, and note it in a book;
that it may be for the last day for ever and ever.
Having convinced the Jews of manifest incredulity, now he would have it
signed and sealed as it were upon perpetual record for a witness unto all
posterity, to the end those which should succeed might know both how obstinate
and rebellious this people were; as also how justly God inflicted his
punishments upon them. We have told you before that the Prophets were wont to
gather their Sermons into certain chief heads, See chap. 8.1.
and afterward to fasten them upon the gates of the Temple: which being read
and viewed of all at leisure, the Ministers took them thence and laid them up
safely in Chests in the Temple: and thus the book of the Prophets were
conserved, and afterward gathered orderly into volumes. But when among the
rest there was some rare and excellent prophecy and worthy of memory; then
the Lord commanded that it should be written in greater letters, the better to
draw the people to ye reading of it, that they might mark it the more
diligently. The Lord now commands the Prophet to do the like, thereby showing
that this was no ordinary matter, but the whole to be carefully written, and
very attentively read. Yea, that it should not only be read, but also so
engraven as it were in men's memories, that it might never be raced out.

No doubt but the Prophet got great hatred of all hands by this prophecy, in
regard he was not afraid to bring them thus upon the open stage, not only to
shame them among those that then lived, but among the posterity also, and that
from generation to generation. For what can men less endure, then to have
their wickednesses published, or that the same should stand as it were upon
record in the minds of men? oh! they can not abide that; they detest and
abhor it, accounting it a most unworthy fact. Yet the Prophet
notwithstanding was to go through with it, and to yield obedience unto God,
albeit he thereby got the hatred of men, Isaiahs constancy worthy to be
observed and followed.
yea and it may be put his life also in danger: which constancy of his we are
carefully to observe, in regard that he nothing feared the fear of men when
the question was of his obedience to his God, and the discharge of his duty.
Then he contemned hatreds, envy, hurly burlies, threats, false alarums, and
all dangers, that so he might the more freely and boldly perform that charge
which was imposed upon him. In which respect it is our parts to follow and
imitate his worthy example if we mean to give ear and to follow Gods call.

Before them.] Others translate, with them. But the word Before, agrees best,
for he meant to provoke the Jews in the sight of all, by setting forth this
prophecy written in a Table. And hence may we gather that wicked men ought to
be severely reprehended, and that in the presence of all, albeit they storm
never so much at it; Wicked persons must be sharply reproved, though they
storm never so much at it.
as being a thing which at no hand they can away withal: for howsoever such
reprehensions and threatenings do them little or no good, yet others
peradventure may be warned thereby, when they shall see them so branded with
perpetual shame and infamy.

Iere. 17.1.
That which is recorded elsewhere, to wit, the sin of Judah is written with
the pen of a diamond, and graven upon the table of their hearts, shall be
fulfilled in them. Neither ought they once to imagine that they shall escape,
albeit they contemn the prophesies by stopping their ears at the publishing
of them: for their wickedness shall be manifest to the view of men and Angels.
Furthermore, in regard they did never willingly repent themselves, nor were
ashamed of their sins, the Lord commands a spectacle of their infamy to be
erected, and set up before the eyes of all: for as they were wont to engraue
victories, or some notable things in tables of brass, so would God have their
shame noted in public tables, which the Jews notwithstanding labored to hide
and cover by their cauils. For this was an extraordinary matter as I said
erewhile, that the Prophet was charged to defame his own nation by so solemn
an edict, for which cause it is added, that it should be for the last day, that
so they might be had in detestation for ever; or, because that when the great
Judge shall appear and sit in Judgment, and that all books shall be opened,
then the sins of the wicked shall be truly discovered: for then the things
which before lay hid and buried as it were in obscure darkness, shall be
discovered and brought to light.

Let us here observe diligently that the prophesies were not written for the
men of one age alone, Note that the prophesies were not only written for them
of former times, but to instruct us and our posterity after us.
but also for their children and all posterities which should be instructed, to
the end they might learn to eschew that hardness of heart which was in their
forefathers, Psalm. 78.6.7.8. and 95.8. And that which S. Paul says of the
whole Scripture, that it is profitable to teach, to admonish and comfort,
agrees also to this prophecy: for we know that these points are needful to be
known in all times, 2. Tim. 3.16. Let us reject then the imaginations of those
frantic spirits and bad companions, who affirm, that this doctrine was fit
for that time, and not for this. Let ye faithful, I say, learn to stop their
ears at such blasphemies, and to drive them far away from them: for albeit
our Prophet be now dead, yet must his doctrine still live and bring forth fruit
amongst us.

Verse. 9. Or, For.
That it is a rebellious people, lying children, and children that would not
hear the law of the Lord.
THe particle For, serves as an exposition, in regard the Prophet now explanes
that which the Lord would have published to all posterity, namely, that the
obstinacy of this people was past cure, because they would not suffer
themselves to be brought into any good order, notwithstanding they were daily
taught and instructed. Besides, we may from their vain bragges gather how much
these goodly Epithites did pierce and gall ye hearts as well of small as great:
for they gloried they were the holy posterity, and how they issued out of
Abraham's loins, as if Gods adoption had served for a veil to cover all their
gross and palpable wickednesses, though they were never so manifest. Nay, God
meant to lay them open, and to publish their wickednesses with sound of
trumpet, as it were. For in accusing them to be such as refused to hear the
law of the Lord, he therein opens the fountain whence all presumption flows,
to wit, the contempt of the word, which discovered their impiety in despising
even of God himself: for they lie who say they will serve God, and yet will
not be in subjection to his Commandments.

Isaiah also aggrauates their offense for rejecting the medicine that should
have cured their maladies, He that refuses to submit himself under the
censure of the word, taxes God of tyranny, is bewitched of Satan, and hates
integrity.
which medicine was offered them in his (wholesome) doctrine. For this cause he
calls them rebellious, untamed, or wild; as also liers, or disloyal, in
regard that whosoever will not submit himself to Gods word, does openly turn
his back upon him, no less then if God played the tyrant in exacting some
unreasonable thing at his hand: and therewithal does also show, that he is
bewitched with the illusions of the devil, and given up to the vanity of his
own heart, so as he hates all integrity.

Verse. 10. Which say unto the Seers, See not; and unto the Prophets, Prophecy
not unto us right things: but speak flattering things unto us; prophecy
errors.
HE how in plainer terms, sets forth and shows as in lively colors, what
that obstinacy and contempt of the word is, whereof he spoke before: for the
wicked not only scorn all instruction, but do also furiously resist it; yea,
they wish it were utterly abolished and buried in everlasting forgetfulness.
This is it which Isaiah meant to say; to wit, that they did not only turn
their ears, eyes, and all their senses from holy doctrine, but could very well
have found in their hearts that it had been utterly extinct and abolished: for
the wicked are evermore pricked forward with such rage, that they would have no
mention at all made of that which they cannot abide to hear of. For the power
and officacie of the word so galls and stings them, that they show themselves
to be no better then furious wild beasts in rage and cruelty. Feign would they
escape, but they are compelled in despite of them to hear God speak; yea and
to tremble before his Majesty.



The Prophet sets not down here the very words which they spoke; to wit, as if
they had openly pronounced them; but he shows what was in their hearts: for
he had not to deal with such fools as would go blaze their impieties to the
whole world: no, they were grown to the height of hypocrisy. For they made
the world believe, they were such as served God devoutly, and therefore
complained as if the Prophets did them great wrong, so to diffame them. But
Isaiah pluckes off this visard wherewith they covered themselves, and lets the
world see what they were indeed; seeing they would not be brought to give place
to the truth. For whence (I pray you) proceeded their murmurings against the
Prophets, but that they neither could nor would hearken to the voice of God?

The Prophets were called Seers, because the Lord revealed that unto them,
which they were afterward to reveal unto others: for they were as beacons set
upon an hill, and as watchmen, thence to discover a far off tidings either of
that good or evil which was by and by to ensue. But the people could not abide
to hear of troubles; and therefore they hated the Prophets, who by laying their
sins close unto their consciences, were therewithal proclaimers of Gods
vengeance which was ready to seize upon them. To this appertains these words,
see not, prophecy not right things: not that they uttered these things indeed,
as we have showed before; but because they thought thus in their hearts, in
which they wished the Prophets would be less severe. For it went against the
hair (as they say) to be so sharply dealt withal. Doubtless none of them
would once show themselves so impudent, as in plain terms to desire they
might be seduced; or to say, that they would resist the truth: for in outward
profession, they made the world believe they sought to promote the same with
all diligence, as all our adversaries the Papists do at this day: but they
denied that the sermons of Isaiah, or of the other Prophets, were the word of
the Lord. They were not afraid to tell Jeremiah, that he was a lier; and not
only that, but gave him threatening words saying, Thou shall not prophecy in
the name of the Lord, lest thou die by our hands: Ier. 11.21. Thus we see the
publishing of the truth was to them a thing intolerable. Now in turning their
ears from it, what could they else believe but lies? See then how they sought
to be seduced and deceived wittingly.

But he discouers the fountain from whence all this sprang, when he says,
they desired to be flattered. For they would have been most ready to have
heard and received flattering words, and could well have found in their hearts
that their ears might have been tickled in the name of the Lord forsooth. What
is the reason then why the world is not only subject to be gugled by
impostures, but also that it earnestly seeks and receives the same? Surely
because all men naturally desire nothing more, then that they might be suffered
to rot in their filthiness, through flatteries. But the messengers of God must
of necessity be sharp in their reprehensions for all that, if they mean to
approve themselves unto God. Whence it follows, that worldly men cavil
foolishly and childishly when they say, we could be content to be Gods
disciples with all our hearts, if he would not deal too severely with us.
Which is all one, as if for their sakes they would cause him to alter his
nature, and to deny himself: as also Micheas says, that the Jews cared for
no Prophets, but such as would prophecy unto them of wine and strong drink:
Mich. 2.11.

Verse. 11. Depart out of the way: go aside out of the path: cause the holy one
of Israel to cease from us.
THe sum is; that when the Prophets are despised, God himself is there
withal despised and rejected, so as he has no more audience. This the wicked
cunningly dissemble, because they are ashamed to confess so great a
wickedness against themselves: but it goes never the better with them for all
that. For God will be heard by those to whom he has given commandment to
speak unto us, Would we obey G^d? let us show it by our obedience to the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.
and to publish that doctrine which is contained in his word. Ought he then to
be heard? Is any reverence due unto him? Let us show it in embracing his word,
as it is contained in the writings of the Prophets and Evangelists. Which I
wish should be well noted, to uphold the credit of the word: for those that
reject it, do as much as if they denied God to have any being.

Again, the cause of such impiety is here touched, which doubles the fault;
to wit, because God flatters us not in our sins, but performs the office of
a good and expert Physician. Men desire to be flattered, and cannot willingly
endure that God should threaten them: thence proceeds this hatred and
reiection of the word: thence comes that furious war which they raise up
against the Prophets, whose threats and reprehensions they can by no means
endure. For what cause should men have to revolt from God, and from under his
rule and government; were it not that they please themselves with the mists of
errors, and hate the right way? The Prophet therefore fitly ioynes these two

Verse. 12. Therefore thus says the holy one of Israel; Because you have cast
off this word, and trust in violence and wickedness, and stay thereupon:
HE adds the chastisement of this impiety; to wit, that they should not escape
unpunished, because they refused to hear the Lord speaking unto them: which
contempt he expresses the more fully by the verb to Reject, or, to disgorge.
He calls it this word, using therein a word demonstratiue, in regard that men
willingly forge unto themselves a word agreeable to the manner and course of
their own life: but they will give God no audience when he speaks.
Afterward he opposes Gods mild summoning of them, and an exhortation to a
quies rest, against their turbulent enterprises, saying; You trust in violence
and stay thereupon. The word Oseq, signifies rapine and extortion, in things
appertaining to men's substance: others translate, Riches ill gotten: others,
Slander, or, misreporting: but they express not the Prophets meaning
sufficiently. For mine own part I refer it not to Riches gotten by wicked
practices; but rather to the pride and rebellion, wherewith this people were
puffed up.

Violence and wickedness.
The word iniquity, afterward added, is not to be restrained to judgment;
because as I think, it has a larger scope: for by these two words, the
Prophet meant to set forth the impudency of the wicked, who proudly and
insolently exalted themselves against God Why so? Because they would always do
what them listed, and withstood him and his sacred will. And as the Poets
fained that the Giants made war with God, A fiction of Poets.
so these resisted him when he threatened, persuading themselves that they were
able to make his force to recoile by their pride and ouerweening.

Verse. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall be unto you as a breach that falls,
or a swelling in an high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment.
THis is the sentence touching their punishment, which Isaiah sets forth by a
goodly similitude: for he compares the wicked to a wall that is cracked or
swollen. Now as the swelling of a wall, shows that it is ready to fall,
because it cannot long stand upright, unless all the parts be equally knit
together; so the pride and insolency of the wicked, is an infallible sign and
token of their present destruction: for the more they are puffed up, the more
sudden shall their downfall be. And as they are full of wind, so it is not
possible, but being ouercharged therewith, they must forthwith break in
sunder. He bids them therefore to exalt themselves and to behave themselves
malapertly against God, if they will: but in conclusion, he will quickly
ouerturne your pride and presumption; for it is nothing else but a bubble full
of wind. Hence we are to be admonished, that there is nothing better for us,
then that we wholly submit our selves under God: and so to gather in all our
spirits, that we bind our selves perpetually to do him service. For whosoever
he be that shakes off this humility, and grows proud, must needs break in
sunder with gathering in over much wind. The Lord indeed for a time suffers the
wicked to swell, and make their great risings and ouerflowings appear, that in
the end they might pull ruin and destruction upon themselves, by their pride
and vain boastings.

Verse. 14. And the breaking thereof is like the breaking of a Potters pot,
which is broken without pity: and in the breaking thereof, there is not found
so much as a shard to take fire out of the harth, or to take water out of the
pit.
WHen a wall falls down, yet there remains some remnants of the ruins
thereof; and besides, the stones will serve for some good uses; yea, that which
is fallen may be reedified. But our Prophet prophecieth here, that those which
shall behave themselves thus rebelliously and proudly against God, shall perish
in such sort, that they shall never be healed; so that the remainder shall be
utterly unprofitable. He therefore uses a similitude taken from an earthen
vessel, whose broken pieces can neither be made up, nor gathered together
again. Which threatenings ought greatly to move us to embrace ye word of God
with all reverence, when we hear that so horrible punishments are prepared for
those which despise the same: for the Prophet shows that they shall be wholly
destroyed and utterly confounded, and takes away all hope of their
restoration. And good reason: For we see how the contemners of God cease not
daily to set up their Creasts, notwithstanding they have had the foil three or
four times: Why so? Because nothing is more difficult then to pluck from out
of their hearts that false confidence which was fast rooted therein.

Verse. 15. For thus says the Lord God the holy one of Israel, In rest and in
quietness shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your
strength: but ye would not.
HEre the Prophet shows one special touching the contempt of God. For when
hypocrites are generally admonished, it touches them little or nothing at
all: the Prophets therefore unto their general doctrines add particular
applications; The prophets are wont to descend from general doctrines to
particular applicatio^s.
touching in a special manner the conversation or those with whom they had to
do, and so always aimed at some certain mark, or end. For his adversaries
might thus cavil and say, Wherefore do thou accuse us of so great an
impiety, as if we meant to reject the word of the Lord?

This particular therefore is alleged to press upon their consciences, and to
cut off all occasions of vain cauillations. As if he should say, Did not the
Lord tell you that in rest and silence should be your confidence? Why staid you
not upon this counsel of God? To what purpose have you kept such fiskings to
and fro? Thus the Prophet convinced them with such forcible arguments, that
without extreme impudency they were unable any way to excuse themselves: or
if they did, yet he went away with the victory, as they say.

He calls the Lord the holy one of Israel, the rather to reproach them the
more for their unthankfulness, that so they might the better know what succor
they might have had from him who would have been their guardian, and as their
protector. But having once despised him, their distrust carried them away to
seek help of the Egyptians; which questionles was a wickedness utterly
insupportable. This Epithet then conteins under it a bitter complaint, in
regard they had stopped up the passage against the Lord, who drew near unto
them for their good.

Some translate the word Shuuah Repentance; others, whom I had rather follow,
Rest: for I think the Prophet meant often to tell the people that the Lord
required nothing of them but to rest themselves quietly in him. Neither is it
superfluous that he recites one and the same thing in two words: for of set
purpose he has put these words rest and silence together, that he might the
better reprove the distrust and incredulity of the people.

Moreover this sentence conteins two parts, to wit, a Commandment, and a
promise: A Commandment, and a promise.
for he commands the people to sit still; in the second place he promises an
assured deliverance. In these words, Shall ye be saved. No obedience without
faith. No peace without faith. No faith without a promise. Only faith quiets
perplexed consciences. Infidelity the mother of unnecessary fears and
distractions.
they therefore obeyed not the commandment: for how should they obey him, in
whom they believe not, or upon whose promises they rest not themselves? We need
not marvel then if they be deprived of peace and rest, which without faith can
have no place; neither can faith be without the promises: which being received,
then, and not before, the troubled and perplexed minds come to be quieted.
Infidelity then only is it that begets this trouble, and therefore the Prophet
has just cause to reprove it, showing, that it is the fountain from whence
all their misery sprang.

Now albeit our condition be not altogether like to that of the Jews; yet God
would have us quietly to wait for his succor, to the end we should not be
troubled or perplexed, but to hope in his promises. This doctrine belongs to us.
This doctrine ought to be common to all the faithful, for Satan inue^ts
nothing else but how to trouble and vex them, and to cause them to fall from
that happy estate in which they are. Moses long since gave this admonition,
stand you still, and the Lord shall fight for you, Exodus 14.14. Not that he
meant they should fall asleep, or be idle, A peaceable and quiet conscience
will give sufficient comfort in all distresses.
but he only required they would keep this peace in their hearts, Coloss.
3.15. which if we enjoy, we shall find by experience that it alone will
suffice us for our succor; but without it we shall be sure to be punished for
our lightness and presumption.

Verse. 16. For ye have said, No, but we will flee a ray upon horses, therefore
shall ye flee: We will ride upon the swiftest, therefore shall your
persecutors be swifter.
HE shows how they would by no means quietly wait for the salvation of ye
Lord, for they chose rather to have help from the Egyptians. But there is here
a goodly meeting together of words, whereby he turns against themselves their
own speeches that were so full of vain confidence: for in the first place he
takes the word to flee, to escape, and in the second place, to take their
flight. The Jews said it was much better for them to prevent the present
danger in fit and convenient time, and therefore promised themselves good
success if they used the aid of the Egyptians. Truly says Isaiah, I deny not
but you shall flee, yet not for your safety; for you shall turn your backs
upon your enemies, and shall be pursued of horses much swifter then your own.

But we shall perceive yet more clearly what vice it is which Isaiah here
taxes the Jews withal, by their presumptuous answer, Horrible presumption to
oppose our no, to Gods yea.
No: to wit, that they obstinatlie refused to yield obedience to that counsel
which God gave them by his Prophets, and thought it safer for them to provide
for their own defense by some other means. Thus in contemning God, they
esteemed the false conceit touching the means of their salvation, which they
had forged in their own heads, (before that which he had prescribed them.)

Let us in any wise therefore turn away our eyes from beholding present
things, To trust in God whilst outward helps fail us, manifests that we have
faith. A hard matter to use this world as if we used it mot. All things must of
necessity succeed ill with them that trust more in the creature, then in the
Creator. An heritage is hastily gooten at the beginning, but the end thereof
shall not be blessed. Pro. 20.21.
and from relying upon humane helps, that so we may wholly depend upon God;
for then we show whether we trust in him or no indeed, when outward means
fail us. I grant it is very lawful for us to use the things of this life:
but alas, we are of such a crooked nature, that in using of them, for the most
part we leave and forsake God, and wholly abuse those his good gifts. Besides,
we are to observe how woeful their end is, who trust more in outward helps
then in God. For all things must needs go backward, and fall out against
their expectations: for example, we see that whilst these Jews imagined to
save themselves, they are constrained to flee away with shame and disgrace, and
in the mean while did themselves no good at all. It may so fall out, I grant,
that things may have some outward show of good success in the beginning; but
it is only to the end, that the change when it comes, might be the more
cumbersome and heavier to bear. Isaiah denies not but Egypt might afford them
some help: but withal he tells the Jews, that God would find means enough
so to cross and overthrow that help, that they should no way escape his hand.
For though the whole world should do their utmost, yet shall they never be able
to defeat God of that which he has determined.

Verse. 17. A thousand as one shall flee at the rebuke of one: at the rebuke of
five shall ye flee, till ye be left as a ship mast upon the top of a
mountain, and as a beacon upon an hill.
BEcause the Jews trusted in their strength, in regard of their multitude,
(which men are apt to do when they see and behold their power) the Prophet
plainly tells them, that all the strength they are able to make at home, shall
do them no more good, then if it were far remote from them. Why so? Because
the Lord would so break and so daunt their courage, that all their forces
should stand them in no stead. For to what purpose serve weapons or an host of
men; yea what good can garrisons or fortresses do, when men's hearts are
appalled in them with fear? Alas! all our power is but weakness, except the
Lord fortify and strengthen us with the power of his holy Spirit. No strength
but from the power of Gods holy Spirit.
This sentence is often found in the law; to wit, that when they have forsaken
the Lord, many of them shall be put to flight before a few of their enemies:
Deuteronomy. 28.62. But the diversity between the Law and the Prophets, The
difference between the Law and the Prophets.
is this; the Prophets apply that to some particular use, which Moses delivered
generally, as we have showed elsewhere.

We have therefore to note three things here. First, that we shall have no more
strength then that which is given us of God. For if he It is just with God to
fear us with the words of men, when we will not tremble at his voice.
when we despise the voice and threats of the Lord. We may also note in the
third place, that the Lord has no need of any great preparations to correct
us; for if he lift up but his least finger against us, we are forthwith undone:
he needs not an host of men to overthrow us, be we

Where he says, as the mast of a ship in the top of a mountain, it may be
expounded two ways. Some think the similitude is taken from a wood or forest
cut down: The first Simile.
for when men do so, they leave certain fair and high trees standing, which
may serve for ships. But the word Har, is taken for a rock, or rocky place
against which ships use to wrack themselves; The second Simile.
after which, there is espied a mast, or some such thing, as witness of that
shipwreck. As a beacon.
The Prophet yet adds another similitude taken from the signs of victory,
which are usually erected and set up after the discomfiture of the enemy. In a
word, he shows that there shall be so small a remainder of men, that it
shall much resemble a general waste and desolation. As if he should say; This
great multitude now dazles your eyes, but there shall come such an ebb and
scattering of them, that there shall not be left so much as the face of any
people. By this are we admonished, how humble, modest, Let not the strong man
glory in his strength^ Ier. 9.23.
and meek we ought to be notwithstanding our great riches and strength: for
if we lift up our hearts, the Lord has skill to take us down by and by, and
to make us become more dastardly then women or little children: so as we shall
not dare to look one of our enemies in the face; and if we do, yet all our
forces shall melt away as snow (before the sun.)

Verse. 18. Yet therefore will the Lord wait, that he may have mercy upon you:
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have compassion upon you: for the
Lord is the God of judgment. Blessed are all they that wait for him.
THe Prophet now adds a consolation: Still the Lord in wrath remembers mercy.
Hab. 3.2.
for hitherunto he has so terrified them, that all the faithful amongst them
might have been driven to despair. His meaning is therefore, to comfort their
hearts; that so having tasted how pitiful and gracious the Lord is: in the
mids of these their calamities they might notwithstanding possess their
souls in patience, and uphold their faith by the power of the promises. This
waiting he opposes then to that ouer-great have, against which he cried in
the beginning of the Chapter. For there he reproved the people for their
posting down into Egypt, and condemned therein their infidelity: but now
contrariwise to their reproach he tells them, Our God will not render like for
like. Psalm. 103.10.12.13.
that the Lord will not render like for like, albeit they have much dishonored
him; neither will he hasten to punish them. Others expound, He commands you to
wait; or, He will make you wait. But as I think the sense which I have given
agrees best.

Now that we may the better clear this sentence, we must lay this foundation,
to wit, that God always keeps a measure in his corrections: God keeps a
measure in his corrections, because he is inclined to mercy.
the reason is, because he is inclined to mercy, which we gather from the word
Judgment: for the Prophets meaning therein is, that the Lord not only
chastises, but also evermore uses a moderation in his chastisements, God not
only chastises, but keeps a moderation in his chastisements.
according to that in Jeremiah, Correct me o Lord, not in thy wrath, but in
judgment, lest I be consumed and brought to naught, Iere. 10.24. Also in
another place, I will not utterly cut thee off, but will correct thee in
judgment, Judgment in this place opposed to severity.
Iere. 30.11. Thus Judgment is opposed to severity; the Lord so moderating
his blows in smiting the faithful, that he cuts not off from them all hope of
their salvation, for of that he always has a most tender respect. And
therefore as Abacuk says, In the mids of his wrath he evermore remembers
mercy. He is not like one of us then, The Lord is patient toward us because
he would have none of us to perish. 2. Pet. 2.9.
to take the advantage presently, and to fly upon us. Alas! so we should be
brought to naught by and by. No, he attends us with patience.

Moreover, it is a confirmation of no small weight, when he adds, that God
will show a sign of his glory in pardoning his people. Where I have
translated, He will be exalted, that he may be merciful; others turn it, When
he shall be merciful. But I think the first translation suits best. It seems
to us sometimes that the Lord either sits idle in heaven, or sleeps when he
permits the wicked to offer violence to his people: and the ordinary phrase of
the Scripture is, that he sits still, or is far off when he defends not his
Church. When therefore he had let loose the raines to the Chaldeans to oppress
the Jews, they might have thought he had been asleep. Wherefore the Prophet
says, that the Lord will exalt or raise himself again, and will go up into
his Judgment seat. What to do? That he may show you mercy.

Where he says, Blessed are all those that wait for him, this flows from the
former part of the sentence, wherein he called the Lord the God of Judgment.
When the Prophet speaks thus graciously of him, it is that he might persuade
and exhort the Jews to hope and patience, Hope and patience.
for the people were full of diffidence, and were tossed to and fro with a
marvelous unquietness, and vexation of spirit: Why so? Their infidelity
pestered them so miserably, that they were not able with quiet minds to wait
upon God. Well, to remedy this vice, A definition of hope.
he exhorts them to wait, that is, to hope. Now hope is nothing else but the
perseverance of faith, If they be blessed that wait for God, those must needs
be accursed that flee from him. Without hope, no happiness nor salvation.
when we peaceably wait for the accomplishment of Gods promises. Where he
says, Those shall be blessed that wait for him, on the contrary he signifies,
that such as suffer themselves to be ouerswayed with impatiencie, and have
their refuge to wicked shifts, shall be accursed, and in the end shall perish:
for without hope in God, there is neither salvation nor happiness.

Verse. 19. Surely a people shall dwell in Zion and in Jerusalem: thou shall
weep no more: he will certainly have mercy upon thee at the voice of thy
cry: when he hears thee, he will answer thee.
HE confirms the former sentence, to wit, that the people shall indeed be
afflicted, but yet that in the end they shall return unto Zion. But this was a
matter very incredible, especially after the ruin of Jerusalem and the whole
land, for then it seemed that all the people were consumed: yet the Prophet
gives them a promise that the Church shall continue safe. We must dwell in Zion
and in Jerusalem if we will have our requests heard and granted.
He begins at Mount Zion where the Temple was erected, and says, that the Lord
shall yet be there called upon: then he adds, that it shall be also in
Jerusalem: thereby understanding the spreading and increasing of the Church;
together with the restoration of such things as before were ruinated. In the
mean while he aduertiseth them that Jerusalem shall be repeopled, because God
had his dwelling there.

When he adds, thou shall weep no more, it is to show that their lamentations
should not last always. The Church, that is, all the faithful, should be in
great heaviness whilst they remained in so miserable and in so woeful an
estate; but Isaiah tells them yt this their sorrow shall have an end: and in
this sense is it said in Psalm. 126.9. that those which sow in tears shall
reap in joy. The Lord often suffers us to be pressed with wonderful
anguishes, but in the end he will relieve us, and give us matter of gladness, to
wit, when he turns the captivity of Zion: The returning of Zio^s captivity,
the matter of our true joy.
for this is the true joy of the faithful. Moreover, in as much as it is a
thing very difficult to rejoice whilst the tokens of Gods judgments present
themselves to our view on every side, the Prophet sets the cause of joy before
us in his mercy: Our joy flows from Gods showing of mercy.
for we may assure our selves that all joy and rejoicing shall return and
abound as soon as Gods anger shall be appeased toward us, according as we
have before alleged that famous saying of the Prophet Abacuck, that in the
mids of wrath the Lord remembers mercy: Though God be most ready to show
mercy, yet will he be sought unto. Ezekiel. 36 37.
and never so far afflicts his Church, but he limits, moderates, and measures
his blows by judgment.

Our Prophet likewise shows by what means we may obtain this grace, in
saying, it shall be when God shall hear the voice of thy cry. For in these
words he incites and prouokes the faithful to prayers, and ardent sighs and
groans: To demand pardon of God without sense of sin, is the next way to
deprive us of this mercy here promised.
for if we ask pardon of God, and be not touched with repentance and remorse
for our sins; whence indeed this cry ought to proceed, we are utterly
unworthy to have any mercy showed us. Would we then have the Church delivered
from death, and restored unto a prosperous estate, no less the^ if she were
raised up out of her grave? Oh let us cry unto the Lord that he may hear the
voice of our cries, No looking for succor without the affection of prayer.
sighs, and groans. For alas! if we be void of the affection of prayer, how
can we look for any succor of him?

To answer here signifies nothing else but that God will cause us to feel by
experience, both his help and favor: for the Lord answers us not by voice,
but by the effects. And yet let us not think he will forthwith answer our
crie^. Why so? Many times there is much weakness of ours mingled with them; so
as they be disordered by reason of our unbridled passions: he will assist us
when it shall be expedient for us; so as we shall prove by experience that he
has respected our salvation.

Verse. 20. And when the Lord has given you the bread of adversity, and water
of affliction, thy rain shall be no more kept back, but thine eyes shall see
thy rain.
He continues on his former speech, confirming the hearts of the faithful,
lest they should faint: Patience begets hope of a good issue.
for patience always begets hope of a better issue. He therefore instructs
them p^tiently to bear the chastisement to come, because they should only
feel Gods wrath the^ein for a time; but soon after, the storm shall be
blown over; he promises them that joy and deliverance shall be at hand, See
Hos. 14 5
because God will turn his anger away from them.

I expound the latter Vau, After that: as if he should say; After you have
been thus afflicted, Psalm. 30.5.
then the Lord will bless you; for he will change your mourning into joy.
Whereas some take the word Rain, for Instructor, it agrees not with the text:
for albeit the principal fruit of our reconciliation with God, stands in the
inioying of faithful Teachers, yet because the common people had suffered much
want, Isaiah fitting his speech according to their weakness, gives the^ therein a
taste as it were of Gods fatherly goodness in mentioning great plenty of all
things.

By the words bread and water, he signifies an extreme poverty and want of
outward things: and therefore he adds adversity and affliction. Now in stead
of this penury, he promises to send them fruitful increases, which he
expresses under the word Rain. For he takes the cause for the effect: as if
he should say; The earth shall be exceeding fruitful: in which phrase of
speech, the Prophet also had respect to the situation of that Country; which
waited for no other means to make it fruitful, but the rain which fell from
heaven; for it was not watered by the ouerflowing of rivers or fountains, See
Deus. 11.10.
but only with raines. Isaiah therefore shows that the Lord will send
abundance of those fruits, which otherwise he could have diminished or taken
away by barrenness. In any wise therefore let us learn to comfort our souls
with these and the like promises, when we shall in any sort feel the hand of
our God heavy upon us.

Verse. 21. And thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee, saying; This is the
way, walk ye in it, when thou turnest thee to the right hand, and when thou
turnest thee to the left.
THe fruitfulness of the land, whereof he spoke before, ought to be esteemed
a good blessing of Good. But behold here the chiefest cause of joy and
gladness; to wit, when God vouchsafes unto us the wholesome and sincere milk
of the word (for our souls.) For there is no famine of bread that ought so much
to affect us with fear and perplexity, as the famine of Gods blessed word. The
famine of Gods word a famine of all famins.
And indeed look how much more precious the soul is then the body, so much
the more ought we to fear that famine above all other famine: as also another
Prophet tells us: Amos 8.11. Our Prophet then promises unto the Jews a
benefit, But the inioyi^g of it a benefit of all benefits. False Prophets would
be taken for the only Doctors of the Church.
a^oue all benefits the greatest. What is that? They shall now be fed with the
word of God, which had been exceeding scarce amongst them before. The false
Prophets I deny not will boast, that they also have the word; yea with greater
boldness many times then the faithful Teachers themselves. They forsooth will
be taken and held for good guides, even whilst they lead men into error, and
at last, plunge them with themselves into everlasting perdition. But the word
which shows us the direct way, comes of God alone. True doctrine it self shall
avail us nothing at all, unless God give us ears to hear it.
And yet if he did not therewithal promise to give ears to hear it, the word
of it self shoud little avail us: for so he should indeed speak but to deaf
ears, neither should we perceive ought but a confused sound.

When he says therefore that he will be behind us as a guide, we may thereby
perceive, that God will not suffer his word to be spoken to us in vain, but
will so work inwardly upon our judgments and affections, that they shall be
bowed to a true and willing obedience. For all of us naturally are unteachable,
so that we stand in need to be wholly reformed by the work of the Spirit. And
therefore the word, shall hear, is of great weight in this place.

Now he compares God to a schoolmaster, who sets his scholars before him that
he may the better teach them, and keep them in order: wherein undoubtedly,
he shows the great affection and exceeding care which he has over us, in
that he contents not himself to go before us, but also to watch us at every
turn with his gracious eye. God not only vouchsafes to teach us, but to watch
and attend us with a gracious eye whither soever we go.


Moreover, the Prophet shows, that those which follow God, shall never go out
of their way. For by the verb exhortatiue, walk ye in it, he adds some
relief to help our perseverance lest some difficulty or other might slake
our course, as it often falls out.

right hand and the left, may seem absurd, in regard that when Moses showed
the people the way in which they should walk, he therewithal forbad them to
turn either to the right hand, or the left: Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 17.20. For that
way is straight, and no man ought to seek out any by-waies. What might be the
meaning of our Prophet then? What is meant by the right hand and the left in
this place.
I answer, he mentions the right hand and the left in this place, in another
sense then Moses does. For it is taken here for all sorts of counsels which we
ought to advise of; which are diverse in regard of the diversity of occasions
that we meet withal: and according as every one meets with sundry
difficulties, and agreeable to his affairs and occasions, he is to take advice
and deliberation.

Thus he calls right hand and left, all the actions of life whatsoever; to
the end that in all our enterprises, we might have the Lord for our guide, and
that we might put nothing in execution, till we have called upon his name,
whether we turn to the right hand, or to the left. Hence we gather an
exceeding comfort and consolation; to wit, that the Lord will be with us in our
enterprises, and will direct our way before us, whither soever we turn,
provided that we willingly stray not out of that path which he has laid
before us.

Verse. 22. And ye shall pollute the covering of the images of silver, and the
rich ornaments of thine images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous
cloth, and thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.
HEnce it appears, that this direction which God will give unto his Saints,
shall not be in vain: for having abandoned their false worship, they shall
give themselves to the true. And the Prophet plainly mentions their external
profession of piety, when they shall make it appear unto all, that they have
renounced idols, and all idolatry. For seeing images are instruments of
idolatry and superstition; Images instruments of idola ry. Such as be truly
converted unto God, must of necessity abhor and detest idols. Faithful
Princes oght to imi^ate Iehues example, in polluting and profaning idols and
idolatry.
therefore those who are truly converted unto God, must needs abhor and
detest them: yea, and as much as in them is, profane and pollute them; as we
read Iehu did, who profaned the Altars of Baal, and made a sakes of his
Temple: 2. King. 10.27. Fatihfull Princes and Magistrates ought to follow his
example, and such as have done the like, if they will give any true testimony
of their sound conversion. I grant repentance has his seat in the heart, and
has God for a witness of it; but we can discern it no way but by the
fruits. And here under one kind, Isaiah comprehends all. For in general he
touches one note of true repentance; to wit, when men make it appear, that
they count all things contrary unto Gods true worship abominable.

When he says, that the idols are profaned, That cannot be esteemed holy,
which is set up to dishonor God withal.
his meaning is not, that ever they were holy. For how can that be esteemed
holy, which is erected to Gods dishonor; which also pollutes men with the
filthiness of it? But in regard that men (being besotted with a false opinion)
attribute some holiness unto them, therefore he says, they are polluted, and
that they ought to be rejected and cast away as filthy things of no worth.

Also in calling them images of gold and silver; he therein shows, that the
faithful cease not to abhor idolatry, what loss or disadvantage so ever come
unto them thereby. For many are loath to abandon idolles, because they think
thereby they shall lose gold, silver, or some such like thing; and therefore
had rather retain them, then to sustain the least incommoditie. Covetousness
so holds and hampers them, that they think it safer wittingly to offend God,
and to defile themselus with such abominations, then to lose the paring of this
or that trifle. But we ought ^o prefer Gods pure worship and service, Gods pure
worship must be deerer to us ^hen the most precious thing the world can
afford us.
before the most precious things in the world. Let us despise gold let us cast
pearls from us, and abhor whatsoever is dear unto us, rather the^ to suffer
our selves to be polluted with such vile trash. In a word, there is not ye
thing to be named for price and excellency, which we ought not to esteem base
and vile, when we are to ouerturne the Kingdom of Satan, and to set up the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, Note.
which consists in his pure worship. How we manifest that the love of the
truth is truly settled in our hearts.
For thus shall we indeed make it manifest to all the world, whether the love
of true religion has taken any place in our hearts yea or no; namely, when
having indeed showed our detestation against our own perverse ignorance,

Verse. 23. Then shall he give rain unto thy seed, when thou shall sow thy
ground; and bread of the increase of the earth; and it shall be fat and as oil:
in that day shall thy cattle be fed in large pastures.

24. The oxen also and the young asses that till the ground, shall eat clean
prouender, which is winnowed with the shouell and with the fan.


Again he shows by the effects, how desirable a thing it is to be converted
unto God; seeing this is the fruit of true repentance, that God will receive
into his favor the repentant; and will so bless them, that nothing shall be
wanting: nay, rather they shall be satisfied to the full with all sorts of
blessings. For as miseries and calamities proceed from the wrath of God, Our
sins the matter that sets Gods wrath on fire.
which we set on fire by our sins; so when he is at one again with us, all
things fall out well, we are enriched every way; as we may plainly see in the
Law. Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.

He spoke before of the rain which should make the earth fruitful, but
because he observed no order in beginning with earthly and temporal benefits,
therefore he now ads to that doctrine which concerned the spiritual life,
those things which appertain to the use of our natural and corruptible life.
For albeit godliness has the promise both of this life and of that which is to
come, 1. Tim. 4.8. Mat. 6.33.
yet in the first place it first aspires to the kingdom of God.

Our prosperous succ^sses in all things depend wholly upon Gods blessing.
Hence let us learn, that men do but lose their labor in tilling the earth,
unless the Lord send his rain from heaven. It is he that must water the
labors of our hands, and add increase thereto, or otherwise we shall but tire
and vex our selves in vain. From his blessing only must our rain come, and
to it must we ascribe the abundance of the fruits of the earth which from
time to time we receive.

Let us further note that nothing shall be wanting unto us, Nothing shall be
wanting to the converted.
but we shall reap the fruit of our labors in most ample manner, if we convert
unto God. Let us also know that our sins make us often suffer want, because
we by our own rebellion repel and beat back Gods blessing. Let us no more
then attribute the cause of famine and the barrennes to any thing else but to
our own unthankfulness. The earth would never be wanting to us in bring^ng
forth her f^uits, but that we close up her womb by our misbehauiours.
For the multitudes of people can not be so great, but the earth will be able
to nourish and feed them: but we shut up her womb by our misdemeanors, which
without them would be opened to give us all fruits in abundance, so as we
should live both peaceably and happily.

That which he adds of the Cattle, serves much to set forth the goodness of
God, for he sheds forth the same upon the very brute beasts. How much more
think we will he do it upon men, whom he has created after his own image?
Now we need not marvel that beasts ordained for the use of man do endure
famine as well as their masters: When God is angry with men the poor dumb
creatures fare the worse: but being reconciled with man, they all fare the
better by it. Deuteronomy. 28.11.
and that on the contrary they fare well when God is favorable to men being
reconciled unto them, which the Prophet repeates and likewise confirms in the
words following, in promising that oxen and asses shall eat clean prouender.
For this sentence is taken out of the Law: and the Prophets usually do so,
that in the evil plight and death of Cattle, we might behold Gods wrath: and
from the sight thereof might be stirred up so much the more earnestly and
speedily to be at one with him, that our houses might be filled with his
liberality.

Verse. 25. And upon every high mountain and upon every high hill shall there
be rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the
towers shall fall.
WHen the Prophets describe the kingdom of Christ they are wont to borrow
similitudes from things appertaining to the life of man: The prophets in
describing Christ's kingdom are wont to borrow similitudes from things
pertaining to our natural life.
for they could not otherwise express the true felicity of Gods children
unless they had done it by setting the same before us in the image of those
things which are subject to our senses, by which men are wont to measure out an
happy and flourishing estate. The sum then is, Happy people that submit
themselves to Christ their King. The faithful cease not to be happy though
they suffer want.
that such as obey God, and submit themselves to Christ their King, are happy
people. But we must not judge of this happiness by the abundance of outward
things, whereof the faithful many times have little enough, and yet cease not
to be happy notwithstanding. But these kinds of speech are allegorical, by
which the Prophet applies himself to our capacity, that by the things which
our senses can comprehend, Heavenly things are of that supernatural
excellency, that they can not now be comprehended of us but under borrowed
speeches.
we might conceive somewhat of those things which are beyond our
comprehension, which being of such an excellent nature, our understandings are
too shallow to conceive the least part of them.

When he says the rivers in the mountains, it is further to set forth this
ouerflowing of God his liberality, wherewith he would enrich his chosen.
Waters usually issue not out of the tops of mountains, where nothing is seen
but barrennes: I grant that valleys are moystned and watered with ye springs;
but you shall seldom see fountains in the tops of hills, yet the Lord
promises to bring this to pass, howsoever it seems a thing impossible: But
by this phrase of speech he means yt we shall be most happy that live under
the kingdom of Christ, Happy men and women that live under Christ's kingdom.
so as there shall be no place whatsoever but he will replenish the same with
all sorts of benefits: Nothing so barren, but he by his goodness will make it
fruitful, so as felicity shall abound in all places. Note.
Our eyes should see the performance of this promise if Christ might have the
full government over us, for we should behold his blessing on every side if
we obeyed him with a pure and perfect heart. All things would then fall out to
our wish: the world, and the utmost bounds thereof should be subject unto us:
Our sparing obedience prouokes God to be sparing in bestowing benefits upon us.
but because we are far off from such a kind of obedience, therefore we
receive but a small taste of these benefits, and so much thereof do we enjoy,
as we feel the growth of the new man in us.

By the day of the great slaughter, he signifies and sets before them another
sign of Gods favor. How? He will maintain those that are his in safety,
against the rage of the enemy: and thus the Prophet goes about to procure
credit and authority to his former prophecy: for otherwise it had been almost
incredible, that poor banished exiles should have inioyed so many benefits.
He speaks here then of the slaughter of the wicked: as if he should say; The
Lord will not only do you good in saving you, but he will also destroy your
enemies.

All the expositors almost think the Prophet speaks here of the discomfiture
of that wicked King Senacherib, when he came to besiege Jerusalem: but when I
weigh all things advisedly, I had rather refer it to the destruction of
Babylon. For albeit there was a great slaughter when Senacherib was with shame
put to flight: yet this people was not at that time delivered. By this we are
admonished, that we be not heartlesse, Though the enemies of the Church be
many and mighty, yet God, power will easily over match them.
though our enemies be many in number, and have greater strength, fortresses,
and more garrisons then we: for the Lord can easily destroy them, and yet
co^serue his Church, although for the time he suffer them to triumph and to
have al things at their wish. Let neither their power nor rage daunt us then:
neither let our hearts fail us, though we be but a small number: for neither
their munitio^s nor fortresses, neither yet their fury nor pride shall be
able to save them from falling into the hands of the Lord.

Verse. 26. Moreover, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun;
and the light of the Sun shall be seven fold, and like the light of seven
days in the day that the Lord shall bind up the breach of his people, and
heal the strokes of their wound.
THe Prophet contents not himself to describe an usual or ordinary state of
happiness, except thereunto he add somewhat that is extraordinary. For he
says, that the Lord will work far above the order of nature, in this his
liberality. We never read that the light of the Sun was augmented, unless
it were when it staid it self in the days of Joshua, that he might have
leisure to pursue his enemies: Josh. 10.13. Also in the days of Hezekias, at
whose request the Dial went back ten degrees: 2. King. 20.11. But our Prophet
alludes now to none of these miracles. Nay, more then that, he meddles not with
the lengthening of the course of the Sun upon our Horizon; but of the
augmentation of the light thereof unto seven fold more. For he shows what the
state of the faithful shall be under the reign of Christ: otherwise, we know
that the Lord makes the Sun to shine, no less upon the wicked then upon the
good: but the question is here, of such a felicity as the wicked cannot
attain unto. There is difference between Gods liberality, which extends it
self unto all, and that which is only proper and peculiar unto the faithful;
as it is said in Psalm. 31.20. Great are the benefits which thou have laid up
for those that trust in thee.

Isaiah speaks of this particular favor: which that he might the better
express, he takes similitudes from things common to every man's eye. And thus
shows, that God will inlighten the faithful with such a light, that the
beams of seven suns put together, shall be far inferior thereunto. But to
the end the sharpness of their miseries, wherewith this people were soon
after overwhelmed, might not lessen the authority of this prophecy, he adds
yet another promise; to wit, that God will (as a good Physician) bind up, or
heal the stroke of his childrens wounds. Whence it follows, that there was a
necessity of this correction; that so by these rods, the people might be
prepared to come to repentance: yea, it was necessary that they should be
bruised and broken, till they were in a mnaner brought to nothing.

He mentions their stroke then, to show that the wound shall be great; for the
people resembled a body hurt with many wounds. If at any time then the Lord
deals more roughly with us then he is wont, think, I pray you, upon these
prophecies: for the Lord will bind up our wounds, which may otherwise seem
mortal and deadly.

Verse. 27. Behold, the name of the Lord comes from far, his face is
burning, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of indignation,
and his tongue is as a devouring fire.
He foretells the destruction of the Assyrians, which were then the principal
enemies of the Church. I grant the Jews had almost no neighbors that were
borderers, but they were against them: notwithstanding in respect the Assyrians
were the richest and mightiest of all others, the Prophet scarcely mentions any
but them and the Babylonians, who had bin Monarks over nations: although
sometimes by a figure called synecdoche, the Caldeans are signified under the
name of the Assyrians.

By the name of God, he means God himself: but he uses this circumlocution,
in regard the Assyrians and the rest of the nations served gods of gold and
silver. For they mocked the Jews, as if they had worshipped a God in name
only. Why so? Because they represented him not forth by some shape or image:
as we read of a certain profane Poet, A profane Poet.
who used to say of them in scorn, that they worshipped the clouds, and a
divinity that was shut up in heaven. See how infidels and profane persons
judge of God according to their outward senses: but our Prophet brings the
faithful to this name of God. As if he should say; This God which has
manifested himself unto you by his name; The God whom we neither feel nor
see with outward senses, is sufficient to avenge the wrongs done to his church.
this God whom you neither touch nor see, shall come, and shall avenge the
wrongs done unto you.

From far.] He adds this by way of yielding or granting so much as it were
unto the idolaters. For as long as the wicked feel not the hand of God, they
think him far off, and in the mean while deride the faithful, as if they
trusted in vanity. The prophet therefore speaking according to the opinion of
the unbelievers, shows that that same God whom they esteem so far off, shall
come: or rather that he is already come, and is hard at hand. This he
signifies by the particle Behold; which he opposes to the word far off: and
therein admonishing the faithful also to pass over all impediments, that they
may come to the hope of this promised redemption.

Now to show that Gods name is not worshipped in vain nor without fruit in
Iudeah, the Prophet sets before them his fearful power, His face is burning.
which he will manifest for the overthrow of the enemies of his Church. For

Where he says, the burden of the Lord is heavy to bear, his meaning is,
that God will bring such heavy calamities with him when he comes, that the
wicked shall sink under them: for by this weight, he understands the strokes
which they shall receive. He also expresses the same thing in mentioning the
lips and tongue.

Verse. 28. And his spirit is as a river that ouerfloweth up to the neck: it
deuideth asunder to fan the nations with the fan of vanity, and there
shall be a bridle to cause them to err in the charets of the people.
HE goes on with the denunciation which he began in the 27. verse, as if he
should say, The Church in deed must pass under the rod* yet so, as the
Assyrians in the end shall utterly come to naught. For he says, that they
shall be swallowed up of the Spirit of the Lord, which he compares to a deep
river. First similitude, of a deep River.
Others take the word Spirit for Breath, so as it should be an allusion to the
whirlewind, or to some boisterous tempest. In the next place he uses the
similitude of a fan, Second similitude, of ^ Fan.
which is very frequent in the scriptures; and says, that he will fan the
Assyrians to shake them out, and to scatter them. For this cause also he adds
the word vanity, that is to say, an unprofitable Fan, which cannot retain
or keep any thing, but loses whatsoever is put within it. For we know God is
wont sometimes to sift and fan his own dear children, but it is to gather
the^ into his floor as good wheat.

The third similitude is taken from a bridle, The third, of a Bridle.
whereby the Lord uses sometimes to tame the pride and fiercenes of the
wicked: in a word, to show that he is their Judge. I deny not but he also
bridles and curbs his servants and children, but it is to bring them to
tracktablenes: for the wicked, he raines them up so hard that he tumbles them
into perdition, and that is the meaning of this clause where he says it is a
bridle to cause them to err. For fierce horses are tugged this way and that
way by their riders; and the more they wince the more they spur them: God
likewise keeps the wicked short, and handles them so roughly, that they err
at every blow he gives them, as David well describes it, Psalm. 32.10. The end
why the Prophet uses these similitudes.
Now the end of these similitudes is to teach us, that there is no dallying
with God. For albeit he forbeares us for a time, yet at the last we shall
prove the Prophets words true, to wit, that his spirit or breath shall be
enough to swallow up the wicked, and suddenly to consume them, no less then
if a flood had passed over their heads. To conclude, seeing he shows that the
nations were to be fanned in the fan of vanity, The wicked and the godly
corrected alike: but the one as dross to be burnt up, the other as pure gold
to be preserved for the Lords use.
let us fear lest if the Lord find naught in us but chafe, he also cast us
upon the dunghill. Note also the difference between the children of God and
the wicked, both are chastised alike, but yet diversely. How so? The one to be
kept and preserved as pure gold, the other as dross to be burnt up and
consumed.

Verse. 29. But there shall be a song unto you as in the night when a solemn
feast is kept: and gladness of heart, as he that comes with a pipe to go unto
the mount of the Lord, to the mighty one of Israel.
HE shows, that all the evils wherewith he threatened the Assyrians should
turn to the salvation of the Church. Why so? Because God would no less
severely punish the injuries done to his children, then if they had been done
to himself. And thus he sets forth his fatherly love and his inestimable good
will toward us, in that he vouchsafes to take arms even in his own person as
it were for our defense. Whence we may gather, Threatenings pronounced against
the wicked in the holy Scriptures serve greatly for the comfort of the
faithful.
that all the menaces so frequent in the holy Scriptures, serve much for the
consolation of the faithful.

In the next place he says, that this shall be an holy song; and compares it
to those that were used in solemn feasts: the rather to stir the faithful
up to thanksgiving, and to teach them how to order their joy and rejoicing. For
it is not enough to rejoice, If our joy be not in the Lord, it is a vain and
profane joy.
unless our joy be directly in the Lord, whose glory should always be the
mark and end we aim at therein: otherwise, our joy should neither be good,
nor acceptable unto him, but rather profane and vain.

Now because the Jews began their feast days at the sun setting, The Jews
used to begin to celebrate their feasts the evening before.
and therefore began to celebrate them as soon as it was evening, he says,
that this song shall be as in the night. And he yet further expresses the
manner of their joy; to wit, that they shall not leap nor skip after the
custom of profane persons; but shall lift up their hearts unto God, resting
in him alone, whom they shall acknowledge the sole author of all benefits.

By the mount, he means the Temple which was built upon it. He calls God the
strength of Israel; because the Jews received their redemption from his out
stretched arm; as also because they dwelt in quietness under his mighty
protection: herein aduertising them, that they could have no safety for the
time to come, but by putting their trust in his strength. For alas! as soon as
we persuade our selves that we have any strength of our own, The mighty one
of Israel.
we forthwith bereave God of this title; which indeed, none but the humble and
meek can give unto him, who are stripped of all their own strength and power.

Verse. 30. And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall
declare the lighting down of his arm, with the anger of his countenance and
flame of a devouring fire, with scattering and tempest, and hailestones.
HE confirms that which he said before of the judgment of God against the
Assyrians, and describes it under a figure, as he and the rest of the Prophets
are wont to do. For whilst God seems to hold his peace, and plagues not the
wicked forthwith, either we think he sleeps, or that he wants sufficient
power: and thus we are distracted with diverse and doubtful thoughts. And
albeit he shows us some one example of his judgment, yet by reason of this
sottishness, or rather unthankfulness, which naturally possesses us, we
wittingly put a veil between, by one device or other, to darken the glory of
God. For either we attribute it unto fortune, or to the policies and subtle
inventions of man's brain: so as we will never in good earnest ascribe the same
wholly unto God, unless he constraines us unto it by force. This is the cause
why the Prophet contents not himself to have once affirmed, that Gods
vengeance should fall upon the Assyrians, but also in this place is diligent to
paint out the same in lively colors, repeating the same thing with greater
vehemency.

His meaning is then, that this destruction of the enemy shall be so famous,
that men shall be constrained to hear the voice of God: that is to say, to
acknowledge his iudegme^ts, and to confess that this desolation indeed was
from his hand, even as if himself had uttered the same from heaven with his
lively voice in all men's hearing. The sum is then, that the matter shall be so
evident, that all shall confess this destruction came from the mouth of God;
to wit, from his ordinance.

voice of God, to the end we might know that he gouernes whatsoever is done in
the earth. And therewithal he extolles the efficacy of his doctrine, in which
the people were to rest, till it should bring the lighting down of his arm.
Gods voice, and the lighting down of his arm, go together.
For these two things must always be joined together, it being unlawful once
to imagine that God is like unto men, who suddenly taking a thing in hand, in
the end leave it unperfected. No, look what he ordaines, that he executes: for
his hand or arm is never separated from the words of his mouth. On the
contrary, he never does any thing rashly, but that which he has ordained
before: so as all the crosses which he sends, are so many documents to us of
his equal and just dealing.

In the end of the verse, he sets forth this vengeance of God under figures;
that by the horror thereof, the Jews might raise up their faith on high with
so much the more courage: for it was a great consolation unto them
(notwithstanding the sharp scourges which they felt) to know that their
enemies soon after should drink off this cup, even to the very dregs. But
away with the dreams of the Rabbines, who from this place gather, that the
Assyrians were indeed smitten with thunder; for such a conjecture is most
frivolous. The Prophet keeps his ordinary course, and by these similitudes
describes Gods fearful judgments, in regard that we are too slow; yea
altogether unfit to comprehend them. Therefore to awaken our dullness, we had
need to hear of devouring fire, of thunders, floods, and deluges of water: The
use of the former similitudes.
which because they are things abhorring to nature, they usually touch us the
more to the quick: in which respect the Prophets do the more willingly draw
their similitudes from them, to the end we may apprehend the fearful
revenging hand of God against the wicked.

Verse. 31. For with the voice of the Lord shall Ashur be destroyed which smote
with the rod.
HE adds this for two causes: First, to show why the Assyrian was to be
broken. For voice shall shake him in pieces. By this we may learn, how vain
the confidence of the wicked is, who have nothing to trust unto but their
outward forces; altogether despising God, as if they were not liable to the
strokes of his hand. But the Lord needs no better weapons then his voice to
scatter all their munitions; for he will consume them with the very beck of
his countenance. Neither are we to doubt but the Prophet also meant by this
means, to withdraw the senses of the faithful from looking to these helps,
lest they should stand to inquire how it might come to pass, but should only
content themselves with Gods promise, who is of power sufficient to execute his
counsels as soon as he has spoken the word.

Verse. 32. And in every place that the staff shall pass, it shall cleave
fast, which the Lord shall lay upon him with tabrets and harpes: and with
battles, and lifting up of hands shall he fight against it.
HIs meaning is, that the Assyrians will try all means to fly from Gods
hand, but all in vain; for it shall pursue them whithersoeuer they shall turn
them, be it forwards or backward. Touching these words of the staff digging;
I willingly consent to their opinion, who think it to be a similitude taken
from those that have laid on so long, till the traces and prints thereof
appear a great while after: as if a whip or staff had been let into the
flesh. Unless any had rather understand that the plague should cleave fast to
the backs of the Assyrian, even as a foundation is laid fast into the earth.
For that which is not rooted in the ground, may be taken away and transported
to another place: but he shows that this staff shall cleave so fast, that
there shall be no removing of it; neither shall any be able to pluck it away.
For God suffers the weight of his wrath to fall upon the reprobates which
utterly ouerchargeth them: and lest they might dream of any starting holes,
the Prophet cuts off al hope thereof in this word every place. For so ought the
text to be resolved; to wit, wheresoever the staff shall light, it shall
cleave fast.

When he mentions the tabrets, it is to show, that the issue of the war shall
not be uncertain, as it is when forces are of equal strength; but his meanig
is, that the Lord shall have the victory. If the Lord go into the field, he
will surely conquer.
Why so? Because he shall no sooner undertake the war, but he brings that with
him yt shall do the deed. For tabrets, harps, and hands lifted up, do signify
the joy which they make that have gotten the conquest, whilst they cry,
victory, victory.

Some refer that to the host, which he adds in the feminin gender, shall fight
against it: but the truth is, he meant to express a greater thing then it; to
wit, Babylon, the head City of the Kingdom, opposing it to Jerusalem, which
he had noted out before by a like relative, verse. 29. From whence we may
gather, that the wicked must needs be consumed at the last, notwithstanding
the great show of means which they have to escape the same: for which way
soever they turn them, or whither so ever they flee, yet the staff of the
Lord shall pursue them, yea and cleave fast to their backs: they shall never
be able to shun his hand, nor beat back his blows.

We also are now and then corrected by this hand of God, but his blows shall
not always cleave unto us; our wounds shall be mollified and eased, and our
sorrow shall be turned into joy. Moreover, the Lord so fights against the
wicked, that they are not able to make their party good, nor yet gain any
thing by their resistance. He fights with the^, but as one that is sure of the
victory before he gives the first blow: sometimes he gives them a little scope
indeed, but he takes down their pride whenever it pleases him. If we then
fight under his ensign, we may assure our selves of a prosperou^ victory:
for under his leading, we shall be safe from danger, and shall have certain
hope of conquest in the end.

Verse. 33. For Topheth is prepared of Or before yesterday.
old: it is even prepared for the King: he has made it deep and large: Or,
his heap is fire.
the burning thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord like a river
of brimstone does kindle it.
ISaiah continues his description of Gods severe punishments, wherein he
shows, that the wicked shall not only have their portion of plagues in this
life, but shall be vexed therewith for ever and ever. Why so? Because hell is
prepared and made ready for them; not for the poorer sort alone, but for those
in great places, even for Kings and Princes. By Topheth, no doubt he means
hell: not as though we should imagine there were some place where the wicked are
shut up after their death as in a prison, there to suffer the torments which
they have deserved: but he thereby signifies their miserable condition and
extreme torments. In the book of the Kings, this word Topheth is taken for
the place where the Jews sacrificed their sons to Moloch: 2. King. 23.10.
whereof Jeremiah also makes mention: Ier. 19 6. Now this place was destroyed
by Josiah, in regard of the horrible murders and superstitions which were
there committed.

For mine own part, I am out of doubt that the Prophets meant to apply the
name of this place, to those exquisite torments which the wicked endure; Let us
learn to make good use of this doctrine.
to the end the faithful might shudder and shake at the only hearing of it:
as also that every one might learn to have idolatry in the greater
detestation.

This very etymology agrees to the word yesterday, that is to say, from the
foundations of the earth, the Lord has foreordeined what punishments he will
inflict upon the ungodly. For howsoever this decree be hidden from us for a
time; yet it is stable and immovable. Let us not the^ judge of the estate of
the wicked by outward appearances, but let us wait upon our God, who will take
them tardie well enough in mischiefs which they plot, and that in his
appointed hour. In ye mean while let us not be ouer-hastie to think God has
forgotten to be just, for he concluded that which he meant to do, and that long
ere we had ability to think of it: neither can we possibly be so swift in
wishing the speedy cutting off of the wicked, but the Lord has prevented our
thoughts and desires long before, because he has concluded in himself from
the beginning what pains and torments he will lay upon them.

Some think this place should answer to that in the Hebrews, Christ
yesterday, and to day, etc. Heb. 13.8. But for mine own part, I simply oppose
yesterday here to our thoughts, to the end we should not take our selves wise
enough to foresee and prevent God: for none of his Counsels are conceived
rashly, but were established and grounded in himself from all eternity. Now
he speaks as I have already said of the torments to come, wherewith the
wicked shall be plagued; besides those which are inflicted upon them in this
life. In which regard we may justly wonder how the Saduces Saduces.
should be so besotted and blockish as to restrain the rewards and due
punishments of sins to the afflictions of this life present, as if Gods
Judgments reached only to this life present. For thus, the phrases of speech
which follow would not agree to bodily and temporal punishments: and the name
of Topheth taken by a figure, should only extend it self to some extreme
curse of God.

Now he shows that even Kings themselves (whom men commonly think to be
privileged in regard of their majesty and power) shall not be exempt from
this punishment. Their Greatness dazles the eyes of the simple, but this shall
be no shelter to keep them from Gods just revenging hand in plaguing them
according to that which they have deserved. He says, they shall be cast into a
deep Deep.
place, to give us to understand that they shall be safe enough for ever
crauling out thence. He also calls Hell large Large.
to teach us, that whosoever they be that consult together in mischief shall
perish, although their number be infinite: for the Lord will not wax weary in
punishing of the^, neither shall he be streighted of sufficient roomth to shut
up all his enemies in.

His heap is fire.] Under a figure he speaks of the ruin of ye wicked,
because we can not otherwise sufficiently comprehend the same: as on the other
side, without some borrowed speeches, we were not able to conceive of that
blessed Immortality which is reserved for us in heaven: by such similitudes
these things must be applied to our senses. Whence it appears how fondly and
ridiculouslie the Sophisters deal, who go about too subtillie to dispute
forsooth of the nature and quality of this fire, Sophisters ridiculous in
disputing about the quality of his fire.
and busy their brains very much to make it appear what it should be. But
let us reject such gross imaginations, seeing we know that the Prophet speaks
here figuratively, as hereafter we shall see that to this fire he ioynes the
worm that never dies, Chap. 66.24.

THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Woe unto them that go down into Egypt for help, and stay upon
horses, and trust in charets because they are many, and in horsemen because
they be very strong: but they look not unto the holy one of Israel, nor
seek unto the Lord.
HE now returns to that which he handled in the beginning of the former
Chapter: for he lifts up his voice again against ye Jews, who were accustomed
when they were in any danger to slay rather to Egypt for succor then to the
Lord. We have declared before why this was so displeasing a thing in Gods
sight. And to be short, there are two reasons wherefore the Prophet does so
sharply reprove this sin. Two reasons showing why the Prophet is so severe
in reproouing this sin of the Jews.
First, because it is impossible we should put our trust in creatures and in
God together, touching the means of our safety: for as soon as we once fix
our eyes upon them, it follows by good consequence that we therewithal turn
them away from God. We can no sooner rely upon creatures, but we therewith
turn away from the Crea^or. Rebellion mixed with their disloyal confidence.
Besides, God had straightly forbidden them to make any contract or league
with the Egyptians. Thus there was rebellion mixed with a disloyal confidence,
as if they meant wittinglie and willingly to provide for their own welfare,
by despising and forsaking of God. It behoues us therefore to consider from
whence this sin sprang if we would understand the Prophets meaning aright.

Here is a second reason which is more particular (which we have touched
before) why the Lord would not have the Jews to be acquainted with the
Egyptians, to wit, least so unlawful leagues might in the end abolish the
memory of their deliverance out of Egypt; as also least they should mar and
corrupt themselves with the superstitions and Idolatries of the Egyptians. But
these reasons could bear no sway with them: Gods inhibiting of them could not
hinder them from running down to their confederates, providing a buckler
thereof to run against the hand of God. In which respect it is no marvel
that our Prophet is so earnest in rebuking of them for so monstrous an outrage.
Their very going down into Egypt simply considered in it self deserved a
sharp reprehension, because God had forbidden the^ so to do, Deuteronomy. 17.16.28.
but the offense was much more intolerable through a false trust they had in
bereauing God of that glory which appertained unto him, to give it unto
mortal men.

Now that he might the better show how God was robbed of his right by this
their fact, he not only accuses them that they leaned and stayed themselves
upon the Egyptians, but also he reproacheth them on the other side, that they
looked not to the holy one of Israel. Whence we may more evidently perceive the
cause wherefore Isaiah does so sharply tax this disloyalty of the Jews. For
otherwise the Lord forbids us not to use lawful means; as bread, and other
sorts of meats, which he has appointed to serve for our use. And thus if a
man being in danger, It is lafull for thee to use those helps and means which
God ha^h ordained for thy relief and comfort: but beware of Asa his sin,
recorded in 2. Chro. 16.12
shall seek those helps which are not forbidden, but ordinary and lawful,
such a one deserves no reproof, if so be he therein derogates nothing from
Gods power. But it is utterly abominable and damnable, if we suffer our selves
so to be entangled in these outward helps, as thereby utterly to neglect
seeking unto God: and in distrusting his gracious promises, to desire to trust
in unlawful means.

The word to look, signifies often in the Scriptures, This trust and
confidence; because we are wont to look wishly toward them, from whom we
look for succor: Act. 3.5. To be short, we are here taught to put the trust
of our salvation in none but in God alone: that so wholly resting our selves
upon his promises, we may go with boldness, and ask whatsoever is to be
desired. He permits us lawfully to use all things which he has ordained for
our good; yet so, that all the powers of our souls do stay upon him alone.

In calling him the holy one of Israel, he sets forth the frowardness and
unthankfulness of this people, that being received into Gods faithful
protection, they cared not to contemn so gracious a protector and guardian of
their salvation, but chose rather to run after the lusts of their own
hearts. In the last word of the verse.
In adding forthwith the name of God; he shows that they could not be kept
in awe, neither by the power nor goodness of so loving a Father. Now since it
pleases him at this day to allure us by no less favorable kindnesses to come
unto him, we shall play the rebels egregiously, if we look any other way, or
if we refuse to rest in him only. Look whatsoever it is then that turns the
eyes of our minds from looking directly unto God, shall be the same to us as
Egypt was to the Jews.

Verse. 2. But yet he is Or, wise also.
wisest. Therefore he will bring evil, and not turn back his word: but he
will rise against the house of the wicked, and against the help of them that
work vanity.
Where he calls God wise, he adornes him not with a perpetual epithet, but
taxes the craft and subtlety of those whom he saw to please themselves in
their wisdom more then was meet. Chap. 19.15
He told them a little before, that they dug deep to cover their counsels,
when by their close and secret practices they thought to flee; and yet to
bleare the eyes of the Lord. Now in taunting wise he derides their folly: as
if he should say; No doubt but you thought your selves to be iollie wise men
in so doing: yea, but you have to deal with a God that has wisdom also to
epsy your plots well enough. Job. 5.19. 1. Cor. 3.19.
Wherein he privily taxes them for such as imagined that God could not charge
them with any thing, or as if he had bin one that was utterly unacquainted
with their doings. In a word, it is as much as if he should have said; What
will become of this goodly wisdom of yours in the end; will it bereave God of
his Spirit? Nay, contrariwise in reproving you for your deceit and vanity, he
will show by the effects, that he catches the wise in their craftiness: 1.
Cor. 3.19.

Hence we may gather a doctrine that is well enough known; to wit, that
whosoever they be that cover their doings by crafty and close practices, shall
be so far off from benefiting themselves any thing at all thereby, that they
shall so much the more inflame the just displeasure of God against them. An
evil conscience always flees from the judgment of God, Chap. 30.1. An evil
conscience always flees Gods presence.
and seeks out corners wherein to bury it self (if it were possible) out of
his sight. The wicked devise many ways to defend their sins, and to make
their party good against God; pleasing themselves in their wisdom and
subtilties, albeit in so doing, they have no cloak or mask to hide themselves
under that is of any value. Others being blinded with their own greatness,
are bold to despise God and all his threatenings. And therefore when the prophet
says, that God is wise also, he touches the soar to the quick, to the end
they might nourish no such good conceit of their crafty devices, as if they
could thereby ouerreach the Lord.

Now in regard they were unworthy that Isaiah should stand ouer-long to plead
the case with them: therefore he tells them flatly, that God has store of
arguments ready to snare these politic heads withal. For first of

He calls them workers of vanity, because they endeavored to fortify
themselves against Gods vengeance, with a vain and unlawful defense: that is
to say, with the help of the Egyptians. In the first clause of this verse he
seemed after a sort to yield them the title of wise men, because he opposed
thereunto the wisdom of God: but now having dispersed their mists, he
discouers to the whole world their just shame and reproach. Hence we are
taught, that it is safest for us to renounce our own reason, and to subject it
only to the will of God. Why so? Because there is no stabilitie nor
steadfastness at all in the plottings of unbelievers: nay, they rather
wittingly incense and provoke Gods wrath to burn against them by these their
witty devices.

Verse. 3. Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and
not spirit: and when the Lord shall stretch forth his hand, the helper shall
fall, and they shall altogether fai^^.
IT seems that Isaiah vtters nothing here but that which every one knows,
neither would any man stand to call the truth thereof into question. For who
would be so mad as to affirm either that ye Egyptians were God, or to deny
that they were men? This was out of controversy; and therefore every one would
willingly assent unto it for the general. But to come to particularities;
there, they were so blockish, or stood in such a mammering, that they called
that truth into question, of which before they were fully resolved.

Thus they waxed proud, taking themselves to be no more men; and that they
might utterly free themselves from yielding obedience unto God. For this cause
we are often admonished in the holy Scriptures, not to trust in man, because
nothing is more vain the^ he: Psa. 146.3. Cursed be he (says Jeremiah) that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm: Ier. 17.5. Yet we see that all, none
excepted, determine and conclude of matters in themselves, as if they were able
to bring their designs to pass an hundred years after, which they have
plotted in their brain: yea, as if they could rule both heaven, The pride of
man's heart intolerable.
earth, and seas, and could govern all things even as they listed. Seeing
there is such pride in all of us, let us not marvel that the Prophet
proclaims, that the Egyptians are not God, but men. For the Jews attributed
that unto them, which appertained unto God. What is that? Even the protection
and safeguard of the Church; which he so reserues to himself, that he will have
none to meddle with this office. Isaiah does therefore tauntingly tax the
Jews in this place with the contempt of God, and their false confidence
wherewith they were puffed up.

And thus we may see how great difference there is between God and men. The
great difference that is between God and men.
Men can do nothing of themselves, but so far forth as God shall give them
power. Come we to speak of the nature and excellency of man, we may well
praise the great graces which he has received of God; but oppose him once
against his Creator, then must he be accounted less then nothing. For is it
possible to attribute any thing unto man, but we shall thereby take so much
honor from God? This is the cause why we can never consent unto the Papists,
Why there can be no pacifications between the Papists and us.
when we come to dispute of the cause of our salvation, of free will, and of
the dignity of merits and works: for in as much as man and God, are in these
things opposed one against the other, it must needs be, that whatsoever is
attributed to man, is taken from God. But they part stakes in such wise, as
they give part to God, and part to men: we on the contrary affirm, that the
sole and whole cause of our salvation, ought to be attributed unto God: as
also, that it cannot be given to any other, but we shall therein commit most
abominable sacrilege. In a word, let us know that in this opposition, nothing
can be left to man which is worthy of any praise.

By the word flesh, he means imbecility and weakness: for what is in flesh
but only corruption? He speaks of horses, but the same or the like weakness
agrees also to the Egyptia^s. As if he should say; They and all the forces they
can make, are not worth a rush. For albet the Egyptians had a soul as well as
a body, yet because they were earthly creatures, and dwelt in houses of clay,
they must down. As if he should say; I am sure you have no spiritual nor
celestial power. To which purpose the Prophet says, Psalm. 146.3. Trust not in
Princes, nor in any child of man: for his breath departs, and then all his
thoughts perish.

Now albeit this word flesh, properly belongs to horses; yet it is no marvel
if men be sent to take a view of the rottenness thereof, there to learn their
own transitorinesse. But from the threatening that is added, to wit, that this
wickedness shall not go scot-free; we may learn a general doctrine. For the
Lord will not endure to have that given to the creature, which belongs to
himself: nor, that any should repose that trust in men, which ought to be
reserved for him alone. God threats both the succourers and the succored.
He threatens then as well those which should give their succor, and should be
the cause of this vain confidence, as those which should be succored, and
should stay the hope of their safety thereupon. If God cannot endure we should
lean upon creatures for salvation in matters belonging to this life present,
much less can he endure us so to do in things appertaining to life eternal.
Now if the Lord cannot abide this perverse trust, as touching things belonging
to our temporary salvation; how insupportable are those, think we, who to
obtain eternal salvation, forge diverse trusts, according to their own
fantasy? For in so doing, they exalt the power of men, to set it up in the
place of God.

Verse. 4. For thus the Lord has said unto me; As the lion and the lions whelpe
roar after their pray; against whom if a multitude of sheepheards lift up
their voice, they will not be moved, nor will humble themselves at their cry:
so the Lord of hosts will come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the side
of it.
THe Prophet adds this verse, to show that the Lord is not minded to leave his
(...) nish the Jews for their wickednesses, and chiefly for their Idolatry;
so God also promises that this enemy shall be cut off when they shall cease
to sin and to serve Idols. Thus we see that our obstinacy is the cause why
the Lord adds plague unto plague, and doubles his blows in pursuing us more
and more. For we still give him new occasions of enflaming his wrath against
us. Reform thy evil manners, and God will redress thy miseries.
If we desire that God should strike us more softly, and that our enemies
might at once be destroyed and never trouble us more; let us study by newnes
of life to enter into his favor again, for he will by and by lay down his
rods, and take away the force and power of our enemies that they shall not hurt
us.

When it is said that it shall not be by the sword of man: the Prophet thereby
means that the deliverance of the Church is the peculiar work of God: The
redemption of the Church, a peculiar work of God.
giving the Jews to understand, that albeit there appeered no help in earth,
yet Gods secret power should be sufficient to redeem them. Are our enemies
confounded then; is their force repressed? Let us know that this proceeds from
the hand of God. Indeed he repelleth the force and fury of the wicked diverse
ways; but it is his only hand notwithstanding whereby the Church is saved.
Note.
For he so works by humane helps, that yet he keeps his chosen after a
wonderful and extraordinary manner, as may be seen even since the beginning
of the world: and it is no less easy to perceive it now, God uses men as
instruments in saving h^s Church, yet so, that his own power only shines in
this work. Chap. 37. 36. 37.
if we were not hoodwinked. And yet this lets not, but the Lord may employ some
of his servants in the deliverance of his Church, but so, that still his own
hand especially shines in such a work.

We know this prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled when the host of the Assyrians
was discomfited, and when Sennacherib fled. For men commonly see not Gods hand
therein, but the Lord manifests his power to the end we might know that he is
the deliverer of his Church. And when he freed Jerusalem from the siege which
was after laid before it, he did therein as in a glass present also unto the
Jews an image of their spiritual deliverance. It is he alone then which will
destroy our spiritual enemies. Our help stands only in the name of the Lord
that made heaven and earth.
In vain therefore shall we seek other helps and remedies, and in vain shall
we rest upon our own strength which is nothing: for we shall never overcome
nor be Conquerors but by the leading and help of our God.

His young men.] His meaning is, that the Lord will so manifest his might
against the Assyrians, that the hearts of young men which are wont to be
courageous shall quail and melt as wax. For in as much as young men have less
experience then those that are old, they are more rash and headie. But the Lord
will easily cool their heat when the hour is come in which he will deliver
his servants. See to this purpose Chap. 40. ^0
This is the cause why Isaiah made special mention of young men, as if he had
said, the flower, or strength.

Verse. 9. He shall flee for fear into his fortress, and his Princes shall be
feared with the banner, says the Lord who has a fire in Zion, and a furnace
in Jerusalem.
NOw he speaks of Sennacherib, who being swallowed up with fear, should
shamefullie flee into his fortress in Nineue, as into his nest. He adds, that
his Princes who should encourage the rest of the soldiers, shall be so
surprised with astonishment, that they shall neither dare to take up their
weapons, nor to join issue, as they say, but shall flee the Standard. To
conclude, he shows that he is Gods Herald to proclaim this Edict, that the
Jews might in no wise doubt nor dispute of the event as they were wont: as
also that they might not afterward forget so great a benefit; neither attribute
it unto fortune.

In the end of the verse, if we read as some translate, Whose fire is in Zion,
the sense will be, that God has a power of fire to devour his enemies.
Notwithstanding I think the relative Asher is superfluous: or ought to be
translated in the nominative Qui, because God is properly called fire, in
respect of the Assyrian whom he will consume. Now because he speaks of fire,
some refer it to the Sacrifices: but this interpretation is far fetched,
neither has it any good ground. For mine own part I doubt not but his meaning
is to say, That the Lord has a fire to consume the Assyrian, or that God
himself is as a fire, so as he closely compares the Assyrian to straw, or
stubble.

He also says, that this fire is kindled and maintained in Zion, and in
Jerusalem, that is to say, in the mids of his people, to show that the wicked
shall not escape unpunished, for persecuting the Church of God. For they shall
one day feel him their Judge, who stands in the mids of his Church, which
for the most part is thought to be destitute of all help. The sum is, that
Gods vengeance is prepared for the wicked which have not ceased to molest his
people, and that ye Lord will not revenge for his own sake only, but for his
elects sake also. Let us rejoice in this consolation, God will evermore be a
consuming fire, to consume the adversaries of his Church.
and howsoever we seem destitute of succor and exposed to all dangers, yet let
us evermore assure our selves that our God will be as a consuming fi^e against
our adversaries.

THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, and the Princes shall
govern in judgment.
The Churches glory begins at the establishing of a well ordered civil policy.
HIs meaning is to say, that God will yet be good unto his church; so as he
will restore it unto the former estate. Now the best way to bring it thereunto,
is when civil policy is rightly administered, and all things ordered according
to justice and equity. No doubt this prophecy belongs to Hezechias, and to
his reign; under whom the Church was reformed and brought again into her
first glory: for before she was miserably scattered. That wicked and cursed
hypocrit Ahaz, had corrupted all after his own fantasy, and had overthrown
both the civil and ecclesiasti^all policy. The prophecy extends it self
first to Hezechias: Next, unto Christ, of whom Hezechias was a figure.
The Prophet therefore promises another King, to wit, Hezechias, who by his
justice and equity, should set those things in order, which before were
confused. In a word, he here sets forth the happy state of the Church, as in a
glass: which seeing it cannot be erected without Christ, it is therefore
certain that the things here spoken of, ought to be referred to him; of whom
Hezechias was but a figure, both touching his office and Kingdom.

He mentions justice and judgment, according to the usual phrase of the
Scripture, which by these two words understands a well ordered government: for
justice signifies equity and moderation: and under the word judgment, is
comprehended that part of equity by which the good are maintained and
preserved from the violence of the wicked. It is very certain that the office
of a good Prince, A good Prince must carefully provide for the flourishing
estate both of Church and Commonwealth.
stretches it self further then justice and judgment; for he ought
principally to uphold the honor of God, and the purity of religion: but the
Scripture is wont to express the whole observation of the Law, under the
duties of the second table. For if we abstain from violence, if (as much as in
us lies) we labor to relieve the poor and oppressed, if we hold the band of
peace one with another, To abstain from offering violence, to relieve the
poor, to be at peace with our neighbors, good signs of the fear of God. It
is needful for a good Prince to have good counselors about him. Nerua.
we therein give good testimony that the fear of God is in our hearts, from
which such fruits of faith do spring forth. Under a part then the Prophet has
comprehended the whole.

But it is not without cause that he mentions Princes. Why so? It is not
enough that he himself be a good King, unless he also have good governors
and counselors about his person. For it often falls out, that the people
behave themselves leaudly under good Kings; as we read of Nerua, under whose
reign, euey one might do as he listed: so as the condition of many was much
worse at that time, then in the days of Nero; Nero.
for the carelessness of one only, gave occasion to many to become wicked.
Kings therefore ought to be furnished with good governors, Good governors,
eyes, ears, and hands to Kings.
which may be as eyes, ears, and hands to his body, in helping him to order
things aright. If this be wanting, a good King shall never be able so to
advance religion and justice; but his officers will be ready more or less to
foreslow the course of good proceedings. And if there be not among the highest,
such a harmony and agreement touching these things, Simile.
as is in a well tuned instrument of music, the Church and Commonwealth shall
seldom prosper. The counsel therefore which Iethro gave Moses his son in
law, is to be hearkened unto of every good King; let him choose for his
officers such as be men of courage, fearing God, Exodus 18.
and hating covetousness; yea, let him appoint such for his Captains over
tens, fifties, and hundreds.

But now adays, bawdes, ruffians, flatterers, and iesters, are forsooth
advanced by Kings, to whom are assigned the chiefest dignities and places, as
just rewards of their flatteries and bawderies. Are we to wonder then when we
see commonwealths every where almost fall to ruin, and come to naught, and all
true administration of justice and judgment abandoned and rejected? No verily.
Our sins the cause of all disorders, both in civil and ecclesiastical
governments.
For it is the just punishment of our sins; yea, and we our selves deserve
to have such governors, because we will not suffer God to have the government
of us. How is it possible they should enjoy this so singular a benefit, which
are known rebels, profane or malicious hypocrites, who cast the Lord and his
hests behind their backs, and will not endure the sweet yoke of Christ, which
would bring with it this happy and flourishing estate of the Church here
promised?

Verse. 2. And he shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and as a shadow
from the tempest, as the rivers of waters in a dry place, the shadow of a great
rock in the desert land.
IN this verse he lets us see how exceeding needful it is to have a well
ordered Commonwealth, when he calls this King an hiding place for the wind;
and the shadow from the tempest. For the world is never in such good case, as
when every one willingly abstaines from that which is evil, and when all
quietly seek the benefit of one another, without constraint. For as much then
as many take liberty to offer violence to their neighbors, by reason of their
intemperancie and unruly passions, men shall be in continual strife and
debate, if there be not remedies at hand by law, and judgment seats to still
and pacify them: but because many by their lordly authority are ready rather
to raise up troubles then to allay them: it is not without cause that this good
King is here adorned with such titles.

And if this were rightly spoken touching the person of Hezekias, how much
more does it fitly appertain to Christ, Christ especially is this hiding
place.
in whom we have our sure and only refuge in these tempests? amiddes which we
must be tossed as long as our conflicting days shall last in this world.
Christ our shadow and most sure haven of safety in the midst of si^ie trials,
and floods of adversities.
Are we then parched with heat? Let us learn to shroude us under his shadow.
Are we ever and anon tossed with waves, so as it seems we shall be swallowed
up of them? Let us run to him as to our most safe and sure haven. He will
easily still and quiet all tempests. He will set all things in order which
before were confused and out of frame.

Verse. 3. Then the eyes of the seeing shall not be shut, and the ears of them
that hear shall hearken.

4. And the heart of the Or rash, or giddie headed.
foolish shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stutrerers shall be
unloosed to speak distinctlie.


HEnce we may yet better perceive that the Prophet so sets forth the
government and reign of Hezekias, that his meaning therewithal is to lead us
higher. For he intreates here of the restoration of ye Church, whereof there
was some resemblance under Hezekias, but the full accomplishment of it was
under Jesus Christ. We know the Church never prospers well if it want just and
wise governors. But which way can this b^ attained unless Christ reign? It
follows therefore that himself and his kingdom are here recommended unto us.
Now this promise is opposed to that fearful judgment of blinding, mentioned
in Chap. 29.10.11. Here on the contrary he promises that true light: so as
those which were blinded before, shall now see clearly: the deaf shall begin
to hear, the foolish shall understand knowledge, and the flutterers shall
speak distinctlie.

He calls them seers and hearers, which ought to have taken heed to the word
of the Lord when it was published unto them: but they chose rather to remain
wilfully blind and deaf, and estranged both their minds and thoughts from
wholesome doctrine. Now the Lord promises them that he will restore eyes,
ears, tongue, and understanding unto them. Sure it is that whatsoever is here
promised proceeds from the free grace of God: for the question is not now
simply what men shall do of themselves, but of that which God shall work in
them. These then are the special gifts of God: as on the contrary, when he
shuts the eyes, takes away understanding, and the right use of speech, and
suffers ignorance and barbarousnes to reign; these are to be accounted
horrible judgments, whereby God auengeth himself upon the unthankfulness of
men, and also of their contempt of his word.

The Prophet then promises that God taking pity of his Church, will at the
last restore that unto her which before he had justly withheld, It is Christ
only that gives us eyes, ears, a tongue, and an understanding heart. No
spiritual life in the world out of Christ.
and that for the love which he bears unto Christ, from whom we must receive a
tongue to speak, eyes to see, ears to hear, and an heart to understand, for
till then, we are more then blockish, and smitten as it were with a fearful
sottishnes. Let us know then that out of Christ there is no spiritual life in
the world. Why so? Because every mothers son of us is blind, deaf, dumb, and
foolish, until we be gathered into that body whereof he is the head: whence
it follows, that all these benefits fail when his kingdom is defaced.

We are also to note that the chiefest benefits which above all others we are
especially to desire are here recommended unto us: No riches comparable with
these benefits, which the Prophet here recommends unto us.
for riches and the like, in the inioying whereof men usually place their
happiness, ought to be esteemed as nothing in comparison of these things. Shall
we not be more then miserable in the mids of all abundance, if the Lord deny
us these spiritual blessings whereof the Prophet speaks in this place? Take
away these, and we may be sure Christ is gone; neither can we have any part in
him. For from him do these heavenly graces flow, as S. Paul teaches us,
Ephesians. 1.3. Seeing therefore we now enjoy these benefits whereof we have been
so long deprived, let us blush for shame that with our tongues we have not
rendered unto Christ that glory which is due unto him; also that we have
neglected to apply the understanding which he has given us to the advancement
of his kingdom, and to the furtherance of his service: for by neglecting these
things, we have manifested to all the world that his kingdom has no place in
us. To conclude, for as much as fools are wont to be rash and headie,
therefore the Hebrews take hastines for folly: for wise men are commonly
wary and slow in that they take in hand.

Verse. 5. A niggard shall no more be called liberal, nor the churl rich.
THe Prophets meaning is, that all things shall be brought into their order,
that men should not esteem vices virtues, as they did in times past. For where
government is confused, the covetous reign as Lords; because men usually
judge of virtue by power and riches. Let a poor man be never so honest,
religious, yea, and liberal, according to his ability, yet he is generally
despised of all. In an ill governed Commonwealth therefore all things are out
of frame, but the contrary easily discouers all such iuglings. For let virtue
once be in request, vice will forthwith be brought to light. The godly also
have greater liberty to repress the pride of such as before trod all justice
and equity under foot.

Besides, in regard the Prophet speaks here touching the state and reformation
of the Church, the government whereof is spiritual, we must yet raise up our
minds a little higher, that we may refer all this unto Jesus Christ, whose
peculiar property it is to discover the vices that are hid, and to take away
the vailes and impediments which change the outward face of them: by reason
whereof, they are for the most part praised no less then if they were virtues
indeed. This he does by the Gospel. How so? Through the preaching thereof, he
lays those wickednesses open, which before were close and secret, and makes
them appear in their own likeness: so as none shall be beguiled by outward
appearances, unless he will wittingly close up his eyes. Will ye see the
reason then why the Gospel is so generally hated of the world? No man would
willingly have his secret filthy thoughts and vile actions made manifest.

The Philosophers dispute very well in many places touching covetousness and
liberality, and in some sort discover the differences between them: but they
gage not the consciences to the bottom, neither do they truly distinguish
between the one and the other. This cannot be done but by Christ's light, when
he shines by his Gospel, discovering the inmost secrets of our hearts,
bringing us to a spiritual and willing obedience. We are here therefore called
to the judgment seat of Christ, who only vnmaskes hypocrisy, causing us to
see whether we be truly liberal or niggardly.

Verse. 6. But the niggard will speak of niggardnesse, and his heart will work
iniquity, and do wickedly, and speak falsely against the Lord, to make empty
the hungry soul, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
WE may also translate, The wicked will speak wickedly: for the word Nebalah,
signifies all manner of villainy or wickedness, which we commonly call, a man of
no worth. We may also translate, The fool will speak wickedly: and thus there
should be some allusion in the words Nabal and Nebalah; but the sense would be
diverse. Notwithstanding, because he used the very same word in the former
verse, when he spoke of lawless persons and niggards; I do the rather follow
this interpretation. I take the word Auen. for impiety; for he speaks of a
continued liberty to do evil, as the sequel sufficiently shows. Why so?
Because he directs his speech to such as plunge themselves into all manner of
leaud behavior; being without touch of breast, and as it were past feeling.
They jest out all admonitions, and scorn both God and his messengers. But
Christ draws even such forth into the light, and lays that open to the view
of their consciences, which before lurked in secret: for to him it belongs to
divide (with his two edged sword of the Gospel) even between the marrow and
the bones, Heb. 4.
that every thought may lie naked and bare before his judgment seat.

Our Prophet then continues on the same matter which he began to handle in the
former verses. Others expound it otherwise, (yet not so properly as I think)
for they take it to be a prouerbiall speech, and expound it in the present
tence; The villain speaks of villainy. But if I be not deceived, the Prophet
points out unto us an higher matter; to wit, that Christ who is the Judge of
the world, will ascend into his judgment seat to manifest what is in the heart
of every one. For as long as he forbeares to execute the office of a Judge, all
things run out of course: wicked men are applauded because they carry a fair
show of virtue; and the godly are counted as the of-skowring of the world. But
Christ will bring every man's doings to the touchstone that sow wickedness,
which before carried some color of virtue, might be discovered. For which cause
it is said, he has his fan in his hand to separate the good corn from the
chafe. This fan is the Gospel, whereby God as a just Judge, Mat. 3.
puts the wicked as it were upon a rack, and maugre their teeth, makes them to
utter their inmost thoughts. We have good proof of this again and again,
The Gospel has brought popish iuglings to light.
whilst we discover that gross idolatry which was so masked under the
papacy, that men took it for Gods true worship. Oh how wonderfully were the
poor people wrapped in superstitions! Who would ever have thought that there
had lien such horrible monsters (in those times of darkness) within the hearts
of men: such as they are now manifested to be. For the contempt of God so
ouerflowed, that some showed themselves beasts rather then men. But what do
the Papists? Popish slanders.
They cry out as if we by our doctrine had let loose the bridle to men, and had
set open the door to epicurisme; so as it should be lawful for any amongst us
(without blushing) to do what he list. But let them hear our Prophets answer;
who tells them, that the truth of God being once brought to light, vile
persons will behave themselves vilely, and the wicked will then speak
wickedly: otherwise, how should Christ be a spiritual Judge, if he did not
manifest the secrets of the hearts, and discover the things that were most
deeply hidden?

But besides the scoffs which the reprobates cast forth against God, he
taxes also their cruelty, namely, They make empty the hungry soul. Wherein
the Prophet orderly recites the sins that are against the second table. The
wicked begin at the contempt of God: afterward, they fall into their sins;
to wit, they spare not to exercise cruelty against their poor neighbors.
What rigor can be greater then to deprive the hungry soul of his bread, and
the thirsty soul of his drink? For the very instinct of nature must needs
cause our bowels in compassion to yearne within us. But when men are grown so
iron hearted, and have so far degenerated, that they are without sense or
feeling of their brethrens wants, do they not show themselves worse then
savage or wild beasts, who will pity their like?

Verse. 7. For the Instruments or measures.
weapons of the churl are wicked: he deuiseth wicked counsels to undo the
poor with lying words, and to speak against the poor in judgment.
We must always retain the future tence, because he disputes not so much
what covetous men are, as what they will be, when Christ by the light of his
Gospel shall discover their hypocrisy, lest they should deceive any. For he
speaks of that heavenly light which should break forth to cause secret
wickednesses appear; as we have said. Christ then manifests the venom that
is hid in the covetous, and shows with what unlawful weapons they fence
themselves. If any will interpret the word Kelai, Measures; I hinder him not:
but the word weapons agrees best, and has a larger sense; for under it are
comprehended all sorts of instruments. He means then by a metaphor to set forth
the cunning practices and subtle iuglings, wherewith the covetous beguile the
simple, and snare them in their ginnes.

In the next place he shows the reason of it; to wit, they are always
hammering of wicked Surely he here describes the manner of the wicked, who
busy their brains about nothing else but how they may fill their purses; be
it by right or wrong, it is no matter. Such people does our Lord Jesus Christ
here unmask, and lets all the circumuent the innocent who are unable to shift
for themselves, then such as have reaching heads? Again, if with sweet bait^,
they deceive under pretext of poor, who had more need to be delivered? snares
be spread even in the open judgment seats? No doubt the sin is greater to
spoil the poor under color of justice, then to set upon them in the high
way. For judgment seats ought to be like Cities of refuge for the distressed
to flee unto. It is a greater s^nne to rob the poor under color of iust^ce,
then to set upon them by the high ways side. Judgment seats ought to be as
cities ^ refuge for the distressed to flee unto.
What shall we say then, if such places be made dens of thieves? On the high
way a man may happily shun a thief, and may wind himself out of his nets:
but which way shall a man escape out of the snares which are laid in places of
justice? The circumstances of this text therefore ought diligently to be
observed.

Verse. 8. But the liberal man will devise of liberal things, and he will
continue his liberality.
We have told you before that these sentences have a more spiritual sense
then our bare reason can attain unto: for the Prophet speaks not so much of
Commonwealth matters, as of the reformation of the Church. These things
therefore appertain to the regenerate, over whom Christ reigns by the scepter
of his word. For howsoever many be called outwardly by the voice of the
Gospel; Many called by the external voice of the Gospel, but few are brought
thereby to yield sound obedience thereunto. The way of the righteous like the
light that shines more and more unto the perfect day: Prou. 4.18.
yet few are brought by it to yield sound obedience unto God, or to bear that
sweet yoke. Those few does the Lord make benefactors and truly liberal, in
such wise, as they seek not so much their own things, as how to benefit the
poor; and that not once or twice, and so away, but continue the same from day
to day, so as their heat does rather increase then decrease.

This place is commonly translated otherwise; to wit, that those who are
liberal, go on forward, and abound in well doing, because God inricheth them,
and recompenceth them with greater benefits. This sense at the first, has some
show of reason: but the Prophet rather meant, that the liberal shall never
cease giving. Why so? Because they shall grow more and more; they shall have the
same will and affections, and shall continue constant in their good course: as
it is said, Psalm. 112.9. 2. Cor. 9.9.
He has distributed abroad, and given to the poor: his righteousness
indureth for ever. Now this is added because it is an easy matter to
counterfeit the liberal person for a time: many also think they have quit
themselves well, when they have given a little; but they grow faint hearted by
and by, and change their minds: whereas on the contrary, true liberality is
not an hours bird, as we say, but grows on to perfection. Those that are
endued therewith, persevere therein constantly: their liberality is not by
fits and starts; neither are they like a seething pot, that is now ready to
boil over, and by and by stands as still as a stone.

This is it which our Prophet meant to express by the verb, shall go forward
or continue. Many things fall out often times, which cooles the heat, and
hinders the course of our charity. First, we meet with the strange Paul
says, Gal. 6.9. to wit, that we shall reap in due season if we faint not. For
the Lord exhorts us not to such a kind of liberality as should last for a day
or a week, but for our whole life.

Verse. 9. Rise up, ye women that are at ease: hear my voice ye careless
daughters, hearken to my words.
IT seems there should be no coherence between these words and the former.
For before he spoke of the restitution of the Church; but now he threatens
that Gods judgments are ready to seize upon those who gave themselves to a
pompous, delicious, and an idle course of life. It should seem therefore that
Isaiah takes up a new matter in this place. The usual tenor which the Prophets
hold in their sermons.
Yet will there be no great inconvenience, if this prophecy be joined to the
former: for the Prophets usually keep this course; first, they lay forth
promises of grace to the faithful; then they direct their speech to the
hypocrites, testifying that the mercy which God promises to his children, shall
be so far off from benfiting of them, that they shall surely bear the reward
of their sins.

Whereas he bends the force of his speech in particular against women, the
Hebrews under this word (according to the use of their tongue) understand Cities:
but I think this should be no figurative manner of speech, and therefore I
rather rest in the bare letter. Now he speaks to women rather then unto men, to
signify the greatness of this desolation: for women and maidens are commonly
spared in such times, by reason of their sex, being also destitute of warlike
defenses. Well, he says the destruction shall be so barbarous, that none shall
escape scotfree.

And note that he speaks expressly of women of rest, who commonly are the most
delicate: for according to their abundance, so they may better shift for
themselves, and may more easily escape dangers, when the poor must be feign
to go to the wall. But Isaiah tells them that they shall be constrained to
rise and tremble: therein opposing this trembling, to that rest and ease which
they quietly inioyed. For he commands them to arise, as giving them to
understand, that it was no time for them now to sit still, because the Lord was
about to awaken them out of their secure couse of life.

When he adds, hear my voice ye daughters: by daughters, the Rabbines
understand Cities and Towns; but this ought to be taken literally, as I said
before. He shows whence this terror and violence shall proceed, which shall
cause them thus to arise and tremble; to wit, from the judgment of God. But he
mentions the voice, to show that this shall be no vain prophecy, because
this war was proclaimed against them by the commandment of God. As if he
should say; You shall one day feel by experience, what power and efficacy
there is in the word of God to awaken you.

Now he blames their idleness, security, and delicacie so often, not only
because it should be vnked for those that had bin wont-to be at their ease, to
be so rudely rouzed up; but also in regard it is a thing almost impossible,
that the world (in this corrupted and depraved estate of man's nature) should
not be too careless in abusing rest and abundance. For we then by little and
little fall into a sottishness of mind, deceiving our own souls with vain
imaginations: so as all fear is abandoned of every one: in which false
security, we easily are drawn audaciously even to rush against God himself.

Verse. 10. Ye women that are careless, shall be in fear above a year in
days: for the vintage shall fail, and the gathering shall come no more.
It is a great relief to a sorrowful heart, when it perceiues that though
afflictions be sharp, yet they are but short.
BY these words he means, that the calamity shall last long: for it is a great
relief to a sorrowful mind, when he thinks that the miseries and
afflictions which press upon him so nearly, shall last but a while. But when
there is no hope left of some comfortable issue, nor promise of deliverance,
what can ensue thereof but despair? He shows then, that they shall not
suffer this extremity for a year only, but that they must expect new
afflictions, one in the neck of another. By the word to fear, he privily
taxes their drowsinesse; showing that they shall be led away with terror and
trembling, seeing the sweet and still voice of wholesome doctrine was so tedious
unto them. And in as much as the Jews were too much besotted with the love of
earthly and transitory things, he threatens them with want of bread and wine.
And thus he applies himself to their capacity.

If they had been better purged from their earthlinesse, he would rather have
awakened them with the fear of that judgment which Jeremiah bewailes, Lament.
1.7. to wit, that the sacrifices and feast days should cease, and that the
holy assemblies should be abolished. But because they had plunged themselves in
voluptuous living, and had not so well profited as to esteem spiritual
benefits, the Prophet applying himself to their weakness, addresseth his
speech rather to their bellies, then to their minds.

Now he touches the wasting of the fields, which should undoubtedly follow
this war: for abundance is the mother of idleness and security. It is
therefore as if he had said; Abundance the mother of idleness and securite.
The Lord will deprive you of your belly cheer, he will rouse you up with a
witness, and will deprive you of all matter of rejoicing. By this verse then
are we admonished not to lie snorting in our prosperity; neither to dream of
such a rest, as if we were to enjoy the same in this world for ever. No, let us
use the good things which God bestows upon us moderately, unless we mean
that God should awaken and ouerwhelme us unawares: and by this sudden change
which shall befall us, vex us worse then we can expect or think of.

Verse. 11. Ye women that are at ease, be astonished: fear O ye careless
women: put off the clothes, make bare, and gird sackcloth upon the loins.
THis is no superfluous repetition, but rather an amplification of that which
he spoke of before: for whilst men are thus rocked asleep, hardly can they
be awakened by the voice of Gods Prophets. It is needful then to cry alowd,
and to add rebuke to rebuke. Therefore in that he multiplies his threatening,
he thereby shows how great our security is, when men are once blinded with
prosperity. It is almost a thing impossible for them to hear the voice of God
when he admonishes them. And to speak the truth, men are in much more danger
by prosperity, then by adversity: for when all things fall out well, they are
ready to flatter themselves; yea, and to be bewitched with their felicity.
This was the cause why he was feign to rebuke the Jews so sharply; even to
quicken them up if it were possible out of their drowsinesse. This exhortation
then ought to be referred to the time to come as if the Prophet should have
said; In the end you shall tremble, for I can assure you, your rest shall not
last always.

Thus he shows that this calamity which was to ensue, should be as a seal
set unto his prophecy, whereby God would manifest by the effects, that these
words should not vanish away in the air. Where he bids them to make bare, and
to gird them with sackcloth, he describes the estate of mourners. For when
adversity presses any, then they put on sackcloth, and make the rest of the
parts of their bodies naked: and so by outward ^estures and garments, and the
like, they manifest the inward dolor of their minds. He calls the women
then from their delicious and dainty fare, and voluptuous living wherein they
plunged themselves, to sackcloth and other testimonies of sorrow.

Verse. 12. Men shall lament for the teates; even for the pleasant fields and
for the fruitful vine.
THis verse is diversely expounded: for some without any figure, understand,
that there shall be such great want of food, that women shall lose their
milk, and therefore that the infants shall weep over the empty and dried
breasts of their mothers: which we see to fall out when people are pined away
in great famins. But the most received sense, and that which agrees best, is;
that by teates, under a figure we understand fields and vineyardes, which also
is expressed in the very words of the text: because from them, as from the
teats of our mothers, we daily suck milk and blood as it were out of ye
earth. His meaning is then, that the fruits of the earth shall fail, because
the Lord will so curse her, yt she shall not be able to yield any increase.
Thus men shall lament in regard of this great penury, as over the teats of
their mother, which were wont to feed them with delicates. This sense I take
to be fittest, as best agreeing to the natural scope of the text: for it was
necessary it should serve as an exposition to that which is afterward added,
touching the pleasant field, and the fruitful vines.

Verse. 13. Upon the land of my people shall grow thorns and briars: yea, upon
all the houses of joy in the City of rejoicing.
He now confirms the former sentence, and shows that the cause of this famine
and barrenness shall be, in regard that thorns and briars shall grow upon the
land; that is to say, the fields shall be laid fallow and barren, whereas
before they were fat and fruitful.

Now this must needs be an horrible change: for this Country, as we know, had
the praise for fruitfulnes above any other; not so much in respect of the
soil, as by Gods blessing, who had said, I will give you a land flowing with
milk and honey: Exodus 3.8. and 17. Hence (I say) came this fruitfulness of
that land.

Whereas he calls it the land of his people: he preuents an objection which
they might thus make; what reason have we to fear the barrenness of that
land, or that it should not yearly yield us fruit, seeing God who is good unto
all, will be much more a nurcing father to us, and that in a more particular
manner? They thought it then a thing utterly impossible, that this land being
bestowed upon them, who were the children of Abraham, should ever be ouergrowne
with thorns and briars. And thus the Prophet rebukes the Jews the more
sharply, because by their rebellion, they had not only made void these
blessings of God, but had also pulled down his wrath so far upon them, as to
lay their fruitful land waste and barren.

The word yea, in the middle of the sentence, amplifies the doctrine: albeit
some expound it, For, reading it thus: For gladness is in their houses. But
this sense suits not well, in regard the construction of the words will not
bear it. I rather think therefore that he inlargeth the sentence, as if he
meant to say, that this calamity shall not only seize upon the utmost bounds
of the land, but even upon the houses of joy also; to wit, even upon those
which were sumptuous and pleasant, where they were always wont to solace
themselves without let in times past.

But when the Prophet spoke these things, I warrant you the people of that time
laughed a good (as we say) at him: neither could they hear such unsavory news
amiddest so many delights which bewitched them. Nay, they took foul scorn
to be so dealt withal, because of Gods promises, which they took to be so
sure, that they thought no want could ever befall them: but Isaiahs words have
all proved true for all that. By this example therefore let us learn to use
prosperity with sobriety, prosperity with sobriety.
and so depend upon Gods promises touching his blessings, to be powered out
upon us, that in the mean while we yield obedience to his word with a good
conscience.

Verse. 14. Or, For the, etc.
Because the palace shall be forsaken, and the noise of the City shall be
left; the tower and fortress shall be dens for ever, and the delight of
wild Asses, and a pasture for flocks.
HE yet sets forth this desolation more at large: for, having in the former
verse mentioned the house of magnificence; he now adds the palaces and
Cities: meaning to show, that nothing (be it never so glorious or excellent)
could be exempted from this common desolation. We see then that men's eyes are
dazeled with their own glory until they lift up their eyes toward heaven,
and thus being sweetly lulled asleep in their plenty, they grew fearelesse
and careless of any thing. Therefore he tells them that all their pleasant and
gorgeous things in the land of Judea, to wit, their Cities, Palaces, Castles
and Fortresses should be laid upon heaps and brought to nothing.

By the word ever, he again admonishes them (as I have touched before) that
this wound shall not be closed up again in a year, Verse. 10.
but should be long in healing: which should answer in proportion to the
length of time in which they had hardened themselves in their vices; for had
not the hand of God pressed them long according to their stubborn and
rebellious nature, they would have been ready forthwith to have rushed into
their iniquities afresh.

Verse. 15. Until the Spirit be powered upon us from above, and the wilderness
become a fruitful field, and Or, Carmel.
the plenteous field be counted as a forest.
THe Prophet had to deal as we know with the Jews, amongst whom the Lord had
planted his Church, it was needful therefore to leave them some hope of
salvation, least they should despair in the mids of so many calamities. For
albeit the Lord handles hypocrites roughly because they falsely shroude
themselves under the title of being his people; yet is he enforced by one
means or other to provide for the good of his Saints. This promise is added
therefore to put them in hope that God can not, nor will not forget his
Covenant; God never threatens so sharply, but he still leaves hope for the
penitent.
howbeit for a time he scourges his children sharply with the rods of men;
for he never so threatens, but he leaves hope and consolation for the repentant
to cheer up and refresh their hearts, and that even when it seems heaven and
earth shall go together.

And that they might the better taste this consolation which our Prophet sets
before them, he raises up their minds to the author Isaiah says, This word
spirit has two extents here: first, to the restoration of earthly benefits.
the Spirit shall come from above, which warming the earth, shall cause the
same to flourish with new frutefulnes. Neither do I doubt but he alludes to that
sentence of David, Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created, and thou will renew the face of the earth, Psalm. 104.30.

Now in regard that he also sets before them this sign as a token that God was
reconciled unto them, he therewithal aduertiseth them, that the restoration
of ye Church flows only from his free grace, who can abolish barrennes as
soon as it pleases him in his favor to distill some sweet dewes from above:
yea, yt he can do it in an instant, because at the first he created all things
of nothing, as if they had been before.

The expositors do diversely translate the latter part of this verse, where he
compares the desert to Carmell: but as I have showed in the 29. Chapter verse.
17. where there is the like phrase of speech, it seems to me that the Prophet
simply sets forth the effect of this restoration: to wit, that the abundance
of all things shall testify that God is indeed appeased toward his people.
For the places which were deserts before should be as Carmell, which was a fat
and fruitful soil, whence also it took his name.

Carmell also shall be as a desert: that is to say, so fruitful, that if it be
compared as it is now with that which it shall be one day, it may well be called
a desert: for it is an amplification of the extraordinary frutefulnes of it;
as if he should say, The fields which now are laid fallow and bear nothing,
shall bring forth fruits: and those which are tilled, and are by nature apt to
yield increase, shall wax so fruitful, that the abundance which is now upon
them is but barrennes in comparison of that which shall be hereafter. As if we
should compare the grounds of Sauoy, with those of Sicilia or Calabria, we
would say that it were but a desert. In a word, he signifies that there shall
be an incomparable frutefulnes, which the faithful shall enjoy after they be
reconciled unto God; and all because they may understand what love he bears
them by lading them with so many benefits.

Now Isaiah so prophesies here of Hezekias his kingdom, that therewithal he
referres all things to the kingdom of Christ, as to the end and full
accomplishment thereof. Come we once to Christ, then must we expound all these
things spirituallie, The second extent.
that so we may know we are renewed, as soon as the Lord sends down his
spirit from above into our hearts, of barren ground, to make them fruitful.
For till we be inspired from above by this holy Spirit, we are rightly
compared to deserts and parched grounds, seeing we bring forth nothing but
thorns and bushes, and are unfit naturally to bring forth any good fruit.
Those therefore which in times past were fruitless, being now regenerated by
the Spirit of God, shall begin in some measure to bring forth fruit unto him:
and those who before had some outward show of goodness, shall become so
fruitful after they be thus regenerated by the holy Ghost, that comparing the
one estate with the other, the first will be judged but as a desert in respect
of the latter: for all the goodly works that men do before Christ has
regenerated them, are but so many glorious sins. Therefore when we see the
Church oppressed even unto death, and that her condition seems very
lamentable, let us lift up our eyes to heaven, and depend wholly upon these
promises.

Verse. 16. And Judgment shall dwell in the desert, and Justice shall remain
in the fruitful field.
THe Prophet here teaches wherein the true glory of the Church consists,
Wherein the true glory of the Church consists.
to wit, when Justice and Judgment gets the upper hand: for men are not to
resemble beasts in seeking only after the abundance of earthly and transitory
things. By this it appears sufficiently, that the Jews were not held by the
doctrine of the law in the hope of temporary benefits only, as some
fantastical spirits affirm: but they were by it commanded to rest in that
which was the principal, to wit, that Justice and Judgment should flourish
amongst them: neither is it to be doubted but they knew well enough that true
felicity consisted therein. We are therefore first of all to seek the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and not to place our joy and
happiness in the abundance of wheat and wine, as hogs that feed in the
trough. For as Zachary sings in Luke 1.75. The end of our deliverance from
sin and Satan, and of all the blessings we receive from God, is, that we
should serve him in holiness and in righteousness all the days of our life.

By Justice and Judgment then he understands all vprightnes, as we have often
showed before. See verse. 1. Which albeit they properly concern the equity
which we ought to use one toward another: notwithstanding, because it is
usual in the Scriptures by the duties of the second table to understand the
observation of the whole law, the Prophet here under a part comprehends
religion and the true service of God. But the Prophets are wont especially to
mention the duties of love and those things that concern the second table,
because we chiefly manifest unto men thereby what affection and love we bear
unto God. Now where he says, that Justice and Judgment shall also dwell in
the desert as well as in ye plowed fields: it so much the better appears that
such plenty of blessings was promised, that the beholding thereof should put
men in mind of that great increase which they had seen in the fields before,
was but barrennes now in respect thereof.

Verse. 17. And the work of Justice shall be peace, even the Or, effect.
work of Justice and quietness, and assurance for ever.
EVen now he enuaied against that peace in which the Jews were lulled asleep.
See verse 9.10.11. But here he promises a peace contrary to that, which
shall be a testimony of Gods love toward them, who will keep them
faithfully after he has received them into his favor. The close opposition
between that brutish peace, which the wicked thought they had gotten when they
committed all sorts of wickedness, whilst they lay snorting therein also
without repentance, and this peace which the children of God enjoy by a godly
and just life, is here to be noted. For Isaiah stirs us up to covet after
this latter; and teaches us to be assured that those with whom God is
appeased, shall enjoy a peace that is blessed and happy in deed. Thus he sets
integrity before them for the object of their desires, They that would enjoy
an happy peace, must labor after an innocent life.
that so they may attain that peace which passes understanding: for there is
no better means to live such a peaceable life as is free from anoyance, then
in absteining from evil, and doing of good, as S. Peter testifies in his
first Epistle, Chap. 3. verse. 13.

But our Prophet leads them higher, to wit, that in living holilie and
justly, they shall keep themselves in Gods favor. For is it not a thing
altogether unreasonable, that the wicked should expect peace, when they
themselves will continually make war against God? The wicked would feign
enjoy peace, whilst they make open war against God.
In deed there is none but desires peace; yea, who is he that can not highly
extol it? but in the mean while themselves are the cause why enemies are
raised up against them, for they trouble heaven and earth by heaps as it were
with their wickednesses. Now in regard that this peace which God gives is
perpetual, Isaiah compares it with that which lasts but for a moment.

In that he calls peace the effect of Justice, let us thence learn that
wars proceed from Gods wrath, which we set on fire by our rebellion, whereas
peace on the contrary proceeds from his blessing. When therefore we see the
enemies boil with rage, Wars proceed from Gods wrath, which we set on fire
by our sins. Our sound and sincere conversion, the only means to still and
quiet the rage of our enemies.
exalting themselves furiously against us, let us seek no other matter to
allay that heat then true conversion: for our God will easily calm and quiet
tumults, we being at one with him: for he it is as the Psalmist says, which
makes wars to cease unto the ends of the earth: he breaks the bow and
knappeth the spears in sunder, and burns the chariots with fire, Psalm. 46.9.
but we have told you before that these things belong not only to the time of
Hezekias, but ought also to be referred unto Christ.

Verse. 18. And my people shall dwell in the tabernacles of peace, and in sure
dwellings, and in Or, quiet refreshings. Peace, the fruit of Justice.
safe resting-places.
AS he has showed that spiritual Justice is that which has her seat in the
hearts of men, the same must be said of peace, which is the fruit of it. Thus
when we hear of sure dwelling places, and refreshings, let us remember what
Paul says, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. This
peace Christ left with his Disciples, which the world could not give unto them,
John 14.27. And what marvel? For as the same Apostle teaches, Phil. 4.7. This
peace passes all understanding. Having once obtained this Justice, we shall be
no more disquieted with inward terrors, as we were when we felt that God was
angry with us. The wicked conscience is always at wars with it self, and
in continual anguishes. The wicked therefore must needs be tossed to and fro
with diverse garboiles: for he that is destitute of righteousness, can never be
in any sound peace He that is destitute of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, can never have sound peace.
of conscience. But where Christ reigns, there only is the true peace to be
found, which the faithful have in assurance, which makes the^ come without
fear before the heavenly throne, not so much in respect of their own piety,
as for that they rest themselves upon the sure rock of Gods mercies in Christ.
Hence we gather, that Christ reigns not where consciences are troubled and
tossed to and fro with diverse doubtings; in which case the Papists must of
necessity be: yea, and all others that cast not themselves upon the
meritorious sacrifices of Christ, and upon that purgation which he has
purchased for us.

Verse. 19. When it haileth, it shall fall on the forest; and the City shall
be set in the lower place.
WE told you before, that the Prophets were often wont to set forth the
kingdom of Christ under shadows; because they borrowed similitudes from an
earthly kingdom, for otherwise (in respect of our dulnes) we could hardly be
brought to comprehend this inestimable treasure of all good things. The meaning
is, that the Lord will remove far off from his people, all incombrances and
discommodities, and will cause them to fall upon others. Now because in this
world were subject to diverse tempests and vexations, so as we must endure
rain, hail, winds, and whirle winds: he says that God by his admirable
providence will exempt us from the harm we might receive by these things,
because the violence thereof shall be driven by him upon those of other places.

By forests, he means vast and deset places, Many are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers the^ out of all: Psalm. 34.19.
where none inhabits. By this we are advertised, that being under the
protection of Jesus Christ, we are so freed from all dangers and
inconveniences, that notwithstanding there are many hailes and tempests ready
to fall upon our heads: but the Lord is our deliverer, who either turns away
these eminent perils, or frees them who are in danger to take hurt by them. And
that he might the better confirm that which he said touching peace; he says,
that the Cities which stood in the plain, shall be out of danger; for they
were wont then to build their Cities upon high places, the rather to prevent
assaults. Now he says, that God will so defend his people, that they shall
need none of these usual munitions, because the Cities shall be safe, though
they stand in the valleys; neither shall they receive any hurt, albeit they lie
open to the fury of the enemy. Why so? For the hand of the Lord will save and
keep them. Will we be secure then? Let us not trust in horses, nor chariots,
nor yet in defenced Cities, lest the Lord suddenly dislodge us: but seeing our
good and heavenly Father vouchsafes to take care of our salvation, let the
protection of so good a guardian suffice us.

Verse. 20. Blessed are ye that sow upon all waters; and drive thither the feet
of the Ox and the Ass.
HE shows how great the change shall be, when Christ begins to reign. Verse.
13. Verse 14.
For he said before, that there should be such a desolation, that thorns and
briars should cover the face of the holy land, that stately houses should be
laid on heaps, and the Cities and palaces utterly raced. All these things were
to fall out when the Country should be spoiled by continual incursions of the
enemy: but now he says they shall be blessed, because God will give them the
abundance of all things. He adorneth and decketh this fruitfulness with
figurative speeches, which may be expounded in plain words; to wit, that they
shall sow in marish grounds, and shall feed their cattle in those places
without fear.

By waters, some understand a fat and fruitful soil: but I take it otherwise,
because of the generallitie of the particle All: for in calling them all
waters, it is as if he had said, that even those places which were covered
with waters, should be fit for tillage: so as they shall not need to fear the
spoiling of their seed. It is our manner also to drive Oxen, Asses, and other
beasts out of the fields that are sown, lest they should crop off, or mar the
corn. But he says here, that it shall be so thick and fair upon the ground,
that Oxen and Asses must be driven thither to eat the first growth, as they
usually do when corn is too rank.

He calls them blessed, according to the usual Hebrew phrase, because their
labor should not be in vain. Adams revolt. But because the inheritance of
this world was restored to the faithful, by the means of Jesus Christ, the
Prophets upon good reason affirm, that he will renew the earth in such wise,
that it being purged again from her filthiness, she shall receive her first
beauty. Those that reply, that this is not yet fulfilled, ought to take a view
of themselves, to see whether they be yet wholly cleansed from all their
sins. And if they be as yet far off from that spiritual righteousness,
spoken of verse. 16 let us be contented to feel this blessing, according to
the measure of our regeneration; If thou see not the full accomplishment of
these promises, impute it only to thy imperfect obedience: and be content to
feel this blessing according to the measure of thy regeneration.
which shall never be perfected in us, till having put off the infirmity of
the flesh, we be fully renewed after the image of God, in true holiness and
righteousness.

THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Woe to thee that spoilest and wast not spoiled; and do wickedly,
and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou
shall be spoiled; when thou shall make an end of doing wickedly.
Whither this woe be pronounced against the Caldeans.
IF we expound this of the Caldeans, the scope of the place will very well bear
it. For seeing in chap. 32.15. he promised freedom to the vanquished, it was
high time for him now to direct his speech against the vanquishers. Not only
that, but the faithful also stood in need to be confirmed in particular
manner, to the end they might be drawn to believe this prophecy, which was
almost incredible. It was very unlikely that such a Monarchy could suddenly
be brought to naught; or that these poor prisoners, destitute of all hope,
should by and by be set at liberty, to return into their own Country. The
Jews therefore you see, might very well have fainted in waiting for any
succor in such extremities, unless the Prophet had prevented the same by this
and the like instructions. He takes away the occasions then which might
otherwise have incited and provoked them to despair, when the Caldeans led
them captive into Babylon; for they then saw no performance at all of these
promises, but felt the clean contrary.

Notwithstanding, because all are of opinion, that this is the beginning of a
new sermon, and that these words are directed against Senacherib and his host,
I also am drawn to admit, that the Prophet here threatens the Assyrians, Or,
against the Assyria^s.
with the chastisement of their unjust oppressions and cruelties by them
committed, against their neighbors; that so comfort might be given by means
hereof, to the comfortless and oppressed. His meaning is then, that there
shall be a wonderful change when this flourishing estate of Niniue shall be
brought to ruin, albeit it seemed impregnable. Why so? Because the Caldeans
should come against it, and should revenge the cruelties which the Assyrians
had exercised against so many Countries. The Caldeans sent to revenge the
cruelties committed by the Assyrians.
And to the end his words might have the greater efficacy, he addresseth his
speech even to the Assyrians, saying; Ho, thou which spoilest; as if he should
say; thou have now liberty to range abroad at thy pleasure, no man dares
resist thee; but a day will come, wherein others shall make their pray upon
thee, as thou have done upon them.

He speaks in the singular number, but it is by a noune collectiue; which is
an usual phrase of speech. Others read it by an interrogation, Shall thou not
be spoiled? Think thou thy violences shall escape unpunished? No, they shall
one day render thee like for like. But we may follow the usual interpretation,
by which Isaiah amplifies the iniquity of the enemy, who was so greedy after
his pray, that he spared none: no not those innocents which never vvronged
him. Wherein we may behold a sign of extreme cruelty. I am very willing to
receive this exposition then; to wit, that in this first member, he describes
the disposition of the Assyrians; showing that they were merciless thieves and
robbers: and further inlargeth their cruelty, in regard they vexed and spoiled
those which never hurt the^: and all to this end, that when the Jews should
behold such wickednesses, they might first be brought to consider of

When thou shall cease.] This is the second part of this verse, in which the
Prophet shows, that the Assyrians do now spoil, because the Lord lets them
run riot: but the time of their restraint draws on, so as they shall have no
more power of doing hurt. If it were said; they shall cease to spoil, when they
were able to spoil no longer; the sense would be too barre^. Our Prophet
therefore mounts higher; to wit, that the time will come, that they shall
indeed cease to spoil, because the Lord will tame them, and take down the
pride of their power. Which is as much as if he had said; even then, when thou
shall be at the highest. Hence we may learn, that tyrants have their term
limited, which they shall not pass. Tyrants have their term prefixed, which
they shall not pass.
They rob and spoil whilst they have run the length of their chain, but when
they are come to the end of it, they shall be constrained to stay there, as at
their last exploit. Let this consolation A consolation.
then cheer up our hearts, when we see tyrants take their swinge, and do
furiously band themselves against the poor Church: for the Lord will calm
their rage well enough; and by how much the more they have exercised their
cruelty; so much the more shall God heap his wrath upon them. The Lord will
cut them off in a moment; for he will raise up enemies against them, which
shall sack and spoil them forthwith, and shall reward them that which they
have done to others.

We are here also to note Gods providence in the change of kingdoms; Gods
providence seen in the change of kingdoms.
for unbelievers think that all things are hudled together by the hand of
fortune: but it is our parts to look higher; to wit, that the Lord rewards the
wicked according to their wickedness; so as in the end, they shall feel by
the effects, that he will not suffer the wrongs to go unrecompensed, which they
have done to the innocents.

The events of things have confirmed the truth of this prophecy: The events of
things have confirmed the truth of this prophecy.
for soon after the Caldeans subdued Niniuie, who by this means lost their
Monarchy; yea, and in few years it was raced and brought into oblivion, that
she might lose her name. Now in respect that Babylon which succeeded it, was no
less replenished with robberies; the Prophet does rightly affirm that other
robbers shall destroy it, and the Monarchy being subdued, they shall pill and
take to themselves that which the Chaldeans had purloined from others.

Verse. 2. O Lord, have mercy upon us, we have waited for thee: be thou, which
wast their arm in the morning, our help also in the time of trouble.
THe Prophet adds this sentence, to show the faithful whereunto they should
have their refuge in such distresses; yea, even then when there seemed to be no
hope of salvation: to wit, unto prayers; beseeching God that these promises
might take effect when they should be in the greatest misery, and the enemies
power at the highest to oppress them. We have need to observe this order
diligently, for the Prophet has no sooner propounded these promises unto
them, Gods promises should forthwith kindle in us an ardent affection of prayer.
but he forthwith exhorts them unto prayer. Yea, suddenly breaking off his
speech, he comes abruptly as it were unto invocation: for he saw how hard a
thing it was for the Jews who were in such misery to overcome that fear
wherewith they were almost overwhelmed. It is not to be doubted but the Lord
hastens to perform the promises which he has made to his children: yet for a
while he deferres to do it, that he might thereby exercise our patience. But if
it come once to waiting, no constancy nor perseverance at all is to be found
in us, for our hearts are by and by danted and broken in sunder. Is it not
needful then to have our recourse unto prayers? for thereby are our spirits
cheered and fortified, when we cast our eye upon the Lord, by whose only
direction we get out of all the agonies and anguishes which press us, yet let
us patiently vvait in assured hope for that which he has promised: for our
God is a faithful God, Deuteronomy. 7.9.
he neither will, nor can deceive us.

Our Prophet further admonishes the Jews not only to consider in general the
judgment of God against the Assyrians, but also to behold therein his
fatherly love toward his chosen people: as if he should say, the Assyrians
shall be spoiled in deed, God judges the enemies of his church not only to
recompense the wrongs and cruelties they have done her into their own bosoms,
but also to manifest the care he has of her salvation.
yet not so much to receive the just reward of their covetousness and cruelty:
as that God thereby means to show what care he has for the salvation of his
Church. Moreover when he exhorts them to cry for mercy, therein he sets forth
our misery. Then, to the end the faithful might encourage themselves in
seeking to obtain favor, they testify that they vvaited upon this God on whom
they called. For in deed, our prayers are vain and frivolous, unless they be
grounded on this principle, Let thy mercy o Lord be upon us (says David) as
we have trusted in thee, Psalm. 33.22. For it were presumption otherwise to
press into the presence of God, if he gave us not entrance by his call: who as
he for his part graciously inuites us to come unto him, so must we on the
other side be ready to yield our selves obedient to his word as often as we
approach near unto him.

Next of all, patience must be joined with faith, without which, we be
unworthy to be heard, because we call not upon God with confidence. Now faith
only is the mother of prayer, The promises begets faith, faith brings forth
prayer. Psalm. 50.15. Patience must underprop faith and prayer. Faith the mother
of prayer.
as ye Scripture often testifies in many places, without which what remains
but hypocrisy, a vice most detestable before God above all others. Hence it
also appears that Christianity is banished out of the whole kingdom of
Popery: for if Gods chiefest service consist in prayer, and they know not what
true prayer is Papists know not what true prayer is.
(because they will have men continually to doubt, and accuse the faith of the
Saints of presumption) how can their service be acceptable unto God? Can that
be a lawful prayer which is made in doubting and without resting assuredly
upon Gods promises? Those great Rabbis which will be called Doctors of
Divinity (forsooth) are they not more simple in this matter then little
children? Certainly our children understand what prayer is better then they,
and have more godly affection. We may also learn from this text that faith is
proved by afflictions, Faith is proved by afflictions.
and the true trial of it consists in a constant undergoing of all dangers and
assaults, and in resting securely upon the word and promise of God. For thus we
make it manifest that we have truly believed.

As touching that which follows, Thou which vvast their arms, etc. Others
translate, as if it were a continued prayer; Be thou our arm in the morning,
and our help in the time of trouble. And whereas the faithful speak in the
third person, they take it for a change much used among the Hebrews. But I
think the Prophet has another meaning, that is, rather to set forth the
ardent desire which is conceived from the consideration of former benefits. And
therefore me thinks these words arm of the morning are fitly added; in which
must be supplied, Thou which vvast, and so the faithful set before them the
favors which God bestowed upon their fathers. As if he should say, Lord, See
Psalm. 22.4.5.
thou have heard our fathers prayers; and when they cried unto thee thou
gave them help. Be thou now our succor and salvation in our afflictions.

Arm and Salvation, differ in this; that arm is taken for the power which the
Lord showed in defending his Church before it was afflicted; and salvation, for
the deliverance thereof when she seemed utterly wasted. He records the
benefits then which the Lord had done to the fathers, that he might move him to
bestow the like favor upon their children: as if he should say, Lord, thou have
heretofore turned away the evils which were ready to seize upon thy Church;
and by thy favor she flourished and prospered: when she was in trouble thou
deliueredst her: can thou now do less for our sakes, seeing it is thy
property to relieve thy servants when all hope in men is past.

The particle also has great force in it to confirm our faith, and to
acertaine us that God, who always continues like himself and never
degenerates from his nature, being ever immutable, will deliver us also; for
such a one the faithful have found him to be. Let us remember therefore in all
extremities how the Lord has been helpful unto our fathers that trusted in
his help, Psalm. 22.4.
and has delivered them, that thence we may conclude, he will no more fail
us, then he has done them.

Verse. 3. At the Or, voice.
noise of the tumult the Or, peoples.
people fled: at thine exalting the nations were scattered.
He returns now to the former doctrine; or rather continues it; having in the
midst thereof placed a brief exclamation. First, he showed that the
Assyrians should be destroyed, albeit they then seemed out of danger. Now he
calls forth the Jews to be eyewitnesses of the same: for the multitudes of
the enemies being in a manner infinite, every one quaked and thought them
invincible. Isaiah therefore sets before their eyes their fearful ruin, and
that no less then if it were already come to pass. He speaks in the plural
number, calling them peoples, because the Monarchy of the Assyrians was compact
of many nations, and their Camp was gathered out of many Countries. But be it
their numbers were so infinite. What then? Yet they shall miserably perish,
says our Prophet.

Some expound the exaltation, Manifestation; whereby God did notably show his
power: but I take it more simply; to wit, that the Lord, who seemed before to
sleep (as it were) whilst the Caldeans spoiled and pilled at their pleasure,
shall notwithstanding suddenly awake, and come forth of his place. Neither is
it to be doubted, but the enemy proudly derided this his patience, as if the
God of Israel had been subdued and overcome: but in the end he rose up, and
being set in his throne, he revenged himself upon the wickedness of his
enemies to the full. There is here then a close opposition between this
exalting, and that appearance of weakness which seemed to be in the Lord for
a time, whilst he suffered his people to be spoiled and wasted.

By the voice of the tumult, some think the Lord would put his enemies to
flight, only with a noise: but I fear lest this interpretation should be more
subtle then sound. I willingly take the word voice then, for the noise which
should move the Medes and Persians.

Verse. 4. And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of caterpillars:
and he shall go against him like the leaping of the grasshoppers.
HE speaks here of the Assyrians. Unless any had rather refer it unto the
Jews, and so take the word spoil, in the active signification; albeit the
first sense agrees best. Now this change of persons gives great vehemency to
the prophecy, in that he so plainly aduanceth himself against such proud
adversaries, and does as it were name them. Yet some doubt whether he speaks
here of the final destruction of this nation, or of that discomfiture in
which the host of Sennatherib was destroyed before the walls of Jerusalem, by
the hand of the Angel. All expositors almost have followed this latter
opinion, which notwithstanding, as I think, is too much constrained. For it
seems the Prophet meant to say somewhat more in the beginning of the Chapter,
when he spoke of the destruction of this people. Yea, as I have touched a
little before, this prophecy may be extended further off; so as it may
comprehend also the Caldeans, which were the last enemies of the Jewish Church.
But not to stand much upon it, it appears sufficiently that the Prophet
directs his speech against the Monarchy of the Ninevites.

Now he compares this warlike people to caterpillars, The first Simile.
because they should have no power to resist, but shall tremble and be so
overtaken with fear, that they shall be taken up by troops and heaps. The
similitude is very fit: and Nahum uses it, Chap. 3.15. although somewhat in a
different sense. We know that this kind of vermin do much hurt, especially to
trees; so as they may well be called the calamity of the earth. But in regard
they are void of defense, albeit they fly in troops; we know that little
children can easily shake them down, gather them up, and kill them by heaps,
as many as they meet withal. Our Prophet says, that the like shall befall to
these insatiable robbers: for albeit in that trade they had done much hurt a
long time together, yet in the end they should be easily ruinated, because
being faint and feeble hearted, they shall fall into the hands of their
enemies, in such wise, that the riches which were hoorded up in Niniue by
theft, should be carried into Babylon.

The other similitude of the grasshoppers is added, The second Simile.
to show that the Caldeans shall come up leaping as it were to devour the
Country. For as these little worms eat up all before them; so they fly
without ceasing, and in leaping nimbly up and down, they mar all the fruits of
the earth: whereas others refer this to the Assyrians, as if the Prophet
compared them to grasshoppers, because it was easy to scatter them one from
another, it agrees not: for the Prophet sets the army of grasshoppers in battle
array as it were, who by their leaping should ouerspread the earth: and very
fitly opposes them to the caterpillars, respecting herein as well the
insatiable covetousness as the multitudes of the Assyrians and Caldeans.

Verse. 5. The Lord is exalted, The Lord which dwells in the most high places is
exalted. He has, ctc.
for he dwells on high: he has filled Zion with judgment and justice.
HE sets that forth at large, which he spoke erewhile touching Gods exaltation,
going on with the same argument which was handled before; to wit, that in the
destruction of so famous a Monarchy, men should know how dear and precious the
safety of the Church is unto him, seeing for her sake he will root out Niniue
the Queen of Cities, with her inhabitants also. Now this advertisement is
wonderful necessary: for hereby we perceive, that God spares not the profane
and wicked; for in setting himself against their rage, he minds to let his
elect see what tender care he has over them.

First he says, the Lord is exalted on high: whereas on the contrary, the
wicked thought to have beaten him down to the ground, in the destruction of
his people. But to the end they should not think God to be like unto those,
who being overcome, recover new strength unto them when things are in better
plight (as often it falls out in the world, that such win that at one time,
which before they had lost at another) he says expressly, yt God is exalted in
the presence of all, and that such an high dignity belongs unto him, because
he dwells in the heavens. Whence it appears, that he is never deprived of his
divine right, howsoever often times he suffers his power to lie hid: but when
it seems best unto him, he will manifest his greatness in the view of the
whole world: for dwelling in heaven, as we know, signifies an imperial
sovereignty under which the whole world is subjected. Thus he shows, not only
that God can easily overthrow all the pride of flesh; but also concludes from
the nature of God, that he must needs show forth his glory at the last, when
the wicked fall to despising of him: for otherwise he should renounce himself.

Where he says, that Zion was filled with judgment and justice, it is
another confirmation; to wit, that God will show signs of his special favor,
when the Jews shall be delivered from the tyranny of the Caldeans. And it was
no less then needful, to set the author of so great a benefit before their
eyes: He has filled.
for we see how peruersly we darken his glory filled with justice and
judgment, signifies, that God will liberally and abundantly shed abroad his
grace justice and judgment rightly executed, and not by the ouerflowing of
these corruptible things.

Verse. 6. And there shall be stabilitie of thy times, strength, salvation,
wisdom, and knowledge: for the fear of the Lord shall be his treasure.
He promises that the estate of the kingdom shall shall be happy and
glorious under Hezechias, having respect principally to that woeful and
miserable scattering which was seen in Achaz his days. For albeit the enemy
was expulsed, yet was there small hope that the Jews (being in such
extremity) should have recovered their first condition. As touching the words,
some translate thus; There shall be in thy times, truth, strength, and
salvation: as if the Prophet should relate what felicity the people should
enjoy under this holy King: and they think that every word contains in it so
many benefits of God. Others take the word stabilitie, for fidelity; as if the
Prophet should have said; that it should be in stead of salvation and
strength. Othersome draw a sense from hence a little differing; to wit, that
strength, salvation, and knowledge, shall be stable under Hezechias. But when
I scan the words of the Prophet considerately, I had rather make another
distinction; to wit, that stabilitie, strength, and salvation shall reign in
wisdom and knowledge under Hezechias: and so, that which is by and by added,
the fear of the Lord shall be the treasure of this good King, will follow and
agree well. For in time of peace, every one desires to be secured: yet how few
are there that care to use the means to enjoy so great a benefit? Nay, do not
the most part pamper themselves as swine in the stie? so as whilst blind
covetousness draws all the world after things earthly, few make any reckoning
of that incomprehensible light of the heavenly doctrine.

The Prophets meaning then is, that the Churches felicity shall be stable,
when vvisdome knowledge bears sway therein, and strength shall long endure,
when the knowledge is advanced: thirdly, that eternal salvation shall dwell
there; when men shall be taught rightly to know it. This is a very excellent
place: from whence we may learn, that ingratitude shuts out Gods blessings
from us: that is, when we forsake them to wallow our selves in earthly and
carnal desires: also, that although all the benefits we could imagine or
desire, were given unto us, No benefits of God sweet and sauorie to us, unless
they be seasoned with the salt of faith and knowledge. Where the light of Gods
word is quenched, our g eatest prosperity is worse then the worst thing the
world can afford without it.
yet shall all turn to our ruin and destruction, unless they be seasoned
with the salt of faith and knowledge.

We may therefore hence conclude, that the Church has no strength, unless
the knowledge of God preceede all other benefits, and that she then truly
florisheth, whilst she willingly confesses to hold all the graces she has
of Gods free bounty. But where this light of the word is wanting, and the true
knowledge of God is either dimmed, or put out, the greatest prosperity we can
enjoy, is worse then all the miseries the world can afford. I therefore refer
stabilitie, strength, and salvation, to one and the same thing; to wit, that
the Church shall have stabilitie, when blindness and error being banished, men
shall begin to learn the knowledge of God.

By this we see what Church there is amongst the Papists, (a pompous and
glorious one it is indeed in outward show); but where is this knowledge?
Therefore ca^ she not be stable; neither is she the Church of God. If the Lord
then show us that favor, that the light of faith may shine truly amongst us,
other blessings no doubt shall easily flow unto us: and if it fall out we be
shaken with diverse storms, yet God will uphold us always with his hand. Now
when he says, thy times, he speaks to Hezekias, not as to a private person,
but as to the head of the people, under whom also the whole body is
comprehended.

But seeing the kingdom of Hezekias was but a little shadow of Christ his
kingdom as we have touched before, these things therefore ought to be referred
unto Christ, Coloss. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of vvisdome and knowledge. We are also to
note these titles which are used to set forth the commendation of Gods word,
and the doctrine of the Gospel: S. Paul also does the like, Coloss. 1.9. when
he says, Teaching in all knowledge and wisdom: for by this praise, he extols
the dignity of the Gospel. Whence we also gather, that where Jesus Christ is
not truly known, there men are destitute of true vvisdome, although they be
expert in all other sciences, which without this are all but vanity.

Moreover it seems the fear of God should be added for an exposition, that
the Prophet might the better manifest that the knowledge whereof he spoke was
the gouernesse of piety, Knowledge the gouernesse of piety.
being neither idle nor vain, but penetrating with efficacy into our hearts
to conform us to the fear of God. See therefore why this fear is elsewhere
called knowledge, Prou. 1.9. and 9.10. yea, The fear of God not only the
beginning, but also the end of wisdom.
the beginning of it, that is to say, the sum and principal part of wisdom.
And those deceive themselves which take the word beginning for the first
rudime^ts or elements, seeing Solomon means the beginning, and the end: for as
men are fools until they have submitted themselves unto the word of God, so
the perfection of wisdom flows from teachablenes, or the obedience of faith.
All outward felicity mere beggerie without the fear of God.
The fear of God then is called his treasure, because without it all
prosperity is but misery: whence it yet further appears that all the parts
of a prosperous life consists in the knowledge of God, which we attain by
faith.

Also under the person of this king he shows that it is an inestimable treasure
to serve God in such devotion and humility as is meet: and further he
esteems all them miserable and forlorn people which are void of this fear of
God. On the contrary, blessed and happy are all those which fear him, albeit
of the world they be judged the most miserable of all others. But what fear
speaks he of here? Even of that which conteines in it true obedience, and a
reformation of our minds and affections. For the wicked have a fear of God,
but they fear him as malefactors do their Judge. Such a fear deserves no
such praise, because it proceeds not from the true knowledge of God, nor from a
ready desire to serve him. It therefore is directly contrary to that
vvisdome whereof our Prophet speaks, These things have reference first to
Hezekiah, secondly to the people, but especially to Christ.
who has so applied these things unto Hezekias, that in the mean while they
also appertain to the whole body of the people, as we have said before.
Whence we gather, that they have relation unto the people as well as the king:
but much more unto Christ, who was filled with the Spirit of the fear of the
Lord (as we have seen in the 11. Chapter) to make us partakers with him of ye
same grace.

Verse. 7. Behold, their messengers shall cry without, and the Ambassadors of
peace shall weep bitterly.

8. The paths are wast: the wayfaring man cease: he has broken the Covenant:
he has contemned the Cities: he regards no man.


IT is not very certain whether Isaiah here

The sign of a desperate estate is noted out, when he says, that the
Ambassadors which were sent to appease this tyrant, could obtain no truce, for
which cause they returned with bitter sorrow and tears, not being able to hide
the same in their journey, but were willing to manifest to others what was in
their hearts, in regard they were in such a wretched estate. No doubt but
Sennacherib with proud and scornful reproaches refused the conditions of
peace which were offered him, so as the Ambassadors were constreined openly to
lament and cry, as having forgotten the dignity of their persons; and let
not to publish the answer which this tyrant gave them, even before they
returned to the King their master to give an account of their Embassage. Others
by the Ambassadors of peace. understand those which were wont to proclaim
peace: but this interpretation is unapt, and as I think, too far fetched. By
the Ambassadors of peace, I understand those which were sent to appease
Senacherib, and to redeem peace with any conditions.

In the next verse he adds, that the ways shall be so stopped up that there
shall be no comers or goers, as it falls out when open wars are proclaimed.
Now it seems that the Prophet brings in the Ambassadors, telling how it shall
not be lawful for them to pass to nor fro any more, the passages shall be so
dangerous. As touching that which follows, he has broken the Covenant, some
expound it, as if the hypocrites complained that God kept not his promise. But
if this be referred unto God, such a complaint may be attributed not only to
the hypocrites, but to the faithful also, who sometimes expostulate the matter
on this wise with the Lord: but I like not this sense. And therefore I rather
think the Prophet continues to set forth the cruelty and vnappeaceable fury
of Sennacherib, who disloyally brake the covenant which he made before with
Hezechias. For albeit he promised truce; yet as soon as any occasion offered
it self to invade Judea, he falsified his faith, and began war afresh.
Thereunto appertains that which is in the end of the verse, he contemned the
Cities, and regarded no man's person: wherein he shows, that the cruelty of
this tyrant was such, that he could not be withheld, neither by fear, nor
shame.

Verse. 9. The earth mourns and faints: Lebanon is ashamed, and hewn down:
Sharon is like a wilderness, and Bashan is shaken and Carmell.

10. Now will I arise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift
up my self.


HE here more fully expresses after what manner they should see the estate of
Iudeah miserably distressed, yet so, that their faith in the end should break
forth as out of a bottomless gulf. He also names the places particularly, to
wit, Lebanon, Bashan, and Carmell, which are far distant one from another,
being as it were the borders of the holy land: all which is to show, that no
corner shall be spared, or rest in safety. And in the description of this
desolation, he attributes to every several place, that which agreed with the
situation of it; as to Lebanon, shame and confusion: because glory and beauty
are attributed unto it in other places, 1. King. 7.2. Psalm. 92.12. Chap. 35.2.
in regard it was replenished and adorned with great and goodly trees. As
touching Sharon, because it was a plain and fertile soil, he says, it shall
be like a wilderness. That Bashan and Carmell is shaken, because there grew
abundance of fruits. Thus he alludes to the nature of these places, and
describes the misery and calamity which should befall the same, that he
might the better amplify and set forth the mercy and goodness of God, which
should be the cause of their deliverance, albeit for the present, they saw
themselves as good as forlorn. For here was cause to behold the immediate hand
of God. Unless any had rather say, that the Prophet recites a thing already
done, to stir the people up to thanksgiving.

Verse 10.
Now I will arise] The particle now, is of great weight: also this double
repetition, I will be exalted, I will arise: for we must note the time to
which this is to be referred; to wit, even to that in which the Church in man's
judgment was brought to naught: for then will it be soon enough for God to
yield her succor. There is here therefore a comparison of things contrary: for
he sets the horrible calamities before the faithful, which should oppress
and easily ouerwhelme them, had they not been fortified with some consolation.
As if he should say; The Lord will indeed suffer you to be brought to the
extremity; but when you shall lie as it were at the last gasp, and in vain
shall have proved all ways to dispatch your selves thereout, himself will
arise for your deliverance. For it is of necessity that we be thus afflicted
and pressed to the utmost; to the end we may know God to be the only author
of our salvation,

The word now therefore signifies a time of extreme misery. A man would think
this to be a strange kind of dealing in the Lord: but the answer is at hand;
God thus defers his succor, because it is good, first that the patience of the
faithful should be exercised: secondly, that their faith should be tried:
thirdly, their flesh tamed: fourthly, that they might be the better stirred up
to feruencie in prayers: fifthly, that they might be raised up in the hope of
the life to come. Afflictions exercises our patience, tries our faith, tames
the flesh, quickens prayer, and raises up in us the hope of the life to come.
And therefore this block is laid in our way, lest they should prevent the
time which the Lord allotted out unto them.

The repetition is very weighty, and is added for the greater confirmation of
the matter: for when things stand perplexed, we think our selves undone;
whereas we should hope above hope, because then is the time when the Lord uses
chiefly to manifest his power. For this cause he exhorts the faithful to be of
good courage, in setting before them these commendations of his glorious
puissance; that none need to fear, but valiantly to buckle with the pride of
their enemies.

Verse. 11. Ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble: the fire of your
breath shall devour you.

12. And the people shall be as the burning of lime: and as the thorns cut up
shall they be burnt in the fire.


NOw he turns his speech against the enemies of the Church, which vainelie
and foolishly exalt themselves: for when God should once begin in wonderful
manner to utter forth his power, they should then have trial of the vanity of
their enterprises, and should be able to bring nothing to pass, although by
great troops they assembled themselves together, to put their plots in
execution. For the Lord scorns their rage, in regard they imagined they were
Lords of the world; whereas he in a moment can cut them off, notwithstanding
all their preparations. Now it is an usual manner of speech in Scripture, Psalm.
7.14. Isai. 59.4.
to call men's deliberations and enterprises conceptions. The similitude is
taken from women with child. And therefore it is said, that men conceive and
bring forth, when they imagine and put some wicked thing in execution: but our
Prophet tells them, that such conceptions shall turn to nothing, and that the
birth also shall vanish into smoke, so as they shall not prosper in any thing
which they take in hand. What need we then to fear all these goodly and gay
shows which our enemies make? For say, that God suffers them for a time to
consuit, to imagine, and rage against us, yet in the end he will scatter all that
they have rashly, and proudly done, as chafe before the wind. Let us also
know that this which Isaias* has prophesied against Senacharib, does likewi^e
appertain to all the enemies of the Church and faithful people.

Where he denounces that they shall be devoured by the fire of their own
breath, or spirit. Some are wont to expound it, Your spirit is like a fire
which shall consume you: but this similitude is both unapt and absurd. The true
exposition is clear enough, The fire which your breath has kindled, shall
devour you: for we are wont to kindle the fire by blowing of it. He teaches
then that the fire which the wicked have kindled by their wicked devices, See
Chap. 50.11.
shall turn to their ruin, because they shall be consumed by them.

Now this sentence is the same which the Scripture so often and so diversely
repeates, as, They shall fall into the pit which they have dug: In the nets
which they have laid are their own feet taken, Psalm. 7.15. Their sword which
they have drawn shall pierce their own bowels, and their bow shall be broken,
Psalm. 37.15. The Prophet shows then that this wretched tyrant (which had
destroyed all Judea, and laid siege with great force against Jerusalem) as
likewise the rest of ye Churches enemies, should draw ruin upon their own
heads, and in the end utterly perish. In a word, the fire which themselves had
kindled should, be the only means to consume them.

Afterward he compares them to the burning of lime, in regard yt their
flintines should be mollified, even as the fire desolues the stones, so that
they should be brought to powder and dust very easily. Questionles the wicked
rush themselves upon their own destruction by their own headines, so greedy
they are to do hurt. The similitude of thorns is no less proper, for albeit
they wound the^ shrewdly which touch them, yet there is no wood that burns so
violently, or is sooner consumed. The like is to be seen in lime, for the
fire softens and desolues it, notwithstanding it be never so hard at the first.
This he says shall befall the Caldeans, because the Lord shall cut them off in
an instant, albeit they were then feared of all: and that their consumption
should be brought to pass, when there was no appearance thereof at all.
Whatsoever prep^rations the enemies of the Church make to con^ume her, is bu^
the kindling and blowing ^f that fi^e which in the end shall consume themselves.
As often then as we see the enemies of the Church heap up treasures, and
gather men and munition together to bring us to wrack, and to put all the world
in an hurliburlie, let us assure our selves they are kindling the fire in which
themselves shall miserably be consumed.

We know this was fulfilled in Senacherib, for time was the best expositor of
the truth of these prophesies, how incredible soever they seemed then. Let us
hope then against hope that the same will befall those that tread in the steps
of this tyrant, and by this and infinite other examples let us fortify our
selves and others in our miseries and calamities, out of which doubtless we
shall be delivered, and shall behold the horrible vengeance which shall fall
upon our enemies.

Verse. 13. Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done: and ye that are
near know my power.
ISaiah makes a Preface here, as one minding to speak something of great
importance: for he calls for audience of his hearers, which men are wont to
do when any excellent or matter worthy of note is to be propounded. He
speaks to them that were near, which should be eie-witnesses as it were of
this spectacle: also he calls those a far off, which should hear of it by
report. As if he should say, Such shall be the power of God, that it shall not
only be manifested to some near bordering nations, but also to those that are
very far remote from them. His meaning is then, that God will make his work
known by some notable and special sign of his presence. Why so? Because the
wicked which before quietly reposed themselves in safety as being exempt out
of all danger, should now on the sudden be surprised with fears and terrors.

Verse. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid: a fear is come upon the hypocrites:
who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire: who among us shall dwell with
the everlasting burning.
But some might reply, hearken, was it a thing of so great importance that the
wicked should be affrighted? I answer, sinners out of their drouzines, and to
make them (will they nill they) feel that God is their Judge, but then
especially, when they have covered their contempt of God under the mask of
hypocrisy. For albeit it is a matter of great difficulty to awaken ye
profane ones, when their hearts are indurate: yet the obstinacy of hypocrites
far exceeds theirs, who think God much beholding unto the^. They are so
bewitched then we see, that they contemn all threatenings, and scorn the
judgments of God, and with their flouts and mocks they reject all the
prophesies, It is a miracle to subdue an obstinate hypocrite.
so as it is a miracle to overcome one of them who so obstinately resist.
Think therefore that it is not without cause that our Prophet is so sharp in
rebuking of them. For doubtless he galls the bastard Jews by mentioning
Zion: who shrouding themselves under the shadow of the Temple, thought
themselves secure in so inuinsible a fortress, that no harm could befall
them. And truly, there are none more proud or hautie then they (as has bin
said) which glory so much in the name of God, and in the titles of the Church.

The word Manephich, is translated Hypocrites; but it may also be generally
taken for traitors and reuolters. Seeing they were so wicked then, as to mock
at God himself, and his true Prophets, he denounces, they shall feel him to
be a sharp and severe Judge, that so they might cease to take pleasure in their
subtilties.

He adds a confession, which has an appearance of humility; the better to
show, that such hypocrites as do not willingly obey the word of the Lord, shall
in the end feel by experience (the mistress of fools) how terrible Gods
judgments are. When laughter shall be turned into gnashing of teeth, then they
shall begin to confess, that all their force was naught else but straw and
stubble. Now for the words: some translate; Who shall dwell for us? others;
Who among us shall dwell? If we simply read it, For us; this will be the
sense; who dare oppose himself against the fire? or, Will put himself between
it and us, that the flame thereof touch us not? The other interpretations will
bear the same sense; but the expositors differs in this, that some refer it to
the King of Assyria; and others, unto God: which latter, I rather receive, as I
have said already. For albeit the Assyrian was as a fire that burnt up the
country by his heat; yet our Prophet meant to express a more terrible thing
then it; to wit, that inward torment and vexation of mind, wherewith the
wicked are racked, the stings of conscience which cannot be avoided, and that
unquenchable fire of offenses which surmounts all torments. So then it is
justice with God to deal with sinners as they deal with him. And therefore
the Lord is called (in respect of them) a devouring fire, by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.24.
Deuteronomy. 9.3.
For the Prophets (as has been often said) borrow their phrases from him: and
the Apostle in Heb. 12.26. does the like.

The Prophet himself confirms this exposition, showing the cause of this
fear: for some might object, that God was too severe sin, that having
scattered all trust of merit (into the air) they might with all reverence and
humility, flee unto Gods free grace by true repentance. As if he should say;
None can stand before Gods judgment seat, unless he be perfectly just: and
therefore that all consequently are accursed. But he rather speaks in the
person, and according to their meaning, who before scorned al threatenings: and
so he now brings them in trembling and asking, who shall dare to present
himself before the face of God? For this dolorous complaint, is a sign of
that terror which he spoke of erewhile: where being convinced of their
weakness, their distress extorted forth these words; Who is able to abide the
Lords presence? Now because they ceased not to exalt themselves against God,
notwithstanding these words were drawn from them against the hair, as we say:
therefore the Prophet, that he might prevent their wicked replies, answers on
Gods behalf, that he is not terrible and fearful to men naturally; but it
falls out so by their own default, in regard themselves are affrighted with
the sense of their own guiltiness; so as God suffers not their consciences to
be at any quiet.

Verse. 15. He that walks in justice, and speaks righteous things, refusing
gain of oppression, shaking his hands from taking of gifts, stopping his ears
from hearing of blood, and shutting his eyes from seeing evil.
NOw he expresses that more fully which we touched before; to wit, yt (these
hypocrites) had no cause to accuse God of ouer-great rigor, because themselves
by provoking him to displeasure, did thereby put his love and follow justice;
if they give equity; if they keep their fingers clean from bribes, and walk
in uprightness Moses in this sense calls him a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 9.3.
lest his majesty and power should be contemned; yet whosoever he be that
shall draw near unto him with a true desire to please him, he shall feel by
the effects, that there is nothing more sweet and amiable then his presence.
Though God titles himself a consuming fire, lest his majesty should be
contemned, yet whosoever draws near him with a desire to please him, shall
feel nothing so sweet as his presence.
At such time then as God causes the light of his countenance to shine upon
the faithful, they have peace with him in a good conscience: whence it
follows, that he is not terrible of his own nature, but we, (we) by our
peruersitie provoke him to be such a one unto us.

Now this is specially directed to the hypocrites, who cover their villainies and
secret mischiefs under the cloak of holiness; and thus abuse the name of the
Lord to sin the more freely. But our Prophet setting down a definition of
justice, by examples, does thereby more clearly and plainly rebuke their
ungodliness. And mentions some principal actions touching the conversation of
men, whereby we may easily take trial of our godliness. For he sets before us
the duties of the second Table (as he has done often already) which is the
best way to discover who indeed is a religious man. For as gold is tried by the
fire, so by a man's ordinary carriage of himself, may you find how he is
affected in the service (...) empt from all troubles; but rather to be prepared
to undergo all sorts of greeuances and vexations. And yet, that they should
know also that God cared for the kingdom of Judah, and in his good time would
deliver them out of the hands of those tyrants which held them tributaries and
besieged them.

The estate which the Prophet here describes is very miserable: for is it not
a pitiful thing to see a people of a free condition so pressed under such a
barbarous tyranny, that all their goods must come to be praised, their houses,
possessions, families, and servants registered? Many of our times which have not
bin acquainted with these things, have yet some little taste how irksome this
servitude is, when their goods are praised to the uttermost mite: and not only
their yearly rents which are certain, but also the hope of future gain: and
not money and possessions alone, but their names also are taken. Such devices
there are to impose new tributes, not upon viands only, but even upon the
smallest things: Note.
so that tyrants rake to themselves a great part of that, which the poor
people can hardly bear: yet all these, and infinite other calamities will
nothing abate the pride, excess, and rebellion of men. What will they be
think you, being freed from these taxes? will they not easily forget all the
evils past, and the favor of God also, and be worse then ever they were
before, in running into all leaud and wicked behavior.

It is not without cause then that the Prophet lays these things thus before
his people, lest after their deliverance they should range after their lusts.
As if he should say; What a shame were that? nay, rather acknowledge the
goodness of God, who has dealt so mercifully with you, and cleave unto him
with your whole hearts. Some have falsely imagined, that Saint Paul alleges
this place in 1. Cor. 1.20. But so he should mistake the Prophets meaning, and
should apply these words to a wrong sense. The cause of the error grew from the
word Scribe, which is not taken here for a teacher. For Isaiah calls him a
Scribe in this place, What is meant by Scribe in this place.
who took the names of men and their families, and inuentories of their
possessions and houses. To be short, he which kept the register of all the
taxes and tributes.

By the poiser, he means him which received the imposts, for he weighed the
moneys which were paid in: such as are our receivers and treasurers at this
day. He adds yet a third sort, which was the most intolerable of all; to wit,
he that counted the towers or chief houses; for they made search, and viewed
every house, to know which were the richest, that they might get the more pence
out of it. Tyrants have such at command, who like bloodhounds, Bloodhou^ds in
Common wealths.
have skill to hunt and smell out fat purses; that so, besides the ordinary
taxes they may raise an extraordinary impost. No doubt but the sight of such
exactors was grievous to the poor people, and not without cause: for they
never left them, till they had sucked their blood to the very marow. If any by
this word had rather understand the officers of the King himself, who had the
charge to pull down the houses adjoining to the walls; I hinder him not for
following his opinion. I rather think it likely that the Prophet speaks of the
exactors, which the conquerours set over them, whom they had vanquished, that
they might the more securely hold their own, as they say.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not see a fierce people, a people of a dark speech, that
thou can not perceive, and of a stammering tongue, that thou can not
understand.
SOme translate the word Noan, Strong; others, Impudently: but I verily think
he meant to set forth the cruelty of the Assyrians, which he presently
declares, saying; There is no communication to be had with them, for they
speak a strange language, which thou can not perceive. For there is nothing
that moves men more to mercy, then an interchangeable speech, by which one may
take knowledge of another misery. But if this be wanting, what is left to
cause an hard heart to relent? Alas, they know not what thou say, and
therefore thou can look for no more compassion from them by thy entreaties,
then if thou had to deal with wild and savage beasts. Thus the Prophet
further aggrauates the woeful estate of this people, that by contraries he
might let them perceive, how exceeding bountiful God was toward them, when he
delivered them out of so great a fear. As in another place the holy Ghost
magnifies the grace of God, in that he preserved his people in Egypt, albeit
they understood not their language. Psalm. 81.5.

Verse. 20. Look upon Zion, the City of our solemn feasts; thine eyes shall
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that cannot be removed:
and the stakes thereof can never be taken away, neither shall any of the cords
thereof be broken.
MAny read it in the vocative case; Look O Zion: but it is better to read it
as I have translated it; Look upon Zion. The Prophet propounds a promise
touching ye restauratio^ of ye Church, A promise touching the restoration of
the church
of which ye faithful were to make special account: for if the Church shake or
fall, where is their prosperity? But he shows that she shall be in such wise
restored, that he sets the thing even before their eyes; The Prophets are wont
to speak of things to come, as if they were already accomplished.
whereas indeed he speaks of a thing to come. And this he does that his words
might be ye more effectual. As if he should say; Thou shall see Zion restored,
and Jerusalem flourishing yet once again. And albeit you now see all things
confused and on an vproare, so as you think Zion is laid in the dust, yet even
in Zion shall you have a safe and quiet dwelling place.

In calling it a City of solemnities, he shows wherein the restoration of
Zion did chiefly consist; Wherein the restoration of Zion chiefly consisted.
to wit, because the people flocked thither to hear the law, to renew their
covenant with God, to call upon his name, and to offer sacrifices: for when
they were deprived of these things, they were as sheep scattered without a
shepherd, or as a body separate from the head: in a word, as a people undone,
and deprived of all joy. And therefore the captives in Babylon sorrow for
nothing so much as that they were banished from Zion, and could not enjoy the
comforts which there they were wont to find, Psalm. 137.5. It also appears
plainly enough by many places that it has bin the chief complaint of all the
faithful.

Moreover, he calls Zion, a City, because it stood in the midst of the City;
and it is also called the city of David. The compass of the whole City of
Jerusalem was very large, for there was a double wall, as we have showed you
heretofore, which is to be seen also in many other Cities. Note we here that
in the restoration of the Church consists the fulness of all blessings, In the
restoration of the church consists the fulness of all blessings.
as the only bliss which we are to desire and wish for; all other benefits
abound they never so much, want we this, are nothing: as on the contrary,
enjoy we this; we enjoy all things; for we can no way be miserable, as long as
Jerusalem, that is to the Church, florisheth. But when does she

In the next place Isaiah says, that the faithful, which a long time had been
tossed to and fro with many tempests, should now at the last have a sure and
quiet abode in the Church of God. But howsoever the people had some small taste
hereof under Hezekias, yet the full accomplishme^t thereof is performed in
Christ only: What manner of peace and quietness it is which the faithful enjoy
in this world.
understand me not, that ever since, Gods children have had safe and quiet
dwelling in this world. No, this rest is now hidden, for we are feign to
wander and stray up and down here; and are driven many times to shift from
post to pillar without any certain abode, tossed with diverse tempests and
whirlewinds, we are on every side assailed with infinite enemies, and yet these
combats must we suffer, so as we can hardly get so much as a minutes rest
here. Think not then that God promises such a peace as carnal sense can
comprehend. No, we must diue into the deepest thoughts of our hearts, reformed
by the holy Ghost in righteousness and holiness, if we will enjoy this peace
which passes understanding, as Paul says, Phil. 4.7. This peace shall we be
sure to enjoy as the Lords gift, if we remain in the true Church.

By tabernacle, and cords, he fitly and aptly describes the condition of the
Church. For he might have called it a city well founded; but he calls it a
Tabernacle, The Church rather called a Tabernacle then a City.
or Tent, which is apt in an instant to be removed from place to place. To
teach us, that although the estate of the Church seem to have little
stabilitie in it, and is subject to many changes, yet that she shall stand
steadie and immovable for all that: she shall stand against all storms and
tempests, Though the Church in this world be subject to many changes as the
Moon, yet shall she stand immovable against all storms and tempests
whatsoever, as is proved in the verse following.
against all the fury of enemies, although we think it impossible, and can no
way comprehend the reason of it. Faith alone is it that can make things so
repugnant to agree together, to wit, that there is safer dwelling in a silly
tent, then in the strongest Castles in the whole world. With this buckler must
we bear off Satan's blows, which otherwise would shake and shiuer us to pieces
as often as we see the Church not a little tottering only, but carried clean away
as with a whirlewind now hither, now thither. Who would think there were any
saftie, or place of rest to be looked for in these tempestuous whirleings? But
because the Lord will not have his servants altogether hampered in the things
of this life, that they may depend wholly upon him; this promised protection of
his ought to be more esteemed of us, then thousands of other stays besides.

Verse. 21. For surely there the mighty Lord will be unto us as a place of
floods, and broad rivers, whereby shall pass no ship with oars, neither shall
great ship pass thereby.
THe two particles Chi, and Im, stand often for a double affirmation; but they
are put here for expositiues: we may also translate, For if, but I willingly
retain that which is clearest. Well, the Prophet gives a reason why the Church
which resembles a restless pauilion, is notwithstanding steadier then Cities
well founded: to wit, because her Lord the Almighty is in the mid^es of her,
for so she shall not be shaken, as is said Psalm. 46.5. Separate God from the
Church once, and she will fall of her self though no man put his least finger
to it. For whereof does she consist, but of a sort of poor* weak and frail
creatures, yea, the frailest of all others. But when God dwells in the midst of
us, then he susteines and bears up this feeble and weak nature, and is to us
as a strong rampart, deep trenches; yea, even as walls and rivers which
compass in a City round about. Now the Prophet had respect to the situation
of Jerusalem, which had naught else but a little river, The Church invincible
as long as God has his abode in the midst of her. Content thy self with a
mean estate, for that which may be for thy advantage one while, may turn to
thy hurt at another time.
nothing so large and boisterous rivers as Babylon and other Cities had. For
they were commanded before Chap. 8.6. to content themselves with the only power
of God, and not to covet after these great floods; as if he should say, We
shall surely be invincible if God be resident amongst us, because his defense
will be a shield and buckler of proof.

The ship shall not pass.] Great rivers have this incommoditie, that they make
passage for the enemies to ariue therein with their ships sometimes more then
were to be wished: and thus that which serves at one time for a help, many
times may afterward turn to our hurt and loss. But the Lord says, he will so
serve as a river, that yet the entrance of no enemy need to be feared, in
regard of any such incommoditie. Now he mentions two sorts of vessels, to wit,
galleys, and ships of burden: and thus he shows that the enemy shall no way
prevail. From hence we may

Verse. 22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is
our King: he will save us.
The manner how God si^s in his Church. 1. 2. 3. King.
NOw the Prophet shows how God visits in the midst of his Church; to wit, by
being served and acknowledged as Judge, lawgiuer, Lawgiuer.
and King. For those who obey and submit themselves unto God, as to their King,
shall effectually feel that he is the safe keeper of their salvation: but
those that glory in this falsely, shall look for salvation from him in vain.
Submit we our necks therefore only to his yoke. Let us harken unto his
voice, and obey him: then will he for his part manifestly show himself to be
our defense and protection. But if we contemn his voice, and rebel against
his Commandments; what marvel is it, if in dangers he leave and forsake us?
The true Church then, as you may observe, is she who acknowledges God for her
King and lawgiuer. That is the true Church, which acknowledges God for her
Lawgiuer and King.
With what face then dare the Papists brag, that they are the Church of God,
seeing they reject the lawful government established by Moses, the Prophets,
and by Christ himself, to bring in their own devices and trumperies in stead
of the same? They exercise a cruel tyranny over the consciences of poor men
and women: Papists exercise a cruel tyranny over the consciences of poor men
and women.
and in taking that liberty away, which Christ has purchased, they miserably
vex the poor souls of his servants, and as much as in them lies, would draw
them into perdition with themselves.

But it is Gods office alone to sit in men's consciences, seeing he is the only
Judge and lawgiuer, whose right it is to rule us by his word. The Prophet
conioynes three words together here; Judge, Judge.
lawgiuer, and King; because it is a thing of such great importance, as ought
not slightly to be passed over. If we then suffer our selves to be governed
by his word, he will never forsake us. Thus in few words, we have the only
mean set before us how to obtain salvation.

Verse. 23. Thy cords are loosed: they could not well strengthen their mast,
neither could they spread the sail: then shall the pray be divided for a
great spoil; yea, the lame shall take the pray.
He turns his speech to the Assyrians, in whose person he also speaks to
all the enemies of the Church. Verse 21.
For having promised her such stabilitie, as shall never be shaken, he taxes
now the fond confidence wherewith the wicked are puffed up; as if they were so
well rooted, that it were impossible ever to displant them. Be it then that for
a time they built their hopes upon their riches, as upon a strong City, and
that the same was as an high wall unto them in their imagination: whilst they
were so besotted therewith, yet Isaiah prophecies their sudden destruction to
be at hand, because Gods hand vpheld them not. Now he goes on with the
similitude which he used in the 21. verse, where he compared the Church to a
very strong place, well environed with goodly rivers: by reason whereof, the
enemy could not approach unto her. Now he compares the estate of the wicked to
ships: signifying thereby their tottering foundation; notwithstanding they
played the bugbeares, and were carried with such fury and rage, as it seemed
they would bear down all before them with a breath. Although they had
furnished themselves then both with great ships and galleys to join in one the
regions, which lay far distant one from another, and so meant to make
themselves Lords of sea and land: yet should they feel that all was but vapors
and smoke. The Lord would turn over their ships, break down their masts, and
cut off their Cables, and sink all into the bottom of the sea. Let us not
altogether then stand wondering and gazing at the strength, violence, or
audaciousnes of our enemies; but let us look up unto the Lord, and wait for
that day wherein he will tumble their fury and violence upon their own heads.

Verse. 24. And none inhabitant shall say, I am sick: the people that dwell
therein, shall have their iniquity forgiven.
NOw the Prophet returns again to the Church; for the ruin which he
threatened should fall upon the Assyrians, tended not a little to the
consolation of the faithful: for what security could the Church have had,
unless God had opposed his help against the power of so many enemies, which
assailed her on every side? Having in a word then touched the state of the
wicked; to wit, that they shall all be brought to naught, because they
persecute the children of God, he aptly returns where he left, to wit, that
God will omit no occasion that may make for the good and salvation of his
Church. He says then that the Citizens of the Church shall be freed from all
incommodities, because by the favor of God, they shall enjoy an happy estate.

The second part of the verse serves for an exposition of the former: for
sins being forgiven, the graces of God shall flow in upon us without any let
or stay. Whence we gather, that all the miseries which assail us, proceeds
from no other cause then from our iniquities. Otherwise, All our miseries
proceeds from our sins. A Principle.
the reason which he yeeldes, should be improper and far fetched: but this
principle is to be holden, that all the miseries which God sends us, are so
many tokens of his wrath. Thence it follows that God must needs use us with a
fatherly respect, when our sins are pardoned; and out of his love, to give us
whatsoever is good for us.

Therefore if we desire to be eased of our troubles, What course we are to
take, that would be eased of our troubles.
keep we this order. Above all things let us seek reconciliation with God; for
the cause being removed, the effect shall forthwith vanish away. But because
our desires are not well nor rightly ordered, caring only to get away the rod
from our backs, and never consider deeply of the cause: we need not wonder if
we lie groueling still under the smart thereof. They therefore deceive
themselves which would be freed from crosses, and yet will delight in their
sins: They deceive themselves, that would be f^eed from crosses, and yet
delight in their sins.
nay, if such should be under no adversity at all, yet should they not cease
for all that to be miserable people: for what rest or tranquillity of mind can
they enjoy, whilst their consciences in every place pursues the^ with the
guilt of their iniquities?

Wherein consists true felicity then? In having obtained forgiveness of
sins, and in feeling sensibly, that all the good things we receive from God,
are so many pledges of his fatherly good will toward us. Learn we also, that
it is impossible to please him, or be accounted among the number of his
children, unless he cease to impute our sins unto us. There is nothing then
but free reconciliation alone, which can make us well pleasing in his sight;
nor nothing but that, which can make way for his love to be shed abroad in our
hearts.

Now albeit we be continually under the cross, In what the faithful find
contentment in afflictions.
yet that breaks not off the promise; for the faithful content themselves
with this comfort and consolation in the midst of all their afflictions; to
wit, that God is their God, and cease not to hold them for his dear
children, though he correct them. For being regenerate by his Spirit, they
begin to taste of that happiness which Adam inioied in full measure before his
fall: but being burdened with many sins, therefore have they need of a
continual washing: Daily defilings needs daily washings.
and yet God so tempers his bitter potions, that he supports their infirmities
still. He also lets them see that he has a care of their welfare, by
moderating the sharpness of his stripes, if he do not at once set them free.
It is not without cause then you see, that our Prophet exempts the renewed
Church from common miseries, because they carry in them a stamp of Gods curse.

Hence also we may note how childish the distinction of the Papists A childish
distinction of the Papists.
is, touching the forgiveness of the sin, but not of the punishment; as if
we were able to satisfy Gods justice. But the Prophet teaches us another
lesson, as we may easily gather from other places of their writings. But if
we had but this only text, can any man speak more plainly, then to say, that
afflictions shall cease, because iniquity is forgiven? Truly it is all one as
if it had been said; The punishment cease, because the fault is pardoned. I
grant that God sometimes afflicts the faithful, albeit he forgiues the fault:
but it is to the end that by this stroke of the rod, he might make them wiser
for the time to come; and not to exact a satisfaction of them, as if he had
been reconciled unto them by halues. But our Papists will needs have such
punishments stand for satisfactions: as if the sinner in part should thereby
redeem himself; which, we know, directly crosses the doctrine of free
remission of sins. And thus their fond inventions, both concerning
satisfactions, and Purgatory, Satisfactions and Purgatory.
falls to the ground.

It is also to be noted, that this privilege belongs only to the household of
faith: for out of the body of Christ, which is the communion of Saints, what
hope of reconciliation with God is there left? That is the reason why we are
taught in the Symbol Two Articles in the Symbol.
to say, I believe, the catholic Church, the remission of sins. For as God
loves none but those whom he finds members of his only Son; no more
bestows he his free imputation upon any, but such as are lively members of
his body. What remains to those that are without then, and are strangers from
the Commonwealth of Israel, but that they must needs perish under the curse?
Therefore to forsake the true Church, is manifestly to renounce eternal life.
To forsake the Church, is to renounce eternal life.


THE XXXIIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Come near ye nations, and hearken ye people: let the earth hear,
and all that is therein; the world, and all that proceeds thereof.
HItherunto our Prophet minding to comfort the children of the Church, has
preached as it were in the midst of their assembly. But now he directs his
speech unto the Gentiles, and takes up the same argument still, albeit after
another manner then before. For having showed that the Lord has such care over
his Church, that he will always provide means for her safety: he now also
adds that which we have seen heretofore; to wit, that he will at last take
his peoples cause in hand, and revenge their quarrel, though for a time he
has suffered the wicked to take their penniworths of them. He continues to
handle the same matter then, but by a consolation of another kind. For he
shows how severely God will plague those wicked ones, which have persecuted
his Church. The Prophet according to his office therefore, summons them by
proclamation on Gods behalf (that he might the better awaken them) to assemble
themselves together, and appear before his judgment seat. For thus the wicked
must be rouzed out of their security, who in time of prosperity despise all
admonitions; thinking that God either will not, or cannot punish their
iniquities. Yet in speaking thus vehemently, his greatest respect was to the
Church: for otherwise he found but deaf ears among the nations, they would
have profited nothing at all by it.

In this place he addresseth his speech to the Idumeans, who were like enough
proudly to despise these threatenings, and therefore he calls heaven and earth
to witness against them, saying, that the judgments which God will execute,
shall be so apparent and manifest, that not only all people, but all the
insensible creatures also shall see it: for it is the manner of the Prophets to
speak thus to the dumb creatures, when men endued with reason and
understanding, grow deaf; as we have seen before in the first Chapter.

Verse. 2. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his wrath
upon all their armies: he has destroyed them, and delivered them to the
slaughter.
BY nations, he means those enemies which bordered upon the Jews, who were
environed with many Countries: for they had as many enemies almost, as
borderers. Now albeit there were other causes of this malice, to wit, envy:
yet because they were of a contrary religion, that did wonderfully inflame
their rage against them, in regard they thereby condemned their superstitions,
which caused the Lord the rather to promise his help, as a Judge to revenge
their quarrel.

He adds, upon all their armies, because the Jews were but an handful of
people, being compared with other nations. Although these nations then boasted,
because of their great armies, and despised the small number of the Jews; yet
the Prophet affirms, that God can easily consume their multitudes, and bring
them all to naught, rather then he will hazard the loss of his little flock,
whereof he is the shepherd. And albeit he speaks of things to come, The
Prophets use the present tence when they speak of things to come, to show the
certainty of their prophecies.
yet uses he the present tence, because he might set the thing before the eyes
of the poor Jews, which were almost overwhelmed with afflictions. For, as I
have touched before, he foretells not these things in respect of the Idumeans,
who would receive no instruction; but in respect of the Jews, whom he meant to
comfort, because they were miserably vexed by their enemies.

Verse. 3. And their slain shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up
out of their bodies; and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
BY this circumstance he shows that the destruction shall be great: for if
but a few persons be slain, they bury them. But when so many are slain, that
those which be left alive, are not able to bury them, they care not much to
leave them unburied: so as the stink of the carkases, as ye know, ascends and
corrupts the air. Thus it appears that God is strong enough to root out
infinite armies. It may be also the Prophet meant to set forth this judgment of
God at large, because besides the killing of the nations, there would be shame
and disgrace brought upon them, in regard their dead were deprived of the right
and honor of burial. Afterward he amplifies the horror of the discomfiture,
in saying, that their blood shall flow from the mountains, as if they were
dissolved or molten: as when breaches of great rivers do violently descend,
and carry earth and all before them. And thus he again shows, that no means
shall be left them to escape, because the slaughter shall be no less in the
mountains, then in the plain where the battle is pitched.

Verse. 4. And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall
be folden like a book: and all their hosts shall fall, as the leaf falls
from the vine, and as it falls from the figgetree.
ISaiah uses here an excessive manner of speech, as others of the Prophets
likewise often do, to set forth the terror of Gods judgment, and deeply to
wound dull and dead hearts. For otherwise, his speech would have been of no
force, neither would it much have profited the careless and secure person. He
adds then, that the very stars themselves shall be darkened in this waste,
as if they were constrained to fall: the better to manifest the wailing which
should be there. For when the heavens are clowdie and gloomie, it seems the
clouds wrap and fold themselves up one in another, the Sun and stars begin
to grow wan and weak, and the whole frame of the heavens shake, as if they
were ready to fall. Now he shows the like shall happen at this time, because
every thing shall show signs of sorrow and lamentation.

But this must be referred to the apprehension of men, for the heavens move
not out of their place: but when the Lord manifests some tokens of his
displeasure, we are as much terrified therewith, as if the heavens were ready
to fall upon our heads, and to bury us under them. Not that such things befall
the heavens; but he speaks as it were to brazen faces, whom he was feign thus
to awake, that they might not take him as if he told them a tale of Robbin
Hood, as they say; no, you shall be so smitten with fear, says he, that you
shall imagine the very heavens are ready to fall about your ears. This is the
just reward of a drouzie conscience, The reward of a benumbed conscience.
to wit, that wicked persons which cannot be touched with any fear of God,
shall be afraid of their own shadow, and shall as much tremble at the falling
of a leaf, as if the Sun and stars fell from heaven. And thus he also
notes a woeful change, which shall trouble and mingle all things together.

Verse. 5. For my sword shall be drunken in the heavens: behold, it shall come
down upon Edom, even upon the people of my Or, discomfiture, in judgment.
curse, to judgment.
HE says that the sword of the Lord is drunk with blood, as when one has
made a great slaughter, swords are bathed in blood. And that the speech might
have the more force, My sword.
he brings in the Lord himself uttering of it. Note.
But why, says he, it is in heaven? For God calls not men up thither to
punish them, but executes his judgments here below in earth, in heaven,
howsoever they give themselves to all iollitie on earth, and go on in their bad
courses sword wherewith they should be slain was already bathed in blood in
God his account, even when he is only determined to punish them, which he will
assuredly perform, notwithstanding all their prosperity.

Genesis 18.20.
Sodom burnt already in Gods account, whilst she gave her self to
drunkenness, dissolutions, and execrable villainies: as much may likewise be said
of all other wretched people which lie fettered in Satan's chains, to be slain
by the sword of the Lord of hosts, even then when they wallow themselves most
in their voluptuousnes. Let us not therefore stand gazing upon the prosperity
of the wicked, whilst they enjoy more then their hearts can wish; neither let
us linger after the same: for albeit no man molest them, yet are they not far
off from ruin. Why so? poor souls! God is against them.

But our Prophet names the Idumeans here, who were enemies to Gods people,
notwithstanding they were of affinity with them, and bare the stamp of the
same religion, for they were children of Esau, Genesis 36.8.
and of the stock of Abraham, as was said before. As at this day, what greater
enemies have we then the Papists, Papists the greatest enemies the Church of
God has.
which are baptized with the same baptism that we are, and make profession of
the name of Christ? and yet they furiously persecute us, and would have us
utterly rooted out, because we condemn their superstitions, and Idolatries.
Even such were the Idumeans, and therefore the Prophet culled them out from
amongst all the rest of the enemies of the Church.

In calling them the people of his discomfiture, he confirms the former
sentence: for it is as much as if the Lord had said, It will be but in vain
for you to think you can escape my hands, seeing you are already ordained to
destruction. For by this phrase of speech he pronounces definitive sentence
upon them, as being already condemned in his heavenly decree, and that no
less, then if at that present they had been put apart, and cut away from off
the land of the living.

And lest it might seem that God did them any wrong, he adds, in judgment:
for there is nothing unto which men are more prone then to accuse God of
cruelty: so as the greatest part can not be brought to acknowledge him their
competent Judge, especially if he chastise them somewhat severely. Isaiah
therefore shows, that this slaughter must needs be mixed with equity, seeing
God never xceeds in overmuch severity.

Verse. 6. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood: it is made fat with the
fat, and with the blood of the lambs, and the goats, with the fat of the
kidneys of the rams: for the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
slaughter in the land of Edom.
HE goes on still with the same argument, but by another description, which
amplifies the matter greatly: wherein his drift is to rouse up the wicked who
were wont to gibe and geere at all admonitions, as we have said before. Is it
not needful then that Gods judgments should be disciphered out in lively
tables to wound the hearts of the enemies, and to animate the minds of the
faithful with an holy pride, in assurance that their foes can not any way
shift it for all their stoutnes and rebellion, but that they must be brought to
the shambles like beasts as soon as God does but hold up his finger, as they
say?

He compares their destruction to the sacrifices: for as they were wont to
sacrifice beasts for the service and honor of God, so should he be glorified by
the slaughter of this people. The Prophet then confirms that here which he
has said before touching the judgment: for when the Lord executes Justice,
Verse. 5.
his glory shines thereby: men reverence and worship him, so as the
destruction of the wicked you see is rightly compared to sacrifices, which
were a part of his service.

Indeed there was no great pleasure in beholding the sacrifices: for the
cutting their throats, the gushing out of the warm blood, and the stinck of
the smoke served rather to drive men away; yet the honor and glory of God
shined even in these things. So, this destruction of the Idumeans no doubt was
an horrible spectacle to look upon, and made no such goodly show, as to bring
one in love with the sight of it: but that the faithful even in this respect,
might learn to sanctify the name of God, they were commanded to lift up their
eyes to heaven, because God in executing such a vengeance, did as it were erect
and set up so many altars for his sacrifices. And because they had unjustly
afflicted the Church of God, and had cruelly entreated his chosen, without all
compassion or humanity, Isaiah^ pronounces that the offering up of their
blood, was a sacrifice acceptable and of a sweet smelling savor unto God,
because it is the execution of his judgments.

By lambs and goats, under a figure he means the people which should be
sacrificed: and in alluding to the sundry kinds of offerings, he comprehends
all the people, as well small as great: to show, that when God shall take his
enemies in hand to punish them, he will not let so much as any one of them
escape. He mentions Bozrah, which was the chief and head City of the Country,
in which the greatest slaughter should be executed: and in the next place
adds the land of Edom, through which this discomfiture should pass, without
sparing any corner of it.

Verse. 7. And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the Or, calves.
heifers with the bulls: and their land shall be drunken with blood; and
their dust is made fat with fatness.
THis verse is annexed to the former, for it is no new thing he speaks of; but
he continues the same figure, amplifying what he had said touching goats and
lambs: to which, he not only adds calves, but wild beasts also. The sum
is, that Gods vengeance is bounden, so as he will spare neither age nor estate;
for he will put to the sword as well the cruel and proud Giants, with their
vain brags, as the feeble weakling: as if one prepared a sacrifice, in which,
beasts of all sorts were mingled one with another. Neither should any think it
absurd, that lambs are coupled with cruel beasts in this sacrifice: for by the
word lambs in this place, he means not harmlesnesse and innocence; but the
poor and weak are called so by comparison, because their mean condition held
them under some appearance of modesty.

Now albeit it may seem strange that the Lord should thus smite his enemies,
without sparing of any at all; notwithstanding by the word sacrifice, he shows
he does nothing but that which is just and equal, and for which he ought to be
praised. And indeed whosoever shall examine this fact, shall be enforced to lay
his hand upon his mouth, and to confess, that God had just occasion to cut
them off all, not one excepted. The like end are all reprobates to look for;
namely, to be sacrificed by the hands of those that are as wicked as
themselves. Some take the word Abbirim, for Strong: I had rather follow them
which translate it Bulls, it being so taken, Psalm. 50. Albeit by Bulls here,
under a figure, he means the strong and mighty.

Verse. 8. For it is a day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense
for the judgment of Zion.
THis verse must be joined to the former; for it contains the end why the Lord
corrected the Idumeans so severely, namely, because he meant now to maintain
and revenge the quarrel of his people. For had he not added this reason, that
which he spoke before, might have seemed not only dark, but improper. For it
would be but a flitting and uncertain knowledge of things, unless From
particular threatenings, we may descend to the general.
Now that which is here said of the Idumeans, ought to be applied to all the
enemies of the Church; for under this one particular, our Prophet comprehended
them all: and for this cause are we to cheer up and refresh our hearts with
this consolation in time of adversity, and to sustain the injuries which are
done us, which God shall revenge himself. For is he called the auenger, think
you, for naught? See Psalm. 94.1. It is not our Prophets meaning then alone to
say, that God has power sufficient to punish the wicked when he thinks good,
but also that he

But the two words, day and year, is to be noted: for thereby he gives us to
understand, that God sleeps not in heaven, whilst he seems to wink at the
enemies cruelty; but only deferres to punish, till the appointed time; to the
end the faithful might learn in the mean space, Luke. 21.19
to possess their souls in patience, and suffer him to govern all things
according to his incomprehensible wisdom.

Verse. 9. And the rivers thereof shall be turned into pitch; and the dust
ehereof into brimstone; and the land thereof shall be burning pitch.
THis whereof he speaks, has relation to that which went before; in which he
adds a more ample declaration of this destruction. We told you erewhile why
the Prophets do lively represent and set forth Gods judgments in such plain
tables as it were; even to bring men upon the scaffold, thereby constraining
men to take knowledge of those things, which otherwise they would neither see
nor comprehend; and if they did, yet they would utterly forget them as soon as
they had seen or apprehended them. But besides this, we must note that the
Prophets spoke of secret and hidden things, which seemed altogether incredible:
for many thought the Prophets bolted out things at a venture in these matters.
There needed many confirmations therefore: and such are those that he uses in
this, and other the like places.

The sum then is, that he speaks of such an horrible change, as shall
utterly waste the land of Edom. Moreover, he alludes to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah: Genesis 19.24. which is a form of teaching much used among
the Prophets: for in this ruin we have (as Saint Jude Jude 7.
tells us) a perpetual example of Gods wrath against the reprobate: neither
is it without cause that the Prophets do so often renew the remembrance
thereof, for they would have all men learn thereby to tremble at Gods
judgments. Hitherunto appertains that which is said in the verse following.

Verse. 10. It shall not be quenched night nor day: the smoke thereof shall go
up evermore: it shall be desolate from generation to generation: none shall
pass through it for ever.
QVestionlesse the Prophet uses an excessive manner of speech; but the Lord is
constrained thus to deal with us, to awaken our dulnes; for an usual form of
speech would not move or affect us. In saying then, that the wrath of the Lord
against the Idumeans, resembles a fire that never goes out, he takes from them
all hope of pardon: for as they ceased not to provoke him, so should they find
him a severe Judge unto them. And Malachi notes it as a sign of the
reprobation of this people, that the Lord was angry with them for ever: Malachi
1.4. The opposition must be supplied, because Gods children always receive
some consolation, lest they should be discouraged. But we need not stand long
upon this matter: it suffices that we have the drift and scope of the Prophets
words.

Verse. 11. But the pelican and the hedgehog shall possess it, and the great
owl and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line
of vanity, and the stones of emptiness.
AS touching these creatures which Isaiah here mentions, there are diverse
opinions: neither are the Hebrew expositors themselves well resolved touching
the same: yet we may perceive the Prophets drift well enough; to wit, that he
sets out the face of a Country laid waste and desolate. For doubtless he
speaks of hideous monsters in nature, which come not among men, neither are
they acquainted with them. And this he does the rather to describe the horror
of this destruction. The first member of the verse then is clear enough of it
self: but there is some difficulty in the second. Some expound these words,
lines of vanity, by an A figure, tha^ has a contrary meaning.
antiphrase, and understand it of the Jews: but I rather think it should be
referred to the Idumeans, as the former words are. And to the end we may the
better know that this is the Prophets true meaning, the same words are found in
the first Chapter of Malachi, verse, 4, 5. who came long after our Prophet: in
which place, he confirms that which Isaiah here denounces. Though Edom say,
we are impouerished, but we will return and build the desolate places; yet
says the Lord of hosts, they shall build, but I will destroy it; and they
shall call them, the border of wickedness, and the people with whom the Lord
is angry for ever. And your eyes shall see it, and ye shall say, The Lord will
be magnified upon the borders of Israel. Malachi then plainly expounds that
which Isaiah spoke somewhat darkly in his time: Isaiah says, the Idumeans
shall build in vain: the other, that they shall spread the lines of vanity:
for it is all one in effect as if he had said, that the master-workmen (as
Masons and Carpenters) shall but lose their labor in going about to build the
Cities again: for men of such craft, use small lines and plummets to measure
their works by. Those then that should take in hand the restoration of Edom,
should bestow cost in vain: for they shall be so confounded, that they shall
not know at what end to begin, nor where to make an end. And albeit God uses
to mitigate the miseries which he sends upon others, by some consolation in the
end, yet they must look for none at all.

Hence we may collect a very profitable doctrine, which is this: do we at any
time see that cities heretofore ruinated, are now built again and brought into
some good fashion? Therein we may behold a singular note of Gods favor:
Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it: Psalm.
127.1.
for the labor of Masons and handicrafts men would have been to no purpose,
unless the Lord had put his hand both to the beginning, midst, and end
thereof; for what can prosper, unless he guide things from the laying of the
first stone, to the last: and likewise, unless he keep them under his
protection? Men may well disburse great sums of money then, yet in vain:
yea, they shall vex themselves, without bringing to pass, unless he be
pleased to govern the business, and to power out his blessing upon that which
they take in hand. Pro. 10.20.
His only blessing therefore makes rich* and that alone is it which vpholds us
in any estate or condition. For which cause it is said, that his hands built
Jerusalem: Psalm. 47.2. Now as touching that which Isaiah here threatens against
the Idumeans, the holy Ghost pronounces the like elsewhere, against the house
of Ahab: meaning that it should be raced even with the ground: 2. King. 21.13.

Verse. 12. The Nobles thereof shall call to the Kingdom, and there shall be
none: and all the Princes shall be as nothing.
THis text is diversely expounded: but I will not trouble you with the reciting
of the expositions; for in refuting of them, I should make my self more work
then needs. That which is most probable, is this, They shall call the Nobles
of Edom to rule, but it shall be in vain: As if he should say, In so miserable
an estate there shall none be found that will willingly bear rule, or take
upon him the government of state-matters. Chap. 3.6.7.
This sentence is read elsewhere, yea, we have had the same in a manner before,
albeit somewhat differing in words. Now this manner of speech leads me to think,
that the Prophet meant closely to tax the pride of this people, who were waxen
ouerhaughtie, by reason of their peace and abundance. For as much then as the
Idumeans being seated upon high mountains grew proud, the Prophet shows, that
they should be brought down with shame, so as none of the Nobility should be
left, neither should there remain any man of great place: for when kingdoms
are ruinated, all government is also abolished. The people are as a body
without an head, neither is there any distinction of persons, or places.

Thus then by way of scorn he says, that these brave Nobles which were so
highly exalted, shall be as Lords without Lordships, Lords without Lordships.
which appears yet better by the second member where it is added for
expositions sake, that they shall be brought to nothing. The sum is, that
Edom shall resemble a body shattered in pieces, in which shall appear naught
else but an horrible confusion of all things. Oh fearful curse of God! What
do men differ from beasts, I pray you, if they want the execution of good
laws? Is their condition any whit better? No surely. The beasts may well be
without any head or governor, because they will not offer cruelty to those of
their own kind: but Lord, what is more cruel then man, if he be not kept
under! Is he not carried an end by his passions as a fury of hell to run out
into all dissolutions?

Verse. 13. And it shall bring forth thorns in the palaces thereof, nettles and
thistles in the strong holds thereof, and it shall be an habitation for
Dragons, and a court for Ostriches.
HE continues on his speech, wherein he sets forth an Image of an horrible
desolation: to wit, when beautiful houses and palaces are razed even with the
ground; or, so laid on heaps, that men can have no use of them: being rather
fit for thorns, briars, and nettles to grow in, then for dwelling places,
which is far worse, then if they had bin converted into meadow or errable
ground. But see how the Lord punishes the pride of such as delight in building
of sumptuous houses, How God punishes the pride of such as delight in building
sumptuous houses.
and gorgeous palaces; they think to make their names immortal, as it were:
but God drives them out, and makes nests therein for birds; and dens for wild
beasts: and thus they serve as perpetual ensigns of their vain ambition, who
by such buildings thought to make themselves garlands of their own renoume and
excellency. Men's places then are inhabited of such beasts, The houses of men
inhabited by beasts, answerable to their natures that dwelt in them.
who represent the nature and dispositions of those which built and dwelt in
those so goodly houses. Now this ouerturning of order is also a woeful sign of
Gods wrath; to wit, when the earth which was created for the use of man, is
co^streined to receive inhabitants of other kinds, A note of Gods curse in this
change.
and to spew out their right and lawful owners: but by means thereof no doubt
it shall be purged of that filthiness wherewith it was in times past defiled.

Verse. 14. There shall meet also Ziim and Iim, and the Satyr shall cry to his
fellow, and the Skritch-owle shall rest there, and shall find for her self a
quiet dwelling.

15. There shall the Owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather them
under her shadow: there shall the Vultures also be gathered every one with her
make.


SOme affirm that these beasts are Fayries, others, Hobgoblins; others,
Satyrs: neither do the Hebrews themselves agree about the proper signification
of their names. But what need we stand much about the matter? It suffices us
that we have the Prophets scope and drift. He meant to decipher out an
horrible desolation. As if he should say, Idumea shall be laid so wast, that it
shall be left without inhabitants: The like was threatened before Chap.
13.21.22. against Babell.
for in stead of them it shall be replenished with wild beasts. See here the
just reward of those vaineglorious fools, which built such sumptuous palaces
to continue the perpetual memory of their names forsooth. And here by the way
also is a prediction of the chastisement wherewith this cursed nation was to be
scourged for their cruelty, in regard they wholly bent themselves to seek
the overthrow and destruction of their brethren and neighbors.

Now howsoever it be doubtful whether the Prophet speaks here of Ladies of
the Fayries or Elfes.
Fates, A Skritch-owle, or an unlucky kind of bird.
Hobgoblins, or Gods of the wods, having the head of a man, and body of a
goat.
Satyrs, yet all agree that these words signify such beasts as have the faces
of men. We also see how cunning the Devil is by diverse illusions, ghosts, and
fearful apparitions; by sounds, and hidious noyses, to inchant desolat
places: but of this we have spoken in the 13. Chap. Now this vice which God
has so sharply punished in one people, is almost common to all: for who is he
that builds such stately houses, but the price thereof is wrung out of the
poor? sometimes by violence and extorsion; Sumptuous buildings for the most
part reared up by extortions.
sometimes by continual molestations; so as the very mortar, stones, and wood,
are replenished with blood, in Gods sight: Therefore the stone shall cry out
of ye wall (says Abacuck Abacuk. 2.11.
) and the beam shall answer unto it, Woe to him that builds a Town with
blood, etc. Let us not wonder at these strange judgments and horrible changes
then, when we see that ambition draws with it these wicked extortions and
robberies, but rather let us seriously therein consider Gods just revenging
hand.

Verse. 16. Seek in the book of the Lord, and read: none of these shall
fail, none shall want her make: for his mouth has commanded, and his very
spirit has gathered them.
BY the book of the Lord, some understand this prophecy; as if he stirred
them up to read it diligently: and so it is, as if he should say, not one
title of it shall fail, when the time is expired: as he adds by and by after.
Others expound it more subtillie of Gods eternal decree, thus; Search whether
he has not so ordained it: but this exposition is too far fetched. The word
Law expounded.
I expound it of the law it self therefore, which by way of excellency is
called the book of the Lord, because out of it, the Prophets drew all their
doctrine, as we have often told you heretofore. That the novelty of such a
fact then, should not make them reject this prophecy, Isaiah says, that they
were advertised of it long before: and thus he privily taxes their
incredulity, for remaining so gross conceited, as to esteem this thing
altogether new and unheard of.

Now he has good reason to bring them to the law, wherein God so often
declares that he will have care of his people, and will punish the wicked sort.
Seeing Moses therefore spoke of it so long ago, the Prophet says, that none
ought to be so incredulous touching the truth of his prophecy, seeing he
tells them of no strange matters, but only confirms that which Moses has
long since testified and taught. This I take to be the native sense of our
Prophet, who by these words meant to fortify the Jews, to Moses had testified
(without cause of blame) that God would always protect and defend his people.
Isaiah therefore preuents these inconveniences, in willing them to ask of
Moses touching the truth hereof, because he was reverenced of all, in respect
of his authority.

None of them, to wit, of the beasts: for the Hebrews use these two words
Isch, and Ishah, not only when they speak of men and women, but also of males
and females of all kinds. For his mouth. He confirms that which he said
before; for albeit Gods works be manifest enough, yet he makes us comprehend
them better by his mouth, that is to say, by his word, that thereby we may
have a clearer sight of them: and this is the right viewing of the works of
God, to wit, when with a quick eye we behold them in the clear glass of his
word. For we are too bold and presumptuous, and give our selves the raines too
much, unless we be guided by this heavenly doctrine, as it were by
torch-light. The pride and ouerweening of men therefore is here to be
repressed, Men err, because they sea^ch not the Scriptures. Mar. 12
who will call into question, and censure the judgments of God and all his
works, without being ruled by his word: for if they would seek in his book,
and ask at his mouth, we should see greater piety and religion in them then
there is.

Now the Prophet in speaking of the mouth of the Lord, meant to confirm that
which was said before touching this judgment; the reason is, because nothing
can fail of that which issues out of his sacred mouth. Isaiah affirms it to
be a thing impossible then, that that which is once decreed of God, which he
also has commanded him to publish in his name, should ever be called back by
any means. And thus with this buckler, he repulseth all the difficulties
which easily arises, as often as the promises of God do surmount our reach.

I grant he sometimes threatens with condition, as he threatened Abimelec, Genesis
12.17. and Pharaoh, Genesis 20.3. and the Ninevites, Jonah. 1.2. whom afterward
he pardoned, because they repented: but if he have once determined to punish
men indeed, he will show by the effects, that he is both true of his word,
and able to perform it, as well as he is able to deliver his in the time of
need.

This the Prophet expresses again when he makes the mouth and spirit or
breath to consent together: for albeit the spirit of the mouth and the word,
do often signify one and the same thing; and that the Hebrews are wont to
repeat one thing twice: yet here he makes an elegant allusion unto the breath,
from which the words proceed, and of which they be formed: as if he should say;
this prophecy shall not want his efficacy, because God, who by his voice has
commanded the brute heasts to possess Idumea, will also draw them thither with
his only breath.

Now he speaks of a secret inspiration. What marvel is it then, if all
beasts assemble themselves together at Gods first beck; as we see it came to
pass in the deluge; yea even in the creation of the world; when Moses
testifies, that at Gods commandment all beasts came by and by unto man, to
subject themselves under his government? Genesis 2.19. and 7.15. The bruit beasts
would have been subject to man, if man himself had been subject to God.
And would they not think you have been subject and obedient to him still, if
he himself had not been deprived of this authority by his own rebellion? But
being now revolted from God, the beasts forthwith began to band themselves
against him, and to offer violence unto him.

Verse. 16. And he has cast the lots for them, and his hand has divided it
unto them by line: they shall
smite the ears in speaking, and should not therewithal cause the same to
sink into our hearts, all would be to no purpose. In that he attributes this
efficacy unto the word then, let us also therein know that it is himself from
whom that power proceeds, that so it might not be spoken fruitleslie, but might
work inwardly upon the conscience, The Lord works not upon all, nor at all
times, inwardly upon men's consciences.
not at all times, nor upon all, but then, when it pleases him thus to work
by the secret power of his holy spirit.

Hence we gather, that by the same word we be brought into the right way of
Gods service, for without it we should remain ignorant, all our reason would
fail, and not only stagger, but our infidelity would make us become wholly
brutish. It is more then need then that the Lord succor us this way, that our
fears being appeased, and our weakness strengthened, we may be fitted to walk
on in our christian course. For if we had these words Fear not, Behold your
God, well fixed in our hearts, How to be eased of fainting fits.
all faintings would soon vanish. Men no sooner feel that God is near unto
them, but they cast away fear, or at the least so resist it, that they are not
overcome of it. In nothing be careful says S. Paul, for the Lord is at hand,
Philip. 4.5. and 6. of which sentence we have entreated at large elsewhere. It
seems also that the Apostle to the Hebrews alludes to this place, Chap. 12.3.
and 13. where having forbidden them to be grieved or discoraged with Gods
correction, he recites the words of our Prophet, and applies this sentence to
all the faithful, that so they might stir up themselves unto perseverance,
and constantly to hold out unto the end, in regard they were to suffer many
assaults.

Neither is it superfluous that the Prophet adds your God: for if we be not
assured that he is ours, his coming shall bring us terror rather then comfort.
Therefore he sets not God forth here in his Majesty, which casts down the
pride of the flesh; but his grace which comforts the afflicted and weak. We
see then it is not without cause that he thus adornes God with this title,
namely, that he is the protector of the faithful, to retain them in safety.

vengeance is threatened against the wicked, and the enemies of his Church; so
that albeit it be terrible unto the^, yet it shall bring consolation to the
faithful. This is the cause why he adds, that he will come to save: for
otherwise the Jews might have replied, What benefit shall the destruction of
the enemy bring us? What shall we be the better for it? Should we delight in
their calamities? This is the cause I say why he says expreslie, that he will
turn this vengeance and recompense (touching their enemies) unto their
salvation: The punishment of the wicked is alwa^es joined with the salvation of
the faithful.
for the salvation of the godly is always joined with the punishment of the
wicked. We showed in the seventh Chapter verse. 4. how the faithful are
delivered from perplexed cares by this favor of God, and by the hope of his
defense. For the present; let us observe, that God is ready armed with
vengeance, to the end his children may learn to rest upon his help, and not to
think him idle in the heavens: this is the cause of these repetitions, for
infidelity has gotten such fast rooting in us, that is not plucked up by and
by.

In the end of ye verse there may be a double reading, to wit, either that God
shall come with a recompense, or, that he will come with the recompense of God;
choose whether of the two you like best, for the sense is all one.
Notwithstanding if you read Elohim in the genetiue case, Recompense shall be
called the recompense of God, because it properly belongs unto him, that so
the faithful may know assuredly that he is no less a rewarder, then God.

Verse. 5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the
deaf opened.

6. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the dumb man's tongue shall
sing: for in the wilderness shall waters Or, be dug.
break out, and rivers in the desert.


HE speaks still of the promise touching the restoration of the Church, that
he might comfort the hearts of the faithful who should be sharply assaulted
with the grievous calamities of which he had foretold. Now seeing Christ is the
fountain from whence this restoration springs, we must of necessity still
have recourse unto him, if we will have the right understanding of that which
Isaiah says in this place, for by him alone it is in deed that we are begotten
again to the hope of the heavenly life. Now it is not unlike but our Prophet
alludes to the prophecy which we have seen in the 29. Chapter verse. 9.10.
where he threatens the Jews with a fearful blinding of their eyes, and an
hardening of their hearts, for which cause he here promises that at Christ's
coming men's minds shall be enlightened and cleared by regeneration, whereas
before they sat in darkness.

There is great force in the word Then: for thence we may gather, that being
out of Christ we are dumb, blind, and lame: Being out of Christ, we are
spirituallie blind, dumb, and lame.
in a word, void of all ability to perform any thing that is good; but Christ
renues us by his spirit, that in him we may recover our true health.

By tongue, eyes, ears, and feet, he means all the faculties of our souls,
which in themselves are so corrupted, that we can not draw thence so much as a
good thought; till we be made new creatures by the benefit of Christ: for our
eyes Eyes.
can not see the truth, our ears Ears.
can not understand it, neither can our feet Feet.
walk in it, until we be united unto Christ. The understandings of men indeed
are very accute in apprehe^ding mischief, We are naturally prone and wise to
do evil, but to do well we have no knowledge. Iere. 4.22.
their tongues eloquent and prompt unto slanders, periuries, lying, and vain
speech, their hands and fingers but too nimble to theft and violence, their
feet to shedding of blood: in a word, all the powers both of soul and body
not only inclined, but also set on fire to do wickedly. But come we to the
performance of that which is good, every finger is a thumb, as they say. Is it
not more then needful then that we be reformed by the power of God, that
thence we may begin to understand, comprehend, speak, and put in execution
those things which God has called us unto? 1. Cor. 12.3.
for none can so much as say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

This reformation then we see proceeds only from the grace of Christ: those
therefore which are converted unto him, do recover new strength, whereas
before they were wholly unfruitful, and as good as dead. For out of him, we
are either deprived of all good things; or else they are so corrupted in us,
that they can be applied to no right use, but are rather profaned by our
abusing of them. Mat. 1.11.5. and 15.3.
Jesus Christ has both fully testified and taught the truth of this point,
when he gave speech to the dumb, sight to the blind, legs to the lame and
impotent: but that which he did to the body, was but a glimpse of that which he
works much more abundantly and powerfully in our souls.

In saying that the waters shall be dug out, he adds other benefits
wherewith the faithful are enriched soon after the establishing of Christ his
Kingdom: as if he should say; You shall not need to fear any want, after
you be reconciled unto God through Christ; for plentiful and perfect felicity
streams from him upon us. But these things the Prophet sets before us under
borrowed speeches.

We are poor and beggarly, ^ill God enrich us with Christ's benefits.
First, he says the waters are dug. For whereas all things were barren
before, now there should be great abundance. How poor and beggarly are we
then, unless God, for the love which he bears to Jesus Christ, powers out
his blessing upon us; which Jesus only brings with him from his heavenly
Father, and then imparts it to the members of his body. I deny not but the
wicked thrive wonderfully in outward abundance; but all is accursed of God;
because they are out of Christ: from whom only flows that true and saving
influence of all riches. Truly it were much better to wish death, Death is
rather to be wished, then that abundance with which we must needs swallow Gods
curse.
rather then the abundance of wine and oil, with which we must needs swallow
the curse of God. When Christ then shall begin to manifest himself, then
shall rivers and waters flow forth, to the healthful use of the faithful.

Verse. 7. And the dry ground shall be as a poole, and the thirsty as springs
of water: in the habitations of dragons, where they lay, shall be a place for
reeds and rushes.
HE confirms the former sentence; to wit, that Christ shall come to satisfy
his chosen with abundance of all good things. Why so? Because waters shall
issue and flow out of the dry ground. But we must remember what I said
erewhile; to wit, that the Prophet here desciphers out unto us, an image as it
were of everlasting happiness: for howsoever this outward change appeared not
visible to the eye at Christ's coming; yet Isaiah not without good cause
affirms, that under his government, all things shall be fruitful: for he
has said before, that without him all things are accursed unto us. This whole
world will be but as a parched heath and wilderness, The world but a
wilderness without Christ. Psalm. 67.9, 7. Psalm. 84.11.
where lions, dragons, and wild beasts range after their pray, until the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ be erected and set up amongst us: let it be
once established; the faithful shall feel no want at all.

The Lord did set his seal to the truth of this doctrine, when he delivered his
people out of Babylons captivity. Yet we are to seek the accomplishment of
this prophecy in Jesus Christ, who sets all things that are out of frame, in
their perfect estate again. For that deliverance was but a dark shadow of
this; and yet we are not to seek the full accomplishment of this promise in
this world; neither, because as our blessedness consists only in hope, so
must we frame our minds to wait for the same till the last day; As our full
blessedness consists in hope, so must we patiently wait for the same till the
last day.
when we shall be put into the full possession of our happiness, which now
for the present is hidden as it were from us. It suffices us that God gives us
some sweet taste thereof in these our conflicting days, that with the greater
affection we might learn daily to aspire to that full felicity which is
reserved for us in the heavens.

Verse. 8. And there shall be a path way, and the way shall be called holy:
and the polluted shall not pass by it: for he Or, shall go.
shall be with them, and walk in the way, and the fools shall not err.
THe Prophet promises the Jews here, that they shall be set at liberty to
return home again into their country, to the end that being afterward carried
captive into Babylon, they might not imagine it to be a perpetual banishment.
And yet me thinks this sentence should extend it self further. For as
heretofore he promised them abundance and store of blessings, Verse. 7.
where there was nothing but barrenness; so he says now, that the place where
none dwelt, shall be inhabited and frequented by multitudes. To be short, that
Judea shall be in such league and amity with other nations, that one of them
shall mutually pass to the other without any danger at all: for where places
are not inhabited, what traffic can men have there? You shall see no man
pass to and fro there. He says then it shall come to pass that the Jews
shall have egresse and regresse (as we use to speak) to traffic with others,
after they are come home, and shall be settled in their Country.

But it is not without cause our Prophet adds, that the way shall be holy. For
where there is much concourse of people, vices and corruptions have their
swinge on every side. How could it be avoided then, but these great troops
must needs pollute the land, yea, and infect one another with a mutual
contagion. The Prophets meaning is then, that not only the land, but the minds
of men should be purged and renewed by the benefit of Christ, that both the one
and the other which in times past were wont to be profaned by their uncleanness,
should now be sanctified. And yet we must keep that in mind which I have
touched before, to wit, that the Jews whose way shall be made holy, should
return into their country again to serve their Redeemer therein. As if he
should say, The land shall be purged from those filthy sinkes which in times
past were in it, that it may be inhabited by the true servants of God.

He ads also a more ample exposition when he says, that no polluted shall
pass by this land now hallowed by the Lord for his children. As if he had
said, God will so separate the faithful from the profane, that they shall no
more be mingled one with another: and this doubtless was to be esteemed as one
of the principal blessings that the Church received. But this is not
accomplished in this life, for hypocrites and contemners of God intrude
themselves pell mell into the Church, and many times hold great places in it:
and yet we may see some sign of Gods favor this way, when he takes off the
scumme from his Church by diverse means; The Church shall not be fully purged
till the last day.
only we must wait for the full purgation of it until the last day: yea, even
the servants of God themselves, who are regenerated by the work of his holy
spirit, are yet compassed about with many corruptions: for albeit the Lord has
begun to sanctify them, yet it shall not be perfected in this life: their old
man is not wholly mortified, but only tamed and repressed to give way for
obedience to the new. Now because the Lord lives and reigns in them, and
subdues their lusts, they are called holy, in respect of ye principal part of
regeneration in them. The elect are called Saints, in regard the principal
part is regenerated.


The expositors turn the end of the verse diversely, where he says, he shall
go with them: for some translate, They shall walk that way, and shall not
err after they have been accustomed to walk in it, no, not they which knew it
before others. This way shall be for the children of Israel, those which walk
in it shall not err though they be foolish. But me thinks the pronowne
demonstratiue he, may better be referred unto God. As if the Prophet had said,
God shall go before you to prepare the way, and the scope of the text also
requires it to be so understood: for it was not enough for them to have an open
way, unless God went first before to direct his chosen. Our Prophet then
magnifies this inestimable grace, by bringing in the Lord walking with-his
people: for if he show us not the way we shall always err, being of our selus
wholly addicted to vanity. Nay, though the way be plain, and be before our
eyes; yet can not we discern it from that which is crooked: and although we
have made some good entrance, yet will our folly carry us hither and thither
out of it by and by.

But our Prophet tells us, that we shall not need to fear missing of the way
when we follow God, whilst he goes before us; seeing it pleases him to take
this office upon him. It is very likely also, that he alludes to the history
of the first deliverance, because God then led his people in the day under the
cloud, and in the night under a pillar of fire, Exodus 12.21. Therewithal he
also shows how needful it is that God should govern us: he also taxes us
all of folly (be we never so wise in our own conceit) when he adds that the
fools shall err no more: for God lets them wander by crooked paths, which
think themselves wise enough to be their own guides: if we therefore desire
to keep him in the way with us, let us acknowledge that we stand in need of
his direction. In the mean while he offers us a good recompense when he
promises that all such as forsaking their own counsels shall be content to
follow him, shall not err in any thing though they be none of the wisest. And
yet his meaning is not that the faithful shall remain fools still after the
Lord has taken them by the hand: but he shows what they were, before God
vouchsafed to lead them the right way.

Verse. 9. There shall be no lion, nor noisome beasts shall ascend by it,
neither shall they be found there, that the redeemed may walk.
HE adds yet another favor of God, and that is, that the people shall be
delivered from all dangers, though they walked through the deserts. Before,
Chap. 30.6.
among other curses of God he put this; that wild beasts should meet the Jews
in all places which way soever they travailed: but now, being received into
favor, they should be assailed neither by lions, nor any other cruel beasts,
because God would chase them away, that his redeemed might pass without hurt
or danger. For albeit they had liberty to return, yet they might well meet
with many impediments in the way, and therefore he says, The Lord shall remove
all anoyances that might any way stop their passage. He that begins a good
work, will accomplish it unto the day of Christ Philip. 1.6.
Hence we gather a very necessary doctrine, to wit, that the Lord not only
begins the work of our salvation, but co^tinues it unto the very end, lest
otherwise his grace might be frutelesse and vain in us. First then he opens
the way to give us entrance. We ought to make use of this doctrine for the
whole course of our life.
We must make use of these four points every day. For albeit our hearts be set
(whilst we live in this world) to aspire to our inheritance which is in
heaven, yet Satan lays many stumbling blocks before us, and we are environed
on every side with infinite dangers, but the Lord who has set us in this way,
and goes before us, leading us by the hand, will never leave us in the midway,
but will fully perfect that unto the end which he has begun in us by his
Spirit. We may also observe, that the mouths of ravening and wild beasts are
musled so by the grace of God, they cannot hurt us, nor exercise their cruelty
upon us; according as it is said in Hose. 2.18. I will make a covenant for you
with the beasts of the field, and with the birds of the air.

Verse. 10. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion
with praise: and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain
joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
THe Prophet confirms the former doctrine; to wit, that nothing shall hinder
the Lord from working the full redemption of his people; because he has
decreed it. He calls them the redeemed of the Lord: first, that he might
provoke them to the consideration of his power: secondly, that they should not
measure the promise of their return, by looking unto humane helps. Moreover,
he shows that they shall come to Zion. Thereby giving them assurance, that
God will not bring them out of Babylon, to leave them in the way. Hence we
learn, that we cannot enter into Zion, which is the Church, until God have
redeemed us: We cannot enter into the Church till God have redeemed us.
for in this example of the ancient people, we have a pattern set before us,
in which we may see that no man is delivered from under the tyranny of the
devil (whose vassals we are all of us by nature) until God have prevented us
by his grace. For who is sufficient to be his own redeemer? Now because the
work of this redemption belongs in particular unto the kingdom of Christ, it
thereupon follows, that he is only the finisher of it; as himself says,
John 8.36. Again, it is not enough to be once redeemed: for mark what the end
of it is here, to wit, that he might remain in the Church of God, and grow
daily from faith to faith. Has Christ redeemed us then? let us aim at this
mark with all our might.

redeemed of the Lord are then said to be truly come into Zion, when having
ended this their pilgrimage, they enter into the possession of the heavenly
life. We may therewithal also note that the more we profit in the grace of
God, and prosper in the Church, the nearer we are unto him.

By the words of joy and gladness, he means there shall be such felicity
under the Kingdom of Christ, that we shall have ample matter of reioicing. But
wherein does true joy and gladness consist? And surely the true and only way
to obtain gladness* is to feel that God is reconciled unto us, whose favor
alone is sufficient to yield us perfect felicity; yea so far, as to make us
rejoice in tribulation: Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Contrariwise, what can comfort or glad
us, if God bereave us of this reconciliation? Hence we gather a sure doctrine;
to wit, the faithful cannot be said to rejoice as they ought, unless they
join praises unto God therewith: this spiritual joy therefore must be
distinguished from carnal and profane joy and delights, into which the wicked
plunge themselves: for they rejoice indeed, but the issue shows how dangerous
this lasciviousness of the flesh is, when we flatter our selves in the
contempt of God. It is not without good cause therefore that S. Paul calls
this joy spiritual; for it consists not in the inioying of earthly things, as
in riches, honors, treasures, which perish and come to nothing in a moment;
but this joy is secret, it has his seat in the heart, and out of it can it not
be removed nor taken away by any means whatsoever, though Satan endeavors with
might and maine upon all occasions to disturb and afflict us.

And therefore our Prophet adds very well, that it is everlasting, and drives
away all sorrow: for albeit the children of God do every day undergo many
anguishes, yet so great is the power of their consolation which they have by
the Spirit, that in the end it swallows up all sorrow and mourning. We glory,
says Paul, Romans 5.3. even in our tribulations: now this glorying or boasting
cannot be without joy. The Apostles went away reioicing from before the
Council, that God vouchsafed them the honor to suffer rebuke for the name of
Jesus: Act. 5.41. I grant ye faithful are not exempt utterly from sorrow: nay,
they are oftentimes plunged in great distresses: it is most true, but they are
not overcome of them, because by faith they look directly unto this redeemer,
by whose power they are more then conquerors. For they may be compared to one
that being gotten up to the top of some high mountain, Simile.
beholds the Sun, and is gladded with the brightness of it; and in the mean
while should see others underneath him below in the valleys, so choked and
stifled with fogges and mists, that they could not behold this light.

The history contained in the next Chapter, and that which follows, is as it
were a seal set unto the former prophecies.

THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Now in the fourteenth year of King Hezekias, Sennacherib King of
Ashur came up against all the strong Cities of Judah, and took them.
IN this Chapter, and in that which follows, the Prophet recites an excellent

The ends and uses of this history.
But this served no doubt for the comfort of the little flock, who would not by
their infidelity cast disgrace upon so excellent Sennacherib, all things being
then in such a desperate case, that the faithful could not, but confess that
they were rid out of death by his only power. Now ye see the reason why I
have said, that this history is as an authentic seal set to the former
doctrines, the which (if it had been wanting) would not have bin believed.

In the fourteenth year.] It is not without cause that he notes this
circumstance of time, in which these things were done. For Ezechiah had then
established the worship of God in his Country: and not content therewith, he
had also summoned the Israelites by posts and messengers sent from all parts,
with commandment that they should come to Jerusalem to offer sacrifices; to
forsake that their long revolt, that with one consent they might be reunited
again into their most holy faith, and serve God according to his word. Read 2.
Chro. 30 31.32. Chapters. Even when the Kingdom was brought into this good
order; to wit, 2. King. 18.4
when superstitions were abolished, the Temple purged, and Gods true worship
erected and set up: Note.
then came the Assyrians to assail Judea, who wasted the Country, took the
Cities, and subdued the land under his command. Jerusalem only remained,
within which Hezechiah was mued up as in a prison.

Let us consider a little now in what dumps this good King and his subjects
were cast: for if we judge of this calamity according to reason unreformed, a
man would think that God did unjustly suffer his servant to be brought into
such extremities; because it seemed in some sort, that his godliness n^ght
deserve protection at Gods hands, and that he should have exempted him from
all encumbrances; because his whole desire was bent to serve his God purely.
For we may well think that God brought not this scourge upon him now for his
negligence, excess, or wantonness; much less for his superstitions or
idolatry, seeing at the very first entrance into his Kingdom, he employed
himself to the utmost, with exceeding diligence to establish religion in the
purity of it. What was Gods purpose herein then? Surely he meant to try the
faith and patience of his faithful servant.

Verse. 2. And the King of Ashur sent Rabshakeh from Lachish toward Jerusalem
unto King Hezekiah with a great host, and he stood by the conduit of the upper
poole, in the path of the fullers field.
THe order of the history may seem somewhat here to be altered: for he said
before, that Sennacherib had taken all the Cities of Judah: verse. 1. and now
he sends Rabshakeh from Lachish which he had besieged: Lachish was not taken
yet then. But we are to note that oftentimes the course of an history is
disioynted, so as that is recited last which was done first. Besides the
Scripture have this figure frequent in them (as in this place) where it is
said, that all ye strong Cities were taken, although some no doubt escaped,
which Hezekias notwithstanding was unable to succor. It seemed then that the
Assyrian was become Lord of the whole land, seeing nothing was left but
Jerusalem, in which Hezekiah was imprisoned.

This history is described more at large in the second book of Kings 18. and
19. Chapters. where it is showed that Hezekiah used all the means he could to
redeem his peace, for he would have had it almost upon any condition. He gave
3000. talents of silver, and 30. of gold, which this tyrant exacted, for
payment whereof, he was driven to rob the Temple of the vessels that were in
it, and of the plates of gold which were fastened upon the gates thereof,
because his own treasure was spent. But as such insatiable gulfes can never be
filled, so when he had received this money he then falls to demand greater
things, and imposed upon him harder conditions then the former, that he might
vex and afflict this good King to ye full. For having once wrought upon his
mildnes, he thought the second time to draw him to whatsoever himself listed,
only he waited for fit opertunitie to begin wars afresh.

But the people no doubt for their parts had well deserved to be thus scourged
for their wickednesses, according as it had been before prophesied: for albeit
religion flourished in outward show, yet their lives remained unchanged,
impiety ouerflowed, and their hearts were as foul within as ever they were
before. For as much as the people repented not of their sins then, was it not
needful they should be chastised with the greater severity in regard of such
a malicious obstinacy? But because the measure of their iniquities was not yet
full, God pacified the rigor of his wrath, and gave them an admirable
deliverance when all things were become utterly desperate.

Verse. 3. Then came forth unto him Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, the steward of
the house, and Shebna the Chancellor, and Ioah the son of Asaph the Recorder.
MEntion was made of this Eliakim in the 22. Chapter: to him the Lord promised
the chief place in the kingdom after the death of Shebna. But it seems this
was but a vain and idle promise, seeing he is sent to the enemy to sue for
favor, as one, being ready to yield and submit himself to the mercy of such
a cruel Tyrant. This might also astonish the hearts of the faithful, even to
make them call the truth of Gods promises into question. Besides, this good
king was so destituted of good servants, that he was constrained to send Shebna
with the rest, though he knew him to be a disloyal traitor. The word Sopher
signifies a Scribe, and therefore it is often taken for Teachers, or such as are
learned: sometimes for those that keep books, and have the disposing of the
rowles or charters of Kingdoms. I have translated it Chancellor: for it can
not be referred to the knowledge of the Law: we may also gather that this
Shebna was in great credit, though he were put from the estate of being
steward, or great master of the kings household. The word Mazkir signifies a
secretary, or a master of the requests.

Verse. 4. And Rabshekeh said unto them, Tell you Hezekiah This clause I pray
you, is not in Master Caluins text.
I pray you, Thus says the great king, the king of Ashur, What confidence is
this wherein thou trustest?
THe Prophet shows that these three Ambassadors (which represented in a manner
the whole state of the kingdom) were not only repulsed, but received
disgracefully, and galled with insupportable injuries by the Captain of this
Tyrant. For he is so impudent as to ask how Hezekias durst presume to rebel,
no less then if he had bin a man convinced of Rebellion. Some expound the
particle Na, I pray you, but it can not well stand with the honor (as you would
say) of so proud and insolent a Tyrant, to come unto them by way of entreaty.
He speaks rather like those who impose conditions upon others, who are either
vanquished, or are ready to yield themselves for fear, whom such are minded
to receive to mercy, which we commonly call, Summer, that is, To call upon,
or To Summon one. But that his Summons might be of the greater authority, this
Captain speaks in the person of his King: and with big words sets forth his
greatness; the rather to daunt the heart of Hezekias, when he should hear he
had to deal with so powerful an enemy. For his meaning was not only to say
that Hezekiah was far inferior to his Master the chief Monarch of the world;
in comparison of whom, Hezekiah was to be esteemed no better then a mean
Gentleman: but he calls him the great King, the King of Ashur; that by these
titles of his power and magnificence he might as it were darken the glory of
all other Kings, that so all might seem to rest in him alone. Which
thunderbolts had bin sufficient to have terrified and feared the heart of
Hezekiah, especially seeing he was mued up, as I said before, within the
walls of the City, out of which he could not escape; much less was he any
way able to make his party good against the violence of this Tyrant.

Verse. 5. I say, Or, they are but words of the lips.
Surely I have eloquence, but counsel and strength are for the war: on whom
then do thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
WHereas we read in the holy history, Thou have said, it may be expounded
thus, to wit, that Rabshekeb makes as if he knew Hezekiah his thoughts: as if
he should say; Thus thou deliberatest with thy self. But the sense comes all
to one, though we read this word in the first person: for Rabshekeh speaks as
one that had gaged the depth of Hezekias his enterprises, and had been made
acquainted from point to point with all his purposes; and therefore scoffingly
reproching him, says, I perceive thy consultations well enough: but alas! they
are but words of the lips.

Now this clause is diversely expounded: some read, Thou say thou have not
the words of the lips only: that is, thou braggest not only of eloquence, but
of courage and counsel. Others, Thou have speech indeed, but counsel and
strength are fit for war. But I approve not of them who take words for
prayers; for that would be a sense constrained, and too far fetched.

Thus understand it then; Hezekias has words of the lips: that is to say,
he tickles your ears with goodly discourses and sweet promises, to keep you
from reuolting: he has indeed plenty of words, as they say, but of what
value are they to wage war against a mighty potentate? as if he should say;
I am not ignorant what Hezekiah does, nor upon what principles he stays
himself, even upon sweet words: but these are nothing worth to wage war
withal; for counsel and strength are needful for that. It may also be well
r^ferred to the Egyptians: as if he should say; that Hezekias played the fool
to suffer himself to be gugled with fair promi^es. For we need not doubt but
the Egyptians were forward enough in promising mountains and wonders, although
they were slow enough in performing any thing. Verse. 6.
But forasmuch as he will speak of this matter anon, I willingly think that
he derides Hezekias, as one who being stripped of all furniture fit for war;
only entertained his people with words full of vain boasting.

Verse. 6. Lo, thou trustest in this broken staff of reed on Egypt; whereupon
if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh King of
Egypt, unto all that trust in him.
IT is very likely that this is distinguished from the former sentence. For
having said that Hezekias entertained his people only with glozing and
flattering words, and thence concluding that his confidence was vain: he comes
now to other particulars, and endeavors by all means to weaken the hearts of
the people, that by the discouraging of them, he might with the greater
facility cause them

First, he compares Egypt to a staff of reed; broken: thirdly, leanes upon
it, that it will rather pierce his hand. The sum of all which is, that the
confidence which the Jews had in the Egyptians, should not only be frustrate,
but also hurtful. And no doubt but Rabshekeh had had good cause thus to tax
them, if Hezekias had indeed relied upon the Egyptians. But he falsely and
shamefully accuses this good King of that whereof he never had so much as a
thought. And yet God in the mean while paid this rude and rebellious people
home with this reproach, which they worthily deserved, in suffering so wretched
a caitife, thus to scorn their revolt and disloialtie. Our Prophet had sharply
censured this offense before, but his reprehensions were rejected; every one
turned away his ears: They that cannnot endure to hear Gods voice in the
ministry of his word, shall be forced to hear of the same things by such as
shall be little to their liking.
was it not good reason then that the Jews, who so unworthily disdained the
Prophet, speaking unto them in the name of God, should be sent to school to
such a Master as railing Rabshekeh was.

By this example we are admonished, that it is no marvel if at some time
unbelievers (who cast off the counsel of God, which tends to their salvation,
setting light by all prophecies) be forced to hear these and the like flouts
from their enemies, with which Rabshekeh the Captain of the Kings army here
proudly and disdainfully scorns the Jews. Also we may see how great
difference there is between the admonitions of the Lord, What difference there
is between the Lords admonitions and Satan's reproaches.
and the reproaches of Satan. When God would withdraw our minds from trusting
in the arm of flesh, he pronounces this general curse; Woe be to him that
trusts in man. That all the world being brought to nothing, we might content
our selves with him alone. But to encourage those whom before he had cast
down, he sets this remedy before them; Blessed is the man that trusts in
the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, etc. Ier. 17.5. and 7. Contrariwise,
Satan accusing us for our vain hopes, therewithal sollicites us unto despair,
draws us from evil to worse; and in the end, to use unlawful means, as
Rabshekeh here does; who scorns the hope which the Jews had in the Egyptians
help, that he might bring them from that to rest upon God only: but he puts
the Assyrians between, as if salvation could appear from no place else. He
names Pharaoh but he also comprehends all Egypt.

Verse. 7. But if thou say unto me; We trust in the Lord our God, is not that he
whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah took down, and said to Judah and
to Jerusalem; Ye shall worship before this altar.
RAbshekeh uses an argument which consists of these three members; to wit,
either Hezekiah thinks himself strong enough to resist, or he looks for
help from Egypt, or, he trusts in God. If he rest upon his own strength, it
is his solly: for what is he in comparison of my master? As for Egypt, let him
never expect help thence, but rather hurt and loss. His only stay that he
rests upon, must be ye help of God; but has he not overthrown his altars,
and abolished his service? will he not therefore rather punish then help him?
Rabshekeh then in a word strips this good King at once, of all succor both of
God and man. Satan's drift in this, was not only to pierce the heart of the
King, and to ouerwhelme him under the burden of this affliction; but also to
stir up the Commons (who commonly are factious and inconstant) to rebellion.
Many whereof no doubt yet doted upon their old superstition, and would easily
have been drawn to a revolt by this subtle device; because the ancient
religion forsooth, which had long custom joined with it, was now changed by
Hezekias, who in their conceit was justly punished for his rashness. For
example, if any thing now fall out otherwise then well, the Papists by and by
cry out with open throats, that it is a just vengeance of God upon us, because
we have been so bold to abolish their traditions and ceremonies, received for
so many hundred years.

Verse. 8. Now therefore give hostages to my Lord the King of Ashur, and I will
give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able for thy part to set riders upon
them.
HIs conclusion is, that Hezekias shall do best to yield himself without
trying it out by fight, and to promise obedience for ever unto the Assyrian.
Which, that he may the rather persuade him unto, he casts his poverty again
in his teeth. As if he should say; If I should give thee two thousand horses,
were thou able to furnish them with sufficient riders amongst all thy people?
For he offers him not horses by way of honor, or that he meant in good earnest
so to do; but rather to afflict and wound the heart of this good Prince. The
clause, I will give thee, must be thus resolved; Although I should give thee
two thousand horse, yet were not thou able to find horsemen enough for them. I
am not ignorant what the expositors write upon this place: but whosoever shall
consider every circumstance well, will easily judge that this was spoken in
contempt.

Verse. 9. For how can thou despise any Captain of the least of my Lords
servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and horsemen?
He now confirms the former sentence, and shows that Hezekias is so far off
from resisting the power of Sennacherib, that he is scarce worthy to be
compared with the least of his Captains. But what is the reason that he lifts
himself thus arrogantly? No doubt because the Jews should not presume any
thing at all in regard of the absence of the King of Ashur, who was now
besieging Lachish. For albeit he was not yet come with all his host, Rabshekeh
brags notwithstanding, that his Leiftenants are strong enough; to the end
Hezechias and the people might without delay yield themselves under his
obedience.

Verse. 10. And am I come now up without the Lord to this land to destroy it?
The Lord said unto me; Go up against this land and destroy it.
NOw he sets upon Hezekias another way; namely, that he shall assemble his
forces in vain, together for his defense. For he pretends that the King has
not now to deal with a mortal man like himself, but rather with God
himself; because he is come up to destroy the land of Iudeah at his
appointment. As if he should have said; As many of you as shall resist me,
shall resist God: and then your resistance will be to small purpose. Hence let
us learn, that albeit we be given to piety, faithfully indeuouring by all
means to advance the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, yet we must not look
for all that to be exempt from all crosses, but rather to fit our selves for
the bearing of them. For the Lord will not always crown our virtuous life
with earthly rewards: God crowns not virtue always with earthly honors.
truly such recompenses were unfitting for us. As namely, abundance of riches,
inioying of outward peace, and having all things that heart can wish. For are
not the wicked therefore esteemed the only happy men in the eyes of the world,
because they are frolike, quiet, healthful, and have the world at will. Thus
then it might seem that our condition should be no better then theirs.

But it behoues us always to set this example of good King Hezekias before our
eyes, Note.
who after he had wholly bent himself to reform religion, and to set up the
pure worship of God, was yet sharply assailed with afflictions, so far forth,
as he was not far off from despair; to the end, that when we shall think we
have done much, we be still ready notwithstanding to sustain all sorts of
combats and persecutions. Neither to be out of heart, if at the first our
enemies be too hard for us; in such wise, that we look every moment to be
swallowed up alive of them. For these great crackers, and haughty sp rits,
will easily be taken down, after they have cast up their first bubbles: yea,
after they have spit forth their venom, all their pride will quickly vanish and
come to naught.

Rabshekeh magnifies the greatness and power of his King, to affright the
heart of King Hezekias, see I pray you what course the wicked sort takes with
us: they assail us by threats, they labor to shake our faith and patience by
many fears; or rather, Satan himself does it indeed in their persons. For
who sees him not speaking here in the person of this railing miscreant? Satan
spe^ks by the mouth of Rabshekeh.
Nay, which more is, he takes unto him even the person of God himself, and so
transformes himself into an Angel of light. 2. Cor. 11.14
For what says the Holy Ghost in other places? He that rests upon the help of
man, seeks his own destruction, Iere. 17.5.
because man is a thing of naught, weak and brittle. Does not Rabshekeh
affirm the same here? Speaks he any otherwise then if he were a Prophet sent
of God? We must wisely distinguish between the voice of God, and the voice of
me^.
It behoues us therefore wisely to distinguish between the voice of God, and
men, who deck and adorn themselves with his name under false pretenses, for
the Devil can turn himself into many shapes, that he may appear in the
likeness of God. But this rayler had no cause at all to reproach Hezekias with
this, as has been said: for he trusted not in his forces, neither was he
puffed up in any confidence of the strength of Egypt.

It is the portion of the faithful to be railed upon when they do the most
good.
But it is our portion even then to be railed on when we do the most good.
Satan has skill enough in deed to assail us by such engines, and causleslie to
make us stink as it were in the presence of men, which I confess is a very
dangerous temptation: for we desire to maintain our credits with men, and are
much offended when they take that in evil part which is done with an honest
and upright affection; and therefore Satan labors in nothing more, then by
slanders to cast disgrace upon that which we have done The integrity of the
faithful ought to be unto them as a wall of brass, to fortify them with
invincible constancy.
But our integrity must be unto us as a brazen wall, whereby we may remain
immovable, as Hezekias here does against all such accusations and slanders.

As touching the latter member of this sentence, wherein Rabshekeh taxes the
King, because he had abolished Gods true worship: who sees not that this is a
mere slander. Hezekias had indeed overthrown the Idols, and the Idolatry
which God abhorred. Unbelievers know not how to distinguish between religion
and superstition.
But what marvel is it if the Infidels know not how to distinguish between
the false god and the true, between religion and superstition? but we have too
much experience of this even amongst our selves. For the Papists who are
plunged over head and ears in their superstitions, accuse us for abolishing
infinite humane traditions, and complain that we have almost clean
overthrown Gods whole service, The raylings of Papists.
and thus they stand railing at us as this Rabshekeh does. Should God help
these heretics who have destroyed his Altars, profaned his Temples and all
things else, which were by us set up in such a decent and goodly order? For the
Papacy was all glorious without, every one admired it: but alas, we retain
nothing but a few bare and naked ceremonies altogether without pomp. Will you
see the reason then why they think the service of God is overthrown? It is
because they measure it by outward things. Therefore when any adversity
befalles us, then by and by they cry out: nay, it is well enough, all the
fault is in themselves. These heretics have brought the whole world unto
ruin by their heresies. And if they see us plunged into any misery, then they
open their mouths wider against us then ever before. Yet must we still remain
strong in the faith against such horrible outcries, and must also let them
know, that that which they pretend to be the service of God, is not; but is
rather mere dotages, which we have worthelie abolished: yea, we must not let
to tell them, that all such things as have been forged in man's brain
appertains not at all to Gods worship, but are to be esteemed as the illusions
of Satan, being of all other things the most dangerous. We ought then as you
see to stand out with an invincible faith against all sorts of these
imputations, whereby Satan endeavors to darken and smother the light of true
religion.

But one might have thought it strange at the first blush, 2. King. 18.4 Exodus
20.4.
that Hezekias had overthrown all the Altars but one; and profaned all the
Temples, only one excepted: but this only defense may serve in stead of many,
that nothing was done for which he had not good warrant out of Gods word; and
therefore was he contented with one Altar, because God had forbidden them to
erect many: he brake down all the Images, because they had been unadvisedly
erected and set up, against the doctrine of the law. We at this day have the
same difference with the Papists, for they blame us for nothing more, then that
we have cashered an infinite number of their bald Ceremonies, and have only
retained those things which God has ordained. But in this matter we are not to
dispute to nor fro touching yt which may please me^; but rather how we may
approve our actions unto God.

Verse. 11. Then said Eliakim, and Shebna, and Ioah, unto Rabshekeh, Speak I
pray thee to thy servants in the Aramits language (for we understand it) and
talk not with us in the Jews tongue, in the audience of the people that are
on the wall.
WE further see by this circumstance how far Hezekias abased himself, mild
entreaties unto the servant of his enemy, by his Ambassadors. Secondly, Verse
12.
the pride of Rabshekeh, in rejecting so currishlie Hezekias was so careful to
appease the rage of this Tyrant, that almost quite forgetting his royal
dignity, he endeavored to pacific him with as lowly terms as was possible: if
we be therefore wrongfullie oppressed, let us not think much to part with some
of our right in giving soft answers.

Now in that he thus humbled himself in the sense of his own weakness,
Hezekias his example worthy one imitation.
because he was unable to resist the Assyrian, it serves greatly for the
setting forth of Gods glory, because he saved this people as it were out of
the lions jaws: for this deliverance had never been so glorious, if they had
bin freed only from some petty danger. But seeing they were at the pits
brinke; the power of God shines so much the more, in that by so rare a miracle
he chased away and discomfited the enemy, who now had put his knife to their
throats as it were.

The Ambassadors besought Rabshekeh that he would not speak thus before the
people; because they were naturally mutable and Rabshekeh not to speak in the
Jews language, for they sought nothing else but how they might find a sit
means to redeem their peace. This good King likewise did all he could to
appease the rage of the tyrant, but to no purpose; for the Ambassadors obtained
nothing of Rabshekeh. The more he entreated, the fiercer grew he, and
ouerflowed in all pride, as the property of the insolent is to do.

Verse. 12. Then said Rabshekeh; Has my master sent me to thy master, and to
thee to speak these words, and not to the men that sit on the wall, that they
may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?
WE see here the madness and wouluishnesse of this tyrant: whence also we may
perceive, that the state of King Hezekias was in great danger. For Rabshekeh
speaks here like a conqueror, and behaues himself toward Hezekias, as if he
had been no King at all, but rather his vassal or slave. In that we see him
then thus swollen with pride, we must needs think that Hezechias on the other
side was not a little cast down, even as one overwhelmed with sorrow, and left
destitute of all succor: so as both in his own, and all men's judgments else,
there was no way but one with him. Let us also gather hence, that Rabshekeh was
not sent thither to offer any conditions of peace, but rather to receive the
King to mercy, and to terrify the people; for the bringing whereof to pass,
Sennacherib had given him a puisant army.

He also makes his bragges, that he has not to do with the King, so much as
with the people; to whom he spoke forsooth for their benefit and commodity.
Now that he might make them quake and tremble yet more, he sets before them
the miseries and calamities into which they plunged themselves, if they
harkened unto Hezechias; to wit, that they must needs die for hunger; because
the extremity would be so great, that of force they shall be constrained to
eat their own dung, and to drink their own piss. They should therefore
show themselves wise, and such as had care of their own safety, if they
forthwith yielded themselves to his mercy.

Verse. 13. So Rabshekeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews
language; and said; Hear the words of the great King, of the King of Ashur.
THe Prophet shows by what practices Rabshakeh endeavored to discourage the
hearts of this people. And first he tells us that he spoke in the Jews
language, Verse 11.
notwithstanding that the Ambassadors had besought him to speak in the
Aramites. Now it must needs be a great corasiue to the hearts of the faithful,
to hear this holy tongue, which was dedicated to the mysteries of heavenly
wisdom, to be thus profaned and prostituted to such horrible blasphemies:
neither could it be avoided, but this tentation shrewdly shaked the vnfirme
and weak. No enemies worse then those that speak out own language.
But hence we may note, that there are no enemies more noisome then those that
speak in our own tongue. Of which, we have experience now in very many who
learn our tongue, that is to say, our manner of speech; that they may the
better insinuate themselves into the ears of the simple and ignorant, to turn
them away from the truth.

Thirty years ago the Papists had a barbarous language, Note.
utterly estranged from the style of the holy Ghost: there was scarcely to be
heard amonsts them, one word that sauored any thing at all of Christianity:
but now they have learned to varnish over their blasphemies with the language
of Canaan, that so we might take them for honest men. And thus we see the
devil has filed and furbushed their tongues; for he is their father and
instructor, as he was in times past unto Rabshekeh.

When it is said, he stood up; it is to set forth the pride and insolency of
this varlet, for his outward gestures manifests sufficiently how arrogantly he
behaved himself. No doubt he stood before; but now he raises up himself, to
be the better seen and feared of the Jews. And having yet once again told
them the greatness of his King, Satan's policy.
he adds unto it the message with which he was sent. For it is one of Satan's
policies with high words to set forth the power of our adversaries, and to
make the dangers seem greater then they be indeed, to bring us out of heart:
for we faint by and by, as soon as our eyes are but a little dazeled with the
glory of earthly things. Against it therefore we are to oppose the power of
God, which will be sufficient to arm us with strength, against all the powers
of darkness. The enemies cease not to brag proudly, even with open mouth of
their greatness and power, and scorn our feebleness and weakness; but if
the Lord be with us, what should astonish us?

Verse. 14. Thus says the King; Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not
be able to deliver you.
IN giving to his Master the title of a King, he speaks of Hezekias as if he
were but some common person, and gives him no title at all. Also, not content
to continue his slanders against this good man, he now disgorgeth his venom
even against God himself, calling the trust and confidence which Hezekias had
in his favor, (whereunto he also exhorts all his) nothing but impostures and
deceipts.

Slanders of the Papists.
We at this day are assailed with the like slanders of the Papists, when they
say, we do nothing else but seduce and lead men into perdition, by teaching
the^ to trust perfectly in one only God. But we need not marvel much if they
cast those reproaches upon us which were cast upon this good King, seeing they
proceed from the same author and father of lies, even the Devil. Where he
says, Ezekias is unable to deliver his people, it was very true in deed,
unless God did also put to his hand. Neither did Hezekias attribute this unto
himself, to rob God of his honor: but freely protested, that his own
safety, and the safety of his people depended upon God only. But it was
needful that this adversary should disguise his words, as the wicked do at
this day, when they mean to defame our doctrine, for they forge fair and
goodly pretexts to make our words heretical in show, so as they easily
deceive the hearers, unless they have their eyes in their heads, to consider
of all things wisely.

Verse. 15. Neither let Hezekiah make you to trust in the Lord saying, The Lord
will surely deliver us: this City shall not be given over into the hand of the
King of Ashur.
NOw Rabshekeh recites Hezekias his exhortation, by which he encoraged the
people, and adds his refutation, as if it had been but a vain speech, even
the inventions of his own brain: whence it appears, that the wicked make
none account at all of the power of God, although they can speak of it to
serve their own turn. For albeit he denies not plainly that God is able to
help his people if he would, but makes them believe he is angry with them, and
therefore is their enemy, yet in overthrowing their faith (as much as in him
lies) he abolisheth the power of God, because his meaning was so to smite the
hearts of this poor people with terror, that they should be constreined
through despair to subject themselves to the laws of this victorious Tyrant.

Moreover, by another subtletie he also endeavors to wring from them their trust
in Gods help, in that he allures them as we shall see in the next verse with
promises of inioying ple^tie and ease. For what is able to work in us a desire
to revolt from God sooner, then when we are drawn thereunto with the show of
profit and pleasure. If the world begins once to smile a little upon us, and to
glad our hearts, then behold the hope of eternal life begins forthwith to
vanish, for our senses always dote upon present things. Rabshekeh having armed
himself with this engine, gives them this admonition, Depend not upon
uncertain hopes, rather take that which is certain. This manner of speech has
great efficacy in it to allure us to a revolt. For men are apt to nothing
more, then to be possessed of that which may bring them profit: and it is
exceeding irksome and tedious unto them to be deferred, or to hang in suspense,
so as to prefer the good which is yet far off, before the commodities which
are before their eyes. See Rabshekehs argument then: We must walk by faith,
and not by fight. 2. Cor. 5.7.
Hezekias promises you help from God, but you see no such matter: he therefore
seeks to captive your wits in the expectation of things uncertain: but the
King my Master will not only promise, but will perform in giving you those
things which you see. This might seem to be a very strong argument. But let us
find out the fallacy, for Satan is often wont by such sleights to turn us
from depending upon Gods providence.

The Lord calls us to the hope of eternal life which as yet is hidden from
us: Romans 8.25.
(for we hope for the things which we see not.) He promises that he will be
our Savior: in the mean while he suffers us to languish and faint many times,
so as it seems all our hope is but in vain, We have need to put on the whole
armor of God. Ephesians. 6.11.
if we only keep our eyes fastened to the estate of present things. Satan sets
now upon us, and thus begins to whisper in our ears. And why do thou hope
thus in vain? What is the fruit of thy faith? What expects thou out of this
world? In a word, we must be armed to wrestle thus against Satan every day.
When Christ calls us to heaven, Satan endeavors to hold us groueling to the
earth. We must therefore stick close to the promises which are set before us,
that hoping above hope, we may stand fast in the Lord, and never suffer our
selves to be seduced nor withdrawn from trusting in him by any allurements
whatsoever.

Verse. 16. Hearken not to Hezekiah, for thus says the king of Ashur, Or, make
a blessing.
Make appointment with me, and come out to me, that every man may eat of his
own vine, every one of his own fig tree, and drink every man the water of
his own well.
Whilst he deuiseth how to estrange the peoples hearts from Hezekias, he
therewithal entiseth the^ unto present pleasures, that they may quite forget
God, and wait no longer upon him. As if he should say, Trust not in God, Trust
rather in my King. See how Satan plays the Sophister: for in darkening Gods
goodness by his fogges and mists, and masking us with vailes of false hopes, he
sets up the creatures in stead of the Creator, to wrap us up in his nets.

Well, Rabshekeh presents profit, pleasure, and ease before them by this vain
brag; to wit, God offers you benefits, but they are far off: I have mine here
in mine hand. Now albeit he uses Hezekias his name here, yet upon the matter,
the comparison stands between God and the Assyrians. For Hezekiah being indeed
the true servant of God, he played not the hypocrite in boasting of his trust
and confidence falsely: but resting upon the immutable and unchangeable
promises, he faithfully exhorted the people (as his duty was) to rest quietly
upon God. Contrariwise, Rabshekeh clothes his King with Gods spoils as it
were, and as the servant and vassal of the devil, endeavored to withdraw the
peoples minds from their true allegiance unto God, to all impiety.

To make blessing with him, signifies friendly to pacify: as if he should say;
Fight not, venture not your selves that way; but yield your selves, and submit
you freely to my King. Now Sennacherib not only craves audience, but would
also have them to do homage and fealty; which that he might the better draw
them unto, he couers this odious term of servitude, with the word blessing.
He counsels them to redeem their peace and other commodities, which they
inioied before at his hands, by this woeful revolt; to wit, that they should
forsake Hezekias to cleave unto him. Now it was the most servile and miserable
condition that might be, to forsake this good King whom God had established,
who also bare the image of Christ: for what was it else but to renounce God
himself, who had erected and set up in the midst of them this sign of his
heavenly favor?

Verse. 17. Till I come and bring you into a land like your own land, even a
land of wheat and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
NOw he adds a condition much more vile then the former: for he shows that
peace can no way be procured with Sennacherib, but by yielding themselves unto
banishment. And what was that but to forsake Gods true worship, to throw
themselves into superstitions; and willingly to cast themselves out of that
inheritance which God had given them? But in regard that Rabshekeh speaks to
men desolate, and such as were astonished with the present danger, he boldly
challenges of them, whatsoever himself lists; to the end they may at the
least procure the safety of their lives.

And here we see as in a glass, that his words are nothing else but a lively
representation of those temptations and assaults, wherewith Satan daily lays
siege against our faith. For all his practices tend only to pluck us away
from our confidence in God, by the allurements and pleasures of this world.
What? is it not good to sleep quietly in a whole skin, and to redeem thy
peace any way? Thou would be happy; does not happiness consist in the
plentiful inioying of all things? But then especially he assailes us thus, when
he sees us in misery; then is he bold, and dares more vehemently solicit us
to shake off Gods yoke; but so, that still he does it with fetches and close
conueiances, as he may best cover our revolt with the show of some good.

Now when he has gotten us in his nets so far forth, that we esteem better of
things present, then of those to come, Satan's conditions which he usually adds
to his temptations.
he adds this condition with it always; to wit, that we will now be his
servants, and run at his beck: and this we can by no means escape, when he
has once tickled us with his deceitful hopes, and with the taste of earthly
things.

But because this word exile, sounded somewhat harshly and unpleasantly in the
ears of this people, it being no easy matter for them to leave the sweetness
of Judea; Rabshekeh willing to let them know that they should loose nothing by
abandoning their Country, tells them, that the Country into which they should
be carried, was no less fruitful and plentiful then theirs. And thus he went
about to dazzle their eyes, that they might not think themselves to be loosers
any way by the bargain. Yet does he finely omit that which was the principal,
to wit, the service and worship of God, the Temple, the Kingdom, and sacred
order and government, with other matters appertaining to the heavenly
inheritance. For alas! without these, what felicity is there? Wherefore let
every one of us in the fear of God learn, to fix the right knowledge of
spiritual benefits fast in our hearts: for it is not for naught that David
says, he would rather be a door keeper in the house of his God, Psalm. 84.10.
then (with all the delights and pleasures of this world) to dwell in the tents
of the ungodly. For he that once suffers his heart to be glewed to the love of
earthly things, is in danger thereby to deprive himself of true happiness.
For this is that horrible judgment whereby God often auengeth himself upon
men's incredulity. Let all the faithful therefore fear before God, and beware
that they faint not under any calamities or afflictions whatsoever.

Verse. 18. Lest Hezekiah deceive you, saying; The Lord will deliver us. Has
any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the King
of Ashur?
Here is now another argument differing from the former; by which he labors
to seduc^ the peoples hearts from their allegiance to King Hezekias, and from
their trust and confidence in God. Verse 10.
He bragged before that he was Gods servant, sent of him to destroy the land of
Judea: for which cause he promises unto himself assurance of the victory. But
now the miscreant fears not to advance himself against the Lord of hosts.
For you must know that the wicked do not always at the first chop discover
all their impiety touching their contempt of Gods majesty; Note.
but the Lord by degrees lays open their thoughts, and constraines them to
cast up the poison which lay hid within them. This wretch now then goes on
further in his blasphemies, and fears not to rush against the highest
Majesty, as if he were the stronger.

But he speaks in the person of his Master, who had obtained great victories
over many mighty nations, which indeed had their gods; under whose protection
they thought themselves safe. Sennacherib having subdued these, thought also
that he had overcome their gods, upon whose help they rested. Thence it comes
that he puffes up himself so far in pride, that he dares iustle against the
living God: yea, he is carried away with such madness, that he fears not to
oppose his strength against the power of the Almighty.

You see then, that albeit the wicked seem at the first to be far from the
contempt of Gods majesty, yet in the end they manifest that they attribute all
to themselves, and utterly exclude him. In words I grant they will give the
praise of their victories unto their gods, but forthwith they sacrifice unto
their own nets, and offer incense to their yarne, as Abacuk says, 1.16. which
practice our hyppocrites imitate at this day. For if they obtain any victory,
they by and by run and thank their Idols: but when that is done, they also
thank their own counsels, policies, manhood, and their forces: so as a man
may well perceive that upon the matter they attribute all their success unto
themselves, and not unto their Idols. In this his proud boasting then, he
shows himself to be a liar, when he acknowledged God the author of his
victories.

On the other side it could not be but the heart of good King Hezekias must
needs be wonderfully grieved in hearing God to be thus charged with breach of
his promises, when this wicked one railed thus against God, and matched him with
Idols. But these things are written, Hezekias his patience worthy our
imitation.
to the end we might consider the patience of this good King, and also follow
his example when the like shall befall us.

Have any of the gods of the nations?] When he opposes himself against all
Gods, as one that had ouermatcht them, it is so far from common sense, that
the wicked themselves do shudder and tremble at it: and yet if the Lord do but
a little press them, he easily draws forth of them such confessions as this.
When they have premeditated what they will say, then they can feign themselves
Gods servants forsooth, but soon after he inforceth them to confess and utter
forth that which was concealed within. Let us know then that superstition is
always joined with pride, so as it is impossible but he should advance
himself above all that which is called God, which in his heart acknowledges
him not. We need not wonder then that wicked men are proud and rebellious, for
it is only the pure and right knowledge of God which is able to humble our
stout hearts. And yet this miscreant is no way excused, for casting the vanity
and feeblenes of these Idols justly in their teeth: for we must look at his
intent and pride, seeing he scorns not so much the superstition and vain
confidence of the Gentiles, as through their sides to wound (if he could) even
the highest Majesty. Even as that tyrant Dionysius, Dionysius.
who resisted God, and provoked him to the fight, whilst he scorned his own
Idols: for against his conscience he derided the God which he could scarcely
comprehend in his shallow brain. The like is to be said of all other Infidels,
who have mocked at false religions, which they thought were of God.

Note we here also the other blasphemy by which the divine Majesty is
wickedlie violated, when Rabshekeh couples the true God with the false, as if
he were one of their consorts. For what blasphemy is greater then to match the
immortal God, the author of all things, with dunghill gods: truth with lies,
glory with ignominy, and hell with heaven? The Lord our God is great, and
worthy to be praised, says David: yea, he is to be feared above all gods: for
all the gods of the Heathen are Idols, but the Lord made the heavens, strength
and glory are before him, power and beauty are in his sanctuary, etc. Psalm.
96.4.5.

Verse. 19. Where is the God of Hamath, and of Arpad? Where is the God of
Sepharuaim? Or how have they delivered Samaria out of mine hands?

20. Who is he amongst all the gods of these lands, that has delivered their
country out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine
hand?


SOme think Hamath to be Antioch in Syria: Arpad, that City whence people
were taken to inhabit Damascus, and that Sepharuaim was situated in this
country. If these things be so, then Rabshekeh recites here the ancient names
of the Cities whence in times past many nations came forth: but afterward they
not only lost their renown, but their proper names also, that such a change
might the rather affect and move them. Howsoever it be, he expreslie notes out
the neighbor cities which were best known by name to the Jews, that the ruin
of them might touch them the more near: neither do I doubt but these places
were of Syria, and Israel. As if he should say, You see these two kingdoms
subdued, which notwithstanding had so many gods and patrons, and do you think
that your God can resist me? The expositors take the particle Chi for an
interrogation in both places. Have the gods of the nations delivered them?
Shall your God deliver you then? But that the sense might run the better, I
had rather translate it thus, Let your God deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?
This seems also to be spoken tauntinglie, as if in scorn he should have said,
Yea, I warrant you, your God will deliver you, as the gods of the Gentiles
delivered those that worshipped them. Now this ignorance of the wicked proceeds
from this, they know not that God punishes men's sins when adversity
befalles them. First of all then they deceive their hands executes his wrath
upon the people, whom he for their iniquities has destinated to destruction.
For though they will not utterly deny but they have received somewhat in their
victories from him, howbeit it is but fainedly, because they neither see his
will nor his justice therein.

In the next place they step one degree higher; that is, even to equal
themselves with God: I have overcome them whom God protected; and therefore I
have also overcome himself. Here is a lively description of that which we saw
before in the tenth Chapter. Ha! Ashur the rod of mine indignation: but he
thinks not so. There the Lord admonished the faithful, that although
Sennacherib in his outrageous pride, strove to abolish all divinity; yet he
was always to hold this principle, that he could put nothing in execution,
but what God himself from heaven should suffer.

It is our parts then to acknowledge that God corrects us by the hands of
wicked men, who are the rods of his wrath: and therefore to turn our eyes from
them, and cast them upon him, who justly corrects us for our transgressions. A
good lesson.
If the wicked prevail, let us not think that Gods arm is therefore broken:
but let us know that we were unworthy

Turk.
When we see the Turk to swell so proudly as he does at this day against us,
and is already become master of an infinite multitude of Christians* we must
not be troubled at it, as if Gods arm were shortened, or as if he wanted
power to deliver us. No, but we ought rather to consider how many ways those
of Grecia and Asia have provoked Gods wrath against them, whilst so many
villainies and abominations have had the full swindge in these countries,
whilst so many horrible impieties and superstitions have bin suffered to
reign there. Note.
It was requisite then that the chastisement should be the sharper, that the
iniquities of such as made profession of Gods name in hypocrisy, might be
suppressed. Thence has the prosperity of the Turk sprung; thence followed
those horrible wastes which we see in all the eastern parts. And yet how
insolent is the Turk? How sets he up the crest, scorning our religion, and
wonderfully extolling his own, or rather worships himself indeed, and
sacrifices to his yarne, as was said before out of Habacuck of other infidels.

Let us be warned to lay these judgments of God near to our hearts, and not
imagine that the Turk was able of himself to conquer so great an Empire, but
that it was the Lord who let him loose thus to punish the iniquiries of men.
But his pride in due time shall be repressed. The Turks pride shall be
repressed in due time.
Now albeit prosperity in it self be a testimony of Gods favor, yet we must
not begin there, if we will judge thereof as is meet. For so play the Turks
and Papists: if they obtain the victory, they conclude by and by that they
have God at their beck forsooth. But when we know him as we ought, his
benefits shall come to us in their order; to wit, they shall serve as
testimonies to assure us of his favor and power. And yet we must be
exceeding wary how we attribute any thing to our selves: for our minds are no
sooner possessed with a false confidence, but we shall be so transported and
carried away with fury, that God shall be found no more worthy afterward to be
matched so with us. At the first, the wicked will detest so much as manifest an
impiety; but when they are once besotted with devilish pride, to array
themselves with God his spoils, it is then easy to fall into this beastly
ignorance. I grant that Sennacherib had some show of piety; for we shall
read afterward, that he was slain in his Temple whilst he was worshipping
Nisroch his God, Chap. 37. 38.
to procure his favor and good will: but as he here confounds the Creator of
heaven and earth, with the gods of the Gentiles, so also when occasion should
have offered it self, he would have made no bones at all to have railed upon
his own Idol.

Verse. 21. Then they kept silence, and answered him not a word: for the Kings
commandment was, saying; Answer him not a word.
THis is added that we might yet better conceive in what a woeful case Judea
was: for this good King having but weak means left, is constrained to put up
all wrongs, and to let his enemy have the last word. He had sent his
Ambassadors to appease his fury: when this prevailed not, he forbids them to
commune with him, that they might no further insense this cruel woolfe, who
was but too much enraged before. Yet it is not easily discerned whether the
Prophet speaks here of the Ambassadors, or of the people, to whom Rabshekeh
uttered these blasphemies. It is most likely that it should be referred rather
to those which kept the walls, who notwithstanding stood still without tumult,
albeit the enemy gaulled them to the quick by his reproaches; because they
obeyed the commandment of their King. A pattern for true subjects.
Whence we gather, that it is a singular grace of God to see a peaceable and an
obedient people, especially when all things are confused and at the last cast.

But some may object, that it was no time now to command them silence, which he
belched out against God, which no doubt vexed them sore, albeit they uttered
never a word. For the Ambassadors sorrowed and wept, and from their inward
grief which pressed them, proceeded the renting of their garments: Verse 22.
by which outward sign, they testified that they abhorred his blasphemies. Now
in as much as it had been but time lost, to have reasoned the case with
Rabshekeh, they return quietly without any word at all: the people on the
other side, who could have gotten nothing by contending, are content to oppose
their sighs against this miscreants pride.

And truly it is a very commendable fortitude not to be bowed, A commendable
magnanimity.
but quietly to keep our standings, when it is not permitted us to answer.
Hence learn, that we are not to contend against the wicked at all times, when
they tear the blessed name of God in pieces by their outrages; because in so
bitter a combat, and amiddest so many railings there is no room left for
defense of the truth.

A good caveat.
And yet we must not so give the reigns to our cowardlinesse, that we should
think our selves excused, if we keep silence when the wicked lift up
themselves against God. For our silence is not to be approved of, unless in
some sort we show that it greatly disliketh us, and that we give them to
understand, as much as in us lies, that there is nothing more insupportable to
us, then to hear the holy name of God rent in pieces. We must give
testimonies of our zeal then, lest the enemies should think that we lightly
esteemed the honor of God, in that we are not moved when they blaspheme.

Verse. 22. Then came Eliakim, the son of Helkiah, the steward of the house,
and Shebna the Chancellor, and Ioah the son of Asaph with rent clothes, and
told him the words of Rabshekeh.
NOw we see that Eliakim and the other Ambassadors were not silent, as if they
had approved of the impieties of Rabshekeh, or, that they temporised in respect
of the danger: for they rent their garments, and thereby showed how much they
were offended with these blasphemies. I except the hypocrit Shebna, who was
forced with shame to do as others did, though but for fashions sake only.
The Jews and other eastern people were wont to rent their clothes, when they
meant to show their great detestation of something: for as their constitutions
were much more fierce then ours, who dwell in these cold Countries, so were
they more violent in their outward gestures, manner of their attire, goings, and
such other signs. We must also note in this place, that those who passed by
the injuries which were done to their own persons, yet rent their clothes when
they heard the name of God blasphemed: for those that are unreconcilable in a
particular injury, where patience is required, and are not moved when they
hear the holy name of GOD rent with reuilings, such show (I say) that they
have no zeal at all in them.

THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And when Hezekiah heard it, he rent his clothes, and put on
sackcloth, and came into the house of the Lord.
THe Prophet shows that nothing remained to this good King but one only hope
of salvation; namely, to power out his complaints into Gods bosom, who is a
just Judge: according as it is said, Psalm. 123.2. The eyes of the faithful
wait upon him, even as the eyes of bond servants wait upon their masters and
mistrisses, when they are oppressed. When Jerusalem then seems lost, Hezekias
destituted of all humane helps flees unto God for his protection. And thus he
confesses, that this is the only remedy when things are become desperate.
Now herein Gods grace shined in such wise, that it was a manifest miracle
showed to all, when the King with all his subjects were delivered out of the
mouth of the lion. This circumstance therefore is to be noted, to the end we
may take knowledge of the excellency of so great a benefit.

Here we are also taught what course to take in extreme dangers: God calls us
to him by extreme perils, therefore we must not be slothful in craving his aid
and assistance.
we must not be slothful nor idle in craving help of God, who by this
means calls us unto him. We must not then stand amazed nor dismayed, but
rather be pricked forward by our necessities, which press us to seek his
assistance: for that use Hezekias makes of his afflictions. He goes forthwith
into the Temple, no otherwise then into a place of refuge, to hide himself and
his people under the shadow of Gods wings.

Thereunto he also ioines the outward signs of repentance, he rents his
garments, he puts on sackcloth, and couers himself with ashes, and does other
things, which were then solemn signs of godly sorrow, by which (being under
sore afflictions) they condemned themselves before God as poor malefactors,
and humbly sought pardon of him. Now the modesty of this holy King is
wonderful, Hezekias his modesty.
seeing he is not ashamed to prostrate himself in the presence of his God,
though he had brought so worthy things to pass, and was adorned with so many
rare and excellent virtues. On the other side we may behold in him a wonderful
courage of mind, and stedfastnes of faith, Hezekias his steadfast faith.
in that the weight of so great a trial hindered him not freely to seek unto
that hand for help which sharply assailed him. There is not one amongst an
hundred to be found but will murmr if God do touch him but a little more
then ordinary; yea, they will be ready (if they have done any good) to twite
God in the teeth with it, and think themselves but hardly recompensed for the
same at his hands. Others will complain and say, It is but in vain and time
lost to serve God, when they see things fall not out as they would have them.
But we see none of these things in Hezekias, for he is not ashamed to confess
his fault, notwithstanding he was endued with the true fear of God.

Therefore if we desire to seek reconciliation with God, and to feel his
favor in the day of adversity, let us give some testimonies of our repentance,
and frankly acknowledge and confess our sins: for afflictions comes not
out of the dust, Job. 5.6. but God solicits us thereby to amendment of life. I
grant that sackcloth and ashes serve to little purpose, unless the affection
of the heart go foremost: for hypocrites (as we know) are but too forward and
ouer-liberall in their ceremonies. The Holy Ghost (as we have seen before)
requires these exercises, and gives them their just commendation; yet so, as
they be always used to a right end. And no doubt it was also a sign of
singular modesty and meeknes, to see this good King and all the people by
these helps to stir up one another to the fear of God: also, in that he
clothed himself with this deformed and base apparel the more freely to
confess his fault, which is an humility that Kings and Princes are ashamed to
imitate.

Verse. 2. And he sent Eliakim the steward of the house, and Shebna the
Chancellor, with the elders of the Priests clothed in sackcloth, unto Isaiah
the Prophet, the son of Amos.

3. And said unto him, This is a day of tribulation, and of rebuke, and
blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to
bring forth.


BY this Embassage he not only meant to call Isaiah to lament this calamity
with him, but also to have some consolation from the mouth of the Lord; Prayers
unstable, unless they be supported by the word.
for if prayers be not grounded upon the word of God, they will be but so many
words cast into the air. We know that the unbelievers will make both loud
and long prayers, and yet flee away from God, either by despising, or in utter
rejecting his promises. Here is a sign of Hezekias his true devotion then,
that being kindled with the zeal of prayer, he adds thereunto a confirmation
of his hope, lest he should faint under the temptation; also, in that he keeps
himself close to the means ordained of God, and desires to hear his voice by
the mouth of his Prophet Isaiah. For albeit he rested upon none but God only,
yet he reiects not the testimony of a mortal man like himself: and this is
the cause why the title of the Prophet is here expreslie mentioned, because he
sent to Isaiah to be confirmed by some new prophecy. And thus he names him,
not as a private man, but as the servant of the Lord, whose office it was to
comfort the King by some word of consolation.

There are two notable remedies then by which we are succored in affliction.
Two sovereign remedies by which we may receive comfort in affliction.
First, we must call upon God for his deliverance: Secondly, we must send for
the Prophets of God (if they be to be found) that they may give us some word of
consolation: for it is their charge to comfort and refresh the afflicted, by
setting the precious promises of life before them. But if Prophets be wanting,
yet we shall have sufficient and full consolation in the word it self. For we
must ask counsel of these Prophets which God has sent, not only during the
term of their lives, but for ever afterward, and of those that succeed them:
for although themselves be dead, 2. Pet. 1.19.
yet we have their books still with us: their doctrine lives, and shall
remain for ever: but the sum is, we must always ask counsel of God.

Some may demand, Hezekias was not sufficiently instructed, and furnished with
the promises, was it not a sign of infidelity in him then to seek for new
promises of the Prophet? I answer, The flesh evermore solicits us to distrust,
therefore we ought never to despise new succors.
therefore we ought not at any time to despise new supplies: nay rather it
stands us in hand to use all the best means we can to beat back the
multitudes of temptations which daily press us. For Satan inuirons us so close
on every side, that if we be not well furnished indeed, it is not possible for
us to wind out of his snares and intanglings. Although we be well instructed in
Gods word then, and have learned that he will surely help us in the day of
trouble, yet when some extraordinary surge or wave arises, it is all the need
then to get us to the mouth of the Lord again and again, Although our faith
be well confirmed in the^ promises, yet upon new assaults we ought once yea
twice to get new confirmatio^s from the mouth of the Lord.
and still to seek out new confirmations to comfort, quicken, and strengthen
our faith. We have no particular prophesies now, but we ought to apply the
generals to our particular uses, because they were written for our learning,
Romans 15.

In that Hezekias sent Ambassadors to Isaiah, and went not himself, it was
because he praid in the Temple: for it appears the mourning was general, in
regard that both the elders and counselors were clothed in sackcloth, it is
also very probable that the King had proclaimed a public fast. Let us also
note, that Isaiah lived not in the Kings house to give himself to iollitie
there: but in his absence, God meant to prove the faith of this good King.

Verse. 4. If so be the Lord thy God has heard the words of Rabshekeh, who^
the King of Ashur his master has sent to rail on the living God, and to
reproach him with words, which the Lord thy God has heard, then lift thou up
thy prayer for the remnant that are left.
Hezekias doubts whether the Lord would hear or no: for the particle Vlai, is
translated, if peradventure; and it is taken in this sense almost throrowout
the whole Scripture. Hezekias might well doubt, if we look upon the estate as
it then presently stood: but having turned his eyes toward the word of God,
he became more certain of Gods will, and then ceased to tremble any more. Now
because it cannot be avoided, but the flesh will always fight against the
spirit in the faithful, and so ouercharge them, that they are feign still to
drag ye wing or to traile the leg after them, they sometimes fit their words
according to the difficulty which presents it self before them. And in other
places we may observe, that Gods servants have spoken on this manner, though
the matter were out of doubt. For when Saint Peter exhorted Simon the Magician
to repentance, Acts 8.22.
he adds; If paraduenture the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee: but
he therein counsels him not to tremble, or to pray in unbelief, because such
a prayer had been in vain: but he sets before him the greatness of his sin,
that he might quicken him up with the greater feruencie to awaken at the last,
that he might prove a true convert indeed. This word if then, is not put here
in a doubtful sense, but sign^fies that which we usually speak, it may be,
when we dare hope or promise something to our selves.

Neither does Hezechias speak thus, as if God understand not what the wicked
say, or as if he were utterly ignorant of it, but because this principle was
fixed in his heart; to wit, that the Lord is near unto all such as call upon
him in truth: he now therefore arms himself with prayers, and is fully
resolved to withstand all distrust. And for as much as he could not attain the
goal without great strife, he says, peradventure, or, it may be. Note also
that he adds here two sorts of hearing, which in part resolves this question.
True it, is that at the first there seems to be some repugnancie in these
words; It may be he will hear the words which he has heard: but it is a very
apt kind of speech; for Hezekias is certainly persuaded that nothing is hidden
from God. He only disputes in himself, whether God would examine this
miscreants blasphemies. For in regard that he often defers his punishments for
a time, and seems to wink at men's impieties, it seemed that he now also
took no knowledge of these blasphemies. Lastly, he takes it for granted, that
all things are manifest and naked before Gods eyes: only he asks in some
perplexity, whether the Lord indeed will show himself displeased with
Rabshekehs railing, by some outward sign or no; that is, not to let him escape
any longer unpunished? To be short, he desires to see the execution thereof,
which is then performed, when God sets those things in order again, which
before were cut of frame and confused; and when he shows himself the Judge.
For then we prove by experience, that he has indeed had respect unto the
welfare of his people. Thus Hezekias asks; Lord, could thou not hear the
blasphemies of Rabshekeh, to revenge the same? or, art thou not able to show
that the glory of thy name is dear and precious unto thee?

When he calls the Lord Isaiahs God, his meaning is not as if he were
peculiarly served by one man only; neither does he hereby cut off himself
from the number of the faithful: but because prayers flow from doctrines, this
holy King speaks honorably of the Prophets ministry, and testfies, that he
is the true servant of God. Sometimes this relation extends it self further;
for all the faithful do jointly call upon God, who holds them all in the
number of his people. How God is said to be the God of Isaiah and Paul.
But he is called Isaiahs and Paul's God, in regard of their particular calling.

Lift up prayers.] This is the second cause for which Hezekias sent his
Ambassadors unto Isaiah; to wit, that he might also enjoy the benefit of his
prayers with others. In which we see, it is not the Prophets office only to
comfort the afflicted, by setting the promises of life before them, but also to
pray for their salvation. It is the Ministers duty not only to comfort his
people out of the word, but also to lift up his prayer unto God for the^ in
their distresses. What is meant by this phrase. To lift up prayer. Lam. 3.41.
Let not the Ministers and Preachers of the word think that they have
discharged their duty then, when they have exhorted and taught those that
depend upon them, unless they add prayers thereunto; for it is all our duties
so to do. But Hezekias sent to the Prophet chiefly, that he might show the
way unto others by his example.

To lift up prayer, signifies nothing else but to pray; yet the phrase of
speech is to be noted, for it shows how our affections ought to be ordered in
prayer. The Scripture in every place wills us to lift up our hearts unto heaven,
for otherwise we shall pray without any due reverence at all to Gods Maieslie.
Besides, our blockishnesse is so great, that as soon as we enter into prayer,
there comes gross imaginations touching the majesty of God into our minds;
so as if he should not call us away from them unto heaven, we would rather
seek him under our feet, then there.

To lift up prayer then, is so to pray, that our hearts be not glued to the
earth, nor yet that we conceive ought of God, that agrees with carnal or
fleshly conceits: but attributing that unto him which suits best with his
divine nature; also that we aspire unto heaven with an ardensie of zeal, and
with all our affections. It is in this sense that David says; Oh, let my
prayer come before thee as incence, and let the lifting up of my hands be as
the evening sacrifice.

Moreover, Hezekias desires Isaiah to pray for the remnant that were left. This
circumstance might serve to bow the Lord: not that he is to be bowed, as men
are: but thus he deals with us, and is contented to stoop down to our
weakness. Be it that our case is so desperate then, as we are even at the pits
brinke, as they say; yet must we lay forth our miseries before God, that
thereby we may gather some consolation; because himself protests, Psalm.
9.9.18. and 10.17.18
that he has respect unto the poor and needy. Yea, the nearer we are to
destruction, with the greater affection ought we to crave his aid and
assistance; as we see Hezekias here does, when all things were become
desperate.

Verse. 5. So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

6. And Isaiah said unto them; Thus say unto your Master, Thus says the Lord;
Be not afraid of the words that thou have heard, wherewith the servants of
the King of Ashur have blasphemed me.


AS the Prophet has told us before, that the only refuge the King had, was to
ask counsel at Gods mouth: so now he shows that it was not in vain,
because he received such comfort and consolation from him as his heart desired.

If in our distresses we power out our hearts before God, he will never
disappoint us of our hope. Note.
By this example we are admonished, that if we seek relief from the Lord, by
discharging all our cares into his bosom, we shall never be left
succourlesse. And albeit such Prophets, as Isaiah was, are not always to be
had in the world, yet will he not fail to meet those that wait for his help
in due season, and with such means as shall be answerable to their necessities.

Now Isaiah says in the first place, that he answered them in the name of God:
for he affirms that God is the author of this his message. The Prophets were
always to have regard that they spoke nothing of their own heads: also, it
was necessary that God should come between with his authority, in a matter of
so great consequence. Thus then our Prophet shows, that God prevented (as it
were) the prayers of this good King. The false Prophets brag much of Gods name,
yet falsely: but Isaiah being the very organ of the holy Ghost, does justly
come in his name that sent him: and in that he forbids him in the first place
to fear, he therein would have Hezekias to hold fast his confidence, or at
least to wait in hope and silence. As often as we hear this voice, Fear not:
that peace which faith brings forth is commended unto us.


As often as we hear these words fear not, let us know that peace which faith
begets in us, is here recommended unto us: for all they which in resting upon
God, do wait for deliverance from him out of their trials, such obtain
victory by their patience, over all seares; so as they enjoy sweet peace in the
midst of the sharpest troubles. Moreover, that this good King might with the
more cheerfulness expect a joyful and an happy issue, our Prophet plainly
shows, that God takes himself as a party in this cause, which he now minds
to take into his own hands: for he cannot endure that the wicked should abuse
his name. And therefore they are to look in the end, that he will show
himself a just Judge in punishing them for the same.

By the word servants, he amplifies the indignity of the fact: for had the
King himself uttered these blasphemies, it had bin a thing insupportable, that
the Lord of glory should have bin so proudly disdained and reproched by a
mortal man; much less then should he endure to be railed upon in such wise by
one of his vassals. And thus the condition of the person that railed, makes the
offense more odious.

Verse. 7. Behold I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a noise and
return to his own land: and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own
land.
SOme translate; I will put my Spirit within him: as if the Prophet spoke of
some secret instinct of heart; but this is too constrained. The similitude is
very apt, in that he shows God has a whirlwind in his hand, which shall
drive Sennacherib away before it into another place. The holy Scripture is
often wont to use such a kind of speech, Psalm. 1.4.
in comparing the wicked to straw and chafe; because God is able with the
least blast of his mouth to scatter them whither soever he will; even then
when they think themselves at the strongest. He compares the trouble then
which fell upon the host of Sennacherib, to a whirlwind, which carried him
violently out of Judea. In the next place, he shows that it will be as easy
for God to chase this enemy away, as it is for a whirlwind to drive chafe or
straw before it. The like is to be said of all tyrants, be they never so
strong and mighty.

We may perceive that the clause, The enemies of the church compared to chafe.
he shall hear, is added by way of exposition: and therefore I had rather
resolve it into a particle of showing the cause, thus, For he shall hear a
noise. For he speaks of this blast, which as soon as it was blown, it
forthwith repulsed and constrained Sennacherib to return into his own
Country, by reason of the news which he heard from Egypt and Ethiopia.

When the Prophet adds, that this tyrant should fall by the sword, it is as
much as if he had said; he vexes others, and endeavors to enlarge his
Monarchy; but God will raise him up enemies in the midst of his own Country,
which shall bring him to naught. Many expound; the Country, or, the land of
Israel: but it is too constreined, for it is spoken of ye country of the
Assyrian. And there is in this clause a close opposition: He which conquered
the Kingdoms and Cities of other Princes, shall not be able to defend his
own, but shall there be slain.

Verse. 8. So Rabshekeh returned, and found the King of Ashur fighting against
Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
HE shows now how Rabshekeh returned to his King without striking any stroke,
and returned not to the place where he left him: for his meaning is, that
Sennacherib had raised up his siege before Lachish, and was gone down into
Egypt to lay siege to Libna, which some think to be Pelusium: others say, it
was a City of Iudeah. For it is very probable, that having heard news of the
ariuing of the enemy, he directed his army toward Egypt, to stop the
passages before them. Now albeit the Lord abated the fury of this tyrant by
new wars, that he might thereby give some rest to the Jews, yet he would not
overcome him by the hand of man, but only manifests and brings his untamed
pride forth upon the stage, because he ceased not still to belch out his wonted
blasphemies, notwithstanding himself was in great danger, as we shall see
afterward.

Verse. 9. He heard also men say Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is come
out to fight with thee: and when he heard it, he sent other messengers to
Hezekiah, saying,
BY that which follows we may conjecture what the cause was why the Assyrian
so suddenly departed from Iudeah. For the Kings of Egypt, and Ethiopia had
made a league one with another against Senacherib, because they saw he grew too
mighty, Note.
and ceased not to invade Country after Country: for they thought if his
violence were not resisted betimes, they might be sure to look for the like
measure. These Kings meant not to defend Iudeah by working his woe, but
respected their own safety, because the power of so mighty a man is for the
most part worthelie had in suspicion of other Princes and their people. It is
wisely done of them therefore that in foreseeing dangers, they join their
forces together to make resistance ere it be too late: for they had been easily
ouerrunne had they been separated one from the other. Thus you see why they
join their forces into one, to wit, that they may withstand the violence and
fury of this Tyrant.

The Assyrian being entangled in so desperate a war, send new Ambassadors to
Hezekias, thinking by threats to enforce him to yield: wherein we may see how
Tyrants are carried away with pride, and an ouerweening of their own greatness,
so as they think to make all the world to tremble and quake at their words, or
at the only hearing of the sound of their names, or at the sight of their very
shadow. This man being somewhat prevented by a new and difficult business,
thinks notwithstanding to subdue Iudeah, whence he was forced to depart. It may
be he was ashamed to be thus disappointed of his purpose, and thus abruptly to
raise up his siege: but he thinks to obtain that in his absence which he could
not accomplish in his own person. Howsoever, the Lord did wonderfully work
in succoring his poor servants, who esteemed themselves as sheep appointed to
the slaughter. Now that he might abate the rage of this Tyrant, he occupies his
head, and fills his hands with such intricate businesses, as out of which he
could not easily wind himself: as if one should hamper a furious beast, or
should hold him fast by the snout, as the Prophet will show anon. I grant, their
cruel and reuengefull natures are not tamed thereby, but yet they are so
restrained, that they can not do the hurt they would.

We see the truth of this now amongst us. How many tyrants are there which
thirst after the ruin of the Church? How many plots do they lay to bring it
about? God will turn the counsels of all Achitophels to foolishnes. 2. Sam.
25.31. and 16.23.
How busy are they in corners, secretly taking counsel together? And with
what power and policies are they endued? But when they think to have their
purpose, it may be the Lord suddenly descries their designs, and raises up
enemies against them. Sometimes he sets them together by the ears, and brings
the cruelties which they thought to execute upon his children upon their own
heads. Yet they continue as obstinate and as fierce as ever they were before,
and cease not to imagine mischief still: as this Sennacherib; he is hindered of
his purpose you see, yet he is not weary of molesting this good King, but
domineers over him with maiesticall terms, as if he had been a poor slave:
yea, he commands him as if he were his vassal. And not content with that, he
proudly exalts himself even against the Lord of glory, and goes beyond the
pride of his Captain Rabshekeh. For although Rabshekehs words and his are all
one in sense, yet he offers outrage against the Lord with greater impudency,
and with an open throat as it were.

Verse. 10. Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah King of Judah, saying, Let not thy
God deceive thee in whom thou trustest, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given
into the hand of the King of Ashur.
WHat an horrible blasphemy is this? He accuses God to be a lier and a
deceiuer, as if he played fast and loose with those that put their trust in him.
For take away his truth from him, and what remains? That is the thing he most
esteems. But he drew these words out from the mouth of this miscreant, who
before seemed to reverence some god. It is not long you see then but he
discouers himself to the full. Whereas he says in the person of God, that
Jerusalem shall not be given. Some do thence conjecture, that the traitor
Shebna had informed the king of Ashur of Isaiahs prophecy, and the words do
sound somewhat that way, but there is no need of any such conjectures, for the
Assyrian knew well enough that Hezekiah trusted in God. The promises made to
David, and so consequently unto him, were not unknown. This is my rest, here
will I dwell for ever, for I have a delight therein: Psalm. 132.14. Not that
this tyrant studied the prophecies to profit by them; but they were manifestly
known to all, yea, that the Jews did wonderfully glory in them, and often
boasted of Gods help and protection against their enemies. This tyrant
opposes his blasphemies against the promises; Let not thy God deceive thee:
and thus he flies in Gods face as it were, as if he had been too weak to
defend Jerusalem; and as if himself was not only stronger then all men
whatsoever, but also stronger then the Lord of hosts.

He goes about to prove this by examples. He first had vanquished other nations
which Tyrants grow proud by having good successes.
See how the wicked are wont to grow more and more in their ouerweening, by
having good successes; so as they even forget that they are men. For they not
only attribute a divine majesty unto themselves, but think they are a degree
above that also. Which more is, when they have rejected all difference between
good and evil, Tyrants glory in their shame.
they take pleasure in doing mischief, they glory in the sins of their
ancestors, and think themselves no small fools, in that they came of such
thieves and robbers. For he that shall note the rising of these Monarks well,
it often falls out that he which is grown the mightiest, may well be called
the rich son of a great thief. A rich son of a great thief.


This tyrant cares not whether it were by right or wrong, that his
predecessors conquered so many Countries: for such never respect equity, when
they mean to make themselves great: let them have the stronger side, and then
it is no matter by what means they come by it, justly or unjustly, all is one
so they have it; all is fish that comes to net, as they think. The saying of a
Poet.
They put in practice the saying of a certain Poet; If a man will be wicked,
let him get might, that he may be so. This vice has not reigned in one age
only, but we feel by experience, that it has the full swindge now more then
ever heretofore.

Verse. 11. Behold thou have heard what the Kings of Ashur have done to all
lands in destroying them, and shall thou be delivered?
We must here note a double comparison; Hezekias to other Kings of Judah (his
predecessors) which were more mighty then he, and yet were overcome by the
Kings of Assyria. But Sennacherib Hezekias is not able to resist him. The other
comparison is of the Kings of Assyria, and Sennacherib himself, with the idols
of the Gentiles. Verse. 12.
If the idols then could not protect the people which honored them; it
thereupon follows, that the God of Israel is no more able then they, to save
his people. But when we read here how sharply the faith of Hezekias was
assailed by these wonderful tentations: let us furnish our selves with the
like artillery, and prepare our selves to the fight. Yea, whilst time lasts,
let us carefully store our selves, that we may constantly and courageously
resist when the like danger shall approach. If Satan object unto us the ruin of
many nations, We must buckle our spiritual armor about us, to resist
temptations before they come. We must distinguish between infidels and our
selves.
let us distinguish our condition from theirs: for albeit we are indeed subject
to the same calamities, yet we have sure promises touching our salvation, which
the others had not.

Verse. 12. Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have
destroyed: as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were
at Telasser?

13. Where is the King of Hamath, and the King of Arpad, and the King of the
Cities of Sepharuaim, Henah, and Iuah?


MEntion is made of Gozan, in 2. King. 17.6. And thence we may garher that it
was a City of the Medes, although others affirm that it was situated in
another Country: but it suffices that it stood eastward from Iudeah. Touching
Charan, it is often mentioned in the Scriptures. Pliny Pliny.
says it was a City of Arabia: but it is commonly placed in Mesopotamia.
Which is confirmed by Abraham's voyage, who came thence with his father, when he
departed out of Caldea: Genesis 11.31. Act. 7.4. The profane Historiographers
call it Charras in the plural number, and say that Crassus and his sons were
slain there.

Verse. 14. So Hezekias took the letter of the hand of the messenger, and read
it: and he went up into the house of the Lord, and Hezekias spread it before
the Lord.
THe Prophet now shows what refuge Hezekias fled unto in his great affliction;
to wit, he went forthwith into the Temple to bewail his misery (which he
could not remeadie) before the Lord, and to discharge his cares and sorrows
into Gods bosom. For it was no confused or disordered complaint, but by
prayers and tears he meant to bow the Lord to his request, that he might
yield him succor. By this example we are taught, The only way to escape out
of t^ouble.
that there is no easier way to wade out of our calamities when they press us,
then by casting our burden upon the Lord: for all comforts besides, shall do
us more hurt then good, if this be wanting.

He spreads not the letters before the Lord, as if he had been ignorant of
them; but God is well pleased we should deal thus with him: therein applying
himself to our infirmities. For our prayers, tears, and complaints, discover
not our necessities before his eyes, Mat. 6.8.
seeing he knows them all before we once begin to open our mouths; or to
ask ought at his hands. But we now speak of that which is profitable for us;
to wit, that God may show that he has heard the blasphemies of our enemies;
so as those who have uttered them, may not escape unpunished. This is the
reason and end wherefore Hezekias spread the letters of this cursed tyrant
before the Lord, namely, to put the greater edge upon his prayers, and to
kindle and inflame his zeal more and more.

Verse. 15. And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying;

16. O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims:
thou art very God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth; thou have made the
heaven and the earth.


BEcause Sennacherib had been the instrument of Satan to shake the faith of
Hezekias, he now opposes his rampart against him; to wit, that God is the
Lord of hosts, and therefore of infinite power. For there is no doubt but he
rouseth up his spirits, in assuring himself to obtain that he asks, when he
adornes the Lord with these excellent titles. Will we have our prayers to
prevail with God? let us hold this principle; that God will be found of them
that seek him: A principle ever to be held, namely, that God will always be
found of them that seek him.
Heb. 11.6. But this good King had special need to lay hold of this sentence;
to wit, that Gods power always remains one and the same, albeit the wicked
strive to lessen it by their railings and scoffs; and to take heart the more
freely and boldly unto him, to set himself valiantly against the lets by which
Satan endeavored to hinder his course. Now herein we may behold the heroical
magnanimity of this good King, who ceased not to resist this tyrant for the
maintenance of Gods power, but bare a loyal affection inwardly in his heart
thereunto, and also made God a witness of his inward affection. Before he
begins to frame any prayer then, he breaks through the fallacies whereby Satan
went about to put him to the wall: so that he not only magnifies Gods power,
but maintains the sovereignty which he has over the whole world.

Now he meditates on these things, the better to confirm himself in the
assurance which he had in Gods providence, by which all things in heaven and in
earth are ordered and disposed. And this foundation ought all the faithful
first to lay, that so they lose not their labor in praying. The Kings prayer
had not been of such force and efficacy, if he had only said, Incline thine
ear O Lord, and hear, etc. or such like words: as when he keeps this
principle first in his heart; that God has care over all the works of his
hands. For he persuades himself that God will take this cause into his own
hands, and will not suffer the tyrant thus proudly to advance himself; but
will rather speedily put him down, since the government of the whole world
belongs unto him. Also, seeing Sennacherib attributed that unto himself, which
of right appertained unto God; that he could not escape unpunished.

Where he subiecteth all the kingdoms of the earth under Gods hand and power,
he applies it unto his own particular use. In the mean while, such a title
never agrees to any but to God only; because he rules over all Kingdoms.
Notwithstanding he denies not but Kings, Princes, and Magistrates have their
just titles; yet so, as themselves be subject unto God, and maintain his right
and dominion: for it belongs only to God to be King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, as S. Paul says. 1. Tim. 6.15.
Not that he therefore abolisheth the names of Kings and Lords, with their
dominions, but shows that all depends upon God only, how great or mighty
soever they be; that they should not think themselves hail fellow well met
with him, but that they ought rather to acknowledge him to be their Lord and
King. Kings then hold their authority, as you see; if so be they will keep
the mid way between God and men, and will not presume to climb higher.

Moreover, Hezechias gathers this title from the very creation; for it is not
possible that the Creator of heaven and earth should ever forsake the works of
his own hands; nay, do we not see on the contrary, that he gouernes mankind
by his providence, which is the chiefest part of the world? It were too absurd
a thing then to limit the creation within so narrow bounds, that it should
only serve as a witness of a certain power of God, that lasted but a while,
and stretched it self to a few things: no, it ought to be extended to a
continual working in all things. By this it appears, that those tyrants which
will take liberty to rule as they list, do therein bereave God of his honor;
and therefore when things fall out otherwise then well unto them, they may
justly impute it to their own pride and presumption.

Hezekias also alleges other epithetes, for the confirmation of his faith.
And first, in that he calls him the Lord of hosts, he again extols his power:
but when he adds, the God of Israel, he notes out a more near and particular
presence: for it was no small sign of Gods love, to have taken the safety of
this people into his own custody. Hereunto appertains his sitting between
the Cherubims: as if he should say; Thou have placed thy throne here, and have
promised protection to such as call upon thee before the Arc of the covenant:
now resting my self upon this promise, I come to thee as to the only guardian
of my safety. Exodus 25.18.
But Hezekias doubtless had respect to the form of the Arc, which was
shadowed with Cherubims. Some expound these Cherubims, Angels, as if it were
said, God reigns in heaven, and sits among the Angels. But this exposition
suits not. For it is said, that he sits between the Cherubims, because of the
Arc which was thus composed. Now we know it was a true and certain sign of
Gods presence, albeit his power was not shut up within the same: but Hezekias
in mentioning thereof meant to affirm, that God was there present, because he
had vouchsafed to gather his people unto him, by stretching his wings (as you
would say) over them. For as much then as there is a great distance of place
between God and us, Hezekias lays hold upon this notable pledge of adoption,
and yet kept he his mind free from being tainted with any carnal conceits
touching Gods Majesty, whereinto the superstitious plunge themselves, who
strive by all means to draw him down from heaven: but the King contenting
himself with faith in the promises which he had received, concludes, that he
needed not to seek far for Gods favorable presence.

Let us observe this phrase of speech well therefore, which teaches us to
mount by little and little unto heaven by the light of the promises which do
shine clearly before us: yet so, that in seeking succor, we imagine not that
God should be absent from us, seeing he has chosen his dwelling place in the
mids of us. For in regard that his Majesty much surmounts heaven and earth, it
is not lawful for us to bound him within the narrow scantling of our
understanding: yet we may comprehend him according to the small measure
thereof, because he has revealed himself unto us by his word: not that we
must needs pull him down from his heavenly throne therefore, but that our
minds which are of themselves weak and dull, might by degrees approach nearer
and nearer unto him: for we have good reason to press with boldness toward his
highness, in regard he calls us unto him by his word and Sacraments.

And if we conceive of these things aright, the spiritual knowledge of God
shall always bear sway amongst us, so as we shall not need to tie the Lord
any more to stones nor stocks. If the spiritual knowledge of God bears sway
in our hearts, we shall not need to tie his presence to stocks or stones.
No, we shall imagine nothing of him that is earthly or carnal: for the nearer
we shall draw toward him, the more will we endeavor our selves to use all
lawful means which he sets before us, that our spirits may not rest upon
earthly things: for he applies himself to our shallownes only, to the end
that his Sacraments might serve us as ladders to climb up unto him by: but this
superstition has perverted and turned it to a clean contrary use.

Verse. 17. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear: open thine eyes, O Lord, and
see, and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who has sent to blaspheme the
living God.
HEnce we gather in how great perplexity Hezekias was: for the vehemency of
his prayer discouers unto us a wonderful measure of grief, so as a man may
see that he endured great combats which he overcame not without much ado. For
albeit the affection and zeal of his prayer shows the strength and power of
his faith; yet he therein represents unto us as in a glass his passions that
boiled within him. As soon then as we are to endure any such assaults, let us
learn from the example of this good King to oppose against the passions
wherewith we are tossed, that which may best serve for the confirming of our
faith, that by the tempest it self we may be brought to a safe and quiet
haven. Let not the sense of our weakness any whit astonish us then; no, not
when fear and dread shall press us above measure as it were. For the Lord
will have us wrestle valiantly even till we sweat and tremble, God will have
us wrestle till we tremble and sweat.
because we must not think to go to heaven in a fetherbed, or at ease, as we
use to speak, but after many combats God has promised an happy issue to
them that fight as they ought to do, which in the end he will undoubtedly
bestow upon us.

But why does Hezekiah desire God to hear? Thinks he that he sleeps, or
understands not? No such matter. But we are wont to speak thus in some
desperate cases, either Hezekias had desired the Lord even effectually and
openly to show some work for his salvation, which he had long hoped for
before in the secret of his heart.

But why does he pray that God would open his eyes, and see? It is as much as
if he had said, Lord, let it appear that thou have care of these matters. Now
he sufficiently shows where his pain held him most, namely, he longed to see
some vengeance showed upon these blasphemers which offered such outrage against
Gods Majesty: for albeit this good King took great thought for the
preservation of his kingdom and people, yet had he respect unto Gods glory
above all other commodities whatsoever. Hezekias respected Gods glory above
all things whatsoever.
And truly the advancement thereof should touch us nearer, and move us more
then any thing else, especially when we know that his glory and our salvation
are things that can not be separated.

Thus Hezekias having brought forth this Tyrant upon the stage as a blasphemous
and hateful enemy of God, because Jerusalem gloried in this title, The God of
Jacob, and in his protection, he thereupon concludes, that God can by no means
cast off ye City which he has taken into his own custody, unless
therewithal he should renounce his own name also. Seeing the Lord then of his
infinite bounty is pleased to join his glory with our salvation, let us hold
fast these promises, and let us fortify our selves with them, namely, that
although the wicked go on in a vain hope, thinking to escape scotfree whilst
they blaspheme God, and cast up that poison out of their hearts which lurked
before in them, yet there is not a syllable thereof which he understands not,
and he will in his due time bring them to an account for the same.

Verse. 18. Truth it is, O Lord, that the Kings of Asshur have destroyed all
lands, and their country.

19. And have cast their gods in the fire: for they were no Gods, but the work
of man's hands, even wood or stone: therefore they destroyed them.


HEzekias begins here to put a difference between the true God and the false,
which we also had need diligently to do: for the wicked that are not
enlightened have many confused thoughts of some divinity, which by and by
vanishes away, so as either they think there is no God at all, or if there
be, yet they regard him not. But God would not have us lightly touched with
some idle or vading conceit of him, What knowledge of God is required to be in
Christians.
but that we should acknowledge him to be the true God, who by the brightness of
his power scatters abroad all the darkness of ignorance. It is not enough then
you see to acknowledge a divinity of I can not tell what, as profane ones do,
but God ought to be so known and received, that he be discerned from all
Idols; and the truth separated from lies. And questionless, when he has once
cleared our judgments; all opinion of false religions which possessed our
minds before, will immediately fall to the ground.

And so much the rather are we to hold fast this doctrine, by how much the more
many please themselves in fond speculations, thinking it sufficient for them if
they acknowledge a God at randon. Whether they ought to worship the god of the
Turks or Jews they know not: and thus they houer in the air, and touch
neither heaven nor earth, as they say. There is not a worse plague to be found,
then such an imagination, for thereby the true God and Idols are mingled
together, whose Majesty is then tumbled down from his throne, unless he be
held as supreme head, and all false gods with their worship laid at his feet.
The beginning of true piety therefore consists in a wise distinguishing of
this only God, from all the troop of idol gods.

But Hezekias uses two reasons by which he corruptible matter: Secondly, they
were the work of men's hands. Now what is more absurd then to see a man so much
past shame as to be the forger of a God; not only because himself is not
eternal, and God is: but because he can not consist by his own power, not so
much as one minute of an hour. For example, All the world not able to form a
silly flea.
let all the world do their utmost to put all the wit and force thereof into
one man if it could be, yet is he not able to make a poor flea: what pride is
it then for a man at his pleasure to put his hands to the work, and to forge
as many gods to himself as he list? for seeing all that is in us is merely
earthly and transitory, we can expect but treene gods to come from the work
of our own hands. Add further, that it is the greatest folly in the world to
imagine under pretext of art, No folly like this, to imagine that a piece of
wood should become a God as soon as the workman by art has given some form
or shape unto it.
to fasten a kind of divinity to a corruptible and an insensible block; as if
a piece of wood or stone began then to be god, as soon as it has some
purtraiture given unto it. Thus we may easily overthrow all the superstitions
which men have invented: for stedfastnes and constancy must be sought further
off then in men's shallow brains: nay, I say more, all that which they have
invented in that shop, is condemned as lies, and things of naught.

Verse. 20. Now therefore, O Lord our God, save thou us out of his hand, that
all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou only art the Lord.
NOw this good King in the conclusion of his prayer ouercomes all fear,
against which he had fought a long time; for there is no doubt but the helps
wherewith he has hitherunto furnished himself, did much encourage him with
boldness to add this short clause. Now albeit God delivers us not always from
outward troubles, yet in regard he had promised to preserve and keep the
City, Hezekias was bold to believe that this tyrant which plotted his
overthrow, should little avail by any of his devices. And whereas he again
urges the Lord with this motive, That his glory shall be wonderfully
advanced, by the deliverance of this City: thence we gather, that we ought to
wish nothing

Moreover, Hezekiah not only desires that the God of Israel may be only
exalted of men, but would have him exalted so far forth, that all Idols also
might be abolished: for many Idolaters at that time would have bin content that
the true God had bin worshipped amongst the rest of their dunghill gods; but
because he can away with none to fit check mate with him, all the gods which
men have forged must be brought to naught, that he only may obtain the
sovereign Monarchy.

Verse. 21. Then Isaiah the son of Amos sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus says
the Lord God of Israel; Because thou have prayed unto me concerning Sennacherib
King of Ashur,

22. This is the word that the Lord has spoken against him; The virgin, the
daughter of Zion has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn: the daughter
of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.


NOw behold the fruit of prayer: for things being brought to an after deal,
God suddenly reaches Hezekias his hand, by the ministry of our Prophet
Isaiah. God will have our faith still exercised.
Not that he so reached or stretched it forth, that the enemy was forthwith
put to flight; but in promising deliverance by Isaiahs mouth, he still
exercises the faith of his servant. Now as the Prophet for his part, could not
of himself have given this consolation; so had it been but a ridiculous thing
to have promised it, unless Hezekias had also believed that this message was
sent him from God. He therefore contented himself with this bare promise,
waiting in silence till God should manifest his power. Now by this we are
taught, that it is our duty at all times to ask counsel Hezekias here a
singular example of faith and constancy; and yet the Lord contents not
himself to have comforted him once, and by one prophecy only; as in verse 6,
7. but he now confirms his faith many ways; that we who are far short of that
constancy which was in him, might learn to know what need we have of many
helps for the sustaining and upholding of our faith continually.

Because thou have prayed unto me.] The holy history expresses no more but
this verb, I have heard thee: the word because therefore is a relative in that
place: but here it is an expositiue, or a particle of giving a reason, as in
many other places. For it is forced and constrained to supply the verb To
hear; as many expositors do: and the sentence runs well being read as it
is; when God therein shows that he will overthrow all the practices of
Sennacherib, and repress his violence and fury, because Hezekias has prayed.
As if he should say; I give thee such an answer as fits thy request. And
doubtless whosoever he be that directs his prayer unto God, Ask, and it sh^l
be given you: Mat 7.7 See Ezech. 36.37.
he shall in the end feel how much the Lord is inclined to answer: indeed
he often holds his peace, and offers us no consolation by his word, but it is
because we have been mute in our afflictions.

The sum of the prophecy comes to this; that Hezekias, as feeble and
destitute as he was of all succor, yet needed not for all that to fear in
beholding this tyrant so to advance himself: for God would be the moderator in
this case, who protests that he will take the quarrel into his own hand: as
if he should say; Sennacherib indeed has offered outrage against thee and thy
people, but the weight of it falls upon my Majesty. And thus he shows that
he will be revenged of the heathen that knew not his name; and withal
admonishes the faithful not to sorrow as men without hope, if the world for a
time do tread them under foot, for he has store of succors ready in heaven
to sustain their infirmities. But it has much greater force, in that he
speaks to the whole Church, then if he had spoken to Hezekias particularly:
for this circumstance augments the indignity of the fact, because Sennacherib
scorned the mean estate of this poor people, as if Gods help had been a
matter of nothing. The Prophet then taxes the blindness of this Tyrant, who
having no respect unto God, thus proudly insulteth over his poor and desolate
Church.

It is an usual thing in the Scriptures, to call Cities daughters: sometimes
goodly Cities also are called virgins, as we have noted before in another
place. But here Isaiah poor virgin, succourlesse and comfortless, which this
vile ruffian, and cursed cutthrote vexed and reviled: whereas God father to
whom this injury was offered, shows that he is acquainted well enough with the
plots of this miscreant, as also in what estate the whole land of Judea was.

Verse. 23. Whom have thou railed on and blasphemed? And against whom have thou
exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy one
of Israel.
IN the verse before going, he described the matter as if it had been seen and
heard of all: now he raises their thoughts higher, showing that the Tyrant
has not only bent himself against Jerusalem, but against her God also. This
sentence ought to be called to mind when the Church is afflicted.
Let this place come to our remembrance as often as we are exposed to the scoffs
and taunts of the wicked: for albeit we are forlorn, and there be no eye to
pity us, nor any to plead our cause, in regard of the enemies rage which is
more and more inflamed against us, yet our God is at hand, who will cover us in
such wise, as we shall have strength and defense sufficient: for all they that
persecute us, do not only war with us, but with him which is the living God.
These things were not written for one age alone; but rather as this promise is
perpetual, I will be thy buckler, Genesis 15.1.
and thine exceeding great reward: A friend to thy friends, and an an enemy to
thy enemies: God perfects his power in weakness.
Genesis 17.7. so, even then when we have least means and strength to resist,
let us be so much the more resolved, that the hand of our God is the nearer to
deliver us. Since God has been pleased then in the person of Abraham to strike
a covenant with us, upon condition that himself will always take our quarrel
into his own hands: let us assure our selves, that he will faithfully perform
his promise, and will manifest it, that the wrong which is done unto us,
redounds to his own person. In a word, he is so made one with us in his
Christ, that he will have ours made his, and that which is his, made common to
us.

To be short, he is so conioined with us, that he means to make a community
of all that is his and ours together. And therefore he took the outrages and
wrongs which Sennacherib did to the Church, as done to his own person: to show,
that wicked men greatly abuse themselves, when they are puffed up with an
ouerweening of their own greatness, as if therefore forsooth they should
escape unpunished, when they have trod the poor Church under their feet. For
we know they basely esteem of God his providence, and especially when they see
the faithful lie panting under the burden of the Cross and afflictions, they
think them unworthy the succor of God: who for that cause awakes himself as
it were, and declares by unanswerable arguments, that he is no less wronged
when his little flock is thus halled to and fro, then if open violence were
offered to his own Majesty. Let it be granted then that our enemies think
our God cares not for us, when outward means fail us, and that they then
spoil with greater liberty, as if we were given into their hands for a pray;
yet God on the contrary affirms, that our salvation is dear and precious
still unto him.

But our Prophet with many words sets forth the pride and insolency of this
tyrant, as of a man altogether insupportable; to wit, in his speeches, looks,
and gestures which he used with head, hands, feet, and all the parts of his
body: for as such proud tyrants have a vain conceit of their own greatness,
so they advance themselves, and behold others with a scornful eye; as if they
were some petty gods, newly fallen from the clouds. For a conclusion, Isaiah
adds, that albeit the affairs of this people went but meanly forward, yet God
notwithstanding, who holds them under his protection, remains in heaven, and
is as almighty as ever he was: wherein he taxes the madness of Sennacherib,
who esteemed the people according to the outward appearance, never considering
that they were dedicated and consecrated unto God. That we then may rest
safely and securely under his power and protection, and that he may spread his
arms over us for our succor in the time of need; we must for our parts be
sure that we be his Israel; which we shall be, if resting upon his word and
promises, we quietly sit us down under the shadow of his wings.

Verse. 24. By thy servants have thou railed on the Lord, and said; By the
multitude of my chariots, I am come up to the top of the mountains, to the
sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the high Cedars thereof, and the fur
trees thereof: and I will go up to the heights of his top, and to the forest
of his fruitful places.
SEe how the indignity and spightfulnesse of this outrage is further
amplified; for the injury that is offered by a servant, is not so easily put
up, as when it is done by the master; because the baseness of the person makes
the wrong evermore intolerable. And therefore the proud ones of the world,
when they will threaten in the most despightfull sort, they will brag that
their wills shall be executed by their servants and horsekeepers: that they may
make it known, how basely they esteem of those whom they purpose to
mischief. By this circumstance then the Prophet meant to show how execrable
this blasphemy was, when Sennacherib was not content to vomit it out of his
own mouth; but had set on his servant Rabshekeh, to make him rent the sacred
name of God in pieces.

As touching that which is recited afterward in the person of Sennacherib, some
take it generally for the former victories which he had won, and by this
means had subdued many nations, as we have said before: but I had rather take
it more particularly, in referring it to this last siege. For when he saw the
whole land in a manner under his obeisance, and the mountains which environed
all the Country, possessed by his soldiers, he brags as if he had gotten all,
and threatens that he will enjoy the castles, mount Libanon with his Cedars,
fir-trees, and other commodities: as if he should say; Nothing shall let me to
be master of all the forts of Judah, and to deal with the Country as I think
good. See how Tyrants glory that the good successes of their wars are in
their own hands, although often constreined to acknowledge the fight to be
dangerous.

Verse. 25. I have dug and drunk the waters, and with the plant of my feet
have I dried all the rivers Or, of the siege.
closed in.
THis Tyrant proceeds here, glorying still in his forces, and threatens to
bring so mighty an army, that the multitudes of his soldiers shall be able
to drink the fountains and rivers of Iewrie dry. By the rivers of the siege,
some understand the river Shilo, and the Cisterns which the besieged Jews
could not lose but they must forthwith perish for thirst. Yet in the first
member he seems to affirm, that he fears no want of water, though the whole
country were destitute of it, because he has men enough to dig pits. In the
second place he says, he is furnished with means sufficient to dry up all
the waters of the City, thinking thus to terrify the Jews. His meaning in a
word is, that Jerusalem will not be able to endure the siege, nor be able to
stand out long against him, but must forthwith be constreined to yield. Now
when the wicked make their vants on this manner, God sits in heaven, whence at
the last he will denounce his just sentence against them. The prophets drift in
this narration.
For the Prophets discourse tends to inform us of Gods just and wonderful
judgment against this Tyrant.

Verse. 26. Have thou not heard how I have of old time made it, and have formed
it long ago? And should I now bring it, that it should be destroyed and laid
on ruinous heaps as Cities defenced?
THe expositors for the most part expound this verse as if the Lord should say,
That this Tyrant neither has done nor shall do any thing but that he has
foretold by the mouth of his Prophet, and thus affirms, that himself is the
author of these things. But I expound it otherwise; to wit, that Jerusalem
shall be delivered by Gods assistance, because he is the protector of it: and
that his speech might have the more weight, he names not the City, but uses
the pronoun demonstrait, as if all other Cities were nothing in Gods account in
comparison of this.

Others refer these words, I have made it, to the deliverance which depended
upon the secret counsel of God: but whosoever shall diligently weigh the
scope of the Prophets words, will confess that it is here spoken of Jerusalem.
God complained, as we have seen, that he was so despightfullie blasphemed; and
yet in reciting the words of Senacherib he only mentioned Libanon, and the
quarters adioining: now to show that under the name of Libanus, war was
proclaimed against himself, he affirms (as in many other places) that
Jerusalem was founded with his hand, and built at his command: whence it
follows, that Senacherib could not overthrow it, unless he first plucked God
down from his throne.

This doctrine is often met withal in the Scriptures, and wonderful comfort
is contained in it, upon which the faithful may at all times boldly lean in
all their trials and afflictions, be they never so hard and difficult to be
borne; to wit, that they shall ever be preserved under Gods protection, because
he has elected them. Gods argument in this place.
For thus stands the argument, I have made and formed the Church: the salvation
of it shall stand for ever, Phil. 1.6.
because I will not leave the work that I have begun unfinished, but will
bring it unto perfection. In a word, the Lord testifies that he will go on
with his work, and will preserve it, because it concerns his own honor, and
our salvation.

Moreover, he is called the former of his Church in another sense then that in
which he is said to be the Creator of heaven and earth: for we are his peculiar
workmanship, says S. Paul, being reformed by his Spirit: Ephesians. 1.10.
of which point we have spoken heretofore in other places. This work therefore
of all others is the most excellent, yea, above the creation of the whole
world. Be it far from any man therefore to affirm that he was incorporated
into the Church by his own power or industry: for it is not without cause
that we are called his workmanship, Ephe. 2.10.

But it may be demanded why the Lord says he formed Jerusalem long ago,
chosen this City for his dwelling place. For albeit it was then only said when
the Arc was made, This is my rest, here will I dwell, Psalm. 132.14. And by
Moses, I will come unto thee into the place wherein I shall put the remembrance
of my name, and I will bless thee, Exodus 20.24: yet had God long before
ordained it. For we were chosen before the foundations of the world were laid,
as S. Paul teaches, Ephesians. 1.4. And S. James says, That we were begotten by
the word of truth, that we might be the first fruits of his creatures, Iam.
1.18. He will then conserve us above all his creatures, and will never suffer
us to perish. Now as Christ is called the first borne of every creature, Colos.
1.13. so the Church also, which is his body; obteines in this world the
pre-eminence of dignity and honor.

I leave the Rabbis to their rauings, Rauings of the Rabbis.
when they say, that God created the Messiah and Jerusalem with a throne of
glory before he formed heaven or earth. But we must hold this principle, that
he will be the faithful guardian of his Church, seeing he has vouchsafed to
prefer it before all the world besides.

As touching that which follows in the end of the verse, And should I now
bring it to this point? Some draw it to a sense altogether wrested. I deny not
but the Prophets words are in the preterperfectence; Now I have brought it, and
put it: but because ye change of the tence is very familiar and usual in the
Hebrew tongue, it is certain that the Prophet having affirmed that God is in
such wise the former of his Church, that it is the chiefest of all his works,
he now thence concludes, that it can not be ruinated as other common things
are. It must be read by an Interrogation then, Shall I bring it now, or, should
I suffer it to be brought? As if he should say, Should I suffer it to be raced
as other Cities which are quite overthrown and laid on heaps? For he compares
Jerusalem with other Cities which were destroyed and subdued by the Assyrian,
that so they might know that this Tyrant should not so easily obtain that
which he desired, because the difference is great between it and other Cities
which have been raced to the foundation. It must not be compared then with
other Cities how well fortified soever they be, because they with the earthly
matter of which they consist, shall easily fall: but albeit the Church be but
weak and feeble in outward show, yet has she such a stable and firm
foundation laid in Gods secret election, that it can never be ouerturned by any
tempests whatsoever.

The glory of the Roman Empire gone.
We see strange changes have befallen the world: Commonwealths have been turned
topsie turuie, Empires abolished, mighty nations subdued, and their renown
and glory extinguished. What is now become of the glory of the Roman Empire?
What is become of the Nobles of this people, who were the Lords of all the
earth? If any relics thereof remain (which is very small) is it not brought
under the miserable slavery of that cursed monster, That Antichrist of Rome,
an exec able monster.
I mean Antichrist, who exercises his tyranny over all the earth? Where is now
the liberty which Rome once inioied? Where is that goodly form of a
Commonwealth, which was once to be seen there? Rome may now well be called the
shop of all mischief and impiety, Rome may now be called the shop of al
imip^ty.
and a cage of every unclean bird? But in the midst of all these horrible
confusions, the Lord shows that he will preserve Jerusalem; that is to say, his
Church: and albeit among these changes, she be tossed up and down, and
diversely afflicted, yet she shall stand fast notwithstanding. At least, the
shakings and persecutions which she suffers, shall not hinder her so, that by
many resurrections (as it were) she should not still be renewed and multiplied
from age to age. Now although the members of the Church are not always of one
rank in this world, yet it is one and the same body knit by ioints and bands
to one head Jesus Christ. Thus then, The Lord will keep and defend the City,
and will cause the children of his servants to continue, that their seed may
be established for ever: Psalm. 102.28.

Verse. 27. Or, For the.
Whose inhabitants Ebr. are short in hand.
have small power, and are afraid and confounded: They are like the grass of
the field and green herb, or, grass on the house tops, or corn blasted
before it be grown.
THe Prophet now better expresses that which he touched in brief before, to
wit, that the estate of the Church is not to be judged according to that which
she is in this world: for though the strongest Cities be taken, that the most
valiant do fail in heart, and fall into their enemies hands; yet the Church
shall remain and flourish, because she rests not upon her own strength,
neither has she her foundation from earth, but from heaven. For there is a
close opposition here between strong Cities which the inhabitants cannot
keep, because they are frighted and troubled; and the Church of God, which
being vpheld by his only grace, sustaines all assaults, and is never
vanquished: for she referres all things to God only, who gives her beginning
and being, continues her strength, indues her with constancy and all sorts of
benefits: in a word, with all the parts of her salvation. Hence we are taught,
that all the fortresses in the world are nothing, unless God be the watchman.
All the forces of men are but as shiuering reeds, unless they be sustained by
his power: castles, ramparts, and weapons, be they never so many and
invincible, without him, shall serve their turns nothing at all.

This is yet better expressed by the similitudes which are added. For it was
necessary that the faithful should be well informed touching the love and
singular affection which the Lord bare toward them, lest they should be
offended at the prosperity of the profane and wicked. Albeit humane forces
then be never so glorious in outward appearance, and make all the goodly shows
that can be devised; yet the Prophet affirms that it is but like the grass
and flowers of the field, The first Simile.
which are green and flourish for a time, and suddenly are gone. He abaseth
them more by the other similitude which he ads touching the grass upon the
house tops, The second Simile.
whose stalks are high and easy to be seen of all: but if they grow upon any
high place, then are they nearest their withering, being never fit for any use:
as the Psalmist says; for the reaper filles not his hand, nor the gleaner his
lap; and therefore the passers by say not so much as God speed you: Psalm.
129.6, 7. So albeit the enemies of the Church be like the tall Cedars, whose
tops touch the heavens as it were, and flourish by inioying the world at will,
yet shall they in a moment wither and come to nothing. As the corn then which
grows on the ground, serves to much better use then the unfruitful grass
which grows on the house top, so the Lord shows that the base and abject
condition of his servants, is much more excellent then theirs, who by reason of
their power, exalt themselves so far, as to iustle against the Lord of heaven
and earth.

Some think that that which is added touching the corn blasted, should be the
fourth similitude: but as I think the Prophet would have it serve as an
exposition of the former similitude: as if he should say; This grass shall
wither away before it is come to a stalk or to any ripeness. As the Psalmist
also says, It withers before it be plucked up.

Verse. 28. But I know thy dwelling, and thy going out, and thy coming in; and
thy fury against me.
HE returns and touches the insupportable pride of this Tyrant, who
attributed I wot not what to himself, as if he had been inferior to none:
yea, he durst blaspheme and rail upon the living God, as if he had been
nothing in comparison of him. But God takes down his pride and arrogancy: as
if he should say, yet do I know all thy haunts well enough; yea, thy sitting
down, and rising up. The wicked exalt themselves, thinking they should be
subject to none, no not to the providence of God it self: but he shows, that
they have no more power but that which is given them from above.

Sitting and going forth is taken here for consultations, imaginations, and
enterprises of the profane and wicked, who invent sundry plots how they may
ouerwhelme and destroy the people of God: but on which side soever they turn
themselves, and what way soever they take to bring their purposes to pass, yet
they shall not perform a jot more then God has willed. For they are
restrained by his providence, which drives them to and fro, and often turns
their wicked plots to a good end, though they meant the clean contrary. But
God (whose proper office it is to direct men's paths, Pro. 20.24.) conducts them
which way it pleases him.

He says also, I know thy fury: thereby minding to show, that whilst the
wicked play the bedlems on earth, God sits still in heaven laughing their
madness to scorn. And because Sennacherib behaved himself malepertly, and
thought to go scot-free, the Prophet adds these words expreslie, to the end
the faithful should not imagine this to be new, or unknown to the Lord, or as
if he esteemed them not.

Verse. 29. Because thou ragest against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine
ears, therefore will I put mine Or, ring.
hook in thy nostrils, and my bridle in thy lips, and will bring thee back
again the same way thou came.
THe more the wicked are carried away with rage, furiously exalting themselves
against God, the more severely does he at the last oppose himself against
their pride. He lets them take their swinge for a time, and suffers them to
enjoy the world at will, but after long forbearance he tames them, and
restraines them, lest they should think they had all under their command.
Sennacherib is a singular example hereof, for the more audacious he is to foam
out his rage and fury against God, the more heavy did he feel his wrath to
fall upon him whom he thus braued: which all the pack of persecuters ought to
expect as well as he.

Now he does aptly and pleasantly scorn the fond ouerweening of this Tyrant,
as if he should say, I see well enough how the world goes, I shall gain
nothing by handling thee gently, because thy wrath is become desperate: seeing
then thou can not be tamed, I will hamper thee like a wild beast. Verse 28.
And thus God shows more plainly, that he is not only acquainted with the
plots and imaginations of this miscreant, but so moderates and holds back his
tyranny, that in spite of his teeth he leads them whither soever he lists:
as if a wild beast have a ring put through his snout, a man may lead him
whither he will. Some translate the word Kaki, an hook, but I had rather
expound it a ring: because an hook is fitter to catch fish withal then wild
beasts, Sennacherib then was constreined to turn from whence he came, and
hastened away without doing any thing; although his purpose was to have possessed
Egypt and Judah wholly: neither would he have been disappointed of his purpose
willingly if God had not drawn him away by his secret work.

Verse. 30. And this shall be a sign unto thee, O Hezekiah, Thou shall eat
this year such as grows of it self: and the second year such things as
grow without sowing: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
NOw he directs his speech unto Hezekias and to all the people: for he spoke
not before to Sennacherib as if he had heard him, but it was to the end he
might the better quicken up the people to be of good courage, seeing the Lord
did thus despise this Tyrant. If he had only said, Hezekias, be of good
comfort, albeit Sennacherib insults over thee, yet I will repress his pride
when I see it fit; these words (I say) had not been of such efficacy, as when
together with the same he turns his speech toward the Tyrant himself, in
thundering from heaven upon him: for by this means he imboldens the faithful
to set light by all his threats. Therefore having first spoken to the Tyrant,
now he turns himself very fitly unto Hezekias and to the people, promising
them deliverance: and that not only out of the paws of this cruel bear, but
also that Hezekias should enjoy his kingdom still in peace and prosperity,
and that the rest of the people should likewise have all things necessary for
an happy and quiet life. And thus he amplifies the benefit of their
deliverance, the rather to show that he will not only succor his people in one
kind only, but many ways: for in deed his deliuera^ces are not only limited
to once or twice, but he would have us feel his benefits in large and in
abundant measure, that the fruit thereof might last for a long time.

But it seems the Prophet fits not his sign to the present purpose, Two sorts
of signs.
I answer, there are two sorts of signs, one goes before, and leads us by
the hand as it were to the thing promised, the other comes after Moses, but
afterward he ordained one which should follow the deliverance: to wit, You
shall sacrifice unto me three days, Exodus 3.12. Why so? To the end they should
not forget so great a benefit, but might yield him thanks, after they had had
experience of so exceeding a favor.

Such a sign is yt which Isaiah here describes: and questionles, it serves
also for a good co^firmatio^ of our faith, to have such an everlasting
testimony as it were still before our eyes, which may cause us to consider how
many mercies ye Lord has showed us. Now though the enemy was driven back, yet
there was great likelihood of famine to ensue, which usually follows wars:
for it is not possible but great dearth must ensue where the fields have been
wasted and spoiled. But against this necessity which was likely to befall, the
Lord promises continuance of food, and propounds this as an evident sign of
their deliverance, the better to persuade the people that he was the author
thereof, or at the least, to fix the memory of it the faster in their minds.
This was a thing incredible, and seemed far to surmount all their capacities:
but it was needful that the faith of Hezekias and the peoples also should be
thus awakened, that having intelligence of so rare a deliverance, they might be
the better prepared to hope, and that the issue also might show how it came not
to pass by chance or fortune; unto which, for the most part, these so many
admirable works of God are attributed.

The Prophets meaning then is, After the Lord shall have fraied the enemy
away, he will hold him so short, that he shall never be able to renew his army
again: and thus thou shall live quietly in thy kingdom, which shall bring
thee forth fruit in such abundance, that thou shall want nothing. Now in regard
that part of their store was spent, and the rest wasted, as it comes to pass
ordinarily in such public calamities, and that it was not permitted them to
till the earth, being now either besieged, or else fled; he promises them
corn without sowing, unto the third year.

Verse. 31. And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall again
take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
THis appertains to the former sentence: for his meaning is, that the Lord
will deliver Jerusalem in such wise, that he will care for it also for the time
to come, and will keep it unto the end. Truly all the benefits the Lord
bestows upon us, are so many signs and testimonies of his perpetual good
will toward us; to the end we might assuredly know, that he will never leave
nor forsake us. But in this sentence we are chiefly to observe that which we
have also touched before; to wit, that the Lord defended Jerusalem, because he
had pitched his Sanctuary there, out of which also the Messiah was to come.
The word Peliaih, properly signifies Deliverance; but it is here used as a
nowne collectiue, which signifies those that are delivered, or, are escaped: as
in other places the word captivity, is taken for the captives. Now it is not
without cause that he promises increase to this little remnant: for albeit the
siege was raised, yet the people being much diminished, they had small cause to
rejoice: and it was a thing very unlikely to expect a full restoration of such
an handful of people.

That he might a little revive their sorrowful hearts then, he shows that the
Country shall be filled with inhabitans, no less then if a fair and goodly
plump of trees should fill the granges which were empty before. But it was not
only the waste of the land of Judah, which wounded the hearts of the faithful
thus with sorrow, but the great dimunition of the ten Tribes their brethren,
which had also been carried away captives. Now albeit they were thus
scattered, yet Isaiah promises that God would set them again into their first
estate, so as they should multiply into an infinite number: God often suffers
his people to be brought to low ebs, that his glory might the better appear in
their deliverance.
for the Lord often suffers his to be diminished and brought to nothing, that
his glory may the better appear afterward in their deliverance. And we at
this day are to expect the like favor from God, which he has heretofore
showed to his people, that when we see the Church at ye last cast, giving up
the ghost as it were; yet the^ we may assure our selves notwithstanding, that
God has means enough ready at hand to multiply this small remnant again. For
such a restoration must not be measured according to the scantell of our
reason.

But he says, the Church shall be brought to so low an ebb, that every one
will esteem it quite forlorn, even as if it were plucked up by the roots:
and truly the kingdom of Israel was a most sorrowful specta^le of this
plucking up. Yet the Prophet in the name of God promises such an increase,
that the tree which was stubbed up by the roots, shall again take deeprooting
downwards. Albeit the church then have not that goodly outward hew and beauty
which the kingdoms of this world have, The Church of God must live by faith,
and not by fight.
yet will the Lord give it such an inward and secret power, that by means
thereof she shall flourish and grow; contrary to all hope and reason of flesh
and blood. Let us not be out of heart then though the Church seem to want
roots: neither let us not think she has none, because they appear not to
our sight; for the Lord has promised she shall take root downward.

Now he adds the fruit also; because the Church florisheth not only as the
grass on the house top, which is the estate of the wicked, as we observed in
the 27. verse; but she shall bring forth plentiful increase: and thus the
Lord will finish in her the good work he has begun.

Verse. 32. For out of Jerusalem shall go a remnant, and they that escape out
of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.
BEfore, he promised the deliverance of the Church under the similitude of
roots and fruits: now he sets it forth in plain terms, without any figure.
In these words therefore he alludes to that siege of Sennacherib, which
enclosed this small remnant of people up in Jerusalem, as in a prison; by
means whereof they were brought to great extremity. Now says he, they shall
come forth: that is to say, all passages shall be laid open, so as you shall
walk to and fro again at liberty without any annoyance. For going forth, is
here opposed to the straits into which the poor Jews were brought, in regard
of the fear of their enemies. Albeit, this word not only signifies liberty
to go and come, but the multiplying of the people which were few in number.
When the land of Iudeah then was ouerspread again with great troops, and that
out of these small remnants there came forth men and women like flocks of
sheep, Ier. 30 16.17.18.19.20. and 31.10.11.12.13. Zach. 8.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.
which were dispersed into all the quarters of the world, it could never have
bin brought to pass, unless the Lord of this little handful, had created, I
will not say one, but many peoples.

He not only opposes the zeal of the Lord against the counsels of men, that
he might magnify the excellency of this work; but also admonishes us that
it suffices of it self for all reasons wherefore the Lord shows so
wonderful and admirable signs and tokens of his power. The matter in outward
appeara^ce was incredible, as we have said: for there were many impediments on
every side, and helps none at all. Thus God manifests then, that the love he
bears to his Church is such, that it shall be no hard matter with him to work
extraordinarily for the maintenance of it. He used the like phrase of speech
in Chap. 9.7.

Verse. 33. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the King of Ashur; He
shall not enter into this City, nor shoot an arrowe there, nor come before it
with shield, nor cast a mount against it.
NOw he comes to the deliverance whereof Sennacherib, verse. 29. secondly, God
therefore promises that himself will stand as a brazen wall, to keep him
from entering in upon them: yea, he wouid so prevent him, that he should not so
much as come near to assail them at all. For he says, the enemies shall not
shoot an arrow there. I think the word Sollah, should be taken here for a
crosse-bow, or other instrument of war, with which they shot darts; rather then
for a mount, for mounts cannot be cast.

Verse. 34. By the same way he came shall he return, and not come into this
City, says the Lord.
We have said before, that to return by the same vva^, signifies, I^ s'en est
return come il est venu.
To go his way without performing any thing; as we use to say in our common
proverb; He went as wise as he came, when one returns without doing that
which he came for, and is prevented in all his enterprises. To confirm this,
he adds that the Lord has said it. For no sooner has he (which cannot lie)
spoken, but we ought forthwith to receive and embrace his word; and that no
less then if all impediments being taken away, we saw the effect by and by to
take place.

Verse. 35. For I will defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for
my servant David's sake.
THis is the confirmation of the former sentence, why Sennacherib shall not
come into Jerusalem; to wit, because the Lord is her protector. The Prophet
here then commands Hezekiah and all the people to turn their eyes toward God,
in regard the sight of this Tyrant was so terrible unto them, that they could
do nothing but tremble. As when we at this day should consider the power of
our enemies, it would make us quake for fear; in so much yt there should rest
scarsly one dram of hope in us: but we must notwithstanding look directly up
unto God, and lay hold upon his promises, and to fense our selves with them, as
with a shield. It is to him, to him alone, I say, that we must turn our eyes,
seeing he has power enough in himself for us to repress the power of mortal
man. For this promise must not be restrained to Hezechias his time only, This
promise must not be restrained to Hezekias his time only, but to ours also.
but it extends it self to all ages. And yet the Prophets words have a more
ample sense: for he affirms, that God himself is the protector and keeper of
the City, because he had taken it into his custody. Thence therefore he
concludes, that it must needs be out of danger, because his defense is
all-sufficient.

When he says he will do it for his own sake, he thereby brings Hezekias and
all the people to the consideration of the free covenant. The Jews had been
often rebuked, and that very sharply; yet did they not cease even of set
purpose to provoke the wrath of God against them: in which regard, they not
only deserved to be left to themselves in the time of need, but that he should
inflict upon them evident signs of his fearful wrath and indignation. That
despair might be prevented then, he teaches them that God will be their
defense: not that he finds the cause thereof in them, Ezekiel 31.32.
but because he respects his own name. Why so? First, that his word might stand
fast, which was, that he would never cast off the posterity of Abraham, which
he had adopted, nor abolish his worship, nor put out the remembrance of his
name, though the Sanctuary should be destroyed: Hezekias no doubt had more
ado to quiet and still the Jews from their murmurings, then to chase away the
enemy: for they took on no less, then if all had been lost. We must not
think then that God had respect to the deserts of the people, or to any other
particular cause, but solely to his own glory. For we must supply a close
antithesis here, which is expressed by Ezechiel: I do not this for your sakes O
house of Israel, but for mine holy names sake, Ezech. 36.22.

What refuge we are to flee to, in the conscience of our unworthiness.
Now seeing the same reason holds still in respect of us, let us boldly oppose
this buckler against all our sins: Lord, although we are worthy by thy just
judgments of a thousand deaths, yet be thou pleased to accept of thine own
free mercy and goodness to keep thy promise with us. I grant, that hypocrites
gain nothing by this, that God is said to be the perpetual protector of his
Church: but unto this rock must all the faithful learn to flee for refuge,
though they come empty handed of any thing of their own to appease his wrath
withal: for he will never suffer his Church to perish, because he has built
and established it with a purpose to keep it: but the cause that moves him to
do it is nothing else but his own free and infinite loves sake.

Furthermore it is diligently to be noted when he adds, for David my servants
sake: for albeit it had been sufficient for God to have sought the cause of our
salvation only in his free and undeserved love which he bears to his people:
yet it is not without cause that he places a most certain pledge of it in
David, in whose hand he had renewed the covenant, promising to be his father.
Neither does the Prophet propound him here as a private person, but as that
holy King, whose throne was established by God, 2. Sam. 7.14.
that under his government ye Church might enjoy peace and safety. In a word,
he was the mediator as it were between God and man, in which respect he was
superior to the very Angels: for he represented the person of Jesus Christ.

Ezech. 21.26.27.
Now albeit soon after his Throne was thrown down, and the Diadem torn in
pieces, yet was not this confirmation vain, that God would still for a time
keep the City, because he would in no sort break his promise made to David
in his truth, Psalm. 132.11.
touching the perpetuity of his kingdom. For we know that his successors
lost not the principality by the exile of the people till Christ came; Iere.
30.9. Ezech. 37.24.
who for this cause in Hosea 3.5. is called David. By this we see how
ridiculous the Papists are, Papists ridiculous in urging the merits of Saints
as a cause why God should pardon us.
when they affirm we are pardoned by the merits of Saints: for there is great
difference between the Saints and David, in regard of the promise which was
made unto him. He might as well have named Abraham, or any other renoumed
Patriarch in the Church: but because he now speaks of the Church, and of the
eternity of Christ's kingdom, he specially names him, whom above all others
had expreslie received this promise, Behold, this is my rest, here will I
dwell: for I have a delight therein, Psalm. 132.14. Seeing the Prophet then
respects the promise, The Prophet respects the promise, not David's person.
and not the person, the Papists then are worthily branded with ye name of
absurd Doctors, in thinking that the intercession of Saints (a dream of their
own devising) can be any whit confirmed by this place. Nay, that which they
pretend here, directly crosses their error: for David which is here placed
between, bears the image of the only Mediator, who abolisheth all newfound
intercessions. Read 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. John 2.1.2.

Verse. 36. Then the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of
Asshur an hundredth fourscore and five thousand: so when they arose early in
the morning, Behold, they were all dead corpses.
NOw the Prophet shows what befell the Assyrian, that we might not think the
Lords words to be but wind: he testifies then that his prophecy took effect
in deed; that so they might be the better persuaded he was sent of God, and had
spoken nothing of his own head. But this so admirable a work must not be
restrained to this one prophecy alone, but to the whole scope of his doctrine,
which by this miracle was authorized, himself known to be the servant of God,
and his calling ratified and confirmed. For doubtless he annexeth this notable
and rare example of Gods justice as a thing then very fresh in mind, to
testify to the end of the world that it was God which spoke by his mouth.

But now where the Angel made this slaughter, it appears not. The common
opinion is, that it happened whilst Jerusalem was besieged; but it might well
happen also in the way, that is to say, when Sennacherib came to lay siege
against Jerusalem. But I leave it as a thing in suspense, because it is of no
great moment: albeit we may easily judge by the scope of the text, that this
Tyrant came not so near that he could throw any of his darts against the City.

Moreover, we are to reject an invention of Satan, who has endeavored by help
of profane histories to darken so manifest and admirable a judgment of God,
which affirm, that part of Sennacheribs host died of ye plague in the wars
of Egypt, by reason whereof he was enforced to return home into his own
country. But who will say that there died so many men of the pestilence in one
night? This father of lies (according to his ancient custom) honors the
Egyptians with this miracle, which God purposely wrought in favor of his
Church. The fact it self makes it more then manifest, that Jerusalem was
miraculouslie delivered, as from the gates of death, specially if we way the
message which Isaiah brought, as we have seen before: by which he apparantlie
testified that God wrought this work rather for the Jews then for the
Egyptians.

And lest any man should imagine this miracle came to pass by natural causes,
it is expreslie added, that all this multitude was slain by the stroke of an
Angel. Now it is no unwonted thing for God thus to use the ministry of
Angels, in procuring the safety of the faithful, for whose sakes he has
created all the armies of heaven. It also serves greatly for the confirmation
of our faith, when we see there are so many thousands of them which wait for
our salvation. The Lord himself is strong enough, and his truth it is which
only keeps us: Romans 8.38. For the Angels are but his hands as it were, in
regard whereof, they are called powers and principalities: Ephesians. 1.21.
but he prouides exceedingly for our weakness, by giving such celestial
ministers to be our gardians and protectors. And yet the whole glory must be
ascribed to God alone, we are to acknowledge the Angels but his instruments;
for otherwise we should easily slip into the error of the Papists, who
ascribing more then is meet to them, do rob God of his power, to clothe them
with it. With which error also, the learned men of our time have bin
bewitched, as we know.

Now we cannot affirm certainly whether this were done by the hand of one, or
many Angels; neither is it much material: for the Lord is able easily to
effect one and the same thing, by one or a thousand of them. For he uses not
their ministry, as if he stood in need of their help, but rather to support
our infirmity, as we have said before: yet it is most probable, and answers
best to the Prophets words, that one Angel alone had commission to do this
service. Even as in the ancient deliverance, one Angel passed through the land
of Egypt in a night, to slay their first borne: Exodus 12.29. Sometimes God also
executes his judgments by wicked angels: but he chose one of his voluntary
servants here, to deliver his Church, as by his hand.

An hundred, fourscore, and five thousand.] We are not to marvel that this was
so great an army, as some ignorants do, who esteem it but a fable, when they
hear tell of such an huge multitude of soldiers; because a less number
serves the turn now a days. But histories do plainly testify, that the
eastern people managed things clean contrary to us; and it is to be seen
among them yet at this day. It was no marvel they brought so many forth to
battle, because they were much more enabled to endure cold and heat then we,
they had more able bodies to labor, they were more sparing in diet; neither
were they given to delicious and dainty fare, with which vice our soldiers
are corrupted.

As touching the manner of this discomfiture, here is nothing set down for
certain. The Rabbines Rabbis too bold in coining fables.
without any testimony or likely conjecture, affirm, that they were smitten
with thunder and lightning. For as they are bold to coin fables, so are they
not afraid to avouch any thing that comes in their heads, even as if they had
found the same recorded in some anthentique history. But the words show, that
this was no such apparent slaughter: for the Prophet says, that they lay all
dead upon the earth: if they had bin smitten with lightning, every one would
have perceived it, neither would the Prophet have concealed it. The conjecture
of the Rabbines then you see, is confuted out of the very text: but I had
rather lane off in the mid way. It suffices that we know thus much; the Lord
was minded to deliver Jerusalem out of the hand of the Assyrian; and he smote
the host with sudden death, altogether without man's help.

Verse. 37. So Sennacherib King of Ashur departed, and went away, and returned,
and dwelt at Nineueh.
NOw Isaiah shows, with what dishonor this Tyrant retired; who before, in his
conceit, had devoured all Iudeah, and durst challenge the Lord himself. In
that he expresses his recoiling back, with so many words to one purpose, it
is to cast disgrace upon his cowardly flight: for it is no superfluous
repetition when he says, he departed, he went his way, and he returned. Il
partit, il s'en alla, il retourna.
The name of King is also added to his further shame. As if he should say; See
this King, this great King, Chap. 36.4. whom Rabshekeh extolled so highly,
because of his power. He came not into Iudeah to return with infamy; but God
for his mercy and truths sake drove him out thence, even as chafe before the
wind.

Where it is said, he returned to dwell in Nineueh, it shows us further, that
he not only left his courage, but his forces also quailed; for he would not
willingly have stayed at home, if despair had not been as a chain to keep
him in: he contented himself with his kingdom then, whereof Nineueh was the
mother City. Afterward when the Caldeans had subdued the Assyrians, the
Monarchy was transported unto Babylon; to wit, ten years after the death of
Sennacherib, in which time Esar-haddone, (of whom mention is here made)
reigned. For Paricides being winked at, and supported by many, the foreign
enemies might easily conquer and subdue a nation full of factions: and
therefore Merodach having made use of this occasion, invaded the Assyrians, and
brought them under his command.

Verse. 38. And as he was in the Temple worshipping Nisrock his God, Adramelech
and Sharezer his sons slew him with the sword: and Esar-haddon his son
reigned in his stead.
THe Rabbines Rabbis bold in coining fables.
give themselves the like liberty here to coin devices; for they feign that
Sennacherib asked his idol, why he could not vanquish the Jews: and it
answered, because Abraham meant to have sacrificed his son to God. And then
this Tyrant following this example, determined to offer (...) howsoever he
could not by and by dispatch himself out of these encumbrances, Romans 8.26.
yet the holy Ghost did suggest into this confused and perplexed spirit of his,
such groans, as could not be expressed. And in truth it had been an uncouth and
absurd message, if so be God had not conforted him inwardly by the secret
work of his Spirit, who was now a good as stricken down to hell with the
outward sound of the Prophets words. Now for as much as he would never have
repented, being seized on by despair, mortification went foremost; next,
followed that secret work of the Spirit, which consecrated this poor dead
body a living sacrifice acceptable unto God.

Verse. 3. And said, I beseech thee, Lord, remember now how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore.
IT seems here that he meant to reason the case with God, and to rip up his
former life unto him, as one being wrongfully afflicted: but he meant nothing
less. He rather furnishes himself with arguments to buckle against the
sharp and dangerous temptations which might follow. For when the Lord dealt
thus roughly with him, he might think himself forlorn, forsaken, and
rejected, as it God had disliked of all that he had done before: for which
cause he fortifies and cheeres up himself, by protesting that all his actions
proceeded from the uprightness of his heart. In a word, he concludes that his
endeavors were not displeasing unto God, though he were presently taken away:
and thus he makes way for good hope and prayer.

He opposes not his merits then to the righteousness of God, Hezekias
opposes not his merits against Gods righteousness, but arms himself against a
sh^rp temptation.
neither complains he as if he were punished unjustly; but arms his self
against a sharp temptation, to the end Gods dealing might not seem too severe
in his eyes, in regard that he had so well reformed and taken away
corruptions, which had then the full swinge in his kingdom, but chiefly in the
Church.

God admits his children sometime to glory in their well doing.
I deny not but the Lord sometimes admits his children to rejoice in the things
which they have well done: not as vanting of their deserts in his sight, but to
acknowledge his benefits, and to be so touched with the remembrance thereof,
that they may the better fit themselves thereby to bear all their adversities
patiently. Sometimes also the importunity of their enemies constraines them to
glory with an holy boasting, that they may commend their cause to God, as to
him that is the Judge and defender of it: and so David boldly opposes his
innocence against the slanders of his adversaries, and that even before the
judgment seat of God: Psalm. 7.9. and 17.3. It is an old practice of Satan,
under color of humility, to drive us into despair.
But Hezekiah meant here to prevent Satan's sophistry, whereof the faithful
have sufficient experience, whilst under pretense of humility, he
ouerwhelmes them in despair. We must be very wary therefore, that our hearts
be not swallowed up of it.

Besides, from his words we gather the true rule of a well ordered life; The
rule of a well ordered life.

The first rule.

Nothing prouokes God more then fained holiness. Ioh. 4.


to wit, when the integrity of the heart holds the first place: for there is
nothing that displeases God so much, as when we go about to cosen either him,
or me^ by our dissimulatio^: for as a glistering show of works is wont to dazzle
our eyes; so nothing prouokes his wrath more the^ feined holiness, in regard
his name is thereby most profaned. We know he is a spirit: is it not good
reason then that he should be worshipped spiritually, especially seeing he
protests that a double heart is an abomination unto him? Hezekiah therefore
had good cause as you see, to begin at the uprightness of his heart.

The word Chalem, which is translated perfect, is nothing else but that
integrity and soundness of heart which is opposed to hypocrisy; which also
appears by the word truth, according as Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.5.
that the end of the law, is love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned. Moreover, Hezekias sets down the fruits which issue from a
pure heart, as from the root; not only to animate himself, but others also,
especially concerning those things which might give them any occasion of
stumbling. He staggered not then, but meant to remove the impediments which
peradventure might discourage many.

Again, The second rule.
let us note how our life must be ordered, if we desire that God should approve
of us; to wit, that we do nothing without his commandment: And have done
that which was good in thy sight.
for as he reiects and condemns all outward shows, whereby hypocrites would
be thought jolly fellows; so esteems he nothing at all of any newfound
services, wherein the superstitious sort travail in vain, thinking they merit
much at his hands, whilst they cast his word behind their backs. But Hezekias,
Hezekias not only ran, but he ran well.
who knew that obedience was better then sacrifices, 1. Sam. 15.22. says not
only that he ran, (which some often do, though clean out of the way) but
also that he squared his whole life to the commandments of God, which only is
the competent Judge thereof. Now from this place we may gather, how much this
holy personage was kindled with the affection of prayer: for albeit he sees
nothing about him but signs of Gods wrath, yet he cease not to have
recourse unto him still, God must be sought unto by prayer, when he seems
most angry.
and exercises his faith, by pouring out his prayers and tears in his
presence; which all faithful hearts ought carefully and diligently to
practice, and that even in their deepest distresses.

Verse. 4. Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying;
ISaiah went his way, and left his sting behind him, as they say; leaving him
as a dead man, whom in the name of the Lord he had adjudged to die. In the
mean while we may gather from his song, how restless his thoughts were, or
rather, with how great terror he was surprised. It is not easy to define of
the intermission between the Prophets departure, and his return: yet it is
out of question, that the promise both touching his recovery, and life, was not
made till he had felt himself forlorn; yea, after he had a long time been
tossed up and down with furious storms and tempests. For his faith was tried
to the utmost when God thus hid his face from him, and suffered him to lie
plunged in the darkness of death: yet we have told you already, that the faith
of this King was not so quenched, but that some sparks thereof appeared, though
he were left destitute of all outward comforts. For by the secret instinct of
the holy Ghost, he breathed out unutterable groans from this bottomless
gulf, which ascended up into the ears of the most high. From whence we
gather, that the faithful are so heard in the day of their distress, that the
favor of God manifests not it self unto them at the first cry, but he
deferres of purpose to let them feel it, till he sees they be thoroughly
humbled.

Now if it were needful that so excellent a king and servant of God should be
in a manner thus overwhelmed with sorrows, that he might be the better fitted
and provoked to desire Gods favor, and to sigh and groan unto him, being at
the last cast, and almost swallowed up of the lower hells:let us not wonder if
sometimes he leaves us perplexed with fear and anguish, and deferres that
comfort long which we desire. First objection.
Hezekias was not adjudged to death in the decree and counsel of God: but his
meaning herein was to try and examine the faith of his servant. Wherefore in
this denunciation there must be a condition supplied; A condition must be
supplied in the denuntiatio^.
for otherwise Hezekias could never have bowed the Lord, nor disanulled his
irreuocable decree neither by his prayers nor tears. But the Lord threatened
him as he did Abimeleck king of Gerar for taking Sarah, Abrams wife, Genesis 20.3.
And as Jonas did the Nineuits, Jonas 1.2. and 3.4. But it will be further
objected, Second objection.
that it is contrary to Gods nature to speak one thing and think another:
for thus his words shall lose their authority, because men will esteem of his
promises and threatenings as things of little weight. Hezekias, because he would
not that he should die: neither had it been needful nor profitable to have
sent him this message, had not the remedy been near at hand. Besides, as it
was the meaning of God to humble his servant with fear and astonishment, that
by a voluntary condemning of himself he might by prayers and tears escape
this chastisement: so also it was no less his purpose to bring him low by this
sharp and biting speech, Thou shall die, to the end he might require life, and
to have it restored as to him that was now shut up as it were in his sepulcher.
The Prophet supplied an infolded condition therefore, which Hezekias easily
espied, although he perceived it not at the first. We can not conclude then
that God used any dissimulation here, seeing he fits his speech to the
capacity and reach of the person to whom he speaks: for it is no unwonted
thing with him to kill before he quicken. He only then holds part of his speech
in suspense, He only held part of his speech in suspense.
that by the outward appearance of death, Hezekias might by little and little
be framed to newnes of life.

Verse. 5. Go, and say unto Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord God of David thy
father, I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto
thy days fifteen years.
IN his first embassage, Why God propounds his name to Hezekias in a diverse
form.
verse. 1. he meant only to terrify Hezekias, and therefore contents himself
with a bare propounding of the name of God, As in verse. 1.
before whose judgment seat he summoned this poor guilty person: but now
when he brings message of consolation, he adds a particular title, The God of
David thy father.
to show from what fountain this favor proceeded: as if he should say; God is
now moved to show mercy, so as he will not deal extremely with thee,
because he respects the Covenant which he has made with David.

We know there is nothing more hard then to cheer up the hearts of such as
have deeply tasted of Gods wrath, Nothing more difficult, then to comfort the
hearts of such as have tasted deeply of Gods displeasure.
with good hope of mercy; and to cause them indeed to feel that God is now
become favorable and gracious unto them. This confirmation therefore was
necessary, to the end this good king, being forlorn in himself, might
perceive that life was to be restored him, whereof he was in a manner utterly
deprived, because the promise touching the perpetuity of the kingdom of Judah
could no way be broken.

Thus he being in a manner half dead by reason of this message, Thou shall dye,
the Prophet to encourage him puts him in mind of that promise which was then
familiarlie known of all. I have sworn once by mine holiness, that I will not
fail David; His seed shall endure for ever; and his Throne shall be as the
Sun before me, Psalm. 89.35.36. Upon this board or planck, Hezekias casts
himself to save his life from shipwreck in these boisterous storms: for he
speaks not of David here as of a private man, but as of an eternal King, which
had the promise, whereupon Hezekias might stay himself. I say eternal, not in
himself, but in the blessed seed. Now because this eternity was to be
manifested at the length in Jesus Christ, of whom Hezekias and the rest of the
kings of Judah were figures, he had good cause to hope well, in regard himself
was the son and successor of David.

As often therefore as our sins do shut up the way against us from approaching
unto God, that we might have part in his favor; let this preface be present
before us. For howsoever by our own default he be estranged from us, yet he is
the father of Christ our head, in whom our salvation lies always hidden for
us. To be short, God who a little before spoke as a Judge, speaks now as a
loving father, by looking upon the mediator Jesus Christ, who ever appeaseth
his anger.

Having left him way for hope, he now tells him that his prayers were heard of
God: which doubtless should be as a goad in our sides, to prick us forward to
the duty of fervent prayer. For albeit God of himself be careful enough of
our salvation, and has evermore prevented us by his loving kindness, and that
not only whilst we slept, but even before we were borne: notwithstanding when
he signifies unto us that all the benefits he bestows upon us, are as the
fruits of our prayers, our slothfulness is utterly inexcusable, if being so
liberally invited to come unto God, we scorn to open our mouths to call upon
his name. Yet we must not think that our prayers do therefore merit, because
God accepts so favorably of them; but in giving that freely, which of favor
he has promised, he adds this declaration of his liberality, to the end he
may the better exercise our faith. For it is no small privilege to have
access into his presence at all times, and frankly to power out our hearts
before him, and familiarly to cast all our cares and anguishes into his bosom.
Had not Hezekias prayed at all, yet the Lord no doubt would have taken order by
some other means, that the government of the kingdom should still have
continued in the stock of David: but that which he was bound to do in respect
of his truth, is attributed unto Hezekias prayers, to the end he might
acknowledge how great the fruit was he received from his faith, which he
exercised in his prayers.

The Prophet mentions his tears, as a sign of his repentance, and also of his
zeal and affection: not that they obtain grace, or that they can appease God
of themselves: but to show that by means hereof, prayers which proceed from
affection, are distinguished from those which proceed from the lips only.
Prayers which proceed from affection, distinguished from those that proceed
from the lips only. Object.


In the last place he adds, that God prolonged the days of Hezekias
fifteen) eeres, which at the first might seem absurd; because we are created
upon condition, not to pass one jot or tittle of that time which God has set
down: as Job says; Thou have set him his bounds, Hezekias his cogitation: for
he was excluded from hope of a longer life, so as he was to account the years
following, as the lease thereof renewed again: no less then if he had been
taken out of his tomb, to live upon the earth the second time.

Verse. 6. And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the King of Ashur, and
this City: for I will defend this City.
THose who think that Hezekias was sick during the siege, ground their
argument upon this verse; because otherwise they think this promise should be
superfluous: but their reason wants weight. For the Assyrian might well gather
his forces together again, and prepare a fresh army, both to invade Iudeah,
and to besiege Jerusalem. Yea, that discomfiture which he had before, might so
kindle his rage and fury, as to give a new onset. The Jews then, you see,
might justly tremble when any should signify some news to them touching the
enemies approaching. This promise therefore is not superfluous, for with the
hope of life, Isaiah secures him from fear of the Assyrian, whom Hezekias
might always have had in some jealousy, if by this means the same had not
been prevented. In which, we see how God still amplifies and adds new mercies
to the former, which he had showed him: as in the Chapter before going, God
promised him abundance of the fruit of the earth, with deliverance from the
siege.

Verse. 7. And this sign shall thou have of the Lord, that the Lord will do
this thing that he has spoken:

8. Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, (whereby it is gone
down in the dial of Ahaz by the Sun) ten degrees backward: so the Sun
returned by ten degrees, by the which it was gone down.


THe holy hist^rie orderly recites, 2. Kin. 20.8.
how Hezekias asked a sign of the Lord, which was granted unto him: our
Prophet will only touch it in the end of the Chapter: but it is no new thing
with the Hebrews thus to set those things last, which should be first, etc.
Moreover, the Lord offers some signs voluntarily unasked. Again, he grants
them to others that require them. Now in regard that the general use of signs
The general use of signs.
is to sustain our infirmity, God for the most part stays not till they be
asked, but from the beginning has always ordained such as himself knew would
be the most profitable to his Church. If the faithful then at any time have
desired that their faith might be confirmed by signs, Signs asked Gedeons
fleece.
we must not by and by follow them therein; because it was a thing very rare:
as to Gedeon, who being taken from the flaile to govern the people, Signs
given unasked. To Adam the tree of life. To Noah the rainbow. To the Israelites
the cloud and pillar of fire. The brazen Serpent. The Passover, etc.
he gave two signs which he asked, to the end he might be the better confirmed
in his calling: Judge. 6.17, 36. As touthing other signs, he was wont
ordinarily to give them to help man's weakness: as to Adam, the tree of life,
Genesis 2.9. to Noah, the rainbow in the clouds: Genesis 9.13. afterward, the
cloud, the pillar of fire, and the brazen Serpent in the wilderness: Exodus
13.21. Numb. 21.8. The like is to be said of the Passover, Exodus 12.3. and of
all other sacraments which have been ordained both under the Law and under the
Gospel, without being asked of God at all.

Hezekias offers injury to God, in that he believes him not upon his bare
word, when he asks a sign.

Hezekias asks one, seeing the Lord is pleased to offer the same voluntarily
unto others. Yet we are to note, that the faithful have not asked signs of
their own heads, but were led so to do by the special instinct of the holy
Ghost, The faithful have not asked signs of God rashly, but were moved to do
it by the special instinct of the holy Ghost.
which may also be affirmed touching miracles: for if Helias asked rain and
drought, it is not lawful for others to do the like, 1. King. 17.1. We are
therefore to consider what the Lord permits us to do, lest whilst having
neglected his word, we presume to indent with him according to the unbridled
desires of our own flesh.

The sign that is here given to Hezekias, is the bringing back of the shadow
in the dyall with the Sun ten degrees, whereby it was ascended, that is to
say, gone forward upon the Horizon. This sign has affinity with the thing it
self, The signs that God gives, have affinity with the things signified.
as all other signs also have: for it is as if he should have said, Even as it
is in my power to alter the hours of the day, and to cause the Sun to come
back again, so am I able to prolong thy life. In that the Sun went not back
so many degrees as there were years added to his life, it could not well be
done, because there were but twelve degrees in the Quadrangle: for the days
were divided into twelve hours longer or shorter, according to the diversity
of the seasons. We need not busy our heads much then as touching the number,
it is enough that the proportion and similitude of the sign and of the thing
it self suits so well together.

The Jews Fables of the Jews.
do here invent fables according to their usual manner, affirming, that the
day in which Achaz died was shorter by ten hours, so as the chastisement
inflicted upon him for his iniquities, were turned to the good of Hezekias, in
regard the shortness of one day was the cause of the length of another. But what
ground have they for this here? Truly not so much as any show at all: for here
is nothing said touching the death of Achaz, nor of any change which then
happened, but of the dyall only which he erected.

Verse. 9. The writing of Hezekias king of Judah when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness.
ALthough the holy history mentions not this writing, yet is it worthy our
observation, and to be kept in continual memory: for therein we see that
Hezekiah would not by his silence either lightly pass over, or by
forgetfulness blot out the remembrance of so excellent a benefit which he had
received of God. What the faithful ought to do when God works their
deliverance by unwonted means.
All the faithful by his example are taught what to do when God for their
sakes manifests his power miraculouslie, or by extraordinary means: it ought
not to suffice them that those of their own times should be made acquainted
withal, but as much as in them is they are so to provide that the posterities
to come may be informed of it, as we see Hezekias here does by this his song.
David in like manner composed many songs to this purpose after he was delivered
out of great dangers; being careful to have that sung to the worlds end, which
was worthy of everlasting memory: see Psalm. 18.2. and 27. But he especially
whom God has advanced to high degree either of honor, or power, even as one
being placed by God upon a scaffold: he, I say, ought well to know and
understand that he is inioined to imitate this godly King in this behalf: and
yet both great and small are diligently to beware of ambition, lest whilst
they seem to imitate David and Hezekiah, they seek to glorify their own
names rather then the name of God.

Verse. 10. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of
the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.
BEhold here a very mournful song, for it conteines in it complaints rather
then prayers. Whence it appears, that this good King was so straited with
distresses, that being oppressed inwardly, he forces himself to tears and
lamentations, and dares not freely open his mouth to frame a well ordered
prayer. In mutterings by himself then he lays forth the greatness of his
sorrow: but this may seem strange if we consider the cause. Was it beseeming
so holy a personage for the desire he had to prolong this transitory life, so
greatly to abhor death? The first rudiments of the heavenly doctrine do teach
us, that we are but wayfaring men here, and therefore ought swiftly to run
the race that is set before us toward eternal life. Hezekias seems to be so
much given to the earth, as if he had never tasted so much as one dram of
true godliness. He flees and detests death, as if he had been utterly
unacquainted with ye word of God. What means he then to set down his boiling
passions in this manner? It seems he meant rather to draw the faithful by his
example to a kind of intemperancie, rather then to keep them within the lists
of Gods hests. Are we not all of us too much inclined to rebellion of our
selves, but we must also have a Scholemaster to instruct us?

But if we shall rightly and advisedly consider of the matter, lie say, I
made my account. From this verse we may gather, that Hezekias was sick about
two days: for in the former verse he said the malady was so vehement, that he
looked for nothing but death. That day being past, he even waits unto the
dawning of the next day following; and from thence, till night: so as he
expected death every minute of an hour. The sense then is; that although he
came to the day break, yet he ran hastily to death, by continual
turmoilings: for being smitten with the stroke of Gods fearful judgment, he
makes no account to live. Man termed a days bird by the Gre^kes.
And as the Greeks when they will show that nothing is so vain a thing as
man, do term him a days bird: so this good King puts the life of a day here
for that transitory life of a man, which is but of small continuance.

Whereas he compares God to a lion, it is no new thing, albeit God of his own
nature be gentle, merciful, and loving, and nothing suits better to his nature
then these titles: but we cannot feel this sweetness when we have provoked
him by our vices, and made him severe by our rebellion. Nay, which is more,
there is not the cruelty nor sternnesse of any, nor of all the bruit beasts,
that can so amaze or astonish us, as does the bare mentioning of the very name
of God in this case: but most justly. For his strokes must of necessity have
that efficacy in them, as to bring down all loftiness, and to humble us to
the very gates of hell, that so being in a manner stripped of all comfort, we
may lie gasping after it, and yet in the mean while apprehend nothing but
dread and horror. And of such terrors David speaks in Psalm. 22.17. where he
says; I may tell all my bones. Again, Psalm. 6.6. Psalm. 38.
I water my couch with tears. Also, My soul is sore troubled: Psalm. 6.3. And
the grave has opened her mouth to swallow me up. Now it is needful that ye
faithful should sometimes be feared in this wise by the sense of Gods
judgments, that they may be so much the rather provoked to desire his favor.

Verse. 14. Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter; I did mourn as a done:
mine eyes were lift up on high: O Lord, it has oppressed me, comfort me.
HEzekias cannot fit himself with words sufficient to set forth the
greatness of his misery, which brought him to that extremity, that he was
not able to speak distinctly, but to mutter forth a confused sound of words,
even as those that lie at the point of death. Whence it appears that he was
wonderfully perplexed, seeing his grief was so great, that he wanted words to
express it. His words stuck as it were in his throat: nothing could be
heard but whisperings: whereunto appertains these similitudes of the crane and
swallow, which the Prophet here uses.

Yet even these confused voices doubtless do pierce the ears of God: and
albeit al our senses be surprised with heaviness, and that our sorrows have
shut up our mouths, yet he beholds our hearts still, and hears the sighs
which be breathed from faith. Yea often times such broken sentences are sent
forth with more force and efficacy, then words rightly framed, provided that
they proceed from the spirit of God, who stirs up in us such gronings, as
cannot be expressed: Romans 8.25. There is no child of God but in this case
feels by experience, when extreme sorrow causes his tongue to cleave to the
roof of his mouth, and his heart to be closed up, so as his prayers are but
stutterings and stammerings. Some translate that which follows in this sense;
Mine eyes are sunk in: but so the particle, on high, should not agree. And
therefore it is best to retain the natural sense, which is; that his eyes
were wasted with often and much looking: or, that he ceased not to lift up his
eyes on high, albeit he was half dead; or was never so far out of heart, but
he knew well that it was his duty to wait for succor from God.

Let us learn with Hezekias Hezekias his example set before us.
to lift up our eyes to the heavens: and let us also know that our God requires
no great rhetorique of us in our prayers. God requires no Art of Rhetorike in
the prayers of his servants.
He confirms this sentence in turning his speech by and by unto God, to desire
his help: for in regard the violence of the disease oppressed him, he entreats
the Lord to comfort him. Some translate, Answer for me; which we have thought
best to turn, comfort, or, glad me: unless any had rather receive their
translation who read it, Make me to rest. How ever it be, he demands succor
of God, to the end the weight of his afflictions might not ouerwhelme him: we
also ought to assure our selves in this case, that God will be so much the more
ready to comfort us, by how much the more we shall be pressed on every side
with many calamities.

Verse. 15. What shall I say? For he has said it to me, and he has done it:
Or, shall walk in trembling.
I shall walk weakelie all my years in the bitterness of my soul.
THe most think that these words are uttered by way of an exclamation, such as
proceeds from joy: as if Hezekias reioiced in having obtained his request: but
I am of another opinion. For it seems to me that he goes on still in his
complaints, because he speaks as those commonly do, who are oppressed with
sorrow: What shall I say? He which has said is to me, has done it. That is
to say, life and death are in his hands, I plead but in vain with him: Job
7.4. and 13.24.
it is but lost labor to complain so much as I do. Many such words and
sentences are to be found in the book of Job. This therefore, as I take it, is
the very true sense of the place. For before, Hezekias looked every way, to
see if any comfort would present it self unto him: but now, seeing that God
had given sentence of death upon him, he concludes, there is no resisting, I
must obey.

In the mean while, these words are to be well weighed; to wit, that God
accomplisheth that in effect, which he threatened in words. For those say
somewhat (I grant) but not all, who expound simply thus; God has performed
that which the Prophet pronounced of me. Because Hezekias does not thus barely
affirm, that he felt the effect of the word, but setting before his eyes the
power of God, he puts an end to all his complaints and cries. Thus David in
the 39. Psalm says; I held my peace, Lord, because thou did it. If the
fear of Gods power restraines us not, we will never cease murmuring: and
therefore Job Job 39.37.
considering that he had to do with God, says; I will lay my hand upon my
mouth: I will make humble supplication to my Judge: Job 9.15. Hezekias then
puts himself to silence, for he saw it was but vain for him to stand
disputing the case with God. And thus he confesses, that he was but as a
dead man, because the Lord made him feel how forcible his threatenings were. By
reason whereof, this good King concludes, that he profits himself nothing at
all with replies, because discourses to and fro have no place in this behalf.
I grant that these words proceeded indeed from despair: for in feeling God his
enemy, he shuts up the gate against the passage of his prayers. But it is no
new nor strange thing; for such words (which turn us from prayer) now and then
to escape us in extreme griefs; provided that on the contrary, we cleave
close to the proppe of prayer; yea, although the sense of the flesh do
ouersway us so far for a time, as to persuade us that all is but in vain.

We may conjecture that this good King was so entangled with perplexed
thoughts, that he fainted in his languishing disease, but especially in that he
saw it was the best way for him to be silent, as I have said: for he did but
lose his labor to plead with God, as it shall appear more fully in the course
of the text. Whence we gather, that he now sets before him the fearful power
of God, to the end he may dispose himself to true humility.

Moreover, because the verb Dadah signifies to move ones self, to go softly;
some expositors translate; I shall be removed, or, tossed: others, I shall
walk softly. But I verily think he speaks of a weak and trembling gate;
for he was so weakened, that he thought he should never recover his former
strength again. This trembling must be referred to fear; for he adds by and
by after, in the bitterness: as if he should say; The anguish which oppresses
me, is so fast rooted in mine heart, that it can never be plucked up: and
thence came this weakness whereof he speaks.

Now because the vulgar translation has; I will acknowledge: Au^cular
confession.
the Papists have wrested this place to prove their auricular confession; but
so unaptly, that old dotards may laugh them to scorn. For it plainly
appears, that he speaks not here of confession, but of an astonishment and
trembling, wherewith Hezekias shall be smitten, even all the days of his
life, as he himself here says.

Verse. 16. O Lord, Or, all those that shall live after me, sh^l know the life
of my Spirit, because thou have made me to sleep, etc.
to them that ouerliue them, and to all that are in them the life of my spirit
shall be known, that thou causedst me to sleep, and have given life to me.
THe Prophets words are so short, that it has caused many interpretations,
amongst which, this that follows is the most approved: O Lord, others shall
live after these years: that is to say, their life shall be prolonged. As if
he should say; Seeing thou have prolonged my days, thou will also cause others
to enjoy the like favor from thee. But this sense agrees not with the text,
and I judge it too far fetched. I should rather deem Hezekias his meaning to
be this; O Lord, all those which shall live after these years which thou
have added unto my life, shall know the life of my spirit. And therefore the
relative (which) must be supplied; for it is a thing usual among the Hebrews
not to express it: and so this will be no constrained exposition. For it is
not to be doubted, neither can it be denied, but he speaks of the years
which the Lord had given him as an overplus. His meaning is then, that the
favor which God has showed him, shall not be known to those of his time
only, but of the posterity also* Thus he sets forth the greatness of the
benefit, which shall be renowned for the time to come, and shall remain
engraven in the memories of all, even after Hezekias shall be dead: so as it
shall be called a kind of resurrection. The word to sleep, signifies to die;
according to the Hebrew phrase, Genesis 47.30. Thus he compares his sickness to
death, 1. Cor. 7.39. and 11.30. 2. Pet. 3.14.
to which he was so nie, that he made none account of life.

Verse. 17. Behold, for felicity I had bitter grief; Or, thou have loved my
soul in the pit of perdition.
but it was thy pleasure to deliver my soul from the pit of corruption: for
thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
Again he amplifies the greatness of his grief by another circumstance: for
sudden calamities which we think not of, do trouble us much more then those
which we see approaching. His sickness was the more cumbersome and
insupportable, because it surprised him unawares, whilst he was quiet and in
prosperity, thinking nothing less then to be so soon bereaved of his life. We
also know that the faithful now and then do please themselves too much in
their prosperity, promising unto themselves a constant and settled felicity;
which David confesses himself was guilty of: I said in my prosperity, I
shall never be moved; but when thou hiddest thy face I was troubled: Psalm. 30.
Nothing therefore could astonish Hezekias more then to hear he must die, when
he made account to live in peace, his enemy being driven away and cut off:
for I think he fell sick after Sennacherib was repulsed, and his host
slain; as we have said before. See then a sore disease which now comes to vex
him vehemently, in the mids of this joy and tranquillity which presented it
self before his eyes.

We must not look to enjoy a settled estate any long time.
This shows, that we must make no account to rejoice in any settled estate long,
nor to lull our selves asleep in iollitie, seeing there is nothing stable nor
steadfast in this life: but we may be bereaved of all our joys in a moment.
Therefore whilst we are in peace, let us even meditate of war, adversity,
and persecutions. Above all things, let us carefully seek that peace which is
grounded upon Gods fatherly love and compassion, wherein our consciences may
rest securely. The peace which is grounded upon the assurance of Gods favor, is
to be sought for above all things.


The second part of the verse may be expounded two ways, because the verb
Chaschak signifies To love, and sometimes To will: This sense agrees not
amiss, It was thy pleasure to deliver my soul: but if nothing be supplied,
the sense will still be perfect, O Lord, thou have loved my soul when it was
in the Sepulcher. It is known to all, that the Soul is taken for the life:
Soul taken for life.
but the Prophet here extols the bounty of God, who vouchsafed to love
Hezekias though he were half dead.

It was thy pleasure etc.
In the next place he gives the reason of it, in bringing us to the fountain
from whence this deliverance issued: for otherwise, one might imagine that he
has spoken of nothing hitherunto but of bodily health. But we may now see that
he looked much higher, to wit, Hezekias esteems his reconciliation with God
above an hundred thousand lives.
Truly it were better for us never to have been borne, then to live long,
heaping sin upon sin, and so to hale down the more horrible judgments of
God upon our own heads. Hezekias then rejoices chiefly, in that the light of
Gods countenance did shine clearly upon him: for our only felicity consists
in having him good and gracious to us. Yet herewithall he shows, that we must
impute the evils which God lays upon us to our sins: for such as accuse him
of overmuch severity, do nothing else but double their own woe. To accuse
God of overmuch severity, is but to double our own woe.
This good King condemns not himself of one sin only, but confesses
himself guilty of many sins, and therefore stood in need of more then one
pardon. If we then desire to be truly comforted in afflictions, let us begin
here: for if God be appeased toward us, no evil can hurt us, seeing he
delights not to have his beloved ones lie languishing in their miseries. Simile.
It fares with us therefore as with inconsiderate patients, who never think of
their disease, but only of the accidents thereof, and of their griefs which
they feel: but it is more wisdom for us to follow the counsel of the
skillful Physician, who considers of the cause of the disease first, and above
all things endeavors to remove that: for they know that outward remedies are not
only vain, but hurtful, if the inward disease be not discerned. Why so?
Because remedies in such wise applied, do drive the disease further in, and so
settles and augments it there, that afterward there is no hope left for
healing of it.

Hezekias therefore like a wise patient, acknowledges the cause of his
sickness; Hezekias looked into the cause of his sickness.
to wit, his sins: which being forgiven, he then knew the punishment was
likewise remitted and ceased. Now by this we may see the sottishnes of the
Papists touching their distinction between the fault and the punishment: The
ridiculous distinction of the Papists between the fault, and the punishment.
for Hezekias testifies here that the one was pardoned as well as the other.

We are also to observe this phrase of speech which the Prophet uses, to wit,
Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back: for his meaning therein is,
that God had wholly abolished the remembrance of them. As in Miche. 7.9. Thou
have cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea. And in Psalm. 103.12. He
separates our sins as far from us, as the East is from the West. All which
sentences may assure us that God will never impute the sins unto us which he
has once pardoned. If it fall out that we be corrected afterward, he does it
not as a Judge, but as a tender and merciful father, that he might thereby
instruct and keep his children in awe. The Papists therefore deceive
themselves in dreaming that the corrections which follow are satisfactions or
recompenses, Afflictions no satisfactions.
as if he would exact that at our hands, because he is loath freely to remit
all. No, Gods only purpose in correcting us is, that he may thereby provide for
our salvation for the time to come.

Verse. 18. For the grave cannot confess thee: death can not praise thee: they
that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth.
WHere he says, that he can not set forth the praises of God if his life be
taken away, he promises to do it, if so great a benefit may be granted unto
him; and therewithal shows, that the only cause why he desires to live, is,
that he might praise God. Now albeit there is not a better sign of a godly
heart then to desire life, upon condition to glorify God continually by the
same: yet it seems Hezekias speaks somewhat too strictly. For the faithful
glorify God no less by their death, then by their life: The faithful
glorify God no less by death then by life.
by death they come to be perfectly conioined with him, and never cease to
sing his praises with the elect Angels. But there is yet another difficulty
which moved Hezekias so much to flee death, and so earnestly to desire to live
still on earth. Which second question, albeit we have discussed heretofore, yet
the readers shall again be put in mind that this terror proceeded not from
the only apprehension of death: for when the hour came that he should die, he
recoiled not back, but willingly went unto his God. But at this time being
smitten with the sense of Gods wrath, his only sorrow is, that his sins had
bereaved him of his life, fearing he should never taste any of Gods blessings
or favors afterward. Hereupon also depends the solution of the first question:
for what marvel is it if this good man seeing he must die, The cause why
Hezekias was so loath to die.
his death also proceeding from the anger of God kindled against him, to take
vengeance on his sins: what marvel is it, I say, if he sorrowed and lamented
to be condemned to die, as one unworthy to be employed any longer in the
advancement of Gods true religion and service?

Whosoever he be that is once struck with this thunderbolt, can not freely
magnify the name of the Lord, neither in life nor in death, but must needs be
mute, because despair has overwhelmed his spirits. In this sense David says;
In death there is no remembrance of thee: Psalm. 6.5. And the whole Church in
Psalm. 115.17. says; The dead praise not thee, O Lord, neither any that go
down into the place of silence. Why so? Because those who feel the guilt of
their sins, and Gods anger pressing them, want matter of thanksgiving. And
yet we must note, that when the Saints spoke thus, Note.
they considered not what their condition should be after death; but from the
dolor which they felt they only looked to the end for which God had created
and preserved them in this world. The chiefest end of man's life we know, The
principal end of man's life.
is to spend the same in his service: who for this purpose conserues his Church
upon earth, as has been said, because he will have his name always praised.
Now he that seems to be cast off, in regard he is unworthy to be any longer
accounted among the number of Gods servants, cannot distinctly consider with a
still and quiet mind, what shall become of him after death, but being
ouershadowed with sorrows, takes from the dead, the faculty of praising God,
as if all exercises of piety ceased after this life, because (as he thinks)
Gods glory is buried in the grave with those that should be the witnesses of
it.

Verse. 19. But the living, the living, he shall confess thee, as I do this
day: the father to the children shall declare thy truth.
HE comprehends not all men generally within this sentence, seeing many live,
who notwithstanding as much as in them is, labor to extinguish Gods glory by
their ingratitude: so far are they off from thinking they were borne to set
forth or magnify the same. But his meaning only is, that men may be true and
lawful Preachers of the glory of God, as long as it pleases him to retain
them alive in the world, because he by his liberality daily and hourly su^mons
them to the performance of this duty. Verse. 18.
This opposition shows that his former speech, The grave cannot confess thee,
death cannot praise thee, etc. oght to be referred to this point, namely, that
such as are cut off from the world, where they employ their time in praising
God, are by death deprived of so excellent a benefit. Besides, he protests
that himsefe shall now be one of the witnesses of Gods glory; thereby shewimg
a sign of his thankfulness: for he says he will never forget such a mercy,
but will magnify the Lord, and preach to others what favor he has tasted
of. And not only to those of his own time, but to the posterity also, that
they may every one set forth these praises, and reverence the author of so
great a blessing.

Hence we are to gather a very profitable instruction; to wit, that men have
children bestowed upon them, Upon what condition God gives men children.
on condition to bring them up in the information of the Lord, every one
indeuoring with all his might to leave behind him for his successors, some good
occasions to set forth Gods praises. Fathers of families therefore ought
carefully to record unto their children, the mercies which God has showed
them. By the word truth, we are to understand the fidelity which God keeps
with his servants, and with all those that are witnesses of his grace, whereby
he manifests unto them the truth of his promises.

Verse. 20. The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my song all
the days of our life in the house of the Lord.
He acknowledges that his deliverance proceeded not from the industry of men,
but from the only favor of God. Whereas some translate; It is the Lord which
can deliver me; they express not the thing sufficiently; it also seems they
miss the very letter: for he not only magnifies the power of God, but also
his work, by which his power was clearly manifested. In a word, he opposes
this his deliverance to that death unto which he was judged of God: for as
before he apprehended him as a severe Judge, so now he leaps for joy in
acknowledging him to be his redeemer. For this cause he prepares himself
again to sing a song of thanksgiving; yea, he calls others to him to aid him
therein. He mentions the Temple, because there the faithful met together.

Had he been but a private man, and one of the common sort, yet he was bound to
have offered a solemn sacrifice for the encouraging of others, as well as for
the discharge of his own duty. He therefore being a king, was to be much more
careful in bringing others with him to give God thanks, especially seeing the
safety of the whole Church consisted upon his deliverance. He will therefore
endeavor, he says, to make it known to all, what favor God showed him; and
that it should be remembered not for a day or two, but all the days of their
lives. Truly it had been a most unworthy thing ever to have suffered so
singular a benefit to have vanished away, or to die at any time: but in regard
of our own forgetfulness and dullness, we have need to have spurs to
prick us continually forwards to the performance of this duty. Thus also he
shows to what end God has appointed holy assemblies, Why God ordained public
assemblies.
even to the end that all with one heart and mouth, may praise one God in Jesus
Christ, and stir up one another to the exercises of piety.

Verse. 21. Then said Isaiah; Take a lump of dry figs, and lay it upon the
boil, and he shall recover.
ISaiah shows now what remedy he gave Hezekias. Others think it was no
remedy, because figs are contrary and hurtful to ulcers: and therefore they
say that the King was advertised, and by this sign more fully instructed that
this recovery only proceeded from the free grace of God. For example, the bow
in the clouds whereby God meant to testify that the world should never perish
again by the flood, Genesis 9.13.
seemed notwithstanding to signify the clean contrary: for it appeeres only
when great raines gather together, and are ready to drown the whole world.
They think then that the Prophet has of set purpose applied a remedy nothing
fitting for the healing of the disease, because it might appear to all, that
Hezekias was healed without the help of any salues. But seeing the Physicians
of our times do use plasters of figs to ripen the Plague Sore, it may be the
Lord added the salve to his promise, as he often does in other cases: for this
medicine lessens not ye promise, which without the word had bin vain and
unprofitable. He also had received a supernatural sign, which no doubt taught
him, that it was God, and none but he who restored his life unto him, which in
his conceit was lost.

Verse. 22. Also Hezekias had said, What is the sign that I shall go up into
the house of the Lord?
SOme expound this verse as if this had bin given Hezekias for a sign; and
therefore they refer it to the former sentence: but it is more likely that
the order of the thing is here changed; which often falls out among the
Hebrews, so as that which should be said in the beginning, comes in toward the
latter end. Isaiah mentions not in the beginning of the Chapter that Hezekias
required this sign, yet it is recorded in the holy history that he so did, 2.
King. 20.8. He now adds that therefore which was omitted at the first. That I
shall go up. In these words his meaning is that the chief care of his whole
life was, to bestow it to the glory of God: for he desires not to live that he
might consume his days in voluptuousnes, but that he might maintain the
honor and pure worship of God. Why God prolongs our days on earth.
Let us be admonished then that our days are not prolonged to the end we
should give our selves to iollitie and dissolutions, but to honor him that
has so much honored

THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. At the same time Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan King of
Babel, sent letters, and a present to Hezekias: for he had heard that he had
bin sick and was recovered.
THE expositors think that this Merodach was the first King of the Chaldeans,
because his father Baladan held the superiority among the Babilonians, without
having the title of King. After this Merodach then had reigned 12. years, he
subdued the Assyrians, and made them tributaries under the Caldeans. For those
are deceived who think that the wars were begun by Nebuchadnezar: It may
well be that he made an end of them, and wholly subdued the Assyrians, whose
power was then like enough half spent, there remained nothing for him then but
to confirm ye kingdom in his own hands which was conquered by ye power of
his predecessor. Now howsoever ye Prophet in few words tells how the
Ambassadors were sent; yet we must observe that Merodach did this guilefullie
to guggle Hezekias with his flatteries. He threatened the Assyrians already
whom he knew the Jews hated for good cause because of their continual wars:
that he might get him a companion then, and a fellow helper in his intended
wars, he insinuates himself cunningly into the amity of this good King:
whose heart, as you see, was forthwith surprised with pride, in that he was
too forward in accepting the fradulent flatteries of this Tyrant, and suffered
himself to be poisoned therewith.

And yet the pretense was nothing else forsooth, but that the Ambassadors came
to congratulate with him, in regard of the late recovery of his health:
howbeit the holy history seems to allege another reason; to wit, that
Merodach was moved to send by a miracle: 2. Chron. 32.31. No doubt but this
going back of the Sun was renowned far and near: neither could it be, but
many nations were much moved by the report of so unwonted a thing. But it is
hard to say, that so profane a man respected any other thing, then to catch
Hezekias by this means in his nets. And because God had by so excellent a
sign, signified how dear the safety of Hezekias was unto him, Merodach
thought with himself (as the wicked and unbelievers are wont to abuse such
testimonies of Gods favor, to the serving of their own turns) that his wars
which he meant to undertake, must needs succeed well, and be blessed from
heaven, if he might get such a one as Hezekias to take his part. Thence it was
that to manifest his good will, he sent his Ambassadors to him with a present:
for he meant to win him, because such an acquaintance should be fit and
profitable to aid him against the Assyrians, whom the Jews (as he well knew)
hated most deadly. Thus you see the policies of Kings and Princes, The
practices of idolatrous Kings and Princes.
to wit, by close conueiances to serve their own turns, never caring by what
means they procure aid, so they may make themselves strong against their
enemies.

Verse. 2. And Hezekias was glad of them, and showed them the house of his
treasures, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment,
and all the house of his armor, and all that was found in his treasures: there
was nothing in his house, nor in all his kinkdome, that Hezekias showed them
not.
THe Prophet plays the historiographer. For first he tells plainly what
Hezekias ambition had blinded his eyes: and thus he meant to make himself
great in the sight of the Ambassadors. Thus he taxes this inordinate joy, from
whence proceeded so great care at length to feast and welcome them. He that
shall read the history barely, will think there is no great fault to be found
in Hezekiah for any thing he did. Was it not humanity in him to receive such
Ambassadors with gladness and magnificence, and to show them all signs of
love? Who can deny it? Nay, he had showed himself more then barbarous, if
he had rejected those who in such kind manner came to visit him; or, if he had
set light by the friendship of so mighty a his heart was too far tickled
with vanity and ostentation. For he meant to show his greatness, to the end
the Babylonian might know that this amity should serve him to good purpose;
which he further insinuated by showing his riches, munitions, and furniture for
war. He was also blameworthy,

Here is a fair looking glass therefore, in which every one may see that
there is nothing so dangerous, as to be blinded with prosperity: Nothing so
dangerous, as to be blinded with prosperity.
to which purpose it was well said long ago; It is a harder matter to bear
prosperity then adversity. We wax unruly and insolent when things fall out as
we would have them; neither can we be kept in awe by any threatenings or
admonitions whatsoever. If this befell Hezekias, whom the Prophet before has
so much commended, whose only treasure was the fear of God: Chap. 33.6. how
ought we to watch over our own hearts, lest we fall into the like dangers?

He suffers himself to be ouerswaied with vain ostentation, If such a
mighty Cedar fell, what shall become of such low shrubs as we be?
and never remembers that being half dead before, the Lord drew him out of his
grave by a miracle from heaven. In the 20. verse of the former Chapter, he
vowed to sing the praises of God all the days of his life, in the assembly of
the Saints. Now when he sees some suing for his friendship, and that a mighty
Monarch sends from far to salute him, he presently forgets God, with all the
benefits which he had received at his hands. Do we see this good King so soon
overthrown, and ouerswaied with pride and ambition, let us learn to hold our
selves within the lists of modesty, by which we may daily be preserved in the
fear of God. Modesty the means to hold us in the fear of God.


Verse. 3. Then came Isaiah the Prophet unto King Hezekias, and said unto him;
What said these men? and from whence came they to thee? And Hezekiah said; They
are come from a far Country unto me, from Babel.
He goes on with the same narration still; but he adds doctrine unto it. And
howsoever he vtters not a word of Gods sending of him, yet it is most certain
that he did this by the instinct and commandment of the holy Ghost; for which
cause he adornes himself with the title of Prophet: wherein he signifies that
he came not as a private man, but as he that was to execute the office which
God had inioined him; to the end Hezekias the King might know, that he had not
to do with Isaiah the Prophet now, The King called not for Isaiah now.
as with a mortal man. In that he says he came; we may gather that the King
called him not, but let him rest at home in his house, whilst he showed and
discovered all his riches: for Prophets are not wont to be called, when such
matters are in hand. Before, when calamities besieged him, and that Rabshekeh
had proudly and disdainfully blasphemed the God of Israel, then Isaiah the
Prophet was sought out and sent for, to entreat him to lift up his prayer for
the remnant that was left: Chap. 37.4. and to give him some word of consolation
and comfort. Thus the Prophets are sought unto when adversity and troubles are
near, or upon us: but all things being quiet and well, the Prophets are
forgotten; Prophets usually sent for in extremity, but forgotten in
prosperity.
nay, they are rejected because they trouble the feast (as they say) by their
wholesome admonitions, and seem to fill all the company with nothing but
melancholy.

Isaiah came notwithstanding uncalled for; wherein we are behold his constancy:
Isaiah his constancy to be noted.
whose example may teach us, not to tarry till we be sent for by such as
stand in need of our office, whilst they please themselves in most hurtful
vices, and plunge themselves into peril by their lightness, ignorance, or
malice. It is our duties to gather the dispersed sheep together; yea, we stand
bound to do it carefully, though no man should require this duty of us.

Now howsoever Hezekias deserved to be sharply rebuked, in that he suffered
himself to be so soon corrupted by the King of Babylon, never asking counsel
of God; The modesty of Hezekias
yet the great modesty that was in him is worthy of memory. Why so? He
repulseth not the Prophet, neither disdaines he his message, as if he had
reproved him without cause, but gives him a mild answer, and in conclusion
receives his hard censure peaceably. He had done better if he had inquired at
the mouth of the Lord at the very first, as it is in Psalm. 119.24. Thy
statutes are my counselors: but having failed herein unawares, it was a
singular virtue in him obediently to receive the reproof of his fault which he
had committed.

The first question.
What said these men?] The Prophet hits him not home at the first, but pricks
him gently, that he might bring him by degrees to confess his fault. For
Hezekias flattered himself, and thought himself in as good ease as might be.
It was needful therefore he should be awakened out of this his sleep by
little and little. I grant this first blow was a very piercing one: as if he
should have said; I pray thee what have thou to do with these fellows?
Ought thou not much rather to have fled from so contagious a pestilence? He
asks also what the sum of their message was, to shame Hezekias, who was
ignorant of the serpent which lay hidden under the sweet flowers: for he finds
no fault with the gratulation of these Ambassadors, although poison was also
mingled therewithal: but he aims at the snares which the Caldeans had set to
trap Hezekias his feet. Notwithstanding it seems by his answer, that he was
little moved by this light reprehension, because he pleased himself too much
as yet, in that which he had done; for he vaunts that these men were come to
him from a far Country, from Babylon. No doubt but Isaiah knew this Country
well, so as Hezekias needed not so eloquently to have described the far
distance of the place: but thus he flattere himself, because ambition
possessed him. It was requisite therefore that his sore should be gaged to the
bottom, and lansed with sharper instruments.

Verse. 4. Then said he; What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
answered; All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my
treasures that I have not showed them.
The second question.
Again he said, etc.] He continues on his covert admonition, to see if
Hezekias will at last be touched and displeased with his sin. But he cannot
yet win so much of him, albeit it is almost incredible that the King should be
grown so senseless, as not to feel such prickings. For he knew well enough
that the Prophet came not as curious folks do, to inquire of news, or to
pass the time in meriment with the King; but to confer with him about some
matter of importance. How ever it were, yet his calm answer is to be
commended; for he falls not out with the Prophet, but modestly confesses how
all things went. But no sign of repentance appears, neither confesses he
himself faulty: for he considered not his sin in this his drowsinesse.

Ambition is so cunning a witch, Ambition a deceitful witch.
that she not only bewitcheth men with her sweet poison, but takes away all
their senses: so as though they be admonished, yet they repent not at the first
onset. When we therefore see this good King smitten with such a benummednesse,
that he feels no reprehensions, neither can be brought to the knowledge of
himself, we ought by his example carefully to beware of so dangerous a plague.

Verse. 5. And Isaiah said to Hezekiah; Hear the word of the Lord of hosts:

6. Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and which thy
fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babel:
nothing shall be left, says the Lord.


BY this judgment here pronounced by God, we may see that Hezekias his sin
was not small, howsoever common reason would judge it otherwise. For in as much
as God keeps always a measure in his chastising of men; Hezekias had not
faulted lightly. God keeps a measure in his chastisements, Ier. 30.11.
from the greatness of the correction we may gather, that this was no light
offense, but an horrible crime. And hereby we are also admonished, that men can
never discern aright, neither of their words nor works, but that God is the
only competent Judge thereof. God the only competent Judge both of our words
and works.
Hezekias shows his treasures: were they gathered together to lie always
hidden under lock and key? He receives the Ambassadors courteously; Should
he have driven He hears their message: but ingratitude in Hezekias, in this
his gladness: for he forgets the misery which pride; because he endeavored
beyond league as was the destruction of the whole state. But the greatest fault
of all was his pride, which after a sort strippes men's hearts of all fear of
God: for which cause Augustine rightly breaks out into this exclamation; O
what and how great is the poison of ambition, which cannot be cured but by a
counterpoison! Augustine. The poison of pride not to be cured but by a
counterpoison.
For he had respect unto that place in the Corinths, where the Apostle says;
the angel of Satan was sent to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above
measure: 2. Cor. 12.7.

Hezekias was invincible whilst all things stood in a desperate case: and now
he is overcome by these allurements, and is not able to conquer nor resist his
own vain ambition. Let us consider how dangerous a malladie this is, and let
us keep so much the more diligent watch over our false and treacherous hearts.
Now in regard the Prophet was to pronounce so heavy a sentence, he says
first, that God enioined him to speak: Hear the word of the Lord, says he:
in the next verse he repeates it again: not that he lays the matter wholly
upon God, because he feared ill handling; but to the end he might touch the
heart of the King to the quick. Wherein we may again note his great boldness
and constancy. Isaiah his boldness and constancy.
He dreads not the presence of the King, he fears not to discover his disease,
nor to threaten Gods judgment against him. For although Kings ears were then
somewhat nice and delicate, yet being assured that God had set him a work, he
executes his charge courageously, how unpleasant soever his message was. The
Prophets were indeed the Kings subjects, and therefore under subjection:
neither attributed they any thing unto themselves, unless they were to go on
Gods errant. But then, what high imagination is there which ought not to be
brought down under his Majesty? Had he minded to have retained the favor of
his Prince he would have bin mute as flatterers are: but he had an eye to his
calling, and endeavors to discharge the same faithfully.

Nothing shall be left.] The manner of this chastisement wherewith the Lord
threatens Hezekias is to be observed: for he takes away from his successors
those things wherein he gloried so much, to the end they might not have
occasion to do the like. See how God punishes the ambition and pride of men:
for their name, or kingdom, which they imagined should last for ever, is raced
out: they are despitefullie entreated, and their memory is cursed: In a word,
he ouerturnes their fond conceits, so as they find the clean contrary to that
which they conceived in their foolish brain.

God can punish the sin of a particular person, and that of a whole kingdom
together.
For since his wrath laid the whole Country wast, all were to acknowledge
their offense; and every one in particular was to consider what he had
deserved: that so none might lay the fault upon another, but every man might
rather condemn himself.

Furthermore, seeing the Jews were culpable already before the judgment
seat of God, Hezekias was justly permitted to fall, that the way might be
opened for God his wrath to break forth, and to hasten the execution of his
vengeance. And the like we know fell out in David. For it was not by chance
that he was moved to number the people, but it came to pass by the fault of
Israel, whom the Lord meant by that means justly to chasten. The wrath of the
Lord, says the text, was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against
them to number the people, 2. Sam. 24.1. So also in this place Hezekias is
threatened with a judgment: but the sin whereby he provoked the wrath of the
Lord to burn, was a just vengeance upon the whole people for the sins
committed by them before.

Verse. 7. And of thy sons, that shall proceed out of thee and which thou
shall beget shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the Palace of
the king of Babel.
THis might seem worse then the former threatening to Hezekias, and therefore
it is referred to the last place, to amplify the judgment. If any calamity
do befall a country, Kings, and theirs, think to be exempted from it, because
they are none of the common sort. When the Prophet tells him then that his
sons shall be carried away captives, we may well say, that this seemed a very
hard sentence to him indeed.

Moreover we may from hence gather how much God detested this confidence which
Hezekias reposed in his riches and outward estate (whereof also he vanted in
the presence of these infidels) seeing he takes vengeance of this crime as of a
sin irremissible by so horrible an example, because the King had showed his
treasures to these heathens and infidels.

Verse. 8. Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, The word of the Lord is good, which
thou have spoken: and he said, Or, at least, let there be.
Yet there shall be peace and Or, stabilitie.
truth in my days.
FRom this answer of Hezekias we gather, that he was not rebellious nor
presumptuous, seeing he quietly heard the Prophets reprehension, though he was
not much moved with it at the first: for hearing that the Lord was angry, he
condemns himself without any replies, and confesses, that he is justly
punished. In whom we have a pattern of true teachablenes and obedience: for
when he heard the judgments of God denounced against him, he stood not upon
terms with the Prophet, but showed himself modest and meek. We must
hearken to the Lords voice not only when he admonishe^h us, but when he
pronounces sentence of condemnation against us.
From the example then of this good King, let us learn to hearken to the Lords
voice quietly, not only when he exhorts or admonishes; but also when he
condemns and terrifies us, in giving just sentence upon us.

In saying, that the word of the Lord is good: he first of all commends his
justice, and with patience accepts of that which for the tartnes of it might
have driven him to swelling and impatiencie: for the very reprobates have
sometimes confessed the fault, and yet their stubborn hearts have never bin so
tamed, but they have grudged against the revenging hand of their Judge. To the
end that Gods threatenings may have a sweet relish therefore, it is necessarily
required that we conceive some hope of pardon in the midst of Gods
displeasure: otherwise, our hearts will be always so stuffed with
bitterness, that nothing but gall and wormwood will proceed out of the same.
But he which in his heart is persuaded that though God corrects, yet he cease
not still to retain the loving affection of a father; Faith will teach us that
nothing is more profitable for us then Gods fatherly chastisement.
such a one will not only acknowledge God to be just, but will also meekely
and patiently bear his temporary severity. To be short, where the feeling of
Gods love takes place, so as this principle be once fixed in our hearts, that
he is our father, it shall not much dismay nor trouble us to be heaued up, or
cast down, according as it pleases him: for faith will teach us that there is
nothing more profitable then his fatherly chastisement.

In this sort David in all humility answers the Prophet Nathan, who sharply
rebuked him: I have sinned against the Lord: 2. Sam. 12.13. (which imports as
much as that speech of old Hely; It is the Lord, let him do that which is
good in his eyes: 1. Sam. 3.18.) For he is silent, not because it could
advantage him nothing at all to murmr; but because he willingly submits
himself to Gods justice. It seems that Saul's silence tends to the same end,
when Samuel told him that the kingdom was rent from him: 1. Sam. 15.24. But
because the punishment only terrified him, he was touched with no compunction
of heart at all for his fault. It is no wonder then though he be full of
garboilings inwardly still, albeit he set a fair countenance of it outwardly;
because he could not resist accordingly as he would: for malefactors that have
fetters on their heels, Simile.
and mannacles on their hands, are wont to entreat those Judges, whom they
could find in their hearts to tumble from their seats, and to stamp them
under their feet. But because David and Hezekias are in such wise humbled
under the mighty hand of God, that they lost not the assurance of pardon, they
chose rather willingly to bear the blows wherewith they were smitten, then to
pull their necks out of the yoke.

It is also very remarkable, that Hezekias not only confesses that this
sentence of God is good, but that also, which Isaiah had spoken: for this word
thou, has great weight in it, in that he is contented with all reverence to
receive the word, though spoken by a mortal man; for he looked to the chief
author of it.

The liberty which Isaiah took might have seemed somewhat too harsh and
combersome in the eyes of a King: but taking him (as he was indeed) for the
servant of God, he suffers himself to be censured of him. Which being so,
their niceness is insupportable, who can bear no admonitions nor
reprehensions at all, but in disdain, object against the Pastors and Ministers
of the word: Are you not men as well as we? As if forsooth God were not to be
obeyed, unless he should send an Angel to admonish them: or, unless himself
should speak unto them from heaven. Hence also we may learn, what to think
of such fantastical spirits, who seeming to reverence God, do notwithstanding
wilfully reject the doctrine of the holy Prophets.

But if they were so ready to obey God, then would they give as much audience
to him in the person of his servants, as to himself if he should thunder from
heaven. I confess we must distinguish the true Prophets from the false, and
the voice of the Pastor from the stranger: but we must not reject all, hand
over head, Those that are indeed willing to obey God, will give him as much
reverence when he speaks by the mouth of one of his servants, as if himself
should speak unto them out of a thu^der from heaven.
unless we mean therewithal to reject God himself. Yea, they must be heard
of us, not only when they exhort and reprove, but also when they condemn and
threaten us (in the name of God) to be punished for our sins.

The particle Ci, is taken here for an exception: and therefore I have
translated; Yet there shall be peace. For Hezekias adds somewhat more therein
to the former; to wit, he thanks God in that he has mitigated the punishment
which he had deserved. As if he should say; The Lord might have raised up
enemies against me forthwith, that might have driven me out of my Kingdom:
but now he spares me, and in deferring the judgment, moderates the punishment
which I should of right sustain.

This sentence may also be expounded by way of a prayer, yet let there be
peace: so as Hezekias should request that the correction might be deferred to
another time. Notwithstanding, it is more probable that he applies that to the
co^forting of his sorrowful heart, which the Prophet had said of the days to
come; that thereby he might arm himself with patience, because a sudden
judgment would have astonished him much more. This exception then agrees well
for the tranquillity of his mind; yet God will spare for the term of my
life. Notwithstanding, if any had rather expound it, For there shall be peace;
I hinder him not. Some take the word truth, for the service of God and true
religion; as if in dying, he should render thanks to God that the pure
doctrine should remain uncorrupted: but I had rather take it for stabilitie,
or a quiet state of the Kingdom: unless any had rather take it to signify an
assured prosperity, and of long continuance.

Now Hezekias might seem cruel, in that he utterly neglected his posterity,
as one that cared not much what became of things after his death. For these are
horrible blasphemies which swinish Epicures Horrible blasphemies of swinish
Epicures.
and others of that rout have in their mouths at this day; When I am dead, let
the earth be on a flaming fire. Again, When I die, let all die with me. But
Hezekias had a far other meaning: for albeit he desired the prosperity of
such as should survive him, as much as his own; yet he could not set light by
the sign of Gods mercy, who deferred the execution of this judgment till
after his death. For he might conceive hope from thence, that his successors
should in the end be partakers of this favor and mercy. Some think he
reioiced for this delay, because we ought not to care for to morrow,
considering that the day has enough with his own grief: Mat. 6.24. But this
suits not well in this place: for Hezekias contemnes not the posterity, but
perceiving that God did favorably mittigate the chastisement which he had
deserved, he thanks him for it, (as we have said) in regard it was his duty
to accept of the present mercy offered, howsoever the judgment was deferred
till after his death. Truly we for our parts are to perform all services to
the age in which we live, and to have special regard unto it: we must not
cast off all care for the time to come; but it is our duties to employ our
uttermost endeavors for that which is present, and now most presses upon us. We
ought to perform our services to the utmost to that age in which we live.
We which live in these times together, are more nearly conioined in affection
by the Lord, that by our mutual communication, we might help one another as
much as in us lies.

It is also to be noted, that in respect of Hezekias his sin, he had just
cause to fear, lest the Lord might again shorten and cut off the course of
his life, which had been prolonged before, even when he lay at deaths door.
Hearing therefore the promise to be ratified and confirmed, he gives thanks to
God, and is the more patient, in regard of the calamity to come; although it
could not but be irksome and grievous to him to think of it.

THE XL. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Comfort ye; Comfort ye my people, will your God say.
The occasion of this prophecy.
NOw the Prophet enters upon a new argument; for he lets the people alone, which
made no use neither of admonitions nor threatenings whatsoever, in regard they
were become maliciously desperate: and turns him toward the posterity to
come, to signify to those which should be humbled under the cross, that they
should not be left comfortless in the end; no, not in their deepest
distresses. It is very likely that this prophecy was written by him, The time
when this prophecy was written.
when the time of the captivity drew near, that after his death he might not
leave the Church behind him overwhelmed with grievous calamities, without hope
of restoration. Now albeit that to the same end he has before mingled
threatenings and terrors with his prophecies, The prophecies that went before,
respected those that then presently lived: these that follow, the estate of the
Church to come.
yet it seems he had a principal regard to those that then lived: but all
that which follows hereafter, touches the estate of the Church to come, which
was restored long after the Prophets death. For he will now set down a
perpetual doctrine, which is not to be restrained to any particular time,
seeing he discourses both of the beginning and progress of Christ's Kingdom.
Of so much the greater importance therefore ought this prophecy to be unto
us, by how much the more it belongs particularly unto us for our use. For
albeit we may evidently discern in the former prophecies, Why the prophecies
following, ought to be more highly esteemed of us then the ormer.
that the doctrine therein contained, is proper unto us as well as to the
Jews; yet in regard he now leaves the Jews that then lived, and speaks to
their successors, and indeed to all the faithful to the worlds end, it seems
indeed that the doctrines following are more peculiar unto us. The Lord meant
therefore to awaken the hearts of the faithful by this exhortation, lest they
should faint under so many calamities. First then he speaks to the Jews,
which soon after were to be led away captives into he brings in God raising up
new Prophets: whom he commands to sweeten and assuage the dolours of his
people, by an amiable consolation. The sum is, The sum of this prophecy*
that after these poor banished exiles shall have seemed to have been
forsaken for a time, that Gods favor and loving kindness shall break forth,
as out of the darkness; and the prophecies which were ceased, should then be
brought to light again.

Now to amplify this their joy, he uses the plural number; Comfort ye:
thereby showing, that he will not send one or two, but many by troops; which
also came to pass indeed: wherein also we may more clearly behold the infinite
love and mercy of God. Moreover, it is diligently to be observed, that the
verb is put in the future tence; will your God say. Which some expositors
translate in the present tence, or in the preterperfect tence; but therein they
both change and corrupt the sense: for the Prophet closly notes out the time
wherein the people should be grievously afflicted, as if God had not seen them
at all. For howsoever the Lord at that time left them not destitute of hope
touching their deliverance, by sending some Prophets unto them; yet in regard
he deferred them long, and that whilst they were miserably persecuted, and in
a manner half dead: this consolation had no great efficacy, till they saw some
evident signs of their return.

Comfort ye, comfort ye.
The verb Comfort therefore is to be applied to the present time, which being
twice repeated, not only confirms the truth of the prophecy, but also sets
forth the power and efficacy of it: as if he should say, in this message there
shall be a full, perfect, and perpetual occasion of gladness.

But especially they were to retain the futurtence, will your God say? for in
these words there lies hid a close opposition between that doleful silence
whereof I have spoken, and that comfortable doctrine which came in place of it.

This prophecy is like to the complaint of the Church, Psalm. 74. We see not
our signs, our Prophets are not, and there is none left that can tell us how
long: in which we know she laments, as one left destitute of true consolation,
because she could hear no promise of comfort in her distresses. The Prophets
meaning in this place then is, The Lord will not suffer you to be left
destitute of Prophets which shall comfort you in your extreme adversity: for
then he will raise up men to whom he will give that commission which you have so
long desired, and then will he show he has care of you.

Now I refer this verb will say, not only to the captivity of Babylon, but
to the whole time of our deliverance; which comprehends in it the kingdom of
Christ until his last coming. We must add, that he will say to ye Prophet^,
whom he will ordeine for this purpose: for in vain shall they utter their
voice, unless the Lord speak not to them first, and put that into their
mouths which they shall publish unto others. Thus then there is a mutual
relation between God and his Prophets. But as I have said, these things are
not to be wholly restrained to the captivity of Babylon; no, they have a
further extent, and comprehend under them the doctrine of the Gospel, in which
this power to comfort is chiefly contained: for it is the proper office
thereof to refresh the afflicted, The proper office of the Gospel.
and those that are brought low, to quicken the dead, and to rejoice such as
are in heaviness: in a word, to bring with it tidings of all joy and gladness;
Gospel, that is, glad tidings.
for which cause it is called the Gospel, that is to say, good news: which
began not then to be published when Christ first appeared to the world, but
long before, to wit, from the time that God first manifested his favor.

Daniell.
Daniell, he first raised up the standard, to the end the faithful might
prepare themselves to return home: after him, Haggai, Zachari, Malachi,
Nehemiah, Ezra, Haggai. Zachary. Malachi. Nehemiah. Ezra.
and others after them, until Christ's coming, always exhorted the faithful
to be of good comfort, and to hope against hope. The last of them that wrote
was Malachi, who knowing there should be no more Prophets after him, sends the
people to the law of Moses, that they might learn what the will of God was
both touching his threatenings and promises, Mal. 4.4.

Now from this place we gather that which is chiefly to be sought in the
Prophets, to wit, What is chiefly to be sought in the Prophets.
they set before us the sweetness of Gods favor, that the faithful might
conceive hope for the time to come: that they should not quail under
afflictions, but might persevere in prayer. But the matter being always
incredible, he calls to mind the covenant; as if he meant to say, That it was
impossible for God to forget that which he once promised to Abraham. Howsoever
the Jews then had fallen from the grace of God by their sins, yet he
avouches notwithstanding that he is their God still, and that they were his
peculier people which depended upon his election: and therefore in regard there
were many reprobates among them, My people.
he only directs his speech to the faithful, for he lets the wicked languish
and consume away in their incredulity. But the godly have here an inestimable
consolation, to wit, that albeit they be pressed with grief and anguish for a
time, yet because they put their trust in him who is the father of mercies and
God of all consolation, they shall in the end feel that the promises of grace
were conserved and kept for them as an hid treasure, to glad their hearts in
due season. See here an excellent commendation of the prophetical office,
which serves to sustain the faithful in adversity, lest they should faint or
sink under the burden: contrariwise, this place shows, that God is exceeding
angry when he depriues us of such faithful teachers as may bring glad tidings
to the Church whereby to refresh the weary soul, and to strengthen the weak.

Verse. 2. Or, speak to the heart of Jerusalem.
Speak comfortablie to Jerusalem and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she has received of the
Lords hand double for all her sins.
HEre God gives his servants the Prophets a Commission, and puts that in their
mouths which they were to utter, when fit time served, for to comfort the
faithful that were sorrowful. And yet he stands not so much to exhort or
imbolden the Prophets to discharge this their duty manfully and faithfully,
as he is earnest in giving of hope to the godly, wishing them to possess their
souls in patience, until the Prophets were sent unto them with this joyful
and comfortable message. To speak according to the heart, signifies nothing
else but to speak that which is acceptable to us: for our heart abhorres all
unpleasant tidings, but it effectually imbraceth, and runs (as it were) to
meet with that which is well pleasing unto it. Now because the people were in
a manner rejected and forsaken, what news could be better welcome then
reconciliation with GOD, whereby all their sins were pardoned?

Under the word Jerusalem by a Synecdoche, Jerusalem signifies the Church.
we are to understand the Church, which is so evident, that it needs no proof.

The word cry, signifies, that this promise of grace shall be clear and
evident; it shall sound so in their ears, that all shall understand: for if
the Prophets should mutter or whisper only, the assurance of this consolation
might seem doubtful or weak: but all doubting is taken away, seeing it is to
be delivered freely and with a loud voice.

Her warfare is ended.
That her warfare is ended.] This is that acceptable tidings; to wit, that God
has put an and to the afflictions of his people. Some take the word Tsebaab,
which we have translated Warfare, simply for the time: as if he should say;
Her time is accomplished. Others think that the time of visitation is here
noted, but unfitly; because this word properly signifies among the Hebrews, a
set and appointed time to finish and end some business or work in. But this
similitude is doubtless taken from soldiers that have liberty to return
home from war; for he says, the end and issue of their afflictions are at
hand: as if he should say; God will not always suffer the rod of the wicked
to rest upon the lot of the godly, but keep a measure in humbling of them. He
therefore compares the time of their captivity in Babylon, to a long warfare,
which being ended, the soldiers that want imploiment, are sent home to their
houses, to live there in peace and quiet.

He says in like manner, that her inquitie is pardoned; Her iniquity is
pardoned.
because God will be so favorable unto them, that he will no longer in rigor
pursue them: this therefore is the exposition of the former words. Simile.
For as the Physicians in healing bodily diseases, do first remove the causes
from whence they spring, even so the Lord deals with us. The rods wherewith he
beats us proceeds from our sins: he must of necessity pardon them then,
before his strokes can cease: Our sins must be forgiven, ere our afflictions
can cease: See Chap. 38.17.
and therefore the Prophet says, that her warfare is accomplished, because
her iniquity is no longer imputed. Some take the word Anonah, for misery, and
say that it shall have an end: which sense also suits well, for so the Prophet
affirms one and the same thing two ways: for to say that her warfare is
ended, and that her miseries are finished, are things that have one meaning.
But yet we must hold this principle; that God cease to correct when he is
reconciled: so as the remission of sins ought always to go before as the
cause, although, as I think, we may say that God was so pacified, that having
pardoned the sins of his people, he is now ready to receive them again
into his favor.

Double.] This place is expounded two ways: for some affirm, that he people
which had deserved double punishment, were adorned with double grace: others,
that God would chastise them no more, because they had had enough already. Now
howsoever the first exposition contains a fruitful and profitable doctrine,
yet we will let that pass now, because it agrees not with the text: for it
appears the Prophet meant only to say, that God satisfied himself
sufficiently with the miseries which his Church had suffered. I wish therefore
that those had bin more modest which blamed Saint Ierom Saint Ierom.
and other authors for this second exposition, which is much more fitting; and
not the other subtlety, that the Lord will render double grace for double
affliction. The sum is, that the Lord will punish his people no more so long,
nor so sharply, because his loving kindness has overcome his displeasure, and
will not suffer him to exercise so rigorous a course any longer: thus the word
double, ought to be taken for largely, or abundantly. Double, is taken for
largely, or, abundantly.
For we must not imagine that the chastisement was equal, or greater then their
sins; for their blasphemy is to be abhorred who accuse God of cruelty, as
if he corrected men too severely. What punishment is sufficient for the least
of our offenses, committed against his infinite Majesty? This ought therefore
to be referred to the mercies of God, that he always smiting in measure, as
it is in Chapter 27.8. will give them no more blows, neither yet continue them
any longer. Why so? Because the former strokes have sufficed him, albeit the
people deserved to be beaten again and again with much more severity. The
Lord shows himself like a father, who having conpassion on his children,
never chides but unwillingly, and therefore is willing to pardon them their
faults. God is as willing to pardon our faults, as we would have them pardoned.


Verse. 3. A voice cries in the wilderness; Prepare the way of the Lord, make
straight in the desert a path for our God.
He goes on with the argument begun, and shows more plainly, that he will
send messengers to the people (in appearance forlorn) which shall comfort and
cheer them. And thus he preuents an objection which some might make; Thou
tellest us indeed of comfort, but where are the Prophets that should bring the
same unto us? For we shall be in a desert. Whence then, I pray thee, shall this
consolation come? Thus he tells them then that the desert shall be no means
to debarro them of this consolation. The desert here is taken figuratively,
for that desolation which should come upon them: though I deny not but the
Prophet also alludes to the way between Babylon and Iudeah; for the tedious
passage through the desert, might seem to take away all hope of returning home
again. Notwithstanding he promises, that albeit all the passages were
stopped, and that there were no way set open for them, yet that the Lord would
easily make the roughest ways smooth and plain for himself, and for his
servants. Some join the particle, In the desert, with the member following,
and expound it thus, Prepare the Lord a way in the desert. But it seems rather
that the Prophet brings in a voice, which should gather these banished ones
together, which were driven out of the habitable land. As if he should say;
Indeed you see nothing but an hideous desert before you, but yet you shall
hear this comfortable voice, by the mouths of my Prophets. Now these things
must be referred to that miserable bondage wherewith they should be oppressed
in Babylon.

But to whom is this voice directed? Is it to the faithful? No such matter. To
whom then? To whom this voice is directed. Cyrus. The Medes, and Persians.
To Cyrus, to the Medes and Persians which held this people captive, who
because they were no voluntary servants of God, they were constreined to
deliver them whether they would or no. This is the cause why they are commanded
to prepare and make ready the way, that the people might pass home into
Judea, as if he should say, Make passage for them in those ways where none was
before. And this sets forth the efficacy and force of this prophecy, for when
God gives power to his servants to command cruel tyrants given to robbery
(and were then conquerors over the Babylonians) to prepare the way for his
people: he thereby shows, that nothing shall be able to foreslow the
accomplishment of his promise, because he will serve his turn of the Medes and
Persians, as of his hired servants.

What an excellent consolation A singular consolation.
is this, to hear that God uses the service of Infidels, yea and when his
Church has need, to make all creatures put to their hands for the helping
forward of our salvation?

Where he says, the way shall be prepared, not to the Jews, but to the Lord
himself: in this also we have a singular testimony of the love he bears us,
in attributing that to himself which in deed belonged to his people. What need
had he of any way to be made for him, or to have a path prepared? None at all.
But thus it pleases him to make known that we are so nearly joined unto him,
that he counts it as done to his own Majesty which is done to us. This manner
of speech is found often in other places, as when it is said, that God went
forth for the salvation of his people, even for the salvation with his
anointed, Abac. 3.13. Also that he went through Egypt, and led them in the
wilderness like a flock, Exo. 11.4. Psalm. 78.52.

Now this place is alleged by Matthew. 3.3. Mark. 1.3. Luke 3.4. John 1.23. and
applied to John Baptist, John Baptist, the first and most renoumed herald of
our redemption.
as if these things were foretold of him, and very rightly: for he was the
first and most excellent messenger and herault of our salvation and redemption,
of which, the deliverance from Babell was only a type and figure. And in very
truth when the poor and afflicted Church recovered health in John Baptist his
time, the deformity which it had, did rather resemble a d^sart, then the
captivity of Babylon. But Gods will was that in the desert where the Baptist
preached, the figure and image of this horrible scattering might be perceived,
which had almost consumed and wasted all the beawtie of the Church. So then
that which the Prophet says here under a similitude, was then fulfilled
indeed: for John Baptist held forth the banner of gladness, when things were
very desperate and confused.

I grant this voice sounded before by the mouth of Daniell, Zachary, and
others; but the redemption being then nearer, John Baptist spoke with more
efficacy: for he pointed out Christ with his finger. John 1.29.


But because the besotted Jews were nothing touched (for the most part) with
the true feeling of their scattering, therefore John the Baptist sought out a
solitary and desert place, that by the beholding of him he might awaken the
drouziest of them to the hope of the promised deliverance. John 1.21.
In that he said he was no Prophet, it was in regard of the end of his calling,
and of the sum of his doctrine: for he was not sent to exercise any
particular function for any set time, but to prepare men's hearts to receive his
Lord and Master. He also referres that properly to all men which is said here,
touching the removing of the impediments out of the way: namely, because the
peruersitie of our nature, the overthwart turnings of our understandings, and
the rebellion of our hearts, do shut out the Lords passage, and causes us
that we can not so deny our selves as to yield him the obedience which we owe
him.

Verse. 4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
made low: and the crooked shall be straight, and the rough places plain.
HE both confirms and expounds the former sentence: The former sentence
confirmed and expounded.
for he shows, that the Lord will suffer no impediment stand in his way to
hinder him from redeeming and restoring of his Church, when it seems good unto
him. These words may well be translated in the imperative, so as the Lord
should make the whole verse a charge given to the Prophets to prepare and make
plain the way, but the difference is not very material: let it suffice us to
have his meaning, which is, that Gods hand shall preuail^, though many
difficulties and lo^^ (...) come in the way to hinder this deliverance. Thus we
may see that many hindrances present themselves as often as God once begins to
work for the salvation and succor of the afflicted: God no sooner begins to
work for the salvation of the afflicted, but, many impediments comes in the
way.
wherein notwithstanding his glory shines so much the more; neither is it any
way hurtful for us. For his admirable power is manifested before our eyes,
seeing all the forces, enterprises, and imaginatione of man's brain can never
so hinder, but that his decree must of necessity come to pass: for he will
bring his servants as easily over mountains, and through rough ways, as if
they passed through even and smooth ways. It is certain that by mountains
and hills, the Prophet under a figure means all sorts of obstacles: for Satan
never cease plotting how to hinder our salvation. For when the matter
concern our spiritual deliverance, no doubt but these words comprehend in them
all inward and outward impediments, Impedime^ts hindering us in our spiritual
course.
as carnal lusts, and crooked affections, ambition, vain confidence,
impatiencie, etc. all which do wonderfully withstand our passage, A singular
consolation.
but the Lord will remove them all: for when he stretches forth his hand,
nothing shall be able to turn or hold us back.

Verse. 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
it together: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
HIs meaning is, that this work of redemption shall be so glorious, that the
Lord will make it known to all, that himself is the author of it, and will
cause his power and majesty to shine therein. It is true that they may be
perceived in all places, and in all things; but he promises especially to
reveal his glory in the protection and deliverance of his Church; and not
without cause: for the redemption thereof even from the beginning until Christ's
coming, was as an incredible renewing or second creation of the world. This
promise therefore came in due season, when Gods power which he was wont to
manifest, was now almost so extinct, that there scarsly shined any sparkles
thereof: as it is said, Psalm. 74. We see not our signs. etc. I say, it was to
good purpose that the Prophet promised the^ a sign so unwonted and memorable,
by which they might evidently perceive, that God had infinite means in his
hands to help his Church, although he seemed to defer it for a time.

He amplifies this miracle afterward by another circumstance; that is, it
shall not only be glorious among the Jews, but also in strange Countries far
remote from them: for by these words, all flesh shall see, he means that all
nations under the Sun should know, that the return of the Jews out of
captivity, was a work wrought from heaven, and that God spoke not to them by
his Prophet in vain.

Wherein he taxes the incredulity of men, who rest not upon Gods promises,
but hold all that the Prophets speak in his name for fables, till they see the
performance thereof with their eyes. By this place we are also taught, what is
the true means to correct our unbelief; The right way to correct our unbelief.
even to exercise our selves daily in the meditation of Gods promises, that so
our faith may be confirmed by all the testimonies of his love which he sets
before us. For thus we must join practice to the pro^ises. The bare view of
Gods works do pro^^ ^^ little, and therefore he sends his word to open our
understandings: and in the second place, he seals up the truth thereof by the
effect it self.

Verse. 6. A voice said, Cry. And he said; What shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field.
HE speaks here of another voice, then that which he mentioned verse. 3. For
hitherunto he has spoken of the voice of the Prophets: now comes in the voice
of God; The voice of the Prophets the voice of God, yet it is necessary to
distinguish them.
who commands the Prophet to cry. I deny not but the voice of the Prophets is
also the voice of God, whose instruments they are, (for they speak not of
themselves:) yet this distinction, is necessary, to the end we may know when
the Lord commands, and when it is that the Prophets and Ministers do execute
his commandments. There is a fit comparison between the two voices then, that
we might learn to receive the message which the Prophets bring in the name of
the Lord, with as much reverence as if himself spoke unto us from heaven: for
they speak as from his mouth, and as his Ambassadors utter nothing but that
which his Spirit suggests unto them.

Moreover, by this preface Why the Prophet uses this preface.
we are admonished, that the Prophet means to speak of some great matter: for
howsoever he always protests faithfully to deliver that to others, which
himself received from the Lord; yet here to stir up the more attention, he
tells us that the words which he pronounces, were put into his mouth by the
express voice of God.

Hereunto appertains the verb To cry: The interrogation has an emphasis here.
as if he should say; Thou must publish this message with a loud voice, that it
may indeed go to the quick. But the interrogation which is added, imports
much: for the Prophets meaning therein is, that he ran not of his own head,
nor bragged of things he understood not; but that they were taught him at
leisure, and distinctly; he being well advised, and very attentive.

From the matter it self we may gather, What is to be gathered from the matter
it self.
that here is nothing superfluous, in regard that two principal points of the
heavenly doctrine are here to be handled summarilie. First, that howsoever man
be nothing in himself but smoke and vanity, and that all his excellency
flower; yet the faithful have good cause notwithstanding to rejoice, because
they seek their salvation out of themselves. Secondly, albeit they be
strangers upon earth, yet they are enriched with heavenly glory,

The Prophet knew well enough what he was to teach, What shall I cry?
but he meant to rouse up their spirits by this interrogation; thereby to show,
that himself and all his fellow servants were constrained by this necessity
to utter this sentence, and that they could not otherwise discharge their
duties well, though they should entreat and admonish never so much: for the
truth is, nothing shall be gained by speaking, if they hold any other tenure
then this.

The word cry, may signify a liberty and evidence in the words: for the
Prophets were not to whisper between the teeth, but in the hearing of all to
pronounce that which they had to say roundly, and to their understandings; yea
freely and plainly to open the meaning of whatsoever message they had received.
Is any man called to the office of teaching What such are to do as are called
to the office of teaching.
then? Let him always think and remember that he must use an invincible
freedom of speech against all difficulties that are opposed to his ministry,
as the Prophets and Apostles have done, without shrinking their necks out of
the collar. Woe be to me, says the Apostle, if I preach not, for necessity
is laid upon me: 1. Corinthians. 9.16.

All flesh is grass.] First it is to be noted, that he speaks not here of the
fragilitie of man's life only, for the words have a larger sense; that is, to
bring to nothing all the excellency which men may seem to have in them. David
indeed compares this life to grass, Psalm. 103.15. because it is corruptible
and transitory: but the scope of the text shows, that Isaiah speaks not of
the outward man only, How far this phrase, All flesh is grass, exte^ds it
self.
but also comprehends the gifts of the mind, wherewith men are usually puffed
up; as wisdom, valor, industry, judgment, dexterity, in dispatching
businesses, by means whereof they think themselves more excellent then all
the rest of the creatures.

This is better expressed by the word Chasd^, which is by and by added; which
some translate Glory: others, Well doing: but I had rather expound it grace:
The meaning of this word, Grace.
by which word I understand, whatsoever gift it is whereby men purchase praise
and honor unto them from others. Notwithstanding, the passive signification
may have place: as if the Prophet should say; Whatsoever is excellent and
worthy commendation among men, proceeds from the mere liberality of God. And
in this sense, David calls the Lord, the God of his savor: Psalm. 59.10. by
whose grace he had received so many benefits as he inioied. It is also very
certain that all that which is praise worthy in men, is here called by this
word grace: and is by the Prophet condemned every whit of vanity: for there is
a close opposition between the common gifts of nature, and the grace of
regeneration.

Many expound this of the Assyrians, and refer it to them, as if Isaiah meant
to discharge the hearts of the Jews from all fear, by lessening, or indeed by
taking clean away the power, riches, wit, and subtle plots of their
adversaries. Thus they expound it then; If the force of your enemies fear you,
remember they are but flesh, which by its own debilitie consumes it self away.
But these men's errors shall be suffice^tly co^uinced anon by the very scope of
the text, where the Prophet applies his speech directly to the Jews. We are
diligently to observe then, that whole man with all his faculties wherein he
pleases himself, is here compared to a flower.

Men are easily brought to confess they are mortal, but the difficulty is
to make the^ disclaim their own carnal reason: 1. Cor. 2.14.
All men are easily persuaded of their mortality touching this life; and the
profane writers have disputed that question at large: but there is much more
difficulty to pluck up that confidence which men conceive through a false
opinion of their own wisdom: for they think they have more sharpness of wit
and industry in them then others, and therefore also think they have good
occasion to glory in themselves above others. But our Prophet shows, that the
rarest gift in man, fades and perishes forthwith, Notwithstanding, he seems
to add a kind of correction by way of mockage, in speaking of the flower of
the field: for there is more beauty in a flower, then in grass. It is
therefore a yielding or granting: as if he should say; Though men have some
outward appearance of beauty, such as is in the flowers of the field, yet, all
is but a flower ^ for the beauty and grace thereof wholly vanishes away; so
as their glorying and flattering of themselves in this vain and deceitful
glittering show, is to no purpose at all.

Verse. 7. The grass withers, the flower fades; because the spirit of the
Lord blows upon it: surely the people is grass.
THis may well be understood of the beauty of the fields, which the violence
of one gale of wind spoils; as it is said in the hundred and third Psalm: for
we know that the wind is called the spirit of God in other places. But I rather
think the similitude is applied to the present purpose, because otherwise the
application would be obscure. The Prophet then expounds his own meaning when
he said, that men with all their glory were nothing but grass, because the
spirit of God will consume them in the top of their pride with one blast.
Therefore this speech must be thus r^solued; Howsoever it be true that men
being indeed with excellent parts of nature, may flourish; yet they shall know
that all is but vanity, when the Spirit of God shall but blow upon them. For
in that they grow so besotted in their own ouerweenings, it is because they
never set themselves in Gods presence, but dig themselves hiding places, that
they may flatter themselves without check or control. To the end then that
they might no more deceive themselves with the sweet deceits of lying
vanities, the Prophet summons them before Gods judgment seat, and grants
indeed that they flourish in appearance, as long as they keep themselves a great
way o^f from the presence of Gods Majesty; but let the Lord begin once to
blow upon them, their all their beauty and strength shall forthwith vanish
into smoke. He seems to attribute an office to the Spirit of God, Isaiah
affirms here the clean contrary. Some may think then, that one Prophet
contradicts another. blo^es upon us, to teach us that in our selves we are
nothing.

Now to the end all might know that the Prophet spoke not of strangers, but of
that people which gloried much in the name of God, he adds, that the people is
graffe: ^or the Jews thought themselves more wor^^ and excellent then any
other nation, and therefore that they of all others ought to be separated from
the common sort of men. He speaks to them then properly and expreslie, to
the end they might attribute nothing unto themselves above others: as if he
should say, You shall show your selves very discreet and wise, if in
considering your own poverty and baseness, you shall reject all vain
confidence. In a word, the Prophet having spoken of comfort in the first verse,
he now shows how men ought to be prepared to receive it: In the first verse
the Prophet mentioned some consolation: now he shows them the means how to be
prepared to receive it.
but they are no way fit to receive it, unless they be first brought to
nothing. Our hardness of heart then must be softened, our high and proud conceits
must be brought low, our glory turned into shame of face, and our hearts tamed
and humbled, if with fruit we will receive the consolations which the Prophets
shall bring us by the commandment of the Lord.

Verse. 8. The grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God
shall stand for ever.
THis repetition is added once again to bring all the glory of proud flesh
unto nothing: With matter of humiliation, the Prophet mingleth matter of
consolation.
it also therewithal conteines an excellent consolation; to wit, that the Lord
having humbled his servants, forthwith gives them matter of joy and gladness.
This is the order of the text then, The grass withers, but the word of the
Lord indures for ever. This only consolation is sufficient, namely, that the
word of God is made the ground of our comfort: Gods word, the ground of our
comfort.
as if God himself should reach out his hand to lift us up, after he has
manifested to us how empty and destitute we are of all good things, and how
perishable and transitory our flesh is. We then are frail, and fading as the
flower, but the word of the Lord is firm and eternal. To be short, that life
which is wanting in us is offered us elsewhere.

The whole sum of the Gospel The sum of the Gospel.
is here comprehended in few words, for it consists in the knowledge of our
misery, poverty, and vanity, that being humbled in good earnest, we might
have our recourse unto God, by whose only grace we shall be wholly restored.
Let not such then as are acquainted with their woeful condition by nature be
therefore out of heart, Our base estate must not put us utterly out of heart.
for the word of the Lord is set before them, which is able to build them up,
and to give them strong consolation.

Moreover, we are here taught to seek consolation no where else but in
eternity, which is only to be found in God, and in none other: for there is no
stabilitie in earth or earthly things. No stabilitie in earth, or earthly
things.
What madness is it then to place our happiness in present things, which we see
consume like smoke? He therefore much deceiues himself which thinks he can
meet with true felicity till he be come unto God, who is therefore called the
eternal, in holy Scriptures, because we might know that life flows from him
into us: yea, he has adopted us for his children on this condition, that we
may partake with him in his immortality.

But all this shall profit us very little, unless we be showed the way how to
attain it: The way how to attain true felicity.
the word therefore comes between, from which we must not turn an hairs
breadth. For if we wander and stray from it, we shall be entangled in such
wonderful laborynths, that we shall never know how to get out.

Now he says, the word endures for ever, not only in it self, but in us also:
which we ought diligently to observe, because without this addition we should
never be able to attain any sound consolation. And S. Peter, a faithful
expositor of this place applies it unto us, in saying, that we are regenerated
by this incorruptible seed: yea, by this word, which, says he, is preached
among you, 1. Pet. 1.23. whence we gather, as I touched a little before, that
life is prepared for the dead, which shall earnestly draw near to this
fountain set open unto them: for that power which is hidden in God, is
manifested unto us by this word.

Verse. 9. O Zion that bring good tidings, get thee up into the hie
mountain: O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with
strength: lift it up, be not afraid: say unto the Cities of Judah, Behold your
God.
HE goes on still with the same argument. The Lord promised before that he
would send Prophets which should publish the promises to comfort this desolate
and sorrowful people: now he commands that this consolation be spread further,
because he means that his grace shall be shed forth upon the whole land of
Iudeah. He gave hope of these joyful tidings to Jerusalem and Zion before: now
his purpose is, that this voice should sound forth, and ring throughout all the
rest of the Cities, for which purpose he commands them to lift up the voice,
and to publish it in the high mountain.

Now howsoever it be true that by the names of Zion and Jerusalem, one and the
same is to be understood, yet the repetition is diligently to be marked. For
the meaning is, that this City was no way more excellent then the rest, but in
regard that God had chosen it above the rest to be the seat of his Sanctuary.
In the next place he says that they publish good tidings, because the Priests
and Levites were there ordained and instructed according to the rules contained
in the Law, that they might be fitted to be leaders of the people, and to
publish the doctrine of salvation. In the mean while this title wherewith God
adornes his Church is well to be observed, to the end she may be known by some
sure and infallible mark. That assembly is not to be reputed the Church,
where the doctrine of salvation* sounds.
For that assembly is not to be held for the Church where the heavenly
doctrine of glad tidings is not sounded forth and preached: and in this sense
the Apostle says, that she is the pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15.
For albeit God might govern us well enough without the ministry of man, yet
he has imposed this charge upon his Church, into whose hands he has committed
the inestimable treasure of his word, and for this cause she is called
hereafter, The mother of all the faithful, Chap. 66.10.11.12. Hence it
follows, that nothing is more absurd and unjust, then to see dumb Idols to
boast of the name of the Church, The true Church the mother of the faithful.
Dumb idols in the papacy, boast in vain of the title of the Church.
as they do in the Papacy. We are also advertised, that the Church is not
taught of God that she should keep her knowledge to her self, but that she
should proclaim that to others which she has learned. Moreover, she is
inioined to publish this grace freely without any fear, that the Prophets
might know they were not to speak timerouslie, as of a thing doubtful, but as
those that were well assured of that truth which they set forth, being fully
persuaded that God which was the author of it could not lie; but his will was,
that the witnesses of his grace should come out of Zion, to replenish the whole
land of Iudeah with gladness.

When he adds, Behold your God; In this sentence he comprehends the sum of
our happiness, which consists in enjoying the only presence of our God, which
brings with it the fulness of all good things; but if we be deprived of it, no
greater misery can befall us. For if we be estranged from God, all things must
of necessity turn to our ruin, though we should enjoy all the pleasures in
the world. From this circumstance it is also to be noted, that nothing is more
contrary unto faith, then to tie the doctrine which the Prophets publish, to
the sight of our eyes: for themselves must needs have been mute, if they had
not lifted their minds far above the world; neither durst they otherwise
have bin so bold and constant to draw on others with them, to hope for better
things in the midst of despair. Surely when the wicked have their swindge, and
that iniquity has gotten the upper hand; when the poor Church trembles, and
seems of all other the most miserable, then is the time to lift up our heads,
When it is the fittest time to proclaim comfort to the Church.
and so much the more to fasten our eyes upon the promises, and to preach and
publish his comfortable presence to such as will behold it by faith.

Verse. 10. Behold, the Lord God will come with power, and his arm shall rule
for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work is before him.
He inricheth this short and latter sentence with many words, because it
needed some exposition: and he uses the word behold again, for the greater
certentie, that he might so much the more encourage the faithful. He shows
more fully then, of how great use the presence of God is unto us: and first he
says, he will come with power, which shall not be idle, but such as we shall
feel to be effectual. Some translate the word Lo, Of himself, which also
word for word may be turned, He is mighty, or, reigning of himself. Now his
meaning is, that God is strong enough, and needs no man to help him. The same
is repeated under the words reward and work: for it is usual among the
Hebrews to repeat one and the same thing two ways. By reward, we must not
understand a recompense due by merit; but the righteousness of God, by which
he protests he will recompense those which call upon him in truth, and with
upright hearts: for those that are but meanly read in the Prophets language,
know that the word Secar imports so much.

The sum is, that God will not come to make shows only, but will manifest
his power, and make us to feel it indeed.

And thus it would not be amiss, if the word Effect, were put in stead of
work. Many expound this more wittily, and descant like children upon work
and reward, as if work were the merit to which reward must be given: but the
Prophet had no such meaning. In both words he repeates the same thing, as I
have said, and sets forth the fruit of the Lords coming, which the faithful
shall receive to their exceeding benefit.

Verse. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom; and shall guide them with
young.
BY this verse he shows what this work of the Lord is: for in as much as he
works diversely, and infinite ways, the hearer might have doubted with
himself what God meant to do. And thus the general doctrine could not of it
self have been sufficient to have raised up their hope. Now howsoever he
stands not to reckon up all the parts of Gods office, yet in these few words he
signifies, that his determination was to uphold and keep his Church. And
therefore he compares him to a shepherd: by which word he sets forth Gods
infinite love toward us, in that he vouchsafes to stoop so low as to be
our shepherd. Gods love in this verse. Gods power in verse. 10. to be joined
together.
The Prophet has in other places, yea and in the former verse also, armed him
with a terrible and invincible power for the defense of his Church; which he
will also repeat again afterward: but here he attributes to him a more
gracious title, to the end the faithful might sweetly repose themselves under
his protection.

Moreover, although by the word flock, he means the elect people whom he had
taken into his custody, we are notwithstanding admonished, that he will be no
shepherd, but to such as with the modesty and weakness of sheep and lambs,
are content to follow him. The condition of a flock therefore must be
considered: for he will not feed wild beasts, God will be no shepherd to
wolves* but to such as show the tractable and meek nature of lambs.
but lambs. Let us thererefore cast off all stubbornness, and let us suffer
our selves to be meekened, if we mean to be gathered into this sold, whereof
God promises to be the shepherd.

He will bear them.] These words express the singular goodness of God, who
over and besides the vehement love which he bears to his flock, has respect
to the vveake and feeble sheep; for then he shows the care he has in dealing
gently with them, his humanity in approaching near unto them, and his patience
in bearing them in his arms. Wherein we see, he omits no office that
appertains to a good shepherd, whose duty is to have his eye upon all his
sheep, that he may govern them according to their condition: and to comfort
them; but especially those that are sick and infirm. The sum is, That God
will be gentle, loving, mild, and merciful in governing his servants; so as
he will not require more of the weak then they are able to bear.

Verse. 12. Who has measured the waters in his fist? and counted the heaven
with a spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure? and weighed
the mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance?
Having set forth Gods fatherly love toward his little flock, now he sets
forth his power the second time.
Having finished his speech touching the fatherly care that God has for the
defense of his people: now he comes to set forth his power; and magnifies it as
far forth as possibly he can, which yet shall move us very little, unless we
look narrowly into the Prophets meaning. An ignorant person at the first
blush would say that the Prophet has heaped up a many of broken sentences
without grace or art: but if we have regard to his scope and end, by an
elegant speech he adornes the power of God seasonably, because his power is the
true and best stay for our faith to lean upon, Gods power, the true stay and
prop of our faith.
that thereby we may be assured he will perform his promise. It is not for
naught the Apostle says that Abraham doubted not, knowing that he which had
promised, was also able to do it, Romans 4.20. And in the same sense he says,
2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have believed; God is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him. To this belongs the saying of Christ, My father which
gave them me is greater then all, Ioh. 10.19. Seeing then that we have
continually to wrestle against distrust, and that Satan is ready to
circumuent us by many fetches, we must attribute to the power of God the
praise that it deserves, to the end his promises may be received of us with
that assurance which is requisite.

Now because the restoration of the people was a thing incredible to flesh and
blood, it was needful that the minds of the faithful should be raised up
far above the world, lest they should tie the grace of God to humane helps.
We see the Prophet not only teaches that God is the Creator of heaven and
earth: The Prophet plays not the orator only in setting forth Gods power but
applies it to the present occasion.
but whatsoever he recites touching his infinite power, it is applied to the
matter in hand; which we also are to do at this day. When any adversity
presses us, our salvation seems to be hidden, Gods power is ouershadowed, as
if a cloud were come between us and it: we stand amazed, even as if we were
utterly rejected and contemned of the Lord. Let us not think then that this
description is some light matter: for if the persuasion of Gods power were well
settled in our hearts, The firm persuasion of Gods power well settled in our
hearts, would keep us from being shaken of any temptation.
we should never be so tossed up and down; neither should any calamity be
able to trouble us.

Abraham rested upon this power, as we have said, that he might with assurance
embrace that which otherwise was incredible: and therefore S. Paul affirms
that he hoped, above hope, being resolved that God was able to perform that
which he had spoken, so as he neither staggered, neither was he weak in the
faith, Romans 4.18.19. This teaches us to lift up our eyes above the hills, Psalm.
221.1. and that we judge not of things according to the outward appearance; We
must not judge of things according to outward appearances.
but that we may indeed assure our selves, that that which God has said shall
surely come to pass, because he has all things in his own power.

All of us are to rest in this; but (as I told you) the Jews had exceeding
need to be fully resolved of it, for they were oppressed under very mighty
tyrants: all passages were shut up against them: all hope of liberty was taken
from them: in a word, they saw themselves every way compassed about, as in a
great and hidious wilderness. This consolation therefore had bin set before them
in vain, if by the Prophets admonition their minds had not bin raised up to
heaven, that so they might wholly rest their hearts upon the absolute power of
God, without looking to inferior things.

When he speaks of measures which men use in small things, it is to apply
himself to our weakness: God is feign to lisp as it were unto us, otherwise we
were not able to comprehend his incomprehensible greatness.
for the Lord lisps with us thus ordinarily, taking similitudes from things
usual amongst us, when he is to speak of his own Majesty, that so those of
shallow and feeble capacities might the better comprehend his greatness and
excellency. We are therefore to reject all carnal imaginations of God,
because his greatness surpasses all creatures: for the heaven, the earth, the
sea, and all that in them is with their vnmeasurablenes, are yet all of them
nothing in comparison of him.

Verse. 13. Who has instructed the Spirit of the Lord? or was his Counselor,
or taught him?

14. Of whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the
way of judgment? or taught him knowledge, and showed unto him the way of
understanding?


THe Prophet now descends to speak that of Gods wisdom, The Prophet having
described Gods power and goodness, now he mentions his wisdom.
which in the former verses he taught concerning his power and goodness. This
golden chain is to be noted: for as carnal reason does peruerslie restrain
the power of God to outward helps, so does it without reason subject the
incomprehensible counsel of God to humane imaginations: and thus many things
will present themselves to hinder the course of Gods works, till he himself be
exalted far above all creatures. If our reason may be judge, then there will
be no end of doubtings. Where reason is Judge, there will be no end of
doubtings.
For as often as it conceiues not how the Lord works this or that, we will call
into question the truth of his promises; because whatsoever surmounts our
reason, will forthwith seem an impossible thing unto us. We must oppose Gods
power to our weakness, and his wisdom to our presumption.
Thus then, as we are to oppose Gods power to our weakness, so are we to
prefer his incomparable vvisdome, before our presumption and boldness.

In asking whether any has instructed or directed the Spirit of God, it is to
show that he needs no teacher to go before him, or to counsel him in
unknown things. The Spirit is here taken for reason, judgment, or
understanding: for he borrowes the similitude from the nature of men, the
better to apply himself to our capacities. For, as I think, he speaks not
here of the essential spirit of God. One thing set forth diverse ways.
Now the Prophet sets forth one and the same thing diverse ways, to teach us
that man is more beastly then the very brute beasts, when he dares aspire to
heaven, to search and weigh the works of God in the unequal balance of his
reason: Isaiah meant then more and more to beat down the headiness and
ouerweening of men. S. Paul alleges this place to the same end, that he
might stop our mouths in asking curious questions touching the
incomprehensible counsels of God, Romans 11.34.
who will not have them searched into, further then with such sobriety as is
meet for so high mysteries. Only there is this difference between Paul and
Isaiah: the Apostle says, That which Isaiah speaks in general, the Apostle
applies to a particular.
that the mystery of the Gospel cannot be comprehended by man's natural
understanding: and the Prophet in general magnifies the providence of God. And
yet we must inquire and search into both these points with humility, and
captiuate our whole reason under a right obedience: for all our wit and
understanding is nothing but darkness, till Christ has enlightened us by his
Spirit.

Verse. 15. Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as
the dust of the balance: behold, he takes away the Isles as a little dust.
IF we mean to understand our Prophets meaning aright, and to read with
profit that which he has here written, How to read this prophecy with fruit.
we must learn to find out his drift, as I have touched before. For he
extols not Gods greatness thus at random, but sets it forth with all his
skill, according as the circumstance of the matter which he now is in hand
with requires: to let the Israelites know, that this buckler is sufficient to
cover them, and that they were not to fear the endeavors, rage, nor violence of
the world, provided that God show them his favor: and that thus they were to
learn to yield themselves under his sauegard. For if they had not bin well
grounded in this point, they should have met with infinite occasions which would
have driven them out of heart every minute of an hour. The Prophet therefore
goes on with the same argument still, and tells the Jews, that if the nations
and peoples be compared with God, they are as nothing: for with his only
blast he will scatter all the inhabitants of the earth, as if they were but a
little pick of dust. For in regard we are too much inclined, and foolishly
witty in seeking pretenses to stre^gthen our own infidelity, we imagine that
whatsoever Satan conspires to hinder our salvation, shuts up all passage
against God. The Prophet minding to correct this vice shows, that all
creatures are nothing before him, and that all nations when they stand on an
heap, are but as the small drops of a bucket in his presence. Whence we
learn, that it is a gross sottishness in us so to prefer the creature, that
we abase the power of the Creator, who ought to be held as supreme over and
above all things; as indeed he is.

Verse. 16. And Lebanon is not sufficient for fire, nor the beasts thereof for a
burnt offering.
LEbanon: that is to say; if we should offer a burnt offering unto God,
according as he deserves; neither Lebanon nor all the beasts that feed in it,
would suffice for the sacrifice. He repeats and imprints in their minds this
power of God still after diverse manners, that the people who were to trust in it,
should not respect creatures, nor any thing they were able to do with all
their forces. Notwithstanding it seems the Prophet speaks expressly of Gods
worship, that he might bring the readers to have it in the greater reverence:
as if he should say; Dare thou measure the power of God within the narrow
scantling of thy reason? Why thou can not serve him as thou ought, though
thou should lay all the vvood and beasts of Lebanon at once upon his altar.
Some gather hence that none can procure Gods favor by offering sacrifices:
which is very true; but we must have an eye to the Prophets meaning, as I have
already said; who to hearten on the Jews, to the greater confidence, shows
that all things are nothing, being compared with God.

Verse. 17. All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him
less then nothing.
THis is a repetition of that which he has said before; to wit, that God can
destroy all nations as soon as it pleases him: and that they are counted as
nothing before him even in their best estate. But it may seem strange that he
says, All nations are nothing. That that which is compared with God, is
nothing. The Prophet speaks not simply of the nature of man as it is created
of God: but his purpose is to beat down and to bring to nothing all their
presumption and pride, when they dare set themselves above him. We know it is
impossible to subsist, or be without God, for in him only we live, move, and
have our being, as it is said, Act. 17.28. notwithstanding that which David
says is also as true, to wit, that nothing is so vain a thing as man: who if
he be weighed in a balance, will be found lighter then vanity it self, Psalm.
62. And in this sort our Prophet shows that all nations are as nothing, yea,
less then nothing: that he might the better note out both their vanity, and
imbecillitie.

Verse. 18. To whom then will ye liken God? Or what similitude will ye set up
unto him?
THe Jews were in great danger of falling from God in regard of another
temptation: for it is certain that the Assyrians and Caldeans obtained not so
many victories without ye assistance of other nations: thence the Jews might
conclude; What auailes it us to have a service of God apart from other nations,
seeing our enemies in fighting have victory from heaven; and our God in the
mean while succors not us at all? Neither is it to be doubted but the infidels
also mocked these poor captives, as it appears by other places.

That this calamity then might not cause the Jews to forget the true
religion; God rises up and says, that a greater wrong can not be done unto
him, then if the faithful being wrung by afflictions, should therefore
conform themselves to the idolatries and superstitions of the Gentiles. Thus
then he confirms them in the truth of his promises, lest they should faint
under the burdens which they were to sustain.

But the Prophet speaks not to the men of his time only, as we have said, but
to all their that they were in no wise to compare the gods of the Gentiles
with the God whom they and their fathers worshipped: for those gods were
made with men's hands; the matter of them being but gold, silver, wood, stone,
or such like: but their God was the Creator of heaven and earth. Great must the
outrage be therefore against his Majesty, when the same shall be compared with
things of nothing: yea, it is a dishonor in the highest degree if he be not
exalted far above the Angels, or whatsoever is called God.

When S. Paul uses this testimony against Idolaters, Acts 17.29.
he peruerts not the true sense of the Prophets words; but from thence he
rightly gathers, that it is a wicked thing to represent God by any similitude
at all. And our Prophet not only disswades the Jews here from distrust, but
also therewithal condemns the superstitions of the Gentiles; showing it to be
a thing quite repugnant to the nature of God to be represented by any graven
Image. And thus we see the Apostles doctrine suits well with this place: for
the Prophet having proved that Gods power is infinite, seeing he is able to
comprehend all things in his fill, verse. 12. at last he concludes, To whom
will ye liken me? Make what Image you will, it shall be nothing like me. This
is a very profitable doctrine, and well worthy our observation: for were there
but this one text, it were enough to refute all the inventions wherewith the
Papists are misled, who permit it as lawful to represent God by outward shapes
and figures. The Prophet holds it as a resolved truth, that it is impossible to
make an Image of corruptible matter, that should any way be able to match with
the glory of God: he utterly reiects the Idols themselves: so far is he off
then from speaking of adoring them, that he counts it even an execrable and
horrible sacrilege so much as to frame or carue them, and to set them up before
God.

But the holy Scripture is full of such sentences. Moses aduertiseth the people
who were inclined to this vice, You saw no similitude nor shape (says he) in
the mountain, only you heard a voice, take heed therefore lest being
corrupted, you should make you any graven Image, Deuteronomy. 4.12.15. Will we have a
right knowledge of God then? Gods image is most lively represented unto us in
his word.
Let us not frame him after our fantasies, but seek him out in his word, where
we shall find his Image represented unto us in most lively colors. Let us
content our selves with this knowledge, and never enterprise any thing of our
own heads, for other means, as Idols, Images and Idols, teachers of lies.
and Images, will never teach us the truth, but vanity and lies, as Jeremiah
very well says, Chap. 10.8. The stock is but a doctrine of vanity: And
Abacuck, Chap. 2.18. The graven Image is a thing teaching lies. Now whereas the
Lord sometimes compares himself to a Lion, to a Bear, a man, or the like,
this is nothing to prove the lawful use of Images as the Papists dream: A
d^^ame of the Papists refuted.
but such similitudes serve to set forth the goodness, lenity, anger, or
severity of God, with other affections attributed unto him; which can not be
manifested unto us but under similitudes of things familiarly known. To
conclude, if it were lawful to represent God by an Image, we should then put
no difference between him and the dunghill gods of the Gentiles, and so the
Prophets doctrine could not stand firm.

Verse. 19. The workman melts an image, or the goldsmith beats it out in
gold, or the goldsmith makes silver plates.

20. Does not the poor choose out a tree that will not rot for an oblation? He
seeks also unto him a cunning workman, to prepare an image that shall not be
moved.


BEcause public consent in things is of great force, and that it is by and by
received for a law, if a thing once please the poor are as well guilty
thereof as the rich: All are gone out of the way all are co^rupt* Psalm. 14.3.
for the rich, they make them gods of gold and silver: the poor, of such a
tree as likes him best. And thus he shows that all sorts are carried away with
an intolerable fury in desiring and seeking out some excellent thing for the
service of their gods, though the means to do it withal fail them. Men will
have gods forsooth that they may look upon, The beginning of idolatry.
and handle. Lo here the original and fountain from whence idolatry has
sprung. For God is not near us in a puppet, but by his word, and by the power
of his holy Spirit. And howsoever in his Sacraments, he represents unto us
lively images of his grace and spiritual benefits, yet his only drift therein
is, to lift up our minds by them to himself. But our Prophet in the mean
while derides the folly of these blind idolaters, who care not what cost or
pains they bestow or take, so they may furnish out trim and goodly idols.

Verse. 21. Know ye nothing? Have ye not heard it? Has it not been told you
from the beginning? Have ye not understood it by the foundations of the earth?
Having scorned the beastly sottishness of the Gentiles, he now turns again
to the Jews: for being all of us by nature inclined too much to superstitious
vanities; so we also easily fall, if any example be set before us. The Jews
being captives and mingled amongst the Babylonians, were constrained to look
upon horrible and damnable idolatries, which might soon draw them to a wicked
imitation: Isaiah therefore as a good Prophet of God, speedily preuents them,
and warnes them that they be no whit moved with such spectacles. He asks if
they have not bin taught and instructed concerning the true God. Many
expositors think that this is but one repetition; to wit, it appears by the
creation of the world, that there is not so much as any appearance of seeking
God in wood, stone, gold, or silver: but we may gather from the scope of the
text, that these are two distinct members. For if he continued still to reprove
the Gentiles, he would then bring no other testimonies but heaven and earth
against them: but speaking to the Jews, who were familiarly acquainted with
the law of God; The Jews had a double means of reproof.
for their reproof he uses testimonies taken both from the order of nature,
and from the word.

First, he asks in general, if they knew nothing. Secondly, he propounds the
means by which they ought to discern the true God from the false. The first
is from hearing the Has it not been told you from the beginning? The last is
from this fair theater of the world, where Gods glory shines round about Paul
also does Act. 14.17. For speaking to them of Iconia, who had never heard word
of the heavenly doctrine, he uses arguments taken from the order of nature.
How? That God left not himself without witness, by giving rain and
fruitful seasons. But our Prophet, who speaks of that true religion which was
among the Jews, could not omit the mentioning of the law, which was to make
them double inexcusable, if they should forsake or despise it, to profane
themselves among infidels. For they were convinced not only by the sight of
their eyes, but also by the hearing of their ears: which were continually
beaten upon by God, in the preaching of his law amongst them. Seeing then that
from their mothers breasts they had (with their mothers milk) been nurced up
with the milk of the true knowledge of God, and were instructed by their
fathers, by continual succession, the Prophet tells them that they shall show
themselves too perverse and unthankful, if such an help shall nothing profit
them.

For that which he says of the beginning, or long ago, is to the same
purpose; namely, that from their cradle, they had been nurced up in Gods true
worship: and besides, in ages succeeding they had such continual teaching, as
would not suffer the^ to err; only, if they did but remember what they had
heard. As if he should have said; You have no new God, but the very same who
manifested himself from the beginning to Abraham, Moses, and the rest of the
Patriarks.

And here we have an excellent confirmation touching the antiquity of that
doctrine Antiquity of true doctrine
which has continued so many ages among the faithful: not that antiquity is
sufficient of it self Antiquity not sufficient in it self.
to give faith and assurance (for so the Gentiles might reply that their
superstitions were no less ancient) but in respect that from the beginning,
the authority of the law has been abundantly confirmed, and that God has
testified that himself is the author of it: for this cause, I say, Antiquity
a good confirmation of the truth.
it gets great confirmation unto it by long use, in that the successors knew
that their ancestors gave them such a form of religion, which they could not
reject without a manifest brand of apostasy. By such an order and progress
then, all difficulty is taken away. Now we at this day have the same faith
with these good fathers, Our faith one and the some with that that these good
fa^he^s professed.
because with us they acknowledged one God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: for the faithful have all one word and promise, tending all to one and
the same end.

Where he adds, from the foundations of the earth; it is spoken by a figure,
where a part is taken for the whole: for a part of the world is Paul says more
fully, Romans 1.20. Their ignorance then is inexcusable; for they need nor
complain touching the want of means, whereby they may come to the knowledge
of God, seeing he is ready so many ways to manifest himself unto them. Men
sin more of pride and obstinacy, then of ignorane.
And to say the truth, men sin more of obstinacy and pride, then of
ignorance: for they willingly despise God, speaking thus distinctly, that they
might stay themselves in creatures, and in vain things. Can such a contempt
deserve to be excused? No, for those who worship their own inventions in stead
of God, (of which all almost are guilty) are they not welworthy to be blinded?
Truly such, and so just a punishment is worthily Those that have a double
means of knowledge, are doubly inexcusable if they sin against it.
But if the doctrine of Gods word be joined to this knowledge which we have by
the creatures, we shall be much less excusable. Thus then Isaiah mentions both
knowledges, to show that the Jews shall be worthy of double condemnation, if
they stand not fast in the faith, being thus informed and assured of the power
and goodness of God.

Verse. 22. He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants
thereof are as grasshoppers: he stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and
spreads them out as a tent to dwell in.
Which he began in verse. 10, 11, 12.
He continues on his former argument, but after another manner; and sets out
the magnificence and power of God. We have told you heretofore why he speaks
thus; to wit, because we are too much inclined to distrust: so as the least
occasion in the world will make us stumble and be offended. For which respect,
The reason why the Prophet uses so many repetitions to one purpose. From the
doctrine of the creation of the world, the Prophet descends ^o the perpetual^
government of it.
the Prophet is constrained to repeat one thing often, that he might keep in
firm and weak hearts in the confidence of Gods promises. Before, he handled
the doctrine of the creation of the world, but now he comes to the perpetual
government of it: for God contented not himself to manifest his power once
only in the creation of the world, but continues still to show it with as
great efficacy in the upholding and conservation of his work. This is well to
be observed of us; for otherwise it were but a bare speculation to know that
God did once create the world, unless we also knew that his hand were always
stretched out to maintain and govern the same in the first estate. Which the
Prophet expresses in this word sits: as if he should s^y; The earth
continues not stable and firm in her place, but as it is stayed and vpheld by
the power of God: for sitting, by a figure, signifies as much as rule or
government.

In that he compares the inhabitants of the earth to grasshoppers; G ashoppers.
it is to show that God is not enclosed within these narrow rooms, seeing
neither heaven, nor the heaven of heavens are able to contain him; that so we
might learn (when God is spoken of in the Scriptures) not to imagine any
earthly or carnal thing of him touching his incomprehensible glory. Moreover,
by this similitude we are taught how blind and sottish those are, which
attribute any thing to themselves; Simile.
for they shall get as much by their brags, as if some little vermin, such as
the grasshoppers be, would rise up against the clouds in fetching their frisks:
but you know they are forced to fall down by and by to the earth.

He spreads out the heaven as a curtain.] David uses the same kind of speech,
Psalm. 124. Isaiah and David speak both touching the aspect and spreading out
of the heavens, in regard of our sight: for it is not their meaning that God
spreads them out for himself to inhabit there, but rather that we might have
room enough to dwell underneath. For as the earth bears us up, so the heavens
do cover us: God has ordained the earth to bear us, and the heavens to cover
us. Object.
and thus we have a mansion or dwelling house made us in this world close and
covered. But these similitudes may seem much to lessen the dignity of the
matter whereof the Prophet entreats, albeit his meaning is clearly to set it
forth in the liueliest colors he can devise: for what is a curtain? What is
a tent? What great matters are these? I answer; heavens with as much ease as a
man draws a curtain. He also leaves it to every man's consideration, how much
difference there is between the heavens and a curtain, and what their
greatness is; which all may perceive. Lastly, there is an opposition between
the houses that men build with much toil and continual cost, (and yet it is
much if they can raise a frame of an hundred foot high:) and this infinite
height of the heavens, so spread by the only word of God. Which shows
clearly, how excellent and skillful a workman he is.

Verse. 23. He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity.
STill he continues to extol Gods providence, Now he comes to speak of Gods
providence in particular.
by which he gouernes the whole world, but especially mank nd. In the former
verse he begun to touch this doctrine; to wit, that God has not created the
world to leave it at six and seven, as we say, but hold his sovereignty and
dominion over it; meaning still to retain the keeping and susteining of it in
his own hands. But because it pleases him to show himself more familiarly to
men, the Prophet has chosen this particular, that he might therein set forth
and praise his providence. The sum is, that Gods dominion extends it self
far and wide, so as he gouernes all things in heaven and earth according to
his good pleasure: but therewithal he teaches (which was a point worthy of
note) that in his government of mankind one may manifestly perceive notable
marks of his power and providence. Now he contents not himself to note it in
general terms, but picks out one particular instance which might the better
awaken our drouzie minds. All things that befall the common multitude are soon
forgotten, and is quickly out of mind as matters unworthy the talking of: but
when Kingdoms and Monarchies wherein men are advanced to great dignities come
once to fall, then it seems the very earth is shaken with it. The Prophet
therefore stirs up our attention very fitly by such docume^ts. Surely a man
would think that Princes and Magistrates are separated from the common
condition of men, and exempt from the ordinary calamities which befall others,
because by their glory they seem to dazell the eyes and minds of every one
that beholds them: but they themselves for the most part are utterly blind,
and therefore our Prophet especially aims at them, saying, That the Lord
brings them to nothing. Has the Lord so great force against the mighty
Princes of the earth? What shall become of the baser sort? Can he not, trow ye,
deal well enough with them, and handle them as he list? Can he not give, and
take away strength, and the greatness of men's spirits when he will?

Verse. 24. As though they were not planted, as though they were not sown, as
though their stock took no root in the earth: for he did even blow upon them
and they withered, and the whirlewinde will take them away as stubble.
THough the particle Ak signifies Also, yet I have translated, As though,
because it agrees best to this present verse, and so the plain meaning will
be, They shall confess themselves to be in as poor a condition, as if they
had never bin planted nor sown. This is an amplification of the former
doctrine: for in this verse he shows, that even Princes shall be so wholly
plucked up and rooted out, that not one glimps of their glory shall ever be
discerned; even as if it had never bin at all. Whilst they are in honor, Psalm.
49. a man would think them to be so fast rooted that the blasts of adversity
were never able to remove them: but sudden changes fall out in a moment which
blot out their name and renoume, so as men shall say, Were there ever any such?
And this comes to pass not in men's persons only, but also to flourishing and
stately kingdoms.

Seeing then such great alterations are signs of Gods terrible power, let us
beware how we choose our selves such tickling leaning stocks, which have only a
vain appearance of help in them, but let us solely and only rest upon the
power of the Almighty, what strength, honor, or riches soever we enjoy. For
the Lord plays not at tenis with the world, in banding of such great ones, as
one taking delight therein, as some profane dogs blaspheme: but the higher any
man is advanced, commonly the bigger he swells in pride, and never leaves
swelling till he burst himself in pieces, that so the just judgments of God
may be always manifest to all. By this we are also admonished, that it is ill
done to attribute the events of things to fortune, or to second causes: for God
became not the Creator of the world, forthwith to leave his work, as a
carpenter does his ship, but his hand continually labors, so as not an hair
of our heads can fall to the ground without his good pleasure. When so many
changes fall out therefore in the world, and that we see things which in our
judgments would stand for ever, to fall and consume as the smoke; let us turn
our eyes toward this sovereign providence and power of God.

As soon as he blew upon it.] In these words the Prophet shows of what short
and momentanie continuance those things be which are wont to dazzle our eyes,
and make us at a stand. For we no sooner think of a great King, but our
hearts quake within us, and we are moved at it: but he shows, that Princes and
kings are but as stubble before God, whose only blast will carry them away
like a whirlewinde, whither soever it pleases him. What is our lesson then? We
must not stand gazing upon the creature, be he what he will, that the same
should hinder us from giving that glory and honor unto God which to him
appertains. This the Jews were diligently to note: for it is like enough
they would have thought this great Monarchy of the Caldeans, under whom they
were held captives, should never have bin dissolved, nor that themselves should
ever have been delivered, unless this doctrine had come between: to wit, That
there is nothing so firm and stable in the world, which God can not scatter
and bring to nothing with his only blast: that they might hold fast the hope of
their deliverance therefore, the Prophet aduertiseth them that as soon as God
shall but thunder from heaven, he will break and crush in pieces all the
terrible forces and power of their enemies.

Verse. 25. To whom now will you liken me, that I should be like him, says the
holy one?
THis is a repetition of the former sentence, where it was said, that God would
not endure to be matched with Idols, verse. 18.19.20. lest the Jews should
diminish any thing of his power; notwithstanding they were so long retained
captives in the hands of Infidels. For they were to beware how they attributed
any power to Idols, because the idolaters (who kept them in bondage) prospered:
for by such disputings; comparing the power of the true God with idols, they
were in danger to have mingled them together. This is the cause why in
indignation he repeates the same thing again; To whom will ye liken me? As
if he should say; Dare you venture to take my glory from me by your
comparisons? For howsoever men frame diverse imaginations to themselves,
thinking to transform God into what shape they list: yet remains he one and
the same still, and his nature is changed never the more by their inventions.

He brings in the clause holy one, to very good purpose, putting it in stead
of Gods name. For therein he privily taxes the Jews of shameful ingratitude,
if they sanctify him not in their hearts: Chap. 8.13. seeing he has separated
them from others. For there is no holiness to be found in the idols of the
Gentiles, being but the works of men's hands. God then is too much wronged and
abased, when idols are opposed to him, and that men begin to call it into
question, whether of them has the greater power.

Verse. 26. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things,
and brings out their armies by number, and calls them all by their names:
by the greatness of his power and mighty strength Or, none shall fail.
nothing fails.
IT seems the Prophet stands too long upon this point, seeing there is none
will deny it. For he repeats one thing often, (which none doubts of) but must
needs be constrained to confess the admirable power and wisdom of God in the
comely order of nature. But we must observe what has been said heretofore.
We in our selves are so untoward, and do value Gods power at so low a rate,
that we sometimes afford him not the honor which we will give to a mortal
man: For the most part we afford not God the honor which we will give to a
mortal man.
yea, the appearance of a silly worm of the earth, puts us sometimes into so
great mammering and fear, that all the promises of the Almighty in the holy
Bible, can scarsely comfort us. For this cause the Prophet has just cause to
repeat it so often, that God is defrauded of his honor, if his power ravish
us not so as to admire it. Thus he makes no idle repetitions you see, because
we are so dull and slow of hearing, that we have need to be awakened and
pricked at every turning with the spur. Men daily behold the heavens and the
stars, but where is he that thinks seriously of the author of these things?
We see the shape of man so artificially formed by God, that he was put into
this world to behold the heavens, that he might acknowledge the Lord of them:
for God has bowed down the faces of beasts toward the earth, and has made
man to go upright; to stir him up to view the place of his abode. And this
was well described by a profane Poet, who says:

Although every creeping thing bends his face chiefly toward the earth, yet to
man God has given a face to look upwards, and has created him to behold the
excellency of the heavens, and to lift up his eyes to the stars.

Thus then the Prophet sets forth man's malignitie, who will acknowledge nothing
of God, though it be painted out before his eyes, but had rather have their
snowt grubling in the earth like Moles: for the majesty of God must needs
touch us near, if we look wishly upon the heavens. In naming of the stars,
he expresses more plainly, that the wonderful order which shines in the
heavens, does as it were preach with a loud voice, that there is but one God
and Creator of the world; which all such must be constreined to acknowledge,
as, amidst so great numbers and diversities of stars, shall observe their
distinct order and comely marchings. For the stars were not thus set every
one in his place at haphazard; neither is it at random that they march so
swiftly in such proportion, fetching so great compasses, and yet walking as by
a direct line; so as they turn not an hairs breadth from that path which God
has limited out unto them: Thus their wonderful disposition shows, that God
is the author and framer of them. Can a man then open his eyes, but he shall be
forced to behold the majesty of God, in the works which his hands have wrought?

He brings out their armies by number.] Under the word army he comprehends
two things. First, a number in a manner infinite: secondly, army; but that where
there are Lieuetenants, Sergants of the band, Captains, Colonels, and ohter
leaders, who are to bring their soldiers in a right array. Thus then the
infinite numbers, order, and certain courses and marchings of the stars, do
very well deserve this name of an army.

By the word number, he signifies that God has this army always at a beck.
Soldiers you know love to be wandering this way and that way, and the Captain
cannot easily get them by and by together, though he cause the trumpet to be
sounded; neither can he forthwith put them in array being assembled. But it is
far otherwise with God, he has always his soldiers at a beck, yea by
number: that is to say, he knows the tale of them, so as none absents himself.

He calls them all by their names.] This sentence is in so many words
contained in Psalm. 147. Some expound it as if God knows the number of the
stars, which to us is unknown: but David and Isaiah both meant another
thing; to wit, that God makes the stars to serve his turn at his pleasure, as
if one should call his servant by his name to set him about some business: and
in the same sense it will be said hereafter, Chap. 45.1. that the Lord called
Cirus by name, because he used him as his servant to set his people at
liberty. In a word, by this he notes a great readiness and obedience, when
he which is called by his name, answers to it by and by.

Those who expound the member before going; to wit, that God knows the number
of the stars, fail also in this, that they think by the word greatness, By
the greatness.
he has given them names signifying their power and office. Others expound
it; that there is no star which has not his property and efficacy; because
the Lord has given it them for ever. Others join these words with the verb
shall call: as if the Prophet should say; The Lord is so mighty, that all the
stars understand what he commands them. But as I take it, this sense agrees
best; to wit, that God is so powerful and mighty, that he no sooner commands
any thing, but all the armies of heaven are pressed to obey him: wherein we
have a singular testimony of his greatness, when so excellent creatures do
without difficulty subject themselves unto him; and in receiving his
commandments, witness that they acknowledge him for their Lord and Creator.

The word none, is by the Hebrews applied not only to men and women, but to
other creatures; yea to those that are without reason: as heretofore in Chap.
34.16. speaking of the birds which should inhabit stately houses, he says,
that none of these shall fail: and the word Isch, which is there, the Prophet
puts here. This place sets before us the power of God, and teaches us that
there is no creature in heaven nor in earth, but it depends upon his will and
good pleasure. What is more absurd or unreasonable therefore, then to compare
him with idols, which are vainer then vanity it self?

Verse. 27. Or, Why will thou say: or, should thou say.
Why say thou, O Iaakob, and speak thou O Israel. My way is hid from the
Lord, and my judgment is passed over of my God.
NOw Isaiah complains of the Jews, who being in a manner brought to the last
cast, turned their eyes away from Gods promises, which were the means of their
comfort. Or if you will have it so, he takes order for the time to come, lest
they should quail under so many and so tedious afflictions as should befall
them. The words are in the future tence, which may be resolved into the
subiunctiue; Wherefore should thou say? From the former sentence he well
inferres, that whatsoever should happen, The coherence of his verse with the
former.
the faithful and elect people were to wait patiently upon the Lord, till he
in due season should relieve them. Now he reasons from the less to the
greater; The Prophet takes his argument from the less to the greater.
that seeing God always holds his sovereignty over all the parts of the
world, it is impossible that he should ever for sake his Church.
Notwithstanding, it is very likely that the people in that time made many
complaints, and murmured against God, as if he had been careless of their
salvation; or as if he came not soon enough to succor them; or else that he
shut his eyes, as one that refused to behold them in their adversities. This
vice he now goes about to correct; for they thought the Lord had cast them off:
and so in afflictions we are also ready to think; for we imagine that he has
rejected and given us up for a pray, because he lets things in the world go at
six and seven.

Iaakob and Israel.] By these names the Prophet puts them in mind of the Lords
covenant, confirmed unto them by so many promises. As if he should say;
Think thou, thou art not that people whom God has chosen to himself?
Wherefore should thou imagine that he which cannot deceive, should contemn
thy arguments or reasons? For the word way, is taken for their estate or
reasons; and hid, is taken for contemned or unknown: because if God withhold
his help but a little, we straight way ^hinke that his providence reaches not
unto us. Some expound it otherwise; to wit, that the people are here reproved,
because they thought to sin without punishment: and so they will have this
sentence, like to that in Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is
no God. But questionless this was the Prophets meaning; Think thou O Israel
that God thinks not of thine affairs? For he contests against the peoples
infidelity, and rebukes them sharply, that he might afterward raise them up
to hope and comfort; showing that it is impossible for the Lord not to regard
and help those whom he has once taken into his tuition and sauegard.

The word judgment, which is by and by added, confirms this interpretation:
for we cry out for judgment in the time of affliction, when we be oppressed
and wronged. And it is said, that God then takes our cause in hand, When God is
said to take our cause in hand.
when in taking knowledge of it, he defends and keeps us: as on the
contrary, that he regards us not, when he suffers us to be given up for a pray
to our enemies. It is as much then as if he should say; O ye Jews, what mean
ye to complain, as if God had forgotten or despised your conditions! Now by
this reprehension, Isaiah prepares them to receive consolation: for all
impediments were to be removed, to the end the way to come thereunto might be
the more easy.

Verse. 28. Know thou not? or have thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
the Lord has created the ends of the earth? He neither faints, nor is
weary: there is no searching of his understanding.
HE repeates the same thing that he said before; to wit, that the people who
had been instructed in the school of God, were no way excusable, in regard of
their dullness. He rebukes them thus sharply then for not having profited
better in the Law, and other good means which God had given them, over and
besides the common understanding wherewith all of them might have been endued.
In the first place he puts the verb To know, which is more general; because
God had caused his glory to appear unto them, by many miracles and testimonies
of his power: in the second place he comes to the hearing; as if he should
say, If these things have wrought nothing upon thee, namely, that thou have
been so long taught and instructed, both by the word and works of God, that he
uses not to sit idle in heaven; it must needs be concluded, that thou art
very unteachable.

He calls him the everlasting God; thereby distinguishing him from al
corruptible idols, the work of men's hands. Now if this article were well
imprinted in our hearts, distrust would vanish away like smoke. For if God be
eternal, then it is impossible for him either to be changeable, or weak; for
eternity has this property unto it, that it is no way subject to change,
Eternity has this proper unto it, that it is no way subject to change.
but continues always alike, which the Jews comprehended not, though they had
often heard it before. This is the cause why the Prophet is so round with them
in rouzing them up by this reprehension. For thus he shows how double guilty
they shall be before God, if having bin taught by his word, and by so many of
his benefits, they shall still refuse to yield him that honor and glory which
to him belongs.

He is not weary, etc.] Here the Prophet shows two things; the first, that
God is not weary of well doing: the second, that there is no searching of his
understanding. In the first member he proves, that nothing can let God to
continue his well doing toward them, because he is not like those yt waste
their goods by often giving out: or to such as are ever and anon weary in
doing good turns: or to such as repent their liberality: for his bounty can
never be drawn dry. If he have done good to the fathers, he will do no less
to the children. And whereas he often works quite contrary to that which we
think meet, the Prophet preuents the conceit, by telling us that his Counsels
are inscrutable. Thus he admonishes us not to murmr though he do not by and
by apply himself to our desires: for there is nothing better to nourish hope
in us, then this sobriety: Sobriety a notable means to nourish hope.
to wit, that we considering how wonderfully God works for the defense of his
chosen, might be brought willingly to submit our reason under his secret
counsels.

Verse. 29. But he gives strength unto him that faints, and unto him that
has no strength he increases power.
The application of the former doctrine.
THe Prophet now applies the former general sentences to the matter in hand:
for his purpose is, as we have said, to hearten on the people, and to give them
better hope. But because the Jews were low brought, and void of strength,
therefore he shows, that it is the proper office of God to succor those which
are thus faint and weary. By this circumstance then he sets forth Gods power,
to the end they might conclude and be surely resolved of their salvation,
whilst God shall be favorable unto them. I grant, that the Prophet had respect
to the people who were detained prisoners in Babylon: but we ought
notwithstanding to make our profit of this doctrine, that although our strength
should fail us, so as we should be brought to deaths door, yet to remember
that it is Gods property to stretch forth his hand to such as faint and are
spent, being left succorlesse. But it is requisite we should first of all feel
our poverty and wearines, that that sentence of S. Paul might be fulfilled in
us, It is necessary we should feel our selves weak, before God give us of
his power.
The power of God is perfected in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9. For if our hearts
be not thoroughlie touched, so as we be indeed convinced of our imbecilitie, we
can not find help of God in due time.

Verse. 30. Even the young men shall faint, and be weary, and the young men shall
stumble and fall.
BY this comparison ye Prophet further enricheth yt which he said before; to
wit, yt the power which God gives to his elect is invincible, and ever durable:
for man's strength easily vanishes; but Gods, never. It is most certain, that
all the natural strength we have is from God; but for as much as men prowdly
attribute that as proper to themselves which he gives to all, therefore the
Prophet distinguishes between the strength which seems to flow from nature,
and that, by which God especially susteines his children. The Prophet
distinguishes between that strength which men seem to have by nature, and
that by which God sustaines his children.
For in as much as the other is an universal benefit bestowed upon all the
world, therefore men take no knowledge of that. Thus then he calls that the
strength of men, which is a gift common to all: and that the strength of God,
by which he assists us when all our strength fails. For he here speaks of
that grace of God which is called supernatural; Supernatural grace.
and says, that it is perpetual, whereas men can have nothing of themselves
but that which is transitory ^^perishable; that so by this mark he may
separate the Church of God from the rest of the world, and spiritual strength
from that which is earthly prosperity.

Whereas in the first member he has put the word Nearim, which is as much to
say as young men; and in the second he adds Bakurim, which signifies not that
only, but men of choice: yet because he repeates but one and the same thing, it
agrees best if we refer it unto the time of age; and yet he means all such
as are stout, and in their best strength. Now by this we may see how he
magnifies the excellent prerogative wherewith Gods children are endued above
others, to the end they might satisfy their hearts with their own condition,
and might nothing envy the children of this world, who rejoice in their own
strength. In a word, he shows how much men err, in having an ouerweening of
their own abilities. Why so? (...) sons of men, that is able to be a
competent Judge in so high and difficult a plea? I answer, hearing, and
bethink us how equal the conditions are which he requires. Truly, though
nothing could be more absurd then to see mortal man stand to judge the
eternal God: yet behold a thing more vile and hateful, to wit, that we dare
condemn him, before we have heard his just defenses.

Verse. 2. Or, Who has r^ised up justice from the East? Has he not called him
to come after him.
Who has raised up justice from the East, and called him to his foot, and
gave the nations before him, and subdued Kings? He gave them as dust to his
sword, and as scattered stubble to his bow.
HEnce it appears what is the Prophets drift; for his meaning is to assure the
Jews that they shall be out of danger of erring, if they will but keep the
way which he chalks out before them. This is the cause why he mentions Abraham:
for he might have instanced other works of God, but he rather chose an example
fitting his purpose: for the Jews being descended from the stock of Abraham,
whom God had (not without many dangers) drawn out of Caldea, they for their
parts were to hope that God would no less assist and help them, seeing his
force was nothing abated, nor his love cooled. It being a difficult thing for
them therefore to hope for any return, in regard they were held captives in
their enemies country far from home, the Prophet sets the like example before
them, to quicken up their hope and confidence. They were scattered in Caldea,
and in the regions adioining: they imagined that the way was hedged up against
them, in regard of the many stumbling blocks that lay between them and home:
but Abraham their father passed from Vr of the Caldeans, into Iudeah. He that
had brought a poor man with his father, his nephew, and wife, safe and sound
through so many straits, could not he also conduct and lead his people? Since
God then had delivered Abraham out of all encumbrances, in drawing him out of
his Country; this example which so nearly concerned them, ought to touch his
children and offspring to the quick: so as the safe conduit which their father
had from, or of the Caldeans into the land of promise, was to serve them as a
pledge or mirror of their deliverance to come.

When he calls Abraham Justice, it is not to magnify him, but to show that
God put upon him that person which appertained to the whole Church: for his
calling was not to be esteemed as that of a private person, but therein God
showed a testimony of his eternal justice, which is common to all the
faithful. As if he should say; In the person of this good Patriarch, the
Church was once delivered, that by means thereof, she might hold this for a
principle; to wit, that her salvation Abraham is as a mirror of Gods justice,
as long as it shall shine in this world. This word justice therefore serves to
amplify the matter; for it was a wonderful work of God to raise up justice
fro the east, where all things were corrupt and defiled with abominable
superstitions. Has God then showed so rare an example of his power and
goodness? why should we not wait for the same still?

As touching that which follows, to come after him: some expound it, as if
Abraham had called upon the name of the Lord whithersoeuer he came: for he no
sooner set his foot in any region, but he set up an Alter to offer sacrifice
to God: Genesis 12:7. and 13.18. All this is true that they say; but yet I expound
it otherwise, to wit, that God led his servant Abraham in the way, who followed
that his leading foot by foot: for having received a commandment to go
forth, he knew not the Country whither he should go; so as he walked, but
knew not which way to turn him, and God held him still in suspense, till he
entered the land of Canaan. Now because Abraham immediately obeyed the voice of
God, and albeit his way was uncertain, yet he depended still upon his mouth,
contenting himself with his conduction: our Prophet fitly says, that he came
after him; because he followed God, as ready and obedient servants are wont
to follow their master at the heels, though they know not whither he goes.

And subdued.] His meaning is, that howsoever this good man might have been
distracted and put out of heart through many temptations, yet God made him
safely pass the pikes, which might any way hurt him. Moses recites not all the
encumbrances which Abraham met withal in the way: but every one may consider,
that first of all his departing to go he knew not whither. Then, being

That which Moses recites testifies plainly, that Abraham had never any settled
peace: and yet the wicked durst enterprise nothing against him, but the
Hittites offered him a place of burial freely without money, though he offered to
pay for it: and they confessed that he was a Prince and man of God amongst
them, Genesis 23.6.

The Prophet further amplifies the grace of God, in that he spared not Kings;
to show, that he was the faithful protector of his servant Abraham. Now the
history of the four Kings which he put to flight and discomfited is
notorious. We may also extend it to Pharaoh and Abimelec, Genesis 12.17. and 20.3.
whereof the Prophet expreslie speaks in the 105. Psalm: for the Lord rebuked
and chastised them, in that they durst adventure to touch his anointed. But he
speaks properly of the victory which he got over the four Kings which led
his kinsman Lot captive with all his family: for it sufficiently appears by
the scope of the text, that he speaks not of kings or nations that were
peaceable, but of armed enemies, who by force were subdued.

He afterward amplifies the easines of this victory, and expresses therein a
great contempt, when he compares Kings to dust and stubble: for Abraham
overcame them without hazarding his person. And therewithal we are taught to
attribute this victory to God, and not to the power of man: for men can not
atchieue a victory with so little ado.

Verse. 3. He pursued them, and passed safely by the way that he had not gone
with his feet.
Again he magnifies the singular goodness of God in amplifying this victory by
other circumstances: and this is advisedly to be considered of us, that he
should obtain so great a conquest in a country unknown unto him. It was a
difficult and dangerous matter for him to pursue his enemies into regions
unfrequented: for Histories record sufficiently what advantage is gotten by
knowledge of places both by sea and land, which those that frequent the wars
have ever and anon experience of. But this hindered not Abraham: whence it
appears yet better, that he was conducted and succored by Gods hand, who
leads those that are his forward with boldness.

Verse. 4. Who has wrought and done it? He that calls the generations from
the beginning. I the Lord am the first, and with the last, I am the same.
THough Isaiah propounds nothing here but the example of Abraham: yet no doubt
his meaning is to put the people in mind of all those benefits which the
fathers in former times had received. As if he should say, Remember your
beginning. From whence raised I up Abraham your father? Through what ways led
I him? And my benefits have not ended there; for since that time, I have never
ceased to fill you with all manner of blessings. When he asks, Who it is? He
speaks not of one fact, but ads other mercies powered out upon them many ways,
which the people were now to call to mind.

Where he says, that God called the generations from the beginning, it ought
to be referred to the continual successions of the times: and the word Dor
among the Hebrews signifies not only the time or age of man's life, but those
also which live in the same age. And thus one age is distinguished from
another, as the fathers from the children; and the grandfathers from their
little ones: for our successors will call us which now live, the former, or
next age: and that of our predecessors, the old time. Now because one age would
consume the race of mankind if it were not supplied by the children which are
borne; the Prophet shows, that God multiplies men by continual succession,
that so one may supply another room when it is empty. Whence it follows
that his providence gouernes all ages, Gods providence gouernes all ages.
lest we should think the world were ordered by fortune: for we may
evidently perceive that his hand and power is in the succession of one age
after another.

But because diverse changes make us think that the world goes upon wheels, as
they say, therefore the Prophet contrariwise shows, that these so many
alterations were foreseen from the beginning. The sum of all is, That God
rules in these varieties and changes which time brings forth, God rules in all
the changes which time brings forth.
and with a steadie hand brings that to pass which himself from the beginning
has ordained.

I the Lord.] He affirms in more evident terms that God is the author of
these benefits, namely, that Abraham overcame his enemies, Pharaoh and Abimelec
took his wife from him, Genesis 12.9. and 14.15. and 20.18. To be short, he
teaches, that it is to him we ought to refer all the benefits bestowed upon
the ages following, after so diverse and sundry ways: for he extended not his
liberality toward Abraham and his seed alone, but likewise to the whole world.

Where he names himself the first, and says he is with the last, this
appertains not only to the eternity of his essence, but to his rule and
dominion which he exercises over the whole world. As if he should say,
Continuance of time makes me not wax old, for I never mean to give up my
right. He is not idle in the heavens, but from his high throne beholds and
orders the least things. Moreover, although the world forgeth unto it self a
world of dunghill gods, yet he will lose nothing by it, because he always
continues one and the same.

Verse. 5. The yles saw it, and did fear, and the ends of the earth were
abashed, drew near, and came.

6. Every man helped his neighbor, and said to his brother; Be strong.


HE shows now that the world was too unthankful, who having seen the works
of God, did still persevere in that blindness wherewith it was possessed
before. In the beginning of the Chapter, he showed that the victory was his,
if they would but lend their ears to hear his plea: now he adds, that the
Gentiles knew his power well enough, and yet for all that, continued obstinate
and rebellious. In which respect, they were left without excuse. Why so?
Because the Lord manifested himself so apparently, that they could not choose
but see him, unless they would wittingly shut their eyes, lest they should
behold him.

That he might therefore take from the nations furthest off, all pretext of
ignorance, he says, they were abashed at the sight of his works; and yet they
fell to their old bias again, and forthwith wrapped themselves in many
superstitious vanities and errors. The sum is, that they not only beheld*
but were also convinced, in that this knowledge abashed them. But some may
object, Abraham, could not be made known to all, in such wise that foreign
nations should be fully acquainted with it. I answer, Abraham here, yet under
him he meant to call to mind other examples of his goodness, which their
forefathers had tasted of since, that from both, they might conceive hope of
deliverance. Abraham was not only delivered out of Caldea, but God drew also
all his posterity out from the bondage of Egypt: Exodus 13.16. and put them
into possession of the land of Canaan. He says then that the Isles felt his
power, when he delivered and preserved his people, that they might know the
true God: for his power plainly appeared in so many miracles.

Lastly, he signifies, that the Isles should be astonished at Gods invincible
power, when he should afterward deliver his people. And whilst the wicked
shall hear tell of it, they will not cease still to be perplexed, because
they therein feel that God is their enemy.

Drew near.] By this, some understand, that the unbelievers took a narrow
view of Gods works. For we use to draw near when we would be more certainly
informed of any new thing: others refer it to the King of Sodom, who met
Abraham: Genesis 14.17. but these things, as I think, savor not, neither come
they near the mark. The words of the text will be easily understood, if we
join this latter member to the verse following, thus; Verse. 6.
They drew near and came: every man helped his neighbor: and so the sense
will be; Although the Isles saw and knew my works, so as they stood abashed,
yet they assembled by heaps to make conspiracies. But to what end? Even to
harten on one another to make new gods, and to confirm themselves more and
more in their blindness.

He amplifies the crime then, when he says, that every one helped his
neighbor. Now truly, he that shall look near home, The fountain from
whence all superstitions flow.
and shall diligently observe men's dealings, he shall perceive that the spring
from whence all superstitions flow, is, that with one consent they agree to
quench the light which shines upon them from heaven.

Now albeit the Lord here complains of idolaters, God complains of the
Gentiles to admonish the Jews.
yet he does it to the end the Jews might be far from corrupting themselves
with so foul a sin, but might rather keep themselves close unto God, and to
a sincere confidence in his promises. He sets the ingratitude of the Gentiles
then before them, that they might learn to shun their steps, and to continue
rooted in the reverence of Gods Majesty. We here see now as in a glass, how
great the peruersitie of men is, who profit nothing at all by beholding the
works of God, but become the more dull and senseless thereby; for they had
rather wink with their eyes, and to shut them at high noone, then to behold
God, who represents himself before them. Besides this blindness, there is a
raging fury which prouokes them to rise up against God himself, and to be so
mad, Idolaters not only blind, but furious and frantike.
as to offer him the combat, rather then not to maintain their superstitions:
so that this vice stands not so much in the worshipping of idols, as in going a
madding after them. The Prophet sets forth this frenzy when he says, play
the men; be valiant, or strong: for he expresses their mischievous
conspiracy, in that they provoked, nay, set one another on fire to commit
idolatry, and to reject the fear of the true God, which they might conceive in
their minds, by the sundry testimonies of his power.

Verse. 7. So the workman comforted the founder; and he that smote with the
hammer, him that smote by course, saying; It is ready for the soddering; and
he fastened it with nails, that it should not be removed.
THis verse is diversely expounded, for it is somewhat obscure: neither do the
Jews themselves agree in the exposition of the words. I know not the reason
why the word Charash should here be taken for a Carpenter or Ioiner; for it
signifies any workman working upon stony matter. Some translate the word
Machalik, (which signifies him that smites) in the accusative: but I had rather
put it in the nominative. They also turn the word Paam, an anuell; others, a
little hammer: but because it signifies sometimes to smite by course, I have
thought this exposition most fitting to the text. For the Prophets meaning is,
that the founders smiting one after another, encouraged each other; because
they then are earnest in their business, and sweat at the work, so as one
draws on his fellow, and hastens him thereunto, to the end that which they
have begun, may soon be finished. In a word, he sets forth the obstinacy
and headstrongnes of idolaters, who combine themselves together in one to
resist God.

It appears as well by this place, as by all histories, that this vice has
not reigned in one age only; yea, would to God we had not too woeful experience
of it among our selves. We see how men provoke one another by mutual
persuasions to uphold Idolatry and superstitions: the more the truth shines
forth clearly, the more obstinatly recoile they back, as if they had plotted
with an high hand to make war upon God. For since pure religion was restored,
Idols, Pilgrimages, Masses, unlawful vows, Idolaters can provoke one another
to the upholding of their superstitions, Pilgrimages, Masses, unlawful vows,
prayers for the dead.
have multiplied, and have bin set up in despite of it: and more Mass Priests,
then ever before. There was some measure kept under the first ignorance: but
the Idolaters run now like hellish furies carried away with the fire thereof,
and leave no corner of their wits unsearched, in devising how to erect
superstitions and Idols, which are now like to break their necks. To be short,
they band and fortify themselves to withstand the Lord of hosts. If any would
lay the fault upon his companion, he shall gain nothing by it: for the evil
is spread so far into every one in particular, that they can no way be
excused. All are given to lies, and wittinglie seek to be deceived: and then
trusting in their multitude, they extol themselves and their side above God
himself: one whets on another to serve and worship Idols, which they love with
such heat, that all the world is now almost set on fire with it.

Verse. 8. But thou, Israel, art my servant, and thou Jacob whom I have chosen;
the seed of Abraham my friend.
NOw the Prophet shows how unreasonable a thing it were that Israel should
mingle himself with profane Nations, though all of them joined hand in hand,
marching in array under the banner of Idolatry, and giving themselves to lewd
practices. Why so? God had called them, and freely separated them to be his
peculiar people, and therefore it became not such to throw themselves headlong
into so beastly a fury. This place is notable therefore, and teaches us to
stick fast to the calling of God, that we defile not our selves with the filth
of the world: if corruptions break forth, and that Idolaters let loose the
bridle to all villainy; yet must we be held short by another bridle; to wit, we
are the chosen of God, and therefore it is not lawful for us to fly out, as
the wicked and unbelievers do. Such were some of you, says the Apostle, but
you are washed, but you are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God, 1. Cor. 6.11. For what is more absurd then to wander in
the dark, after the sun of righteousness has shined upon us.

Let us in any wise therefore bethink us of our vocation, that we may follow
it effectually and diligently: and walking in it as children of the light,
let us abhor all the darkness of our life past. This is the cause why he
calls Israel his servant: not that the Israelites had merited ought by their
services, but because it had pleased the Lord to choose them for his own. And
therefore to the same purpose he adds, Thou Iakob whom I have chosen: wherein
he sets before them a special comme^dation of his free bounty. As if he
should say, You are my servants, not by merit, but of my free mercy, seeing I
have prepared you thereunto by mine election, and by putting you apart to be my
peculiar people. To be short, he admonishes them, that they obtained not this
title of being the servants of God by their own industry; for there was
nothing to be found in them that should make them more holy then others, but
only because the good pleasure of their master was such, God chooses and
refuses whom it pleases him. The end of our election is, ^o be Gods servants.
who chooses this or that man according to the counsel of his own will.
Therewithal also he shows what is the end of our election, to wit, that we
should be the servants of God. For he has chosen us, as the Apostle says,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. The
end also of our election is, that such as were the bondslaues of Satan before,
should now submit and give themselves to God in absolute obedience.

In the third place he adds, the seed of Abraham, to teach us, that election
depends upon the free promise Election depends upon the free promise.
of God: not that the promise goes before election (which is from everlasting)
but because ye Lord makes known his favor in respect of his promise: for to
Abraham he said, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. This favor
then was continued to his successors, and in respect of the promise, God had a
special care over the welfare of this people, as also S. Paul says Romans 9.4.
That to them were given the covenants, the promises, and the law. For which
cause this seed was called an holy nation, a royal Priesthood, etc. Exodus
19.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.

But the Lord shows the singular love he bare to Abraham in calling him his
friend. Abraham Gods friend.
It is no small favor to be called Gods servant: Simile.
for if it be worthily esteemed an high dignity to be brought into the service
of a King or Prince, how much more highly ought we to think our selves
advanced when we are accounted the household servants of the Almighty? And yet
he contents not himself herewith, but as if that were too little, he honors
him yet further, and adornes him with the title of Friends. Now that which is
here said of Abraham belongs to all the faithful, which Christ declares at
large, Ioh. 15.15. I call you not servants, says he, but friends: for the
servant knows not what his Master does, but I have acquainted you with all my
heavenly mysteries and secrets: by reason whereof, you may easily discern how
great the love and affection is which I bear toward you. Seeing then that God
has done us so great honor, ought we not to bethink us of our duties? Has
he showed so unutterable a favor to us, and shall it not stir us up to serve
and honor him with the greater care and reverence? But let it (I pray you) be
always remembered, that Abraham is not called the friend of God, but in regard
of adoption: Note, that Abraham is not called Gods friend, but by the right of
adoption.
as Moses also says of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.37. He loved thy fathers, and
therefore he chose their seed after them.

Verse. 9. For I have taken thee from the ends of the earth, Or, have called
thee before the excellences.
and called thee before the chief thereof, and said unto thee; Thou art my
servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.
ISaiah goes on with the same matter still; for who is it that feels not by
common experience, what need he has ever and anon to be quickened up, by the
often repetition of this and such like consolations, when adversities do
press us? It is no wonder then that the Prophet insists so long upon this
argument. Now from the only person of Abraham, he ascends to all his
posterity, and mentions the benefits which he had done for them. I take the
relative Ish, for the particle For; because he yeeldes a reason wherefore the
people were to be of good comfort in their adversities; to wit, they had felt
and tasted before how good and gracious God was unto them: what cause had they
then that they should not trust in him still for the time to come?

The ends of the earth may be taken two ways; either that the people had bin
brought from a far Country, even from the place of Abraham's nativity, or in
respect that God, who has the utmost bounds of the earth at his beck, yet
vouchsafed to reach forth his hand but to one only people. He adds the far
exceedings, or, excellencies; for I have so translated the word Atsilim, which
others expound in the masculin, Princes, or, excellent: but there is no great
difference between the one or the other: for the Prophet magnifies Gods grace,
who passed by other mighty nations, and took unto himself a nation abject
and obscure. Egypt well conceited of her lea ning, antiquity, nobility, etc.
Some refer this taking to Egypt, whence the people were brought. For it is not
unknown how glorious this kingdom was, and what good opinion the Egyptians
had of their learning, antiquity, nobleness of blood, and other prerogatives.
But I expound it otherwise, and refer it to the election of the people, who
were taken from the midst of other nations, much more excellent then they: so
as there is a comparison here between the Jews and other nations. Which Moses
also shows when he says; That they were not chosen because they were more
in number then any other people; for they were the sewest, Deuteronomy. 7.7. but
because the Lord loved them, and because he would keep the oath which he had
sworn unto their fathers: Deuteronomy. 7.8. Again, Thou entrest not into thine
enemies land for thine uprightness of heart, nor for thy righteousness; for
thou art a stiffenecked people: Deuteronomy. 9.5.6. Albeit then they were much less
in quantity then all other nations, yet they were chosen* wherein they had a
testimony of Gods singular love: had they any cause then to mistrust so
bountiful and liberal a father for the time to come, having already received
so many benefits from his hands?

He further adds, that the people had a pledge of this grace in the law,
standing as it were upon record: as if he should say; It is not hid from thee,
but it is written fair in plain tables: for having chosen thee, I afterward
gave thee my law, that thou should not wander hither and thither, but
might keep thy self loiall unto me, that so I might perform my promise
concerning thy salvation.

As touching that which follows, and not cast thee away: it seems both
superfluous, and that it comes in out of place, were it not that it is an
usual thing so to do with the Hebrews, which also has great weight in it.
For thereby he expresses the steadfastness of their election: as if he should
say; I have not left or forsaken thee, though thou have given me many
occasions: for the ingratitude of the Jews was so great, that he had just
cause to have cast them off, but that he meant to show himself to be that
God who changes not. Now that which is said of them, belongs also to us: for
this sentence of the Apostle is perpetual, Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling
of God are without repentance. Howsoever then he casts off the greater part of
the world, in regard of their incredulity, yet he always reserues to himself
some seed of adoption, that so the calling may remain in some sprigs: neither
indeed can Gods election be altered by the peruersitie of men. And therefore
let us remember that God has chosen us on this condition, that we should
still remain in his house and family, God has chosen us, but upon condition
that we continue in his family.
albeit by good right we deserve to be driven out of it.

Verse. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not afraid, for I am thy
God: Or, yet, or, certainly I will, etc.
I will strengthen thee, and help thee, and I will sustain thee with the
right hand of my justice.
BEcause the former doctrine was to settle the peoples hearts touching their
quiet resting upon Gods providence, the Prophet thence concludes, that they
ought not to fear, having so many benefits set before their eyes; in which
they might evidently discern the love which God bare unto them. The reason
which he adds, for I am with the, is diligently to be observed. For this is
the sure foundation of our confidence; to wit, which being once fixed in our
hearts, we shall stand fast and invincible against all manner of temptations:
as on the contrary, when we think God is absent, or doubt whether he will
assist us or not, fear surprizeth us, and carries us floting up and down
through many waves of distrust. But if we rest immovable upon this
foundation, there is no calamities nor tempests whatsoever that can ouerwhelme
us.

And yet the Prophets meaning is not that the faithful can be so confident,
Faith is never so firm, that it should not be assailed with wauerings, yet at
last it gets the victory.
that fear should no more assail the^; but notwithstanding they have
wauerings in their hearts, and be often solicited to distrust upon diverse
occasions; yet they resist the same with such constancy, that faith at the
last gets the victory. For it is incident to us by nature to fear, and to lie
full of doubtings: but such a vice is to be corrected by this meditation; God
is with me, to help, and takes care for my salvation.

Some read it in the preterperfect tence; I have helped thee: but I read it
in the future; I will help the. I also expound the Hebrew particle Ak, Yet,
it being often used in this sense in other places. It may also be taken for
Certainly: but I leave the choice to the readers discretion. If we take it in
the preterperfect, this particle will be as much as Yea, or, Likewise.

Under the word justice, the Scripture not only comprehends equity, but also
the Lords fidelity in preserving his Church. For he shows his justice, when
he defends his children against the conspiracies and sundry plots of their
adversaries. He calls the right hand of his justice then, that whereby he
manifests his fidelity and justice. Whence we are to gather a singular
consolation, to wit, that we ought not to fear, seeing the Lord is determined
to protect and defend his servants, for it is not possible he should either put
off, or renounce his justice.

Verse. 11. Behold all that provoke thee, shall be ashamed and confounded: they
shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish.
THe Prophet promises the Jews assured help against their adversaries; for
if he had given them hope of their deliverance, and had made no mention of
their enemies, their minds might have been forestalled with many such perplexed
thoughts as these: It is true indeed that God promises much touching our
deliverance out of all perils, but yet we see our adversaries the stronger, who
deal cruelly and uncivilly with us. Where is then that salvation so often and so
largely promised? See here therefore a circumstance added to the general
promise. As if he should reply, I grant your enemies flourish, and yet at the
last they shall be ashamed and confounded. Deliverance is promised, but it is
upon condition that you abide the brunt of your enemies, and buckle hand to
hand diverse ways with them. For we must not promise to our selves any worldly
rest or tranquillity here, because we must always be ready armed to fight.

Verse. 12. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them: to wit, the men Or,
that plead with thee.
of thy strife; for they shall be as nothing, and the men that war against thee
as a thing of naught.
THou shall seek.] That is to say; if thou seek them. For we use not to
seek out enemies after they are put to flight. Therefore I think it should be
construed thus; if thou seek them, thou shall not find them; because they
shall be cut off, and brought to nothing. We must note here yt there are two
sorts of enemies: Two sorts of enemies.
the first sort assailes us by open violence: Satan's policies.
whose servants seeing these are, what marvel is it if they tread in the steps
of their lord and master? First then the Prophet speaks of pleaders; and next,
of the armed enemies which dealt roughly with the Church. What wonder is it
then, if we be exercised with false accusations? Nay, we must not think it
strange, if many companions fell themselves to Antichrist as his vassals to
revile and slander us, Antichrists hirelings.
seeing the same has befallen the Prophets and other servants of God.

Verse. 13. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee,
Fear not, I will help thee.
THe Prophet showed us erewhile whereupon we should build the confidence of our
salvation, that we might continue safe against all assaults; to wit, when we
were certainly persuaded that God is our God. Now he teaches the same thing,
but in other words; neither is the repetition superfluous: for we know how
easily the remembrance of this doctrine vanishes away, albeit we have it
often repeated unto us. This promise therefore cannot be too much praised nor
insisted upon, seeing it does so hardly take root in our hearts. Let us be
well assured then that we shall find an undoubted issue in all our
perplexities, because the Lord will assist us: as often therefore as we shall be
pressed under any dangerous assault, let us learn to fix our eyes upon him.

Now when he calls himself the Lord our God, it is not so much to set forth
his power, as his goodness, which he will make us feel. For what benefit
should redound unto us from the knowledge of his power, if therewithal we were
not well persuaded of his love? At the only hearing of his power we are
astonished; but when his goodness is preached with it, the very remembrance
thereof suffices to appease us.

He speaks of taking by the hand, and of the voice again; for it serves much
to the comforting of our weak faith, to know what signs of love God shows
us, especially when the doctrine of faith is joined thereunto, which assures us
of his perpetual favor. This clause therefore, saying unto thee; has great
weight in it: for we must needs remain always in suspense, Gods voice.
till we hear the voice of the Lord in his word. It is that alone which
suffices to abolish all our fear, and to set us at rest. Are we desirous then
to have our hearts quieted, and to overcome the many troubles which daily befall
us? Let us hearken directly to the good word of God, and ever hold fast the
comfort thereof in our hearts. For it is impossible for them who either will
not hear this word at all, Note.
or hearing it, do it negligentlie, to attain this peace: nay, let them be
sure that an accusing conscience and a trembling heart shall always pursue
them.

Verse. 14. Fear not, thou worm Iakob, and ye Or, dead.
men of Israel: I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy redeemer the holy one
of Israel.
What course God takes in ministering comfort to his afflicted Church.
HE seems to speak somewhat too meanly of this people in that he calls them
a worm, and then dead men: but this comparison agrees well with the calamity
which the people were in: and he takes a better course this way to minister
comfort unto them, then if he had called them, The elect nation, a royal
priesthood: an holy tree springing forth of an holy root, or if he had
adorned them with the like titles. For to say the truth, it had bin absurd to
have imposed such glorious titles upon them, being pressed as they were under
so base and vile a slavery. By the name of worm Worm Jacob.
therefore, he laments the ignominy and shame into which they were brought;
and puts them in good hope of a better estate. For thus he shows, that the
Lord cares for them, notwithstanding they be abject and vile in the eyes of
men. As if he should say, Though now thou be nothing, yet will I succor
thee, and by restoring thee to thy first estate, will cause thee to come forth
of this rottennes and abject condition of thine.

Some translate the word Methim, Men, which agrees not with the text, but must
necessarily be translated dead, for it is an exposition of the other epithete
worm, according to the Hebrew phrase. I agree with S. Jerome S. Jerome.
who has so translated it, neither do I pass much that the word is otherwise
written here then elsewhere, in regard of the changing of the pricks: for this
might easily fall out by reason of the likeness which these pricks have one with
another. The thing should be weyed, for there is nothing more absurd, then to
read men, in stead of worms, unless they read it dead, or mortal. But God
meant no doubt that this voice should be heard among the people who were now at
last cast, to the end it might pierce even into their graves: for on the
contrary he promises to be the redeemer of these which are dead.

Now the Prophet had not such respect unto his own time, The Prophet had
respect to the succeeding ages, as to his own times.
but that he meant his doctrine should extend it self to all ages of the
world. As often then as we shall see the Church oppressed under cruel tyrants,
let us call this sentence to mind, that albeit Gods children be trodden under
foot by the proud, that they be despised, and that they have not so much
leisure as to take their breath, being persecuted and afflicted above measure:
yet let us know that even such are in great account with God, so as they shall
be able ere long to lift up their heads. Let this be applied to every one of us
in particular, that we may not be discoraged for the scoffs of the wicked, nor
for the miseries and calamities which we endure, no nor for death it self. Do
we resemble dead men, and is all hope of deliverance taken away? A Consolation.
yet will our Redeemer come at last, and will raise up his Church out of her
very grave.

When the Prophet adds the holy one of Israel, he brings back the people as he
has done before to the remembrance of that Covenant by which Israel was
separated from other nations to be Gods peculiar people: thus he incourageth
them, that their miserable condition should not too much deiect nor cast them
down, though they seemed as worms of the earth, and as dead men.

Verse. 15. Behold, I will make thee a roller, and a new threshing instrument
having teeth: thou shall thresh the mountains and bring them to powder, and
shall make the hills as chafe.
HE speaks still of the restoration of the Church, promising that she shall
be so exalted above her enemies, that she shall bruise and grind them to
powder. And this he expresses under a very fit similitude. For the Jews to
whom he speaks were almost crushed in pieces: but now on the contrary he tells
them that they being delivered shall crush their enemies, and so render them
like for like. Now it was very needful that this consolation should be added,
for had they not recovered new strength, it is like enough they had bin subject
to the tyranny of their enemies for ever: God meant to arm them then, that
they might be able to repulse the outrages done unto them: so as they were now
become the executioners of Gods vengeance as our Prophet shows.

But by these words it might seem he meant to inflame the Jews with a desire
to revenge, Note.
and to bewail their condition, then to wish their overthrow. If we embrace
this promise with such faith as is meet, that is, in casting down all the
impaciencie of the flesh at her feet, then shall we first of all be disposed to
patience; and in the next place we will with a moderat zeal wait for the
accomplishment of Gods judgments. We must therefore labor to quench all those
inordinate passions of the flesh, and with an humble and meek spirit to wait
for the fit time when this judgment shall be executed: not so much in regard
of our own particular profits, as to see Gods justice exalted, according as it
deserves. David has written to this effect, Psalm. 58. The righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in ye blood of the
wicked: not that they take pleasure in their miseries, but as it is said
afterward in that Psalm, Men shall say, Verily there is fruit for the
righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. For God manifests
his just judgments to the world, when the wicked are punished for their
misdoings. The Jews (being cruel and blood-thirstie) snatch up these promises
like savage and wild beasts, who rauenouslie devour the pray that is offered,
and keep a howling if they do but apprehend the very sent of it. We cannot
approve our selves to be Gods children, unless we be led by the spirit of
meekness.
But the Lord would not have his children to forget that mildnes which he above
al things likes of: for we can make no claim to be the children of such a
father, unless we be led with the spirit of meekenes and gentleness. To be
short, by the harrow with sharp teeth, he means nothing else but the fearful
and terrible end of the wicked, whom the Lord will overthrow by the hands of
the faithful, yet not so inflame their hearts with a desire of shedding blood,
as to comfort and cheer up their spirits.

Verse. 16. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlewind shall scatter them: and thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall
glory in the holy one of Israel.
fan, Three things to be noted, in that the Church is compared to a Fan.
and the wicked to chafe, which the wind scatters to and fro. As if he should
say, Though the wicked thresh and fan you now, yet they shall be chastised
more severely, for they shall be crushed in pieces by their destruction, and
scattered as straw. But yet note the difference; for the faithful are fanned
in this world for their great good, The faithful are fanned in this world for
their great good.
because they suffer themselves to be brought under the obedience of God: but
the other obstinately resisting and abiding no yoke, the Prophet teaches, that
they shall be scattered as chafe, that is, carried away by the wind. Thus
then, God had threshed ye Jews with great strokes of the flaile; he had
smitten them down with laying them on; and scattered them with his fan: that
so becoming clean and pure wheat, he might gather them into his Garner; but
appointed out the profane nations to be as stubble for the fire.

The Church sometimes fannes the wicked, to make them fit for Gods glory.
that the victorious Church fannes some unbelievers, to the end they might be
purged, and find place in Gods flore: and thus this prophecy was fulfilled,
as often as any of the Gentiles were won to the faith by means of the godly,
thereby bringing them under the dominion of Christ. Neither had the faithful
ever any earthly power to rule over their enemies: nay contrariwise, they are
always feign to possess their souls in patience: but the Lord causes them
under such heavy burdens to flourish like the Palm trees, so as they escape
safe from danger. And which more is, they have even a midst these streites
trodden the enemies of the truth under their feet with invincible courage.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the Scripture

Besides, as often as we read these prophesies, we must lift up our minds to
Christ's kingdom, that putting off all perverse affections, we may keep such a
measure as is fitting, and never with this scattering before the time. For it
ought to suffice us that our head will at the last tread down all our enemies
under our feet, and make them his very footstool, that we may participate
with him in his victory. Where he adds, that the Jews should have cause to
rejoice in the Lord: Wherefore it is added, that the Church must rejoice in the
Lord.
though he meant hereby to assuage their sorrows, yet therewithal he also
exhorts the faithful to modesty, that they should not break forth into
fury, if it fell out that the Lord should thus subdue their enemies. For men
are inclined to nothing more then to swell in pride, when things fall out as
they would have them: they forget then that they are men, and as for God whom
they ought to acknowledge the author of all benefits, him they utterly
neglect. Thus then, that the Prophet might bridle this inordinate joy of the
flesh, which often caries us beyond our bounds, he adds, in the Lord, because,
Let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord.
as all our glory and gladness comes only from him, so it should be ascribed
only to him. Lastly, he exhorts us to acknowledge Gods benefits, that the
higher he has advanced us, the more careful should we be to cut off all pride
and presumption, that we may give our selves to rejoicing in him, and to the
setting forth of his praise and glory only.

Verse. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none (their
tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them: I the God of Israel will
not forsake them.)
HE goes on with the argument begun from the beginning of the former Chapter:
for he sets out the miserable and poor estate into which the Jews should be
brought being in Babylon, till God having compassion upon them, should at the
last assist and help them. Thus he aduertiseth them to prepare themselves for
the enduring of extreme poverty, when he tells them of thirst: for we know
there is nothing more tedious to be borne, then the want of water when one
is thirsty. This therefore was a very apt kind of speech to express the
greatness of their calamity.

But the Prophet affirms that God will aid them, even at the very pinch: and
thus we may see to whom this promise belongs, namely, to such as being in
extremity, patch away, and faint with thirst. Hence also we may note, that the
Church flows not always in abundance of outward things, The Church flows not
always with abundance.
but is sometimes brought to penury and want, that by such goades in her
sides, she might be stirred up to call upon God; for we are wont to wax idle
when things fall out as we would have them. It is good therefore to be
exercised with hunger and thirst, that we may learn to seek the Lord with
our whole hearts. In a word, it is very needful we should be pressed with
poverty, that so we may the better taste the Lords bounty.

Questionless the Prophet meant by this circumstance to set forth the
greatness of Gods grace; as al^o admonishes the people hereby, not to faint
nor quail in the time of need and want. Now we are to observe what titles he
gives them: for in calling them poor and needy, he speaks not to strangers,
but of such as the Lord had chosen and adopted for his heritage. We ought not
to wonder then if God now and then suffer us to languish under hunger and
thirst, seeing he has exercised our forefathers no less severely.

When he says, the waters appear not: let us learn that the Lord for the
trial of our faith and patience, takes away all means from us, that we might
rest upon him alone. By the word I will hear, he signifies that God helps
not all, God helps not all, but such as call upon him.
but such as call upon him: are we so careless then as to contemn this
help? It is good reason we should be left destitute still, without feeling any
succor, in regard we are unworthy of it.

Verse. 18. I will open rivers in the tops of the hills, and fountains in the
midst of the Or, plains.
valleys: I will make the wilderness as a poole of water, and the waste land
as springs of water.

19. I will set in the wilderness the Cedar, the shittath tree, and the myrre
tree, and the pine tree; and I will set in the wilderness the fur tree, the
elm and the box tree together.


THe Prophet amplifies the former doctrine by another circumstance; to wit,
that the Lord needs no natural, nor external remedies to succor his Church
withal, but has secret and admirable means ready, by which he can supply the
necessity thereof above all that man's reason can conceive or imagine. When we
see no help, despair easily creepes upon us; we dare hope no longer then we
see worldly means present before our eyes: if they fail us, then all hope in
God is gone. But our Prophet tells us that this is the very hour in which we
should gather greatest assurance; The time in which we should gather greatest
assurance.
because the Lord has then most liberty to manifest his power, when men are
brought to extremities, and seem utterly confounded. It is his property then
to assist those that are his, against the expectation and thought of man, that
thus we might not suffer our selves to be transported hither and thither by
any difficulties or idle discourses.

Now the better to confirm this, he promises to work miracles contrary to
the order of nature: teaching us thereby not to speak or judge of these his
doings according to humane sense, neither to tie his power nor promises to
secondary causes: for the Lord is strong enough of himself, The Lord is strong
enough of himself to help his chosen, without, or against means.
and needs no help from others; he is not so bound to the ordinary course of
nature, but he can change it as often as it pleases him. Now we know the things
he here promises to do, are contrary to nature: as to make rivers spring
forth in the tops of mountains; and fountains in the midst of the plain;
and pooles in the desert. But why promises he these things? Lest the Jews
might think the way to be stopped up against them, in regard of their
returning home; because that great and spacious wilderness was between them
and it, wherein passengers were wont to be parched with the heat of the Sun,
and left destitute of all necessaries. Thus then the Lord promises plenty of
waters, and all other provision needful for their journey.

These things were accomplished when the Lord turned the captivity of Zion;
but much more perfectly when he converted the whole world unto him by the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, from whom flowed waters in great abundance,
Ioh. 4.14. and 7.37, 38., 39.
which were shed abroad throrowout the earth, to quench the thirst of poor
forlorn sinners. Then there was such a change, as men could by no means
conceive the reason of it in their understandings.

Verse. 20. Therefore let them see and know, and let them consider and
understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the holy one
of Israel has created it.
Howsoever God shows himself wonderful in all his works, God shows his
admirable power in nothing more then in the redemption of his Church.
yet when the matter concerns the restoring of his Church, it is then that he
manifests his admirable power principally, so as he makes every one astonished at
it. We have seen heretofore, and it will be repeated again hereafter, that by
bringing the people home from captivity, the Lord left such a testimony of his
power therein, as shall be memorable to the worlds end; and the Prophet in
effect says as much here. Now because we are either dull or careless in
considering the works of God, or heed them not as we should; The cause why
the Prophet repeats one thing often.
therefore they easily slip out of our minds: and this is the cause why he
repeates one thing so often. For we still stand muzing rather upon things of
nothing, then to take to heart the works of God: and if it fall out that they
draw us to any admiration of them, yet it is but as a wonder that lasts for
nine days, because our minds presently run after other fancies, in which
there is no fruit at all. The Prophet awakens us then once again, that he
might chase away all sluggishnesse and sottishness of mind from us, that so
all our senses might be brought to comprehend the power of God.

First of all then he wills them to see or behold, which gets a certain
knowledge: then he adds consideration, which better confirms understanding,
and more certainly. It is not certain whether the Prophet speaks to the
Jews; that is to say, to those of the household of God, or to strangers: as I
think, we may generally affirm, that when the Church should be restored, the
power of God should then be perceived of all nations near and far off; so as
all should be compelled to admire so rare and excellent a work. It is also
certain that the Medes and Persians having gotten dominion over the Jews,
were wonderfully abashed in hearing these testimonies of the Prophets, but
chiefly when they saw the accomplishment and effect thereof performed before
their eyes: for they might well know that men could never bring such things to
pass; and yet they were not converted to God themselves for all that.

Verse. 21. Stand to your cause, says the Lord: bring forth your strong
reasons, says the King of Iaakob.
IT was very needful that this should be added to the former doctrine: for
whilst we converse with the wicked, they scorn our hope, and think us
fools, and too simple and light of belief. You see with what scoffs our
weak faith is assailed and shaken; Oh these fellows build castles in the
air, and persuade themselves of the accomplishment of things impossible and
unreasonable. The cause why the Jews were fortified against the scoffs of the
Gentiles by these admonitions.
For as much as the Jews then lay open to such taunts in their banishment, it
was necessary they should be fortified by such admonitions. And that this
sentence might get the greater weight touching the assurance of it, he sets
all profane people at naught, commanding them to stand to their cause: as men
are wont to do in judgments. But in calling him the King of Iaakob, he bids
defiance to all the idols, and shows that he will take his peoples quarrel in
hand, to the end they may know at length that he is the protector and defender
of his own glory, in delivering such as are iniustly oppressed. And yet it was
needful that the faithful should be fortified with an exceeding measure of
faith: for in what case was the estate of the Kingdom, whilst they were
detained prisoners in a strange land, and in a manner overwhelmed with
calamities? That is the cause why the Prophet called them dead men, and worm
Iaakob, verse 14. But their hearts were sustained by this promise, in which it
was affirmed, Chap. 11.1. that their root was hidden in the earth, when the
people was compared to a tree hewn down by the roots: only there should
come forth a rod out of the dry stock of Ishai, etc. Thus by the eyes of
faith, they beheld the kingdom that was hid: for it was impossible to see it
by the outward senses, no, nor to comprehend it by the light of natural reason.

Verse. 22. Let them bring forth, and let them tell us what shall come: let them
show the former things what they be, that we may Or, put the^ in our hearts.
consider them, and know the latter end of them: either declare us things for
to come.

23. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know ye are gods:
yea, do good or evil, that we may declare it, and behold it together.


NOw he directs his speech not only to the idolaters, but permits them also
to bring in their idols: as if he should say; I know you think your idols very
wise, yet they will be able to speak very little in the defense of so bad a
cause. We see here that God takes unto him the person of an advocate, and
speaks in the name of all the people; for he will not be separated from his
Church, but is careful, as you see, to furnish and fortify her against all
the opprobries of the wicked, and against all their plots, whereby they endeavor
to assail our faith. We must be of good courage then, seeing God is pleased to
be the pleader of our cause, and stands between us and the idolaters; and as
one armed with his own invincible truth, bids defiance to the idols
themselves, being ready in person to refute their vanity.

Besides, he shows that his elect are sufficiently furnished with his word to
get the victory; so as they need not be afraid to undertake the combat
against all unbelievers whatsoever. And truly he that has profited in the
heavenly doctrine as he ought, shall easily confound all the impostures of
Satan, by a constant and victorious faith. I grant our faith begins at
obedience, but the teachablenesse by which we submit all our senses to Gods
worship, goes so before the understanding, that from thence our minds are
illuminated with sound knowledge.

By this mark we may discern superstition from that true religion, How to
discern superstition from true religion.
which is directed by a rule that is neither doubtful nor deceivable. The
idolaters vaunt themselves but too much in their errors, yet all their pride
proceeds from folly, sottishness, and frenzy. For if they would consider of
the heavenly doctrine, with calm and quiet minds, all this ouerweening by
which they darken the light of truth, would forthwith fall to the ground. But
the faithful have another respect, whose faith albeit it be founded upon
humility, yet it is not carried away with a foolish or inconsiderate zeal,
because it has the spirit of God for the conductor and leader thereof, that so
she may never turn aside from the certain light of Gods word. Therefore where
the right rule of discerning things is absent, Where the right rule of
discerning things is abs^nt, there can be nothing but superstition.
there can be nothing but superstitions, as Isaiah says. Now because things
are not to be done rashly, therefore the faithful wills them to bring forth,
and put them in their hearts: not that they meant to halt between two
opinions, being before instructed of God, The difference between sottish
obstinacy and true faith.
but because the superstitious could allege nothing for themselves, but that
which was worthy to be laughed at of all. See here again then the difference
between blockish obstinacle, and true faith, which has her foundation upon
Gods word, so as she can never be moved.

But now let us see with what argument our Prophet defends the Majesty of God;
for he so attributes unto himself an infinite power and foreknowledge of all
things, that none can take them unto himself without manifest blasphemy. Who
it is that rightly deserves to be called God. How Isaiah frames his argument
against Idols.
Whence we gather, that these things are so proper to the Divinity, that he
indeed rightly deserves to be called God, who knows and can do all things.
Thus the Prophet reasons then, If the Idols whom you adore be Gods, they must
be able to know and do all things: but they have no power to do any thing at
all, neither in prosperity nor adversity: neither do they know that which is
past, present, or to come: therefore they be no Gods.

Apollo, Jupiter, and others, knew of things to come: and therefore they were
Gods. First I answer, Oracles given forth of Idols, ambiguous. Pyrrhus.
Croesus.
As, that which was given to Pyrrhus, Thy men overcome shall the Romans. And,
to Cressus, after he has passed H^lys, Crsoeus shall overthrow many kingdoms.
How the event will show that touching the first we must understand it thus, The
Romans Croesus has passed Halys, he shall overthrow many kingdoms: not other
men's, but his own. Thus Satan at that time vexed the minds of men by these
entangled ambiguities, that he might always leave them hanging in suspense,
that gave themselves to be directed by such impostures.

But besides this, that is to be noted which Paul says 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, That the
efficacy of error is given unto Satan, that he might blind the unbelievers who
delight in his delusions. When they ask counsel then of this father of lies,
it is no marvel though they be dedeceiued under a color of truth: but in the
mean while, it is a just punishment of God upon them for their ingratitude.

We read that a lying spirit was let loose by means of the false Prophets,
the better to blind Ahab, who pleased himself in such beguilings: 1. King.
22.21. It was good reason also that the profane nations who had forsaken the
true God, should be entangled in the snares of error, and so drawn headlong
into perdition. Thus then it is a fond dispute whereabout Saint Augustine
labors so much; S. Austen.
to wit, how the devils may be partakers of this prescience which the good
Angels have: for the cause hereof must not be sought out in nature. So in times
past, when God gave the bridle to false Prophets, he by their fallacies avenged
himself upon the peoples wickedness: not that such imposters had any great
gift of knowledge, but being fitted for this purpose, they did according to the
license given unto them.

As touching God himself, albeit his foreknowledge be hid, and that it be a
bottomless depth, yet is it manifest enough to those whom he has chosen: so
as they may discern him from the troop of false gods. Not that he foretold
all things by his Prophets, for men's curiosity in that behalf is insatiable:
neither is it expedient they should know all things; but he has concealed
nothing from them that is fit to be known, for by many excellent prophecies
he has foreshewen that he has a special care of his Church: as Amos says;
Is there any secret thing which the Lord will not reveal to his servants the
Prophets? Amos 3.7.

The Jews have wickedly and unworthily abused this prerogative, in that they
have set their fond predictions to sale among strange nations. But the truth of
God has always so shined in the prophecies, that all men to whom God has
given wisdom, may clearly perceive that the God of Israel was and is the only
God. The God of Israel the only God.
Verily it was no more possible for the idols to beguile the faithful which
were instructed in the school of God, then at high noone to persuade one of a
perfect sight, that black were white: so far was it off for them then to get
any credit by their foreknowledge; and yet least of al by their power: neither
of which it was any way lawful to ascribe unto them, seeing it appeared by
continual prophecies, that one God only ruled and governed all things, both
adverse and prosperous. The Assyrian thanked his idols for his victories which
he obtained: but God had long before instructed the Jews of that which should
happen; yea and had made it evident in all men's sight, that he armed this
wretch to execute his own judgments. Read Chap. 10.

Now to do evil, Evil, taken for corrections.
is not taken here to commit any outrage, which is a thing far from the nature
of God, but it signifies to correct and send adversities, which indeed ought to
be attributed to Gods providence, and neither to fortune nor idols. And this
is often met withal in the Scriptures: as in Amos 3.6. Is there evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? Jeremiah also accuses the people, in
that they knew not that God was the author both of evil and good: Lament.
3.38. The Lord then punishes the sins of the people by wars, plague,
famine, poverty, sicknesses, and other the like evils, and will be known to be
the efficient from whom all of them proceed. Now Isaiah alleges not all the
examples and arguments, by which he was able to have distinguished the true God
from idols; for that would have taken up much time: but he now contents
himself to prove it briefly, and yet plainly: for he has not yet ended his
argument.

Verse. 24. Behold, ye are of no value, and your making is of naught: man has
chosen an abomination by them.
NOw he scorns the idols, that he might confirm the faithful in the
confidence and obedience of God, seeing by this comparison, that idolaters are
miserably blinded and beguiled. The word making, ought here to be taken in the
passive signification: as if he should say; It is a vain imagination or
invention of naught. But it seems he speaks improperly, nothing: for are they
not made of gold, silver, brass, vvood, stone, or such like matter? The
solution is easy, for Isaiah considered not the matter, but the quality; that
is to say, the opinion of divinity which men gave unto them. For the
superstitious do not simply worship the wood, brass, or metal, but the
majesty of God, Idolaters tie a divine majesty to their stocks and stones.
which they fondly and blasphemously tie to the corruptible idol: so as in
effect here is nothing but a vain imagination. To which purpose Paul says,
that an idol is nothing: 1. Cor. 8.4. For what can that be, or what name shall
be given to a work of vanity?

An abomination.] Others read it, The abomination; in the nominative, and
understand it that such are abominable as erect and set up idols: but I think
it is otherwise to be understood. I take ye verb chosen, indefinitiuely, as
the Grammarians speak, and it is often so taken in the Scriptures. For when
the Prophet speaks of the common people, and recounts some ordinary and
usual thing, they express not the noune substantive. Thus I understand it
then; Men cannot forge idols, but therewithal they also forge an abomination.
And surely this is a worthy text, This place teaches us to abhor the idol and
the idol maker.
teaching us both to abhor idols, and the boldness of those that set them up:
for this cannot be done without offering great violence to the Lord himself.
Many esteem it but a sport, but the Prophet not only thinks otherwise, but
he calls it such an abomination, as God neither can nor will suffer unpunished.

The word To choose, points out as with the finger, The original of idols.
from what fountain idolatry springs. For true religion should never be
polluted with so many corruptions, if men had not presumed to make them idols
of their own devising. Whence we may note, that all devised and invented
worships of God are here opposed to true piety.

Verse. 25. I have raised up from the north, and he shall come: from the east
Sun shall he call upon my name, and shall come upon Princes, as upon clay,
and as the potter treads mire under foot.
NOw he turns again to the argument which he touched before concerning Gods
prescience and power; and shows that the name of divinity appertains to him
only, in whom these things are to be found. Touching his raising from the
north, some expound it of Cyrus; others, of Christ: but I think the Prophet
notes out two things here; so as north, we are to understand the Caldeans, and
by the east, the Medes and Persians: as if There will come two changes worthy
of memory, for I will raise up the Caldeans, Caldeans.
and exalt their kingdom: afterward, the Persians Persians.
shall come, which shall be their Lords and Masters.

Now although these things were to fall out long time after, yet the Lord
shows that they were already manifest in his sight; yea, that he ordained
them in his secret counsel, to the end the event thereof might be a certain
token of his divinity. Yet in the first member of the verse, he denounces
judgment, to fear the Jews: in the second, he sets forth mercy, in
testifying that the captivity and deliverance of the people was his work,
that all might perceive that the prescience and power of God were things which
did indeed belong unto him.

The profane nations divide certain offices amongst their gods: Apollo,
Apollos. Jupiter.
he foretells things to come: Jupiter, he puts them in execution: another, he
dispatches a business contrary to that: but Gods office Gods office.
is not only to foretell and signify things to come, but to prescience,
Prescience and the execution thereof, ought to be appropriated to God
inseparably.
and the execution of the same inseparably.

In that he says, he will raise up from the north, he prophecieth (as I
touched before) of the captivity to come: of which there was no fear at that
time, because the Jews and Caldeans were in league together: in the next place
he prophecieth of the restoration of the people, who had leave of Cyrus to
return into to their Country. Now who would have imagined that things being in
so good plight, (as then they were) that such a change had been possible,
especially in regard the event was to fall out long time after, namely, About
some two hundred years between the time of Isaiahs prophecies, and the
accomplishme^t thereof.
about 200. years after the prophecies of Isaiah? And yet the Lord testifies
that he is the author thereof; that so all might know that the Caldeans came
not by chance, but were raised up of God, who used them as his rods to correct
the Jews withal.

The Medes and Persians also subdued not the Caldeans by their own power,
further forth then as they were led and directed by the same hand of the Lord.
In this place therefore he sets forth the greatness of Gods power, and that so
plainly, that he proves Kings and Princes to be but dung and dirt in
comparison of him.

And thus we may yet better perceive, that the Prophet not only respected
those of his own time, but those also which should come after him: for they
which then lived, could hardly discern what this meant; but their successors
which saw it, and had experience of it, understood it much better. The end was,
that all might know how there was but one God, before whose eyes all things are
naked and manifest, and who gouernes all things according to his good pleasure.
You may perceive then what an excellent text this is, in that it shows the
perfection and certentie of Gods oracles. The perfection and certentie of Gods
oracles.
For the Jews forged not these prophecies whilst they were prisoners Isaiah
spoke as he was moved by the holy Ghost.
From this place therefore we may safely conclude, that Isaiah spoke not by his
own motion; but that God used his tongue as the organ of the holy Ghost, who
put these words into his mouth.

The certainty of prophecies.
In that he says, he shall come; it signifies that whatsoever was foretold by
Gods commandment, should without all peradventure come to pass. For he
speaks of a thing to come, Gods prescience and power.
which sets out as in lively tables the prescience of God. Secondly, in adding
that he is the author of these things, that is to be applied to his power. To
call upon the name of God, signifies nothing else in this place, but to perform
somewhat at Gods commandment. It is true that Cyrus little thought he was
employed in the service of the God of Israel, neither meant he to obey him: but
the event showed that the Lord marched before him by his secret power and
providence, to bring him to Babylon by continual and incredible victories.

In comparing him to a Potter which treads his clay, it is added because every
one thought the strength and power of the Caldeans was so great, that none was
able to vanquish the^: for they seemed invincible then indeed. But even at that
time when the Babylonians trusted in their wealth, despised their enemies, and
proudly advanced themselves, the Prophet tells us that they, and infinite
others besides, should be trodden under foot as the Potter does his clay. In a
word, his meaning is, that the prosperous estate of the Caldeans could no way
hinder the change that was to come; neither should they be able to let the
Medes and Persians from inioying their Monarchy. And truly the issue did well
verify and confirm the truth of this similitude, when Cyrus having vanquished
so many nations, and got many godly victories, did in a little space of time
conquer all the East.

Verse. 26. Who has declared from the beginning, that we may know? or before
time, that we may say, he is righteous? Surely there is none that shows,
surely there is none that declares, surely there is none that hears your
words.
THe Lord having made proof of his Divinity, returns again to show the
difference between him and idols. For he asks whether the idolaters were able
for the confirmation of their false worship to say the like for themselves:
that is, to allege any example of such a prescience or power. Now because he
might without controversy, rightly attribute these things to himself, in
derision of them he answers for them; Surely we acknowledge, that he which is
able to do such things, must needs be the true God.

Word for word it is, we will say he is just: but the word Just, has many
significations: for it is taken sometimes for True and Approved: in which sense
it is said, Luke 7.35. That wisdom is justified of her children: that is to
say, approved. We have seen testimonies enough then of Gods divine majesty,
which has put down all the vanities of idols, in regard that all things in
heaven and earth are governed and ruled at the disposition of one only God;
who in an instant is able to bring the mightiest Monarks to naught.

Now the Lord speaks here in the plural number, we; to show that he defends
not his own cause alone, but his peoples also. I grant his own eternity is
sufficient for him; but we being still infirm, it is behoouefull for us to
know certainly that he is the true God, that so our minds may not wander
after creatures, but may rest wholly and only in him. Experimental knowledge
therefore is added with the word, Experime^tall knowledge must be joined with
the word.
the better to sustain our weak faith, if it be yet ready to waver. In the
next member he says, that the idols are all mute, and leave those that follow
and serve them in suspense. Whilist God on the contrary, makes the candle of
his word to burn so clearly, that it is able to give light to his elect
people, and to give them both what to speak and think.

Verse. 27. I am the first that says to Zion; Behold, behold them: and I will
give Jerusalem one that shall bring good tidings.
NOw God expresses that more clearly, which he had told the Jews touching the
things to come, that he might fortify them in the faith: for it should little
avail them barely to know what was to ensue, unless the Prophets had also
showed them the end and use thereof. The Lord testifies then, that his
predictions tend to the edification of his Church: and it was great reason this
should be added to the former doctrine, that the people might know these
examples were propounded not only to set forth Gods power, but also that the
faithful for their parts might feel the fruit thereof. For thus we ought to
apply all the examples of the prescience and power of God unto our own use; How
to apply the examples of Gods prescience and power to our own use.
that so we may be assured of the care he has over us, and that he turns all
things to our salvation.

Zion is commanded then to acknowledge the true and only God. First in respect
that

Behold.] We have to consider of mount Zion here, as of a place not inhabited;
and of Jerusalem, as a City laid waste: for which cause Jeremiah brings her in
speaking as widows and desolate women are wont to do; Behold, O Lord, how I
am troubled: Lament. 1.20. The Lord here sets her out as a widow left alone.
Afterward, Isaiah will incite her to rejoice, as she who having been barren
before, should now be made fruitful by the Lord, and should have many
children. In this sense the Lord now shows that he will comfort Jerusalem,
even at that time wherein she shall seem nothing else but a woeful spectacle
of horrible ruins. Now the message is, that a widow and one that was forsaken
before, should bring forth many children: or, that those who were scattered and
dispersed by banishment a far off, should come toward Jerusalem in great
troops.

This waste therefore must be opposed to the restoration performed by Cyrus,
where it is said, Behold, they come. And by the word first, is understood, not
only the eternity of God, but also the antiquity of the prophecy.
Afterward, Isaiah adds how God teaches the faithful touching things to
come; to wit, by the labors and ministry of his Prophets.

Saint Ierom.
Saint Jerome has translated the word Meuasher, Evangelist; but it properly
signifies a messenger. And yet there is no great difference in the sense, for
his purpose is to speak of the Prophets which should bring the joyful and
desirable tidings of this deliverance; which God by Moses had also promised
long before; to wit, that he would raise up faithful Ministers from time to
time, which should far excel all soothsaiers, magicians, and prognosticators.
For this cause also he gave the Church this goodly title, Chap. 40.9. saying,
that she brought good tidings, because the word of God should sound forth in
her.

Now this serves much for the praise and commendation of preaching. The praise
of preaching the word.
For the Lord comes not down from heaven to teach us, but uses the ministry
of his servants, and shows that he speaks by their mouth; which is so
admirable a benefit, as should cause us to embrace it with both our hands. He
promised under the law (as I was saying) that he would raise up a Prophet in
the midst of his people: Deuteronomy. 18.15. Now he confirms that promise, in
saying, that messengers shall not be wanting to comfort them in their dolours
and extreme distresses. No form of a Church where vision fails.
Hence we may also conclude, that there is no form of a Church where
prophecies cease: that is to say, when there is none to bring us good tidings
of comfort in our miseries out of Gods word.

Verse. 28. But when I beheld, there was none; and when I inquired of them,
there was no counselor; and when I demanded of them, they answered not a word.
THe Lord having spoken of himself, turns again to the idols: for in these
Chapters you shall meet with these antitheses every where; by which he
opposes himself against idols. As if he should say; I do these things
whereof I have spoken; but the idols can do none of them, because they are
void of counsel, wisdom, and understanding. They can neither answer them that
ask things of them, nor mitigate their griefs. Now in this comparison, he
shows that he can easily prove himself to be God. First, by the doctrine of

Besides, men's eyes are so dazeled with carelessness, because they neither
ask, mark, nor consider any thing: they bewitch their own hearts then by
beholding idols, and wittingly deceive themselves; for doubtless they should
quickly perceive the vanity that is in them, if they did warily observe all
circumstances. Whence it is evident, that Idolaters shall never be able to
excuse themselves by pretext of ignorance, because they loved rather to be
blinded, and to err in darkness, then to see the light, and embrace the truth.

Verse. 29. Behold, they are all vanity; their work is of nothing: their
images are wind and confusion.
Having condemned the Idols, The Prophet proceeds from the confitting of
Idols, to tax such as honor them.
now he says as much of those that honor them. As it is in Psalm. 115. They
that make them are like unto them; and so are all they that put their trust in
them. He shows then that the whole rabble of the superstitious sort are full
of vanity, and have neither wit nor discretion. I grant it is hard to persuade
them to it; for pride which possesses them, so puffes them up, that they
think themselves the only wise men of the world; and those that follow not
their train, the only fools and dizards that are, in comparison of them.
Papists deride the Protestants. The Romans contemned the Jews.
How proudly do the Papists and their subtle Doctors deride and scorn us?
With what fury have the Romans contemned the Jews in times past? What then?
Let not us care for such a pride, seeing God condemns them all here of vanity.

Their work is of nothing.] He calls works, both the images which the
superstitious forge to themselves, as also all the new found service, wherein
there is neither end nor measure; when some one will be the master and author
of his own religion. These works he calls things of nothing.

In the next place he proves it more plainly, in calling them vvinde, and
Chaos: that is to say, confusion: for so I expound the word Tohu, it being so
taken in Genesis 1.2. where Moses shows that the earth was at the first without
form, and a confused lump. This place ought diligently to be observed
against Idolaters; for they think images were ordained to preserve and uphold
religion, and that men's minds are stirred up to devotion by the sight of them;
as if God were there present: they call them lay men's books, Images lay men's
books.
fit for such as are not capable of the doctrine of the Scriptures. But the
holy Ghost here pronounces, that they are formelesse and confused things,
because they trouble and detain men's minds in superstition; yea, in such
sort, that all their light of wisdom and knowledge, is choked and quenched by
performing service to them. To conclude, he teaches that all images and the
honor done unto them; and not so only, The Image and Image maker mere vanity.
but those that make and follow them, are nothing but mere vanity, and that
we may boldly so judge of them.

THE XLII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Behold, my servant; I will stay upon him: mine elect, in whom my
soul delights; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.
IT seems the Prophet breaks off his speech to speak of Jesus Christ: but
we must call to mind what we have said elsewhere: to wit, When the Prophets
prophecy of any thing hard to be believed, they forthwith mention Christ.
that it is usual with the Prophets in promising any thing, hard to be
believed, forthwith to make mention of Christ: because all the promises are
confirmed in him, which otherwise would be doubtful and uncertain. All the
promises are in Christ, yea, and Amen, says Paul 2. Cor. 2.20. For what
acquaintance have we with God, What acquaintance have we with God, unless
Christ come between?
unless this Mediator come between? we are so far separated from his
Majesty, that we can neither be partakers of salvation, nor of any other
benefit without Christ. Now when the Lord promised any deliverance to the
Jews, his purpose therein was to lift up their minds far above the thing it
self, that so they might conceive of better and greater things then their
bodily liberty, and return into Iudeah. These promises were but preparatiues
to that great redemption accomplished by Christ.
For these things were only as preparatiues to that great redemption which
they at last obtained, and which we now obtain by Christ Jesus. Yea, that
grace of God that shined in the return of the people, had been imperfect,
unless he had even then bin known to be the perpetual governor of his
Church. We have also told you before that the deliverance out of Babylon,
comprehended in it the absolute and full restoration thereof. It is no wonder
then if the Prophets join this beginning of grace with Christ's kingdom, for
they use so to do almost in all their sermons. We must come to Christ then, No
help in God without Christ.
without whom there is no (hearing) nor help in God: that is to say, we can
lay no claim to the right of being in the number of Gods children, unless we
be grafted into that body, of which he is the head. The very scope of the text
therefore shows, that he is spoken of in this place, as of the head and first
borne. Why so? Because the things here mentioned, cannot be attributed to any
other then himself: but if this reason will not suffice, the Evangelists shall
end the controversy for us. See Matthew. 12.18, 19, 20, 21.

He calls Christ Gods servant, In what sense Christ is called Gods servant.
by way of excellency: for although this name belongs to all the faithful,
because they are adopted for his children, on condition that they sacrifice and
consecrate themselves and their whole Gods servants, yet there is a special
Christ, then unto any of them. For he is called servant, in respect that God
the Father has not only given him the charge of teaching, or to do some
other thing; but also in regard that he has called him to perform an
excellent and peerless work, which is common to none but him. Furthermore,
to his humane nature: for his Godhead being eternal, and that in respect
thereof he has ever obtained equal glory with his Father, Christ Gods servant
in respect of his humanity.
it was necessary he should take our nature upon him, that he might submit
himself to the obedience of a servant. And therefore Saint Paul says; that he
being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with him; and
yet notwithstanding emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a
servant, etc. Phil. 2.6. Christ then is a servant, but voluntarily, Christ
being Gods servant, no way impaires his dignity. Dispensatio^.
lest we should imagine his dignity might be somewhat impaired thereby. Which
the ancient Doctors signified under this word Dispensation: whereby it came to
pass, as they say, that Christ subjected himself to all our infirmities. The
affection by which he became subject unto God, Christ's subjection voluntary.
was voluntary: in the mean while it was to the end he might become our
servant also: notwithstanding this his so abject a condition, hinders him
nothing at all from inioying his sovereign majesty; for which cause the
Apostle says, God has given him a name above every name: Phil. 2.9.

He uses the particle demonstratiue, Behold, to bring the Jews as it were to
the sight of the thing done: for that which they saw in Babylon, was able to
have put them clean out of heart. He wills them therefore to turn their eyes
from beholding things present, and to fix them only upon Christ. Some expound
the verb Tamach, which signifies To stay, passiuely; others, actiuely. If we
take it in the passive, the sense will be, that God so stays himself upon
his Christ, that he will give him charge of all things, even as masters do to
their trusty servants. Now it is a sign of great trust which the Father
reposeth in him, that he gives him charge of all things, and commits into his
hands his own rule, authority, and power. Yet I reject not the active
signification; to wit, I will erect or set him up; or, I will establish him in
his estate: for that which follows immediately after, I will put my spirit
upon him, is but a repetition of the same thing. He says in the first place
then, I will stay upon him: then he shows the manner of this stay, in saying,
that he will govern him by his Spirit: and thus he shows that he will
sustain and help Christ in all things, and will not suffer him to fall under
any difficulties. Now it was needful that Christ should be endued with the
holy Spirit from above, Why Christ was to be endued with the holy Spirit.
in regard he was to take upon him that divine office of being mediator
between God and men: for according to his humane nature, he was unable to
bear the weight of so great a burden.

Christ a servant elect.
Elect is here taken for excellent: as in other places young men which are in
the flower of their youth, are called men of choice. He is called a servant
elect then, because he shall bear the message of reconciliation, and all his
actions shall be disposed of by the Lord. Yet, behold here a testimony of
that love which God has showed us in his only Son; for in him the head, we
may see our election shine, by which we are adopted to the hope of a better
life. Seeing then that there is an heavenly power dwelling in the humane nature
of Christ; We must look upon Christ in both his natures.
when we hear him speak, let us not so much look upon flesh and blood, as
lift up our minds higher, that so we may see his divinity shine in all his
actions.

In whom my soul delights.] By this testimony we may conceive that Jesus
Christ is not only well pleasing unto God his Father, but is also that his
only beloved Son: so as there is no obtaining of any grace, but by the
means of his intercession. In this sense it is alleged by the Evangelists,
Mat. 3.17. Luke 9.35. Saint Paul also teaches, that we were reconciled with
God through this his well-beloved one, for whose sake God loves us: Ephesians. 1.6.
According to which, our Prophet shows that Christ shall not be adorned with
the virtue and power of the holy Ghost for his own particular only, but to
shed it abroad also far and wide upon others.

By the word judgment, he understands a well ordered government, and not the
sentence which the Judge pronounces upon the judgment seat: for the verb, To
judge, among the Hebrews signifies to rule, govern, and direct things. He
adds, that this judgment shall extend thorowout all the earth, as well to the
Gentiles as to the Jews: which promise was then new and strange: for God was
only known in lurie, Psalm. 76.1. so as foreign nations were excluded from
any hope of grace. We therefore that are Gentiles, stand in exceeding need of
these so clear and evident testimonies, that we may grow daily in the
assurance of our vocation and calling: for without these promises, what
assurance is left us? They nothing at all pertain unto us. Christ was sent
then to bring the whole world under the rule and obedience of God his Father.
Whence it appears, that al things without him, are but a confused chaos.
Before he comes therefore, All things out of ord^r without Christ.
it is impossible to see any right order or gouer^^ment among men. Let us then
learn in all things to submit our necks unto his sweet yoke, if we desire to
be justly and rightly governed.

Now we must judge of this government according to the nature of his kingdom
that we live in, which, as you know, is not of this world, but consists in the
inward man: John 18.36.
for it consists in a good conscience and integrity of life; approved not of
men only, but of God chiefly and principally. Wherein Christ's kingdom
principally consists.
The sum then comes to this, that our whole life being perverted since the
time we were altogether corrupted by the fall of Adam, Christ is now toward
the end of the world come with an heavenly power of the spirit, The end of
Christ's coming in the flesh.
to change our hearts, and to reform us into newness of life.

Verse. 2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the streets.
THe Prophet shows after what manner Christ shall come; to wit, without such
pomp and preparations as earthly Kings have. For when they come in, trumpets
are sounded on every side, and the Heralds make a great noise and crying; so as
a man would think heaven and earth would go together. But Isaiah says, that
at Christ's coming, Christ's kingdom not carnal.
none of this din shall be heard: not so much to manifest his modesty, as to
teach us that we should look for no outward pomp in

He shall not lift up his voice.] That is to say, he shall make no stirs, but
shall be quiet and still. And surely he was so far off from popularitie, Mat.
9.30.31.
that he forbad the publishing of his own miracles; to the end we might
thereby know that his government and authority differed much from that which
Kings and (...) power of God, that so we may credit that which he has spoken
accordingly: for Isaiah speaks not these things at rando^, but thereby meant
to dispatch our minds of all scruples, because nothing is impossible to God,
who holds the whole world under his subjection: but in the Chapters following
we shall meet with the like phrases of speech. Some translate the word El
Mighty, others, God: but the matter is not great, because the sense comes all
to one reckning: for he describes his power and Majesty, and adornes him
diversely with such titles, to teach us, that he can easily raise up and
restore that which was fallen to the earth.

Verse. 6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine
hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee for a covenant of the people, and
for a light of the Gentiles.
HE repeates the name of God again, in which we must supply that which was
said in the former verse touching Gods power. All almost do think that he
speaks here of the end of Christ's calling, because he was sent of the Father
to establish righteousness among men, of which before they were destitute,
whilst he is absent from them, and being given to all sorts of vice and
unrighteousness, were detained prisoners under Satan's tyranny. But because the
word Justice, or righteousness, extends it self further, I leave this
subtletie: neither is it said that Christ should be called to righteousness, but
this phrase of speech must be resolved into the aduerb Justly, or Holily. I
rather think that is called in righteousness, because his calling Things that
are not done according to a good and lawful order can not long last.
for we know that things disorderedly done can not long continue, unless any
had rather expound it, that God in ordeining of Christ the restorer of the
Church, seeks no other cause of it then in himself, and in his own
righteousness: notwithstanding it is certain that this word notes out unto us
stabilitie, and is as much to say as faithfully.

By the holding of the hand, he means the Lords present help: as if he should
say, I will govern and uphold thee in the vocation unto which I have called
thee. In a word, as thy calling is just, so also will I sustain and maintain
it, even as if I led thee by the hand. And the verb will keep, which is
forthwith added, shows sufficiently what the holding by the hand signifies,
to wit, that Christ shall be so governed of his Father, that he will be his
teacher and protector in such wise that he will succor and assist him in all
things.

I will give thee for a covenant.] Now he expresses the cause why God
promises to be the protector of Christ. Moreover, he distinguishes between
the Jews and the Gentiles; not that they differ ought in nature, or, as if the
one were more excellent then the other (for all have need of Gods grace, All
have need of Gods grace.
and Christ brings salvation indifferently to both) but in regard the Lord had
attributed the first degree to the Jews, therefore it was good reason they
should be distinguished from others. The Jews more excellent then the
Gentiles, not by merit, but by Gods free grace.
Before the partition wall then was broken down they were the more excellent,
not by way of merit, but by the free grace of God, because the covenant thereof
was first made with them.

But some may ask why Christ is named in the covenant, which was ratified long
before: Abraham: the original of this separation then was long before the
coming of Jesus Christ. I answer, Abraham and his posterity was founded on
Christ: for thus run the words of the covenant, In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18. The covenant was confirmed then
only in Abraham's seed, that is to say in Christ: at whose coming it was
confirmed, and established by effect, though it was done before in regard of
the promise. Therefore it is that Paul says, All the promises of God are Yea,
and Amen in Christ, 2. Cor. 1.20. who in another place is called the minister
of circumcision, to fulfill the promises made to the fathers, Romans 15.8. And in
another place he shows yet more plainly that Christ is our peace, so as those
who were furthest off, are made near by his blood, and that both are by this
means reconciled to God, and made members one of another, Ephesians. 2.17. By
these places it appears that Christ was promised not to the Jews only, but to
the whole world.

And here we have again another testimony touching the vocation of the
Gentiles, Another testimony, touching the vocation of the Gentiles.
seeing our Prophet expreslie affirms that he is given for a light to them.
Now he mentions the light, because the unbelievers were plunged in most
palpable and profound darkness, during the time that the Lord enlightened the
Jews only. What is our lesson then? Surely we are worthy to bear the blame
for ever if we remain in darkness, and have this light of life in the mean
while shining before us. For the Lord calls all unto him, none excepted, and
gives Christ unto all, that he may be our light. It remains then that we only
open our eyes, then will he alone chase away all darkness, and will illuminate
our minds by the word of truth.

Verse. 7. That thou may open the eyes of the blind, and bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison
house.
ISaiah recites here more at large to what end Christ shall be sent of the
Father, Why Christ was sent of his Father.
that we may the better perceive what fruit we shall reap by the same, and how
necessary his help is. Now he taxes all men of blindness, All are blind.
to the end we should acknowledge it, if we mean to be illuminate by Jesus
Christ. To be short, What our condition is without Christ.
he shows under these borrowed speeches what our condition is, till Christ
appears for our redemption: to wit, that we are all miserable, poor, and
destitute of all good things; environed, and overwhelmed with infinite
miseries, till Christ has set us free from them. But howsoever the words be
here directed unto Christ, yet the intent of the Prophet is thereby to instruct
the faithful, The remedy of all our evils is in Christ, if we se^ke unto him
for succor.
and to teach them that it is in Christ, and in none but him, upon whom they
must depend, and to assure them that the remedy of all their evils is ready at
hand, if so be they seek unto him for succor. For the Prophet sets not
Christ to school here, as if he stood in need either of instruction, or of a
commandment: but he speaks to him for our sakes, that we might know
wherefore he is sent of the Father: as it is in the second Psalm, I will
preach the decree: ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thy
possession. That which is here spoken to Christ, is rather to instruct us then
him.
For Christ's dignity and authority is there magnified, to assure us that the
Father has given him sovereign dominion over all, that so we might have good
hope, and might boldly put our trust and confidence in him.

Verse. 8. I am the Lord, this is my name; and my glory will I not give to
another, neither my praise to graven Images.
HEnce we may gather how great the disease of incredulity is, The greatness of
our incredulity noted.
seeing the Lord uses so many repetitions to heal it, as if he could hardly
satisfy himself therewith: for we are by nature so inclined to distrust, All
of us too much inclined to distrust.
that it is impossible we should believe any thing the Lord speaks, unless he
first of all mollifies the hardness of our hearts. Besides that, we fall ever
and anon into the same evil by our own heedlesnesse, if we be not withheld by
many persuasions. This is the cause then why he returns to confirm that
whereof he spoke before, to wit, that his promises might not want their credit
and authority.

The word Hu, is sometimes a substantive, and so it is a proper name of God:
but I willingly expound it, This is my name: that is to say, this name, The
Lord, is proper to me in such wise, that they sin grievously who attribute
the same to any other. To be short, by this manner of speech he confirms all
whatsoever he has spoken touching the office of Christ, and now adds (as you
would say) a seal to the promise. As if he should say; He that pronounces
these things, testifies that he is the only God, and that this name belongs to
him, and to none other.

I will not give.] That is to say, I will not suffer my glory to be
diminished; which must needs be, if I should be found either a lier, or
inconstant in my promises. Thus you see that he will perform his promises,
because he will thereby provide for the maintaining of his own glory, lest the
same should any way be impeached. Truly this is a singular text; Gods glory
shines principally in the performance of his promises.
for it teaches us that Gods glory shines especially in the accomplishment and
fulfilling of his promises: whence we also gather a wonderful confirmation of
our faith; to wit, that the Lord will never fail nor be wanting in his
promise; neither can any thing hinder or stay the course of that which he has
once determined. But because Satan labors by all means to obscure and darken
this glory of God, and to give it either to false gods, or to men, therefore he
protests that he cannot endure to be taken for a falsifier of his promises.

The opposition which is between the only God, and idols, is to be referred to
the circumstance of the time: for if God had not delivered his people, the
infidels might have boasted, as if the true religion had been built upon a
sandy foundation. His meaning is therefore, that he will not suffer the wicked
to make their triumphs over the Churches ruin. And wherefore is it, I pray you,
that God has hitherunto spared us, and has to this day dealt so favorably
with us? The reason why God ha^h spared us that profess the true religion.
Even because his Gospel should not be exposed to the horrible blasphemies of
the Papists. Hence let us gather a general doctrine then, to wit, that the
Lord will have his glory wholly reserved unto himself; for he will maintain
and defend it every way to the utmost: showing that he is exceeeding jealous
of it, when he cannot abide that the least jot thereof should be taken from
him to be given to creatures.

Verse. 9. Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things I do
declare: before they come forth, I tell you of them.
NOw he calls to mind the former prophecies, by the accomplishment wereof, he
shows he ought to be believed for the time to come: Our experience of Gods
former mercies ought to confirm us for the time to come.
for our former knowledge and experience of Gods goodness, is of great use to
confirm us for hereafter. It is as much then as if he should have said; I
have spoken often to your fathers, and you know that nothing has failed of
that which I have promised, but all is come to pass: and yet when I tell Note.
that our salvation being for a time hid under hope, we may stick to his word
and promise, and may be the better confirmed in it all the days of our life.

By the pronoune Behold, he evidently shows, that they knew by the effects
that God never deceived them that trusted in him, nor never spoke any thing by
his Prophets in vain; for his truth was apparent to all, by infallible signs
and tokens.

Before they come forth.] By this clause he separates God from idols, because
it is he only which knows and foretells things to come: but idols know nothing
at all. Now although the gods of the Gentiles often times gave them answers
when they sought unto them, yet we have told you in the former Chapter, Chap.
41.22, 23.
that such answers were either false or ambiguous. For those yt depended upon
such toies, have for the most part bin grossly deceived, as they were well
worthy: and if any success at the first has ensued, yet they were thereby
(...) as a womb unto them, that so they might conceive hope of salvation,
even in the midst of corruption. Albeit then that he was able to bring forth a
new Church without pain or travail, yet to the end his grace might the better
appear in such a birth, it is not without cause that he attributes the cry of
a travailing woman unto him. But for as much as this similitude might diminish
somewhat of Gods power and majesty, the Prophet ioines the other affection
withal: for touching his love, God as touching his love, resembles a mother:
but as touching his power, a lion.
he resembles a mother; but touching his force and power, he is like a lion.

Verse. 15. I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbs: and I will make the floods Islands, and I will dry up the pooles.
THe Prophet means that all the munitions which animated the wicked to retain
these poor captives, could not hinder the Lord from setting them at liberty.
It was needful this should be added to the former. For when we see the wicked
armed (in a manner) with invincible power, we then tremble, and have much a
do to apprehend Gods power, so far as to continue steadfast in our
confidence. Isaiah therefore insists upon this point, signifying that neither
men nor munitions can resist the Lord, when he is minded to deliver his chosen.
In a word, he shows that the change shall be such, that those who were the
strongest before, shall be broken to pieces, and shall gain nothing by
resisting of him. This I take to be the native sense of these words; so that it
is needless to stand descanting subtly upon them any longer, as some do, who
expounding these things allegorically, think that mountains and hills
signify Cities; herbs, the men which dwell in them. But why should we follow
such sophistries, seeing the Prophet only shows that God is powerful enough
to fulfill his promises, and to deliver his Church? because he can easily
surmount all stumbling blocks that shall be laid before him. This sentence
therefore answers to other prophecies which we have seen heretofore, where
Isaiah teaches, that Gods power is not tied to second causes, when he is
determined to prevent the enemies of their purpose; but goes through with his
work after a wonderful fashion, Gods power not tied to second causes.
and breaks down all impediments which seemed to shut up his passage.

Verse. 16. And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, and lead
them by paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before
them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not
forsake them.
Having showed that the force of the enemy could not hinder God from
delivering his people, he goes on with that consolation which he touched in
the 13. and 14. verses. Now he calls them blind, Who they be that the Prophet
calls blind.
which know not what way to turn them, nor which way to run, by reason
things go so cross and awkward with them. In a word, such as see no issue,
but bottomless gulphes ready on all sides to swallow them up: for even as the
way seems plain and smooth whilst things do indifferently prosper; so in
adversity, (but especially when all is darkened with sorrow, when all hope is
gone, and death it self presses hard upon us) we stand then like amazed
creatures. The Prophet teaches therefore, that when all things are desperate,
then, even then is the time and hour in which we should most of all expect
succor and help from the Lord. The time in which we ought chiefly to expect
help from God. It is good for us sometimes to be brought into straits.


It is sometimes also very requisite that we be brought into straits, so as no
evasion be left us, that we be sometimes put to our shifts, and pressed on
every side: yea, to be left stark blind in regard of the sight of any outward
means. Why so? That we may learn to depend upon the only help of God, and
to rest our selves quietly in him. For as long as we can see any leaning
stock, or are able to catch hold of any stay, be it never so little, upon
that we set our whole hearts: and thus it comes to pass that we are carried
hither and thither, and utterly neglect the remembrance of Gods wonted favor.

Would we be assisted and succored then in our adversities? Truly we must
content our selves to be blind then: that is to say, we must turn our eyes
from beholding things present, and keep our reason short, that we may only
rest upon Gods free promises. I grant this blindness will not be very pleasing
to us, and that therein the imbecillitie of our judgments may be therein
easily discerned; yet ought we not therefore to flee it much, if we wisely
consider the fruit that redounds to us by it. For is it not better to be blind,
and to be led by Gods hand, then to see with both eyes, and to plunge our
selves into unavoidable dangers? He confirms this, in promising to turn
darkness into light. Be it then that we perceive not so much as one sparkle of
light in our afflictions, yet must we not despair of Gods help; but use it
rather as a means to trust more confidently in Gods promises then ever we did
before: for God will easily change our darkness into light, he will soon
make crooked things straight, and lead us in the way, that we may boldly walk
therein without stumbling. But in the mean while, let us know, that these
things are only promised to the faithful that put themselves into Gods
custody, and are contented to be governed by him: in a word, to such as being
acquainted with their own dimnesse of sight, do willingly content themselves
to follow such a leader, waiting in the darkness of their affliction, for the
light of his countenance; for to such only he reaches forth his hand. Let us
cleave fast therefore to his promises, and not imitate the wise men of this
world, who will walk by their own light whether he will or not; or will wander
in unlawful deliberations.

Verse. 17. They shall be turned back: they shall be greatly ashamed that trust
in graven Images, and say to the molten Images, Ye are our Gods.
BY this we evidently see to whom the former doctrine belonged: for now he
distinguishes Gods servants from Idolaters. As if he should say, The Lord will
lead his people, but in the mean while those that trust in graven Images
shall be ashamed. As if he should say, the choice is here set before you,
either by grace to be saved, or miserably to perish. For all such as put their
confidence in Idols shall surely perish: but those that rest upon Gods word and
promise shall assuredly be saved. I grant they must suffer many and tedious
afflictions, yet they shall not be ashamed nor confounded: for God in the end
will show that this difference which he puts between them that trust in him,
and those that trust in Idols was not in vain.

Moreover, it is very certain that by the two marks which he here expresses,
Two marks to discern Idolaters by.
all Idolaters are meant, who fix their hope in any thing but in God. For
albeit they bow not before their Idols, yet in attributing unto them I know not
what divinity, they take that glory from the only true God which to him
belongs: for the principal part of Gods service stands in faith and prayer,
both which the Prophet expresses in this place. But it may be demanded, Thou
art my God. For the most superstitious have confessed that God was in heaven;
neither have they bin so gross as to attribute a divine nature directly to
wood or stone: it seems therefore that Isaiah makes them more sottish then
they are. Images which belongs to God; All Idolaters attribute that to Idols,
which belongs to God.
albeit they acknowledge him to be in heaven: for when they trot so fast after
their puppets and Idols, to whom they make and pay their vows, do we not
evidently perceive that they give that to them which only appertains to God?
It is in vain then that they labor to color and cloak brutishnes, for they
make gods of wood and stone, and in thus doing offer extreme violence to the
Lord. The Prophet therefore has not ouershot himself, neither has he framed
a false accusation against Idolaters, because their own words do
sufficiently testify the same to their faces, when they call their Idols and
Images, gods. Yea let it be granted that they be not heard to pronounce any
such words, yet their madness may easily be discerned, in that they think God
can neither hear, nor help them, unless they prostrate themselves before a
senseless stock, and mumble up a certain stint of prayers before it. Now
these things are thus uttered, to let all know, that none can be saved, but he
which shall trust in God only.

Verse. 18. Hear, ye deaf: and ye blind regard, that ye may see.
HE takes blind and deaf here in a contrary sense to that in the sixteenth
verse, where by this similitude he noted out those who were so destitute of
counsel, and overwhelmed with the weight of afflictions, that it deprived them
of all sight. For by blind Blind.
in this place he means such as did shut their eyes against the clear light,
and would take no knowledge of Gods works. By deaf, Deaf.
those that would not hear, but rather delighted to lie snorting in the
filthiness of their ignorance. He condemns here therefore the blindness of the
Jews, or rather of all men, as I take it. A general blindness and deafnes gone
over all men.
For although it be true that he reprocheth the Jews to be blind even in
seeing; and deaf whilst they heard: yet this also does in part belong to the
Gentiles, to whom he manifested

In that he calls for audience then, he gives them to understand, that the
only cause which hinders them from comprehending Gods truth and power, is their
own deafnes, and blindness, mixed with a malicious unthankfulness. For he is not
wanting in giving them sufficient testimonies of his power, neither is he
negligent in teaching them familiarly enough: but the fault is in themselves,
in that they applied not their hearts to instruction, nor to meditate in his
word: no, nor yet to behold his wonderful works, so as every one wittingly
shut their eyes: and therefore the Prophet shows that all the fault rested in
themselves if they saw not Gods power.

Verse. 19. Who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger that I sent?
who is blind as the perfect, and blind as the Lords servant?
ALl expositors almost do expound this verse, as if Isaiah mentioned the
outrages which the wicked are wont to belch out against the Prophets. For they
cast the servants of the Lord in the teeth with the things which they have
reproved and condemned, which such companions as they can not endure. As if
they should say, Who are they, I pray thee, whom thou accusest of blindness, The
misinterpretation of this place.
and and who are they thou call deaf? Take it hardly to thy self. We know
none so blind as thou art. They think then, that it is as much as if the Lord
complained thus of the Jews, I see very well that you esteem my Prophets for
no better then blind and deaf. But we shall by and by see that this
interpretation suits nothing at all with the scope of the text: for the Prophet
shows afterward why he calls them blind, to wit, because they saw many
things, but kept them not. Now this can not any way agree to the Prophets, let
us therefore follow the pure and native sense.

Isaiah before condemned all men of blindness, but the Jews especially,
because they The right interpretation
for they had not only that glimmering, which was common to all nations, but
had also the word sounding in their ears, by which the Lord fully manifested
himself unto them. Though the whole world besides then was blind, yet these
should have had eyes to see and know the Lord, in regard they had the doctrine,
as a burning lamp to give light unto them. Besides, he speaks to these
afterward in the sixty Chapter, Rise up Jerusalem, and be bright, for the
darkness shall cover the whole earth, but the Lord shall give thee light.
Because the Jews then were blind in so clear light, therefore he taxes them
by this particular reprehension. As if he should say; I strive but in vain
against those which are far off from me, neither do I much marvel at their
blindness; but this is strange, that such a thing should befall my servants,
who have the clear light shining before their eyes. I am as one astonished to
see them deaf, who have the word continually sounding in their ears. The
things I teach them are so plain and evident, that the very blind and deaf
may in a manner understand them: but alas! I speak to them in vain; for I
think there is not a more brutish and sottish people to be found. To be
short, whereas they should have had the quickest sense of hearing and seeing,
they were the worst of all.

Whom I sent.] Isaiah descends by degrees The Priests.
to walk before others in a good example of life, and to show unto them the
high way to heaven. Their lips, ye know, were to preserve knowledge, and at
their mouth men were to seek it: Mal. 2.7. The Prophet therefore complains,
that those who should be lights and guides to others, were themselves as
blind as the rest.

Some refer the word servant, to Isaiah: others, to Christ; and think that
both were condemned of blindness. But this comes nothing near the Prophets
drift: for his meaning is, by way of comparison to amplify the former
complaint made, touching the blindness of the Jews. Their fault was much
greater then that of other nations: but the Priests were yet in the greatest
fault of all, who were their leaders and guides. Let us know then, that by how
much the more we come near unto God, and the higher he shall have advanced
us in dignity above others, the less shall our excuse be.

To the same purpose he calls them perfect; which indeed should have been so:
for he puts them in mind by this reproach, of that perfection from whence they
were fallen by so unworthy a revolt, and thereby had shamefully profaned that
holy and glorious name of their God. For seeing he gave them a perfect rule of
righteousness to direct them both in life and doctrine, it should have been
their parts not to have swarued an hairs breadth from it.

Verse. 20. Seeing many things, but thou keep them not: opening the ears,
but he hears not.
NOw himself expounds what this blinding is, which he mentioned before; and he
shows it to be twofold. Thus we may perceive well enough, that he speaks only
of the Jews, who wilfully and maliciously had choked the heavenly light. The
fault will be double then when they shall appear before Gods judgment seat,
if we shut our eyes before the clear light, and stop our ears whilst he
vouchsafes to teach us by his word. I grant the profane nations are justly
left without excuse: but the Jews, and others, to whom the Lord so many ways
manifested himself, shall be worthy of a double condemnation, in that they
would neither see nor hear God. Let us fear this judgment then, What use we
are to make of the former doctrine.
who have so many worthy lights and examples shining before our eyes; for there
is a blinding espied at this day in many, and as great an hardening as was
among the Jews; but the one shall be no more excused then the other.

Verse. 12. The Lord is willing for his righteousness sake, that he may
magnify the Law, and exalt it.
THat he might amplify the offense of the Jews, he now shows that it was
not Gods fault that they were deprived of good days. He said before, that the
miseries and calamities which they endured, were the punishments of their
wilful and obstinate blindness. Now, to fill up the measure of their
iniquity, he adds that by their obstinacy they had rejected all relief.
This place is diversely expounded. Some read; This verse diversely expounded.
See more in the sequel.
The Lord would have it so: others, He is gracious. But I have translated, The
Lord is vvilling: that is to say, is inclined to deliver his people, to
magnify his law, and to exalt his justice. And thus God yeeldes the reason why
he is ready to succor the unworthy; to wit, because he is willing that his
glory may be advanced in their salvation, that his justice by this means may
also appear, and that his law might flourish in her perfect strength. Now in
that the Jews were in such a distressed estate, it was because they wittingly
loved darkness rather then light, and to heap sorrows upon their own heads,
rather then to obey God: for had not this come between, it was his only
desire to have enriched them, and to have advanced them.

Some expound it thus; The Lord is as willing to magnify his law, and to show
his justice in chastising the Jews, as he was to threaten them by it: and
thus they refer the word righteousness, to the punishments and plagues
wherewith this people were visited of God. Others translate, For my
righteousness sake: and so refer it to Christ; but they deceive themselves in
the word Tsidko, for doubtless the Prophet speaks of righteousness, minding
to show that the Lord was willing to exalt the truth of his promises, and the
signs of his righteousness in the conservation of the Jews: if they had not
showed themselves unworthy of so great a benefit by their own unthankfulness:
others think that the Lord is here excused, in regard it seemed he suffered
his truth to fail, when his chosen people were exposed to so many calamities;
and that the Prophet meant to prevent this slander, by telling them that they
were not thus scattered and made a pray, because the Lord took any delight
therein, but because he respected his justice above all things. The sense
according to Master Caluins judgment.
But for my part, I expound it simply in this sense, that the Lord to exalt his
Law, was ready to do his people good, that his glory and justice might shine
therein: but that the people deprived themselves of such a blessing, and thus
made their case desperate by their own obstinacy.

The cause why the Lord adornes his Church with so many favors.
From hence also we may gather, for what cause the Lord adornes his Church with
so many of his favors; even that he might magnify his law, and bring men to
the service of his Majesty, that so his truth might shine more and more.

When the Prophet says that the Lord is vvilling; it is evident that he finds
no cause out of himself: but yet he expresses it further, in adding for his
righteousness sake: for he excludes all that men bring of their own; neither
can he be moved to do good, but because he is just. Add also, that no
dignity or worthiness is to be found in any man: but there was a special
reason of this, in respect of the Jews, whom he had vouchsafed to adopt among
the rest.

Verse. 22. But this people is robbed and spoiled, and shall be all snared in
dungeons, and they shall be hid in prison houses, they shall be for a pray, and
none shall deliver: a spoil, and none shall say, Restore.
NOw Isaiah shows, that the people are miserable, and appointed to destruction
by their own folly, because they rejected God, who otherwise was ready to
have succored them, but they, like desperate persons rejected all remedies,
and sought their own overthrow. He so excuses the Lord then that he
vehemently reproues the people, who unkindly did cast off the Lord, and turned
his grace into wantonness. And yet, as I have said already, this is not said so
much to justify God, as bitterly to complain of this nation, who had sworn
to procure their own ruin, seeing they wilfully threw themselves into sundry
calamities. If we see the Church scattered and deformed at this day, let us
blame our sins, The cause of the Churches deformity.
for we thereby would not suffer the Lord any longer to continue his loving
kindness toward us.

Some translate the conjunction copulative Vau, Wherefore, which I have rather
translated But, for it is opposed to the willingness wherewith the Lord was
inclined to defend his people, if themselves had not hindered the same. I have
turned the verb To bind into the futuretence: for the Prophet speaks of the
people which should be led captive. As touching the word Bakurim, I think they
are here two dictions, signifying in the caves; for if they should be taken for
young men, it will not agree with the scope of the text.

They shall be spoiled.] Those who interpret this of all men generally, of
whom Christ only is the Savior, come nothing near the Prophets meaning: for
he simple affirms that the people shall perish, without hope of deliverance,
because they rejected Gods grace. Hence let us, gather what shall undoubtedly
befall us, if we forthwith receive not Gods mercy whilst it is offered: What
it is to reject grace being offered.
truly we shall deserve to be destituted of all succor, and to perish
miserably, being made a spoil and a pray.

Verse. 23. Who among you shall hearken to this, and take heed, and hear, for
afterward.
ISaiah goes on with the same argument, for he says, that the Jews are and
shall be so besotted, that they shall see nothing, though they be admonished.
In the next place he speaks directly to them, and taxes their dulnes, that
could neither conceive nor know any thing touching Gods judgments, which yet
were so manifest, whereas in all likelihood they ought to have been best
instructed and taught of all others.

For afterward.] That is to say, To hear for afterward.
who being at the last tamed by afflictions, shall come again to bethink
themselves, though very late. We see then how this admiration who among you!
aggrauates their crime and obstinacy, when he says, they should be ever
unteachable. In the mean while let us learn what use to make of Gods
threatenings and chastisements: The use we ought to make of Gods reprehensions
and corrections.
for the Lord neither reproues nor corrects us for our sins as if he
delighted in taking vengeance, or required any recompense, but that we should
stand upon our guard for the time to come.

Verse. 24. Who gave Iaakob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not
the Lord, because we have sinned against him? for they would not walk in his
ways, neither be obedient to his law.
SEe wherefore Isaiah complains, that the Jews took nothing to heart; for
when they suffered, they thought it came to pass by before Gods heavenly
throne, to prove unto them, that he was the author of their miseries: for it
was impossible to persuade them that their corrections proceeded from God, who
punished them for their offenses. And may not we say the like of the people of
this age? Every one is content in general terms to confess that God is the
author of all things: but come to particulars, men are ashamed to acknowledge
that this and that cross proceeds from his hand. Why so? Because their minds
are distracted with many thoughts, and being forestalled with this opinion of
fortune, they turn their minds rather to this or that, then to the Lord.
Isaiah shows then that the sins of the people are the cause of such a ruin,
and that the Lord is just in bringing the same upon them: according also as
Moses had testified; How should a thousand have fled at the sight of one, if
their strong God had not sold them, and if the Lord had not shut them up? Deuteronomy.
32.30.

We wonder to see things fall out every day contrary to our expectation; We
wonder why God afflicts us, but we never wonder at our sins which are the
cause of them.
and in the mean while, never consider the fault to be in our selves. We must
therefore be brought unto the consideration hereof by force of arms, as it
were: it is needful therefore that this doctrine should be often pressed upon
us.

Now to the end they might not charge God with cruelty, the Prophet adds,
that it came justly to pass: for he snatched not up the rod rashly, but that
necessity constraines him there unto; God takes no pleasure in our afflictions.
neither takes he pleasure in our afflictions.

We are to observe two distinct things here then. First, that no adversity
happens Gods providence, lest we should imagine that things fall out by chance,
or by some outward unjustly, because we have first provoked God to chastise us
for our sins committed against him. It is in vain for men to accuse God then
of any hard measure; for we must acknowledge his just judgments in the
chastisement which are worthily befallen us.

When he says, they would not walk in his ways, he further amplifies the
fault of the Jews, but he changes the person; for in the former member he
put himself in amongst the rest, because he was one of the same body, and
therefore confessed his faults. Not that he resembled the common people in
any leaud behavior; or that he approved of their wickednesses, but it was
impossible in so great an heap of vices, that he should be utterly untainted
with some infection and contagion thereof, with the rest of the parts of the
body. The reason why the Prophet first mat heth himself with the multitud^ and
yet afterward exempts himself.
Therefore in as much as there was great difference between him and others, he
changes the person, and ads that they would not, thereby showing, that so
soul a rebellion displeased him: so as he could neither wink at it, nor
consent unto it. For he speaks not here of petty offenses, but of a contempt
and renouncing of God; in regard that they brake out into pride, after they had
shaken off his yoke. This is the cause why Isaiah in the second place puts
himself out of the number.

The use of this doctrine belongs to us.
Now if these things fell out justly upon the Jews, let us know that the like
hangs over our heads, and will be inflicted upon the whole world, if being
admonished, we repent not: for we see how graciously the Lord calls us to him,
how many ways he manifests his good will toward us, and with what love he
protests he is ready to be appeased, though he be justly offended. But if
after so many favorable summons, If Gods patience be abused, we shall be sure
to smart for it.
and daily experiences of his patience, we still refuse to give ear, it is
most certain that we shall feel by woeful experience, that the misery which
befell these, is common to all rebels.

Verse. 25. Therefore he has powered upon him his fierce wrath, and the
strength of the battle: and set it on fire round about, and he knew not; and
it burned him up, Or, but he put it not upon his heart.
yet he considered not.
BEcause Gods chastisements which had begun to seize upon them, and were
afterward to be finished in their captivity, were very grievous, therefore the
Prophet sets forth the vehemency of them by these similitudes. For he says,
that the Lord will power out his wrath: as if some thunderclap should fall
upon their heads with great violence; or as if the waters should ouerflow, and
make great breaches thorowout a whole Country; as the waters gushed forth
hastily in the deluge, after the windows of heaven were broken, and that the
bottels thereof were set open: Genesis 6.11. In the next place he uses an other
figure, saying, that God will gather together his forces to fight with this
people, and to assail them to the utmost. If any understand this of the
enemies which the Lord raised up against the Jews, I gainsay him not: for it
is certain that they came forth by Gods just judgment. For what was
Nebuchadnezzer but Gods rod? Yet I rather think it should be taken by way of
similitude; to wit, that God entered by violence as an enemy armed, and powered
out his fierce wrath upon them.

Now he has diverse means to fight against us; God has diverse means to correct.
for he corrects his people sometimes by plague, sometimes by the sword,
sometimes by famine: and therefore I think that in this similitude he
comprehends all sorts of afflictions wherewith the Lord smites his people. And
if we think them now and then too sharp, We must set the ugly shape of our
sins against the bitter taste of our afflictions.
let us consider the ugliness of our sins, and we shall perceive that they
be not excessive, neither that he is too severe and rigorous in punishing us.

And he knew it not.] He cries out again against this gross sottishnes
wherewith ye Jews were so possessed, that they could no way feel their misery;
neither could they so much as lift up their eyes to heaven, to acknowledge Gods
hand which smote them.

But he put it not upon his heart.] This phrase of speech signifies to consider
of a thing seriously and diligently; for if we thought upon it, and had it
well graven in our hearts that God is the Judge, and that he justly
chastises us, we should forthwith repent. The world at this day is pressed
under many calamities; there is almost no corner thereof exempt from his
wrath: Gods judgments abou^d in every place, but no man lays ^he^ to heart.
yet who knows it, or puts it upon his heart? Do not all band themselves
furiously against him with an untamed rebellion: it is no marvel then if he
lay on load, and power out his wrath on every side upon the mad world, which
desperately opposes it self against him.

THE XLIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. But now thus says the Lord that created thee o Iaakob: and he that
formed thee o Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee: I have called thee
by name, thou art mine.
WE can not well tell whether this verse depends upon the former, or is
separated from it. For the Prophets (whose writings are left unto us)
distinguished not their Sermons into certain Chapters, so as we should be able
to define of every days Sermon. Yet me thinks this doctrine is joined to the
former, so as having showed himself very angry against the Jews even to
threaten their destruction, he meant now to sweeten this sharpnes. For the Lord
has evermore respect to the faithful: neither is impiety at any time so
ouerspread, but he reserues a small remnant which he keeps from falling into
such extremities, because he cares for their safety, and therefore the letter
Vau should be resolved into a particle aduersatiue thus, Yet, will the Lord
leave some consolation to the faithful which shall succeed. This place
therefore is to be well observed, How this verse depe^ds upon the former.
for albeit the whole world should conspire to root us out, and that Gods
wrath should burn on every side about us, and that we were brought to deaths
door, yet if there do but two or three of the faithful remain, we ought not
to despair, seeing the Lord speaks thus unto them, Fear not.

The word now, which the Prophet here uses has great weight, for it signifies
that the calamity is present, or very near at hand. In a word, that it is the
time wherein all things shall seem desperate and forlorn; yet even then, God
will neither cease to comfort his elect, nor sweetly to assuage their sorrows,
that so in the greatest of their extremities they may have a firm and an
invincible faith. Hereunto appertain these Titles of Creator, and Former,
without which these prophesies would have bin utterly ineffectual. Now we may
gather from other places, that the Lord speaks not here of that general
creation This creation must be applied to regeneration.
which is common to us with other men, when we are borne dead in trespasses and
sins, but of our regeneration into the hope of eternal life, in which
respect we are also called new creatures: and in this sense S. Paul says, that
we are Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. as we have sufficiently showed
heretofore. In this sense he also calls himself the former: as if he should
say, I have not formed my Church, in which my glory clearly shines, to bring
so excellent a work to naught. Whence we may observe, The Church has nothing
in her self to boast of.
that the Church has nothing in her self whereof she can boast, but of Gods
grace, to which all these gifts wherewith she is adorned, ought to be
attributed.

That which is added, for I have redeemed thee, I have redeemed thee.

To call by name, What it is to be the called of God.
signifies to receive one into a near band of familiarity, as when God adopts
us for his children. What is the reason of this speech? Surely the reprobates
are so rejected of him that it seems he forgets their names, in which respect
the Scripture says, that he knows them not, Math. 7.23. Now by this
opposition we see more clearly what it is to be called of God: to wit, when he
leaves

To the same purpose he adds, Thou art mine. To give the faithful to
understand, that he will ever have a Church among his elect, because he will
not be deprived of his right of possession. To be short, The Church Gods prop^r
inheritance.
he shows that it is his peculiar and precious inheritance, which he will at
no hand endure to be dispossessed of.

Verse. 2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through
the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou walk, through the very
fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
THis is a prevention, whereby the Prophet shows that the faithful ought not
to faint under their afflictions, seeing God is at hand to succor them. Thus he
speaks more plainly then he did in the former verse: for in teaching that the
Church shall not be free from miseries and calamities, but must wrestle with
them without ceasing, he thereby incourageth her to patience and magnanimity.
As if he should say; The Lord has not redeemed thee that thou should enjoy
thy pleasures, and should give thy self to ease and illenesse, but to the
end thou should prepare thy self to endure all sorts of evils.

What is me^nt by fire and water.
By fire and water, he means the infinite variety of troubles, to which we
are subject in this present life: for we have not to encounter with one
calamity only, but with many, and those of diverse natures: so as we must
make account to go through fire and water. See Ps. 66.11.
As the Apostle James also, Chap. 1.2. exhorts the faithful to count it
exceeding joy, when they fall into diverse tentations. For certainly our faith
has need of many trials, Our faith has need of many trials.
in regard that often times, he which for once has gone away conqueror, may
faint and be overcome the second time. God exercises us therefore with many
afflictions, See Exodus 3.2 and 2. Cor. 4.8, 9, 10.
but in the end we shall escape: the waves shall beat upon us, but they shall
not swallow us up; the fire shall burn us, but it shall not consume us. We
shall have a sense and feeling, Though we be brought into many st^aits, yet the
Lord will give us a timely issue.
I grant, of the misery as well as others, but God will sustain us by his
grace, and fortify us with the spirit of patience, that our hearts fail us
not, till putting forth his hand unto us, he has drawn us up unto himself.

Verse. 3. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior: I gave
Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba Or, in thy stead.
for thee.
A confirmation of the^ former consolation.
HE confirms the former sentence by the experiences of the time past. For if
the Lord had in former time succored his people, it was good reason they
should stay assuredly upon his favor (for the time to come.) We must ever
keep that in mind which is contained in the first verse; Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee: for these things should be joined together, because they
tend all to one our God, then by consequence is with us: verse. 2. and we
shall experience that he is our Savior. But if we will find him such a one to
us, To feel God our Savior, we must be a part of Israel, not in name only,
but by some infallible testimonies.
it is necessarily required, that we prove our selves to be a part of Israel;
not in name only, but to show some infallible marks thereof in the whole
course of our life. Thus you see the foundation of our confidence is in this,
that the Lord is our God. Whence it follows, that those who acknowledge him
not for their father, neither will rest upon his good pleasure, must needs
have trembling consciences for ever. The wicked rejoice and lift up their
crests against God, but their security and joy is nothing else but a giddines,
and frenzy of spirit; by reason whereof, they hasten their own perdition the
sooner. But the faithful are here assured, that he who has chosen them, will
always continue their God and Savior: for which cause he has separated them
from the rest of ye world, to be his heritage.

In this sense he calls himself the holy one of Israel, because amongst all
mankind, which is naturally estranged from him, he chose his people Israel to
be his peculiar flock. Now howsoever the outward separation be to little
purpose, unless the elect also be sanctified by the power of the holy Ghost;
yet although Israel was polluted as well as other nations, God notwithstanding
pronounces that his covenant shall never be broken with them, in regard he
will remain always like himself. Moreover, it is evident enough that the
word holy, is taken for him that sanctifies. Will we be assured then of Gods
love? Let us ever set before us the pledge of our adoption, which will be unto
us as a sure rock whereon to settle our hearts: The means to keep our selves
in the assurance of Gods favor.
this grace therefore let us beg of God with all the powers of our soul.

I gave Egypt for thy ransom.] I mean not to expound these repetitions which
the Prophet so often uses, which also are frequent in his language: for he
puts, To give the ransom; and, to give in thy stead, in one and the same
sense. We have told you already that the Prophet confirms the faithful, by
setting these former presidents of Gods grace before them. As if he should say;
You have proved long since, that the Lord has had care of your salvation; for
how was it possible for Sennacherib to bring his forces against the Ethiopians,
and other nations, but that God had a purpose to spare you, and to turn the
violence of your enemies against your neighbors? Seeing then that hitherunto
he has employed himself so much in your service (as it were) you have no
reason to doubt of his favor for the time to come. If therefore at any time it
so fall out, that our necessities shall cause us to call Gods providence or his
promises into question, let us remember what mercies he has bestowed upon us
in times past: How to stay our selves as often as occasion is given us to call
Gods provident care over us into question. Object.
for he may justly condemn us of exceeding unthankfulness, if having
received so many favors from him, we yet stand in doubt of his good will
toward us for hereafter.

But some may ask why he calls Egypt and Ethiopia the Churches ransom,
seeing profane nations are unworthy of such an honor, as to be the redeemers
of Gods children? I answer, Egyptians, Ethiopians, and Sabeans were put in thy
stead: I constrained them to sustain the harms which hung over thine head,
even as if there had been an interchange made between you: for to save thee, I
destroyed them, and in thy stead, put them into the hands of thine enemies. See
Prou. 11.8. and 21.18.
We must resort to the history for the better understanding hereof: for when
Sennacherib came with violence against Judah, God arested him by the way, and
sent him to fight with others; so as he was constrained to turn back his
forces. And thus the Egyptians and the Ethiopians were destroyed, vvhilest Gods
people were spared: 2. King. 19.9.

Hence we may easily gather, that the same providence and infinite goodness
of God, Gods providence the same in releuing his Church at this d^y, as in
former ages.
is as far extended unto us at this day, as it was toward the Jews, unless
we be more then blockish. Is it not he, think you, that makes tyran^ (who
would eat us up at a morsel, a^^ with one consent are all of them ready in
their fury to swal^ow us up quick) to devour one another, and to turn their
rage which was kindled against us, upon others? Do we not see by experience,
that to preserve us, he puts others in our rooms, and so they become our
ransom? When we therefore are thus favored of God, that the wicked lets us
alone in quiet, whilst they are assaulting one another, (for it is not of any
good will they bear us that we are freed from their fury,) let us then lift
up our eyes unto heaven, and with all thankfulness acknowledge that God puts
others in our places by a miracle, Whence it is that the Church lives in peace.
to the end he might spare us: for we are as sheep appointed to be slain;
naked swords are glistering on every side over us; and if he either plucked
them not out of their hands, or turned the points and edges of them toward
others, we should feel the smart which they do.

Hence we may draw a general doctrine; to wit, A general doctrine. God
esteems the faithful more then all the world besides.
that God has such a respect to the faithful, that he esteems them above
all the world besides. Be it then that the world do cast us off, yet let us
rejoice in this, that the Lord does highly esteem of us: first, in that he
prefers us above all his creatures: secondly, in delivering us so wonderfully
out of dangers: yea, and in that he preserues us in the midst of a thousand
deaths. If all things were in quiet amongst us, and that we saw no troubles at
all, this favor of God could not be so well discerned of us. But when it
seems we are compassed in so on every side, that all hope of escaping is taken
from us, and that then on a sudden the enemy is forced to recoile back, and
is turned from us another way, we shall have good experience of that which the
Prophet here says, See 1. Sam. 23.26, 27.
and shall acknowledge Gods inestimable favor toward us.

Verse. 4. Because thou wast precious in my sight, and thou wast honorable, and
I loved thee, therefore will I give man Or, in thy stead.
for thee, and people Or, in the place of thy soul. This verse contains the
reason of the former.
for thy sake.
SOme expound; Thou wast honorable, because I advanced thee unto honor: but
me thinks God yields a reason here, why he delivered Egypt and Ethiopia into
the enemies hands, in the stead of his people: to wit, because they were his
beloved, and that he held them dear and precious in his sight. And thus this
particle should be expounded in this sort; Because I loved thee, I gave man for
thee. All merit shut out.
Now in these words he shuts out all merit, to the end the Jews might
challenge nothing upon desert. Even so, the very cause of our salvation, The
cause of salvation, and of all benefi s besides, comes unto us of Gods mere
liberality.
and of all the blessings wherewith we are adorned, is only from Gods free
love. Thence also flows all our dignity and honourablenesse: for if he
should esteem us according to our virtues, he might soon shake us off. Let us
therefore renounce all opinion of merit which is not to be found in us, that so
we may wholly attribute all to Gods free grace, who shows us no mean or
common favor, when he vouchsafes to entitle us precious. In which respect he
also calls us his first borne; Exodus 4.22. and friends, John 15.15.

In that he says, he gave man for them, it is nothing else but an explication
of the former sentence, taking man for men: Man taken for men.
as if he should say; There is not a man whom the Lord will not destroy for
thy safety: for he makes more reckoning of the soul of one faithful man,
then of all the world besides. And yet he heerewithall admonishes the Church
that she is here redeemed at their cost, who by nature and birth differ
nothing at all from her.

Verse. 5. Fear not, for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the East,
and gather thee from the West.
WE must not think there is any superfluity in that the Prophet so often
repeates this exhortation. All of us know, and have sufficient experience how
inclinable our nature is to distrust. Now it is hard for us to think or imagine
into what wonderful straits and distresses the Church of the Jews was then
brought. As soon as we begin once but to call Gods promises into question, our
minds are distracted with many passions, we stand amazed at the greatness and
diversity of the dangers, we are daily assaulted with vexations of spirit; at
last we grow sottish, and cannot be brought to taste how gracious our God is.
Our minds therefore being thus possessed with desp^ite, have we not need that
this voice should again and again ring in our ears, I am with thee, fear
not? that so this fear may either be wholly rooted up out of our hearts, or
at least so corrected by little and little, that we may not be overcome of it:
for I can tell you, if it take never so little rooting there, it is not so
easily displanted. Hence we observe, that we ought to place our hope in
nothing but in Gods being present with us: for if he be absent, Wherein our
hope ought to be placed.
we must needs tremble for fear or wax dull and dead hearted, or stagger to
and fro like a drunken man. And yet the Lord would not have us be so void of
fear, as that we should thereby grow careless or idle; but when we hear that
he is near, and that he will assist us, faith must then overcome all
difficulties in the midst of eminent dangers.

I will bring thy seed from the East.] This place is drawn (as we know) out
of Deuteronomy. 30.3.4. For the Prophets are the expositors of Moses, and do gather
their doctrine out of his writings, See his preface.
as we have showed you from the beginning. Thus the Prophet applies this place
of Moses then to the circumstance of the time present, unto which in this
Sermon he has a special respect. Moses had thus foretold, The Lord thy God
shall cause thy captives to returns (...) and commands the vanquished to hold
their peace. Yet in that he bids them hear, it is to show that the only let
that keeps men from the knowledge of ye truth is, The only let that keeps men
from the knowledge of the truth.
that their minds being forestalled with error, they scorn to give ear unto
God. For this contempt hinders them from coming to repentance, but rather
stand proudly to defend the invention of their own brain. But the Lord was
ready to have taught them if they had had but a patient ear. For where could
they have found a better Master? But their pride and rebellion blinds them so,
as they can not see the truth, and shuts up their ear from harkening to the
voice of God. Are they not justly left without excuse then, seeing they
obstinately reject him, and will not lend their ear to his doctrine, who
offers himself in such mild sort to instruct them? For if they were in any
measure teachable, Those that are willing to learn, shall soon perceive that
the truth is grounded upon infallible arguments.
Isaiah well affirms that they should be constrained to subscribe to their
own condemnation: for in truth, all such as show themselves teachable shall
easily understand that the truth of God is grounded upon infallible arguments,
and not upon uncertain opinions which have their foundation in the air.

Verse. 10. You are my witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant, whom I have
chosen: therefore ye shall know and believe me, and ye shall understand that I
am: before me there was no God, neither shall there be after me.
THe Lord having provoked the Gentiles to disputation, and having showed that
all that which they esteemed touching the excellency of their Idols, was mere
vanity and lies: now he leaves their assembly, and brings forth his
witnesses, that men may know, that his case is not like that of the false gods.
He rightly boasts then that the true witnesses take his part: for the Jews had
bin taught by revelations from heaven so far forth as sufficed to give them
undoubted assurance of their salvation. And yet he privily taxes their
ingratitude, if so be they did not publicly and unfeignedly protest that they
had learned all things requisite for the defense of Gods glory: The truth of
the prophesies must never be forgotten.
and thus indeed he also summons them to vow never to forget nor conceal ye
truth of these prophesies, by means whereof they might be able to show the
certentie of the true religion: for it had bin treachery in them to have
defrauded so good a cause of any defense which they were able to bring unto it.
Gods cause must not be left destitute of our defense.


By the name servant, some understand Isaiah: but I had rather understand it of
all the Prophets, because there is here a change of the number. This name then
is given particularly to the Prophets whom the Lord chose to maintain his
truth: and yet I doubt not but in using the singular number he had a special
and chief respect unto Christ, Christ, the end and accomplishment of all the
prophesies.
who is the end and accomplishment of all the prophesies: and it is also very
sure that he is the special witness that shall convince the whole world. But
yet we must have regard to the Prophets intention, which is, to call the Jews
indeed to be the Lords witnesses? and to accuse them of ingratitude if they did
not franckly profess what they had heard and seen. For having had so many
good lessons taught them from time to time, they could not without gross
disloyalty either doubt or call into question the power and goodness of God.
The Church must bear witness to Gods truth.
Thus then he shows that the Church is picked out to bear witness to the
truth of God: in which sense S. Paul calls her the pillar and ground of truth,
1. Tim. 3.15. It is her office then to publish and maintain it, so as it may
be received of the posterity from age to age. Not that the Lord stands in need
of such an aid, but because it is his good pleasure neither to approve nor
establish the same among men by any other means.

Isaiah therefore under this one word comprehends all the servants of God, who
stand bound to defend their Masters quarrel, but chiefly the Ministers, who
ought to be as the Standard-bearers, and by their example to show the way unto
others. It is therefore specially spoken to them here, though in general he
is to be held no faithful servant of God, who so smothers the knowledge of the
truth within him that he dares not avouch it before men.

Therefore you shall know.] That the Lord might not seem to procure to
himself witnesses of things unknown, he adds, you shall know, you shall
believe, you shall understand: thus showing by the order of the words, Faith
goes before confession.
that faith precedes, or goes before confession. If this confession then have
no deeper foundation then in the tip of the tongue, and is not laid in the
heart, it shall be held but vain and frivolous, for the Lord neither allows
nor approues of it. And yet there is some difficulty in the order of the
words, To know, To believe, and To understand: Many have knowledge that are
destitute of faith.
for faith is not always joined with knowledge: for a man will not say that
such believe because they know; faith is often absent, where knowledge is
present. Besides, it is doubtful in what sense understanding, which is here
added after belief, is to be taken, as if it should differ from knowledge. But
our Prophet in this place shows that there is a certain preparation unto
faith, by which God first gives authority unto his word as often as he sees a
necessary use of that means. I grant, that faith begins at humility, which
captives all our reason under Gods lore: but because we embrace not the
doctrine that is offered with such an assurance as we ought, therefore God
confirms it unto us by sundry testimonies, and by our own experience, the
better to settle us firmly in this faith. In this sense the Evangelist S. John
shows, that himself and S. Peter believed the Scriptures after they had seen
the signs of Christ's resurrection in the Sepulcher, John 20.8. In another
place also he says, That the disciples believed in Christ, when that was
accomplished which he had spoken with his mouth, John 2.22.

The sum then is, that the Jews shall feel by the effects that they
worshipped the true God, after their faith shall be confirmed by visible
signs. A true faith distinguished from inconstant infidelity.
In the mean while, he discernes true faith from that wavering infidelity,
which carries unconstant men hither and thither: for God gives knowledge and
judgment always to his elect, whereby they shall be able to distinguish truth
from lies. After this, follows faith and steadfast confidence, which causes
them without doubting to receive whatsoever the Lord has revealed unto them:
and then faith kindles a greater light in the understanding, and as we profit
by degrees, so knowledge grows in us, and shines more clearly. The power of
the holy Ghost, and not man's reason must effect all these things in us.
But this is not effected in us by our own reason, but by the power of the
holy Ghost; for it is his office to inlighten us.

That I am.] His meaning is, that it is needful to know what a one God is, if
we would rightly believe: and that it is he only, and none other that we
worship, lest our minds should wander and err in receiving whatsoever men
should approve, True faith forgeth not fancies, neither wauereth, but is
grounded upon the infallible truth.
or thrust upon us. That is not properly termed faith, which forgeth ought
according to men's fancies, or that lightly credits whatsoever is set before
her: neither is that faith which by and by cleaves to whatsoever is set before
her, or wauereth in uncertainty: but true faith is grounded in such assurance,
that in giving her self to the service of the only true God, she boldly
contemnes all false gods, and delivers men's understandings from all fear of
error.

By this we may know what to judge of the implicit faith of the Papists: for
they account them believers, The implicit faith of the Papists, is to believe
as their mother the holy Church believes.
who are senseless and ignorant of that they believe, and are not able to utter
one word touching the knowledge of God, (for alas they know not what he is) in
regard they openly protest that they believe as their mother the holy Church
believes. But the Lord contents not himself with such absurdities, but ioines
faith with understanding, to teach us that the one cannot be separated from the
other.

Moreover, it is no faith, unless we believe in one God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who spoke by the Prophets and Apostles. Have we not this God?
Then is our faith but a fancy. Which that he may the better confirm touching
that he said before, I am the only God; he adds in the second place, that
there is no other before him. The words Lo-notzar, may indeed in another sense
he taken for a creature, or work of God; for they signify, There is none. But
because it seems that this is constrained, I willingly agree to the usual
exposition, that There is no God formed before. In which there is a kind of
Ironie: as if the Prophet should have said; There is none other God but he,
unless he be forged by mortal men. I trow then you will not compare them
with the eternal God.

He adds, that there shall be none after; because himself holds always the
entire and perfect sovereignty, and is not changed by age or corruption. The
sum is, that we cannot say we have faith indeed, till we come to rest the
same wholly in him: for those which acknowledge a kind of divinity, and yet are
ignorant what it is, are always pursued with a trembling conscience, and are
wrapped in wonderful snares. Let us therefore stay our selves upon that God
which cannot endure any companion with him; or that the least portion of his
majesty should be impaired; because He only is.

Verse. 11. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior.
THe Lord triumphs here as having gotten the victory. In the former verses he
has sufficiently instructed us touching the means whereby to come to his
knowledge; and has showed that there is no other God but him. Now to confirm
this doctrine he breaks out into this exclamation; It is I, even I, that am
the Lord, and there is none besides me. And thus we may see how dangerous a
thing it is to forge a god according to our fantasy: for we have no sooner
effected it, but behold, an Idol in stead of God. Let not us therefore, accept
of any thing but that which proceeds from him, lest we run out in this
behalf. Has he manifested himself unto us? It is good reason we should
daily profit, grow, and be more and more confirmed in his knowledge. And this
is the use we should make of this repetition, I, I am the Lord.

Yet I would not have you think he speaks here of his eternal essence only;
but let us know that his power and goodness, which he fully manifests by
causing us to feel the same, are here comprehended. And that is the reason why
ye epithete of the only Savior is added; which is a mark whereby to separate
him from all his creatures. For the world deceiues it self in attributing unto
God a naked and bare title, and in the mean while transports his dignity over
to the creatures. In the Papacy I grant there is mention made of God, but they
strip him of his honor; when one part thereof is given to Peter and Paul, and
another to William and George: that is to say, Saint Peter, Paul, William,
George.
when his offices are divided into so many parts, that they leave nothing to
him but the bare title of God. The Papists leave nothing to God but his bare
title.
They brag that they worship but one God: I wot well; but when we come to
speak of his offices, they forge as many gods as there are creatures, and to
them they distribute his authority and power. But the Lord will have these
things to remain wholly and soly unto him; neither can they be attributed to
any other without committing horrible sacrilege: for it is he only that
bestows all good things upon men, and he only defends and preserues them.

The latter member of the verse then, expresses that knowledge which proceeds
from experience, that so we might seek salvation in none but in him, who is
the author of it. Whence we gather, that the principal part of Gods service
consists in faith; which is, when he is acknowledged to be the fountain of
life, when he is adorned with the title of Savior; as also when these things
which he affirms to be proper to him only, and to dwell in him, be not
transported over unto others.

Verse. 12. I have declared, and I have saved; and I have showed when there was
no strange god among you: therefore you are my witnesses, says the Lord, that
I am God.
THis verse is as it were a rehearsal of the former; for the Lord tells them
again that he has foretold things to come, and has brought them to pass
accordingly, To declare, is, or may be referred to his f^reknowledge: and, To
save; to his power and goodness. In a word, his meaning is, that he is the
only God who knows and accomplisheth all things. Now howsoever this was
spoken to the Jews, yet we are to know that it also appertains unto us: for
all the prophecies which remain on record, ought to be so many lessons to
teach us the wisdom and power of God, that so we may wholly rest upon him.
Now, that we should abolish all superstitions, and suffer him to sit as our
only Doctor in his heavenly chair; he tells us again, that he has showed
his power, and manifested the signs of his favor, without any man's help:
whence it follows, that those are too ungrateful and perverse, which will not
content themselves with him alone.

W^^n there was no strange God among you (says he) to worship, even then did
I openly discover my power in the sight of the whole world. How dare you then
attribute that to Idols, which belongs to me only? And yet the Prophet does
not so much in this place commend the antiquity of the peoples religion, as he
labors to reject all false succors. As if he should say; Seeing you have
known none but the true God, whose miracles have been so wonderful and
apparent, you ought to be resolved, that there is no help but in him.
Therewithal also the Prophet shows, that our infidelity hinders God from
showing his power in the midst of us: let us therefore abandon all errors, and
all false opinions of God, if we will have experience of his power; for if we
turn aside after idolatries and superstitions, are we not well worthy to
feel the want of his power and goodness?

In conclusion, he calls them witnesses, as accusing them of froward and
cursed ingratitude, if they dissemble that goodness of his, which was so
publicly manifested: for the more God shall have declared his power by many
visible testimonies, the more are we bound to publish and make known the same
unto others.

Verse. 13. Yea, before the day was, I am; and there is none that can deliver
out of mine hand: and I will do it, and who shall let?
HE speaks now of Gods eternity; but we must still keep in mind the
Prophets drift. For he which had a beginning, He which had a beginning, is not
of himself.
is not of himself, neither can he hold under his dominion, nor govern the
things which he created not. When the Lord therefore calls himself the
eternal, it is to show that the world was made by his hand, and that this
goodly order of nature fell not out by chance, but took the original from his
admirable wisdom and power: Genesis 1.1.

And therefore he adds in the next place, that none can deliver out of his
hand: Gods sovereignty proved by his eternity.
which yet shows us more plainly, that by his eternity we may prove his
sovereign and infinite power. For were he not eternal, he could neither
retain all things in his hands, neither without beginning, it necessarily
follows, that all things be subject to his disposition. Heereunto appertains
that which is added, that nothing can let him from doing that which he has
once determined. All which, served to teach the Jews, that they should not
stand amazed nor be discouraged, in regard of the force, fury, and multitude
of their enemies.

Verse. 14. Thus says the Lord your redeemer, the holy one of Israel; For your
sake I have sent to Babel, and brought it down: they are all fugitives; and
the Caldeans cry in the ships.
THe Prophet says that Cyrus Cyrus.
shall be as an hired soldier, which shall bestow his travel in the Lords
service, for the redemption of his people. I grant he names not Cyrus, but he
speaks of the host which marched under his conduct, to subdue the Babylonians.
We know this was brought about by Cyrus and Darius: Darius.
but all of them were Gods executioners, who had foretold these things long
before. He directs not his speech only to those that saw the accomplishment of
all these things, but also to all those whom the Lord meant to sustain with
this hope of deliverance, which they could never have dreamed of by any humane
reason. For he speaks to the captives, who being oppressed under the cruel
servitude of the Caldeans, were left destitute of all means of comfort: in
which respect these promises might seem most fabulous, because in man's
judgment there was no hope that ever they should get out of this prison.

But we must give this honor to Gods word, We must give this honor to Gods
word, as to believe things incredible. The virtue of faith.
even to believe that which otherwise is incredible, to the end we may hope
above hope: for such is the power of faith, that she stands not gazing upon
things external, but fixes her eyes in the heavens, and pierces thorough
even to the very throne of God.

Now there is great force in that which is added, for thy sake. For seeing
pride, and an insatiable covetous desire to rule, pricked Cyrus forward to this
action; and that there were many occasions for which this war was raised, a man
would not have thought that the whole world should thus have bin shaken in the
overthrow of this Monarchy, and that the poor Jews the miserablest of all
people under heaven, should by this means have had a way made to return home
into their own country. But God protests, that he will give the Persians
victory, so as they shall easily conquer all the East, because he favors his
Church.

For this cause he shows in the first place, that it is he which is their
redeemer, and the holy one, the better to persuade them that he held those whom
he had chosen to be his peculiar people dear and precious unto him.
Notwithstanding, he sent them to perform this work by his free grace, because
he meant thereby to procure the salvation of his Church. In the same sense he
adds, that at his commandment he brought them down: for albeit the Medes
and Persians Medes and Persians.
had another end, yet their journey was governed by an heavenly instinct. And
thus God meant to show what love he bare to his chosen people aforehand, lest
they should have fainted in their extreme anguishes and afflictions. This
promise therefore was of great use, in respect the poor captives might from
hence greatly comfort themselves that they were beloved of God, although all
the world besides contemned, hated, and rejected them as the ofscouring of all
things, seeing they saw that God in the end was minded to succor them, and for
their sakes to destroy the Monarchy of the Babylonians.

Where he says, they shall flee, it is to show that God shall so prosper the
affairs of Cyrus, that the Chaldeans shall be astonished at his arrival, and
shall throw down their arms to take them to their heels: for it often falls
out, even to some mighty Prince, well appointed with all furniture to
enterprise war, in which notwithstanding the issue shall be woeful. It was not
enough then that Cyrus was sent with a great army, unless therewithal his
enterprises had succeeded well.

And that he might further set forth their hasty flight, he adds, there shall
be a cry, or tumult in the Ships, for they could not flee by land. True it is
they had a river fit for the purpose, to wit Euphrates, Euphrates.
which met with the river Tigris, Tigris.
by reason whereof they had means to escape: but they were disappointed of
their purpose in this behalf, in regard the river was drawn dry.

Verse. 15. I am the Lord, your holy one, the Creator of Israel, your King.
THis verse conteines in it only a description of him that speaks: first,
showing This verse a seal to the former sentence.
I call this verse therefore a seal to the former sentence, as if the people
should have said, We hear much spoken of God, and of his promises; but I pray
you what is this God? The Prophet answers, Even he that is your holy one,
creator of Israel, and your king.

He is called holy one, Holy one.
because he culled and our holy one, God our Holy one now.
in that he has put us apart to be members of his Church, whereof he has
assured us, by our vocation and calling.

The title Creator Creator.
is not to be referred to the general creation of all things: for so he

In that he adds your king, King.
it might seem somewhat strange: for what appearance was there of a kingdom
among the Jews now? Were they not laden with reproaches and contumelies,
because they were left destitute of all succor? Yet faith was to break through
all these obstacles: in this title therefore the Prophet gave them hope that
the kingdom should again be restored, howsoever to the eyes of flesh and
blood it lay now in the dust, yea utterly extinct; notwithstanding all this,
they were to hold God for their Sovereign and King still.

Verse. 16. Thus says the Lord which makes a way in the sea, and a path in the
mighty waters.
HE once again comes to confirm that which otherwise seemed incredible: and
that this confirmation might have the greater authority, he takes unto him the
person of God. Now he puts them in mind of former benefits, to teach them, God
always the same.
that as they had found him an Almighty Savior before, so they should assure
themselves that he would be no less powerful and gracious unto them for the
time to come: neither less able nor willing to work their deliverance. As if
he should say, The Lord who speaks will certainly show the greatness of his
power by the effects: of which as your forefathers have had experience,
Unthankfulness.
Are we not too unthankful then if by former benefits received, we be not
drawn to hope in him for hereafter? but especially when he has shown so
certain and so excellent testimonies of his continual care over us.

Israel delivered out of Egypt, to the end they should never forget it.
He brought Israel out of Egypt, upon condition they should never forget such a
deliverance: Exodus 13.9. The Prophet now sets the same God before their eyes,
showing that nothing could withstand him, which by his power he overcame not,
when he took his peoples salvation in hand. For then he made a way for them
in the sea, Exodus 14.21. and guided them through the tempestuous and mighty
waters; to wit, through the river Jordan, which he dried up, though it was very
boisterous: Ios. 3.16. Now he expressly names these two admirable miracles,
because they might imagine that all passage was shut up against them, in regard
of their return into Judea: and that all these promises therefore were but
fables.

Verse. 17. When he brings out the chariot and horse, the army and the power
lie together, and shall not rise: they are extinct and quenched as towe.
NOw he shows that neither munition, nor strength can resist God, or hinder
him from delivering his people when he thinks good, no more then the s^a was
able to let him from saving them: but he divided the same, and drowned their
enemies with their chariots and horses therein. See here then an amplification
of the former verse as if he should say; Be it that the whole world have
conspired your destruction, and would hinder me from working your deliverance;
shall it not be in vain? For when I list, I will not only find out a passage
for you in the midst of bottomless gulphes, but I will also scatter and
overthrow all force and power of your enemies: yea, I will so dash them in
sunder, that they shall never be able to arise. It may be he that has lost one
victory, will gather his forces afresh together the second time, and win that
he lost before: but the Lord in this place promises a perpetual victory;
showing that their enemies shall be so discomfited, that they shall be utterly
extinct. Which sudden destruction he further expresses by the similitude of
towe: when fire is put to towe, it may well make a blaze for a while, but
forthwith it is consumed and gone.

Verse. 18. Or, Forget ye the, etc.
Remember ye not the former things? neither regard ye the things of old?
This verse must be understood by way of comparison.
THe Prophet hitherunto has showed at large how mighty the Lord is to save his
people: now he says that all the miracles which were wrought in the first
redemption, were nothing in comparison of those that forget so great a
benefit; for the memory thereof worthily deserved to be celebrated from age to
age, even to the worlds end: and as the Lord had commanded, was to stand upon
perpetual record. For in the preface of the Law, Exodus 20.2. thus he speaks;
I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage. He also commanded the fathers to be often recording of it to
their children, and to continue the remembrance of it to their successors. This
therefore must be taken by way of comparison: as in Jeremiah; Behold the days
come, says the Lord, that they shall say no more, The Lord which brought the
children out of Egypt: but the Lord lives, which has brought the posterity of
Iaakob out of the land of the North, and out of all the coasts of the earth,
whereinto he has scattered them: Ier. 23.7. The sum is, that the last
deliverance shall be far more glorious then the first, if the one be compared
with the other. Whence it follows, that this prophecy is not to be referred
to a few years; because the Prophet extols not here the beginnings of their
deliverance only; but extends the fruit of this return even unto Christ, at
whose coming both the kingdom and priesthood were reallie established.

Verse. 19. Behold, I do a new thing; now shall it come forth: shall you not
know it? I will even make a way in the desert, and floods in the wilderness.
BY this we may yet better perceive what the Prophets drift was in the former
verse. For here he says, there shall be a new work: that is, no common or
ordinary, A new work is here opposed to that which is common and ordinary:
See Chap. 42.10.
but such a one as by the excellency and greatness of it, shall darken the
same of all the rest, no less then the Sun when it shines in his might,
darkens all the stars in the firmament. In that he says, it shall now come
forth; the meaning is, it shall not be long deferred. I grant these things were
not by and by accomplished; but when we have respect unto him that speaks,
four hundred, nay a thousand years in his sight, are but as yesterday. Thus
he comforts them, because he would not that their seventy years captivity
should discourage them.

When he adds, shall you not know it? The interrogation has more force in it
then a bare affirmation.
This interrogation has more force and vehemency in it then a simple
affirmation. And this manner of speech is much used both among the Hebrews,
and also among Greeks and Latins.

Further, he promises to make a way in the desert, The desert between
Babylon and Judea.
wherein he has respect to that desert which was between Babylon and Judea:
for here he speaks of the peoples return home. And for that cause also he
mentions the floods: for they might well have perished for thirst, in
traveling through a place so barren and waste. Therefore the Lord promises to
provide them of water for their journey: as if he should say; Fear not for
want of necessaries, for I will furnish you sufficiently; so as you shall
return under my conduct and leading.

But it seems the Prophet passes his bounds, when he magnifies this
deliverance in such excessive speeches. For we read not that the rivers were
here turned into blood, nor that a gross and palpable darkness troubled the
air, or that the first borne were slain, or that any vermin were sent to
devour the fruits of the earth; neither any of the like wonders which came to
pass in Egypt: none of these happened, as we know in Babylon. What means he
then by this new deliverance? This has caused almost all the writers that are
Christians, to expound this place simply of Christ's coming: wherein no doubt
they have been deceived no less then the Jews, who only restrain this to
the deliverance out of Babell. And therefore as I have said in another place,
we must here comprehend the whole time that passed between the deliverance
out of Babylon, until the coming of Christ. The Churches redemption out of
Egypt, may be compared to her first birth.
The redemption out of Egypt may be compared to the first birth of the Church;
because the people were then gathered into a body, and the Church was
established, which before was without form: yet this redemption ended not at
the peoples coming forth of Egypt, but continued till they were possessed of
the land of Canaan, which was given them after the Kings were driven thence.
The like may be said of this birth by which the Jews were brought out of
Babylon, and restored home into their own Country: for this restoration must
not be restrained to their going out of Babylon only, but it stretches it
self unto the coming of Christ; during which space of time, there came great
and wonderful things to pass indeed.

See Exodus 14.11.12.
that they preferred so miserable a servitude before so blessed and happy a
freedom. When a small handful (I say) of them then returned into Iudeah, in
respect of that great multitude which was led into captivity, yet fell there
out greater lets and hindrances. For were there not conspiracies, What
impediments happened to the Jews in their return.
new hatreds and grudgings raised up against this people, who were in too much
contempt and disgrace already? Did not the work cease, and was not all

That we may the better understand then how wonderful this deliverance was, To
understand this last deiiueuerance of the Church aright, we must look to the
histories of things begun and continued till Christ's coming. The Prophets
still kept their eye upon Christ.
and in what sort it surpassed the first, we must have an eye to the histories
of things begun and continued until Christ's coming; who then added infinite
graces and benefits to the former: for doubtless the second deliverance was
greater then the first.

Neither is this any constrained exposition, but it agrees with the manners of
speech used among the Prophets: for they have always respect unto the Messiah,
and incessantly did they fix their eyes upon him. The Prophet Haggai therefore
will give us much light for the understanding of this place. For he shows, that
when the Temple was built, the old men which had seen the excellency of the
first, wept, saying; that this latter was nothing in comparison of the former:
and hardly could they be persuaded but that God had utterly forsaken them, and
that his promises were of none effect. Bur Haggai to comfort them, and to show
that the glory of the second Temple shall far surpass the first, albeit the
outward form of it were less beautiful, brings them forthwith to the
Redeemer, saying on this manner: Thus says the Lord of hosts; Yet a little
while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land, and all nations: the desire of all nations shall come; and I will fill
this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The gold and silver is mine,
says the Lord of hosts: the glory of this house shall be greater then the
first: Haggai 2.7. As Haggai then continues the restoration of the Temple till
Christ's coming, to which he refers the true glory of it: so this deliverance
out of Babylon held on the course thereof till Christ; for these things are
conioined together, or rather have affinity one with another; so as it is no
marvel though he say, it did every way surpass that deliverance out of Egypt.

Verse. 20. The wild beasts shall honor me, the Dragons and the Ostriches;
because I gave water in the desert, and floods in the wilderness to give
drink to my people, even to mine elect.
HE adornes the former sentence; for all things standing in this confused
manner, it was needful to set out Gods power in the highest terms that might
be, that at least the word might supply that which seemed to be wanting in
effect. His meaning is then, that Gods hand shall be so sensibly felt and
perceived in this work, that not only men but vvild beasts also should be
touched with a sense of it, so as they should yield a kind of honor and thanks
unto God. This prophecy therefore answers to Psalm 114.3.4. where it is said,
That the sea saw it and fled, Jordan went back; the mountains skipped like
sheep; and the little hills as lambs: the earth trembled at the presence of
the God of Iaakob.

Isaiah attributes here the same feelings to the brute beasts, in regard that
by a secret instinct they should be constreined to give place, that the people
might pass with more security. And yet the reason hereof has a larger
extent, to wit, that they shall stand amazed at the beholding of so many
miracles. To be short, God shows, that he will not leave his people destitute
of necessary food that they should be enforced to return back through want:
for by this excessive kind of speech, he expresses the incomprehensible love
of God toward the Jews, that by the power of their hope they might mount
above all present obstacles.

The use.
Now when we hear of these things, let us not measure his power (in our
distresses) according to the order of nature: but by faith let us fix our eyes
above all things visible and comprehensible.

Moreover, lest these poor banished orphans should lose all hope of Gods
everlasting favor in seeing themselves thus rejected and despised of all:
Isaiah brings them to the remembrance of their adoption, as if he should say,
Think not but yt you remain the people of God still, My people, mine elect.
notwithstanding this your horrible scattering: for he who has once elected
you never changes his counsel. As often then as we stand in need of
encouragement to hope well, let us remember the calling of God: We must in
temptation oppose our vocation against our unworthiness.
for albeit we feel our own unworthiness, yet it ought to suffice that the
Lord has vouchsafed us this honor, to make us his people.

Verse. 21. This people have I formed for my self: they shall show forth my
praise.
THe Prophets meaning is, that the Lord must needs perform that which he spoke
before, because it concerns his own glory to deliver the people which he
has chosen to himself. This appertained therefore very much to the
consolation of the Jews, as if he should say, Do ye think I will suffer my
glory to fall to the ground? It is joined with your salvation, Gods glory and
our salvation joined together.
and therefore it stands me in hand to look to it, Be you sure therefore that
all shall got well with you: for I can not suffer you to perish, but my
glory must therewithal be abolished also. But your salvation is sure; for I
have determined that you shall magnify my greatness for ever.

Where he says he has Created this people, it is to let us understand that
our regeneration is a work supernatural: for we are to hold this principle
which we have often told you of heretofore, that he speaks not here of that
general work of his creation touching mankind; Isaiah speak not here of our
common creation, but of our spiritual regeneration. See Chap. 29.23.
but of regeneration or adoption, by which God separates his Church from the
rest of the world, and from all the remainders of it. Let no man be so bold
then as to attribute this work either to himself, or to the merits of men;
but let us from this place learn to ascribe so excellent a benefit wholly and
only to the free grace of God.

They shall set forth my praise.] Although the Prophets meaning be (as I have
said) to show that the people should be delivered in regard it nearly
concerned Gods glory: yet from this place we also learn, The end of our
election and vocation.
that the end of our election is the setting forth of Gods glory in all
things. I grant that the reprobates are instruments of this glory; but it
shines in a far diverse sort in us: for we are chosen, as S. Paul says, that
we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Exodus 14.4. and 17.18.
and he has also predestined us, to adopt us in himself by Jesus Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will to the praise of the glory of his
grace, Election.
wherewith he has freely accepted us through his beloved, Ephesians. 1.4.5.6.
Hereunto appertain the words of Peter, where he says, We are a chosen
generation, and that we should show forth the virtues of him who has called
us out of darkness, Vocation.
into his marvelous light, 1. Pet. 2.9. And Zachary sings, That we are
delivered out of the hands of our enemies to serve our God in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.75. Here ye see the
end then both of our election and calling: which is, that we being consecrated
and set apart for Gods use as it were, we might praise and honor him as long
as we have any being in this world.

Verse. 22. And thou have not called upon me, o Jacob: but thou have rather.
wearied me o Israel.
WIth this privy rebuke he confirms that which was said in ye former verse:
God saues none for his merits sake.
to wit, that the merits of the people had no way moved him to deal so
graciously with them. This deliverance therefore was to be ascribed to his
free goodness. For proof The proof.
hereof, he says, Thou have not called upon me: under which word he
co^prehends the whole service of God, This phrase, Called upon me, expounded.
whereof prayer was a principal part. And thus he takes a part for the whole,
according to the usual manner of the Hebrews. Now the Lord manifests it
sufficiently in other places, that Invocation is a special part of his
worship: Prayer, a special part of Gods worship.
for having said in the fiftieth Psalm that he reiects sacrifices and
ceremonies, he presently adds, Call upon me. For this cause the Scripture
mentions this exercise of prayer, when it notes out the marks of Gods worship.
For Moses minding to show that the same was again restored, says, that then
men began to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26.

I take the particle Ci in the second part of this verse for a conjunction
aduersatiue thus, God require^ a willing obedience. Psalm. 110.3.
But thou have rather wearied me. Others translate, For thou have travailed: as
if he should say, Thou have done that which I commanded thee unwillingly: which
comes all to one. For as the Lord requires obedience, so would he have his
servants to perform the same cheerfully and readily. He loves a cheerful
giver, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 9.7. but those that serve him by halues,
or by constrains, cannot properly be called his servants; neither does he
accept of them, nor of such services. To show then that the Jews had not
worshipped as they ought to have done, he says, they did it unwillingly.

If any had rather have it an exposition of the former member, and so translate
it thus; Thou have not called upon me, O Israel, because thou have yielded me
but a forced and constrained service: I gainsay him not, because the difference
is not great as touching the sense. Yet if it be taken as I have translated it,
I think it is nearer to the Prophets meaning: and the opposition contains
also in it a rendering of the cause. Will we have our services acceptable unto
God then? The use.
let us yield him a frank and willing obedience.

Verse. 23. Thou have not brought me the sheep of thy burnt offerings, neither
have thou honored me with thy sacrifices: I have not caused thee to serve
with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.
SOme may dema^d why the Prophet should thus reproach the Jews, God looks
rather to our faith and obedience, then to our sacrifices.
as we know, and obedience, are things which God chiefly looks unto, without
which, nothing we do, is, or can be pleasing in his sight. They wanted
therefore integrity of heart; their hands were full of blood; beasts every day
unto the Temple, and offered them there, yet he rightly affirms that they
offered none of these things (to him;) because God accepts of no sacrifices
which are separated from the truth, and so offered them to another, and not to
him: for all he required was, that by these outward means, his people should
exercise their faith and obedience. But these being wanting: what worth was
there in the sacrifices? Hence we gather that the Prophet speaks here of no
new thing, but continues that which he began to teach in the former verse; to
wit, that he reiects all hollow and servile services.

Verse. 24. Thou boughtest me no sweet Or, caneh.
savor with thy money, neither have thou made me drunk with the fat of thy
sacrifices: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me
with thine inquities.
BY the word Caneh, he means that wherewith they made the precious ointment
which was seldom used; High Priests. The Tabernacle. The Arc. The Instruments.
as is recorded in Exodus 30.25. For therewith were the high Priests, the
Tabernacle, the Arc of the covenant, with the instruments thereunto
appertaining, anointed. He says then; Albeit thou should lay forth thy
money to buy me of that odoriferous ointment, thou shall but spend it in vain,
if thou look that I should accept of it. For all their labor was lost,
because they aimed not at the right mark. God esteemed none of all these
ceremonies, as long as they were separated from faith, and the uprightness of
the heart, and a pure conscience.

Where he says, thou have not made me drunk; it answers to a phrase of speech
in the Law; where the Lord testifies that he felt a sweet taste in the savor
of the sacrifices: not that he took delight in the killing of beasts, but
because by such helps he meant to keep his people in true obedience. Here on
the contrary he says, that the people sacrificed not rightly, because they
defiled all by their impuritie. As if he should say; You have affamished me (as
much as in you is) in that you bring me nothing in sincerity, but that which
through your sins is corrupt and without savor. Presently after the Prophet
sets out the soulnesse of this fact, in that the people were not only
careless in doing their services to God: but which is worst of all, endeavored
to subject the Lord their God to their will, or rather to their disordered
appetites and lusts.

Those who refer this place to Christ, offer violence to the Prophets meaning:
and therefore the exposition which I have used ^eemes to me the most native: God
esteem^ neither of our labor not large expenses in his service, if the
integrity of the heart be wanting: See Mich. 6.6, 7, 8.
for the Lo^^ complains that they have enforced him (...) bear an heavy
burden, in regard of their ^innes, whereas they should have submit themselves
to him in all reverence, and ^ith all good consciences: for when we advance our
selves against God, we do by our ins^lencie and rebellion, make him as it were
a servant to our lusts.

Now he expresses this better when he says, that he has been vvearied:
that is to say; I have swallowed many disconten^ments, in regard of the
dissolute behauiou^ of my people: for we wound and pierce him to the heart,
when we reject his voice, and will not endure that he should reign over us.
But it seems he alludes to that he said crewhile touching the peoples
weariness in serving of God: which being set as opposite unto the same, it
shows that these rebels did much grieve him.

Verse. 25. I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins.
The conlusion.
BY this exclamation the Lord puts an end to the former sentence, as if he
should say, that he for his part can rejoice, that he puts away the iniquity
of his people, and holds them in freedom, No man is saved for his merits.
that they can plead no merit whereby to obtain this at his hands, seeing
they deserve rather to be severely chastised, nay to be utterly confounded.

Now he repeates one and the same thing twice, that he might touch men to the
quick for opposes his mercy to all other causes, as if he should say, There
is nothing moves me to show mercy, but only my free favor, and that
Redemption therefore is wrongfullie attributed to Merits or satisfactions,
seeing I am the only author of it. The sum is, that the people were to
continue their hope of return, because God was willing for his own names sake
freely to remit their sins, and to work their deliverance.

The doctrine of remission of sins handled in this place.
In this place then there is handled the doctrine of the remission of sins. It
now remains to see upon what occasion: for there is no doubt but the Prophet
promises deliverance in regard of Gods free grace. And for this cause he
rather spoke of forgiveness of sins, Why God speaks rather of remission of
sins, then of redemption. Simile.
then of Redemption: for they being sore pressed and corrected for their
sins, the cause was to be removed ere the effect could cease. A disease can
not be cured till the matter which feeds it be first removed: so, as long as
Gods wrath stands unappeased, so long must our chastisements continue.
Therefore it is necessary that this wrath be pacified, and we reconciled unto
God, before we can be freed from our afflictions.

This manner of speech therefore is to be well observed against a childish
distinction of the Sophisters: who confess indeed that God pardons the fault,
but they wrangle and say, that we must satisfy for the punishment. And hence
have proceeded Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory, and infinite other
inventions. But our Prophet speaks not only here of the fault, but makes
express mention also of the punishment, which is likewise done away, in regard
their sins and iniquities were freely pardoned. Which is yet more clearly
proved, in that he adds this particle, For mine own names sake. For it is
certain that this exception is opposed against all merits. This exception
opposed to merit.
As how? That God respects neither our persons, nor ought that is in us, when
he is to do away our offenses, but is moved thereunto by his own free mercy.
For if he should consider any thing in us, he should then seem to be bound to
us, and so the pardon should not be free. For this cause Ezechiel expresses
the opposition, I do not this for your sakes o house of Israel, but for mine
own sake: Whence it follows, that God is the author of forgiveness, and is
also inclined freely to forgive, because he finds no cause at all in man
(unless it be his misery) why he should do it.

And therefore I will not remember thy sins.] The Prophet added this for the
consolation of the faithful, who by the feeling of their own unworthiness,
might easily have slipped into despair. For this cause he puts them in good
hope, and confirms them in this confidence: to wit, That they should obtain
remission of their sins, and so be delivered out of captivity,
notwithstanding their unworthiness. Hence we have to gather a very profitable
doctrine, to wit, None can be assured of obtaining pardon, unless he rest upon
Gods free goodness.
That no man can assure himself of obteining pardon, unless he rest upon the
free grace of God. For such as look to their works must of necessity waver,
and in the end despair. For if they were not besotted with gross hypocrisy,
they would always set their guiltines before their eyes, which would
constreine them whether they would or no to doubt of Gods favor.

Where it is said, that the Ministers also do remit sins, that is not
repugnant to this place, for they are witnesses of this free remission. They
use this common distinction, A distinction.
That God forgiues sins by his power, and The Ministers by their office: but
because this distinction does not sufficiently explane the Prophets meaning,
it is best to hold that which I have set down, to wit, that God not only
pardons sins by his power, but also that all benefits which we are to expect,
flow unto us only from his free grace. And thus the Lord has so adorned the
Gospel and the Ministers with this authority, How God is said to pardon by the
Ministers.
that he reserues it notwithstanding entirely in his own absolute power.

Verse. 26. Put me in remembrance: let us be judged together: count that thou
may be justified.
BEcause it is an hard matter to correct men's pride, Man's pride not easily
subdued.
the Lord goes on still with this argument; and insists the longer upon it,
that he might the better bring the Jews to humility, as also that he might
cause them to renounce the confidence of their works. He gives them liberty
freely to say and allege what they can in their own behalf, God gives us
leave to make our defenses, if we think his accusatio^s ouerstrict.
to make their party good against him: unless if upon better advice, they
should rather think it best for them to lay their hand upon their mouth.

By way of yielding so much unto them therefore he bids them put him in mind:
Ironi^, a figure in speaking, when one means contrary to the signification of
his words, to mock him whom he reasons withal.
If thou have any thing to allege for thy self, says he, I pray thee
remember me of it. Speak thou in thy turn, and I will give thee audience. And
by this manner of speech he gauls men more to the quick, then if he should have
spoken to them in plain terms. For thus he shows, that they are more then
senseless, if they dare attribute any thing unto themselves. Why so? Because,
if liberty were given them to tell their fair tale, they would be convinced
of their vanity and emptines, without being able to say ought for themselves.

That thou may be justified.] That is to say, that thou may get the day,
and go away conqueror: I therefore give thee free leave to say what thou
can. Now this is spoken after such a kind of taunting and deriding manner,
Ironia.
as did more cut their combs, the^ if the Lord should have stood to have judged
the^ in his own person, according to his absolute authority. In the mean
while we must not forget the Prophets drift, who was constrained to pluck this
mask of merit from the Jews, that in all humility and meeknes, they might
receive the grace of God. The Prophets drift.


Verse. 27. Thy first father has sinned, and thy teachers have trangressed
against me.
The Prophets argument according to some interpreters.
THe expositors for the most part understand this place of the first Father
Adam: Adam.
others rather refer it to Abraham. As if the Prophet should say; You have not
only sinned, but your father Abraham Abraham.
also: notwithstanding all the holiness wherewith he was endued. By teachers,
they understand Moses Moses.
and Aron, Aron.
which sinned: albeit they were adorned with singular graces. And if the case
stood so with your father and teachers, how much more are you sinners, who are
their inferiors? An argument from the greater to the less.
And thus according to their sense, it should be an argument taken from the
greater to the less.

But I understand it otherwise; for under this word father, he comprehends not
only one or two of their predecessors, but many; and that by a change of the
number. A thing usual among the Hebrews. And this manner of reprehension is
often found both in the Prophets, as also in the book of Psalms: for they
knowing themselves to be the holy nation, they swelled in pride against the
Lord; as if this honor had been due unto them, either in regard of the
excellency or merits of their fathers: and thus the right of inheritance made
them swell. The Prophets therefore were careful from time to time, to discover
the iniquities of their fathers: for which cause Saint Stephen, Stephen.
who succeeded them, is bold to pronounce, that they had always resisted the
holy Ghost: Acts 7.51. As if he should say; You have not begun this day to be
thus wicked; your fathers were as bad long ago. A Proverb.
Of an evil Crow, there is issued forth a naughty egg. But you, says our
Prophet, are grown worse then your fathers, and far surpass the wickedness
of your predecessors: so as if the Lord had only respected you as you are in
your selves, he might justly have consumed you long since.

In the next place he adds their teachers; to show that the fault rested not
only in the people: for even those which ought to have been their guides and
leaders, to wit, the Priests and Prophets, were first in the transgression, and
plunged them into error which followed them. And thus (to be short) he shows
that there was no estate nor condition free from vices nor corruptions. As if
the Lord should have said; Let them go now and brag of their merits, and let
them allege any way but the least show of reason why I should be bound to
succor them, and they shall find there is nothing but my free mercy.

If any shall object, to reproach the children with the offenses of their
forefathers, because it is written, The soul that sins shall die: and, The
son shall not bear the iniquity of his father: Ezech. 18.20. God punishes
the children of wicked parents, because they walk in their steps.
The answer is easy, for the Lord punishes the sins of the fathers upon
their children which succeeded them: and yet they are not punished for the
faults of another, seeing themselves stand guilty of the same crimes. And when
it so falls out that the Lord smites the whole body of a people, he couples
the fathers with the children, that he may wrap them all in the same
condemnation.

Verse. 28. Therefore I have profaned the rulers of the Sanctuary, and have
made Iaakob a curse, and Israel a reproach.
THe letter Vau, must be resolved into a conjunction of concluding: This verse
contains the cause of the Jews ruin.
and the verb To pollute, should be translated in the future tence, though it
may also be les^ in the preterperfect. Yet I had rather turn it; shall
pollute: and to apply it to the time of the captivity, in regard he speaks
properly to those which should live in Babylon. If any had rather extend it to
the diverse calamities wherewith the Lord afflicted his people, and so join it
to the captivity of Babylon, it will not be greatly amiss. And it may be the
sense will run better, if we should say, that he speaks here of those
things which often fell out before; to the end he might warn them for the time
to come, not to stand too much upon their pantables, lest with shame and great
dishonor, they again received the just reward of their ingratitude. He sets
forth the cause of their ruin then, in regard that both fathers and children
were to drink of one cup, who ceased not to sin, but would from day to day
kindle Gods wrath against them without ceasing; not giving ever their bad
courses till God severely scourged them.

Now it is said that God prophanes the rulers of his Church, The sense of this
word, To profane, Psalm. 89.
when he despises and reiects them as things of naught: and so it is taken in
Psalm. 89. and in many other places. For even as when we are set apart, and
sanctified by him, we dwell under the wings of his safeguard and protection, as
long as we retain and keep that sanctity pure and undefiled: so as soon as
we cast the same off, he prophanes us, because we cease to be holy; God p
ophanes us, because we ce^se to be holy.
and so we make our selves also unworthy of his defense. And thus he lays
them open for a pray to the enemies, which before he called his anointed, and
could not endure that any should touch them. But is it not strange that the
Priests, which represented the person of Christ, should be said to be polluted?
The reason is, because they erred out of the right way themselves, who should
have been lights to others.

The Hebrew word Cherem, which I have translated execration, is as much to say,
as cutting off: but it also signifies execration; and therefore I have judged
it to suit best with this place, Isaiah follows Moses style.
because reproach follows. The Prophet borrowes all these words from Moses,
whom he follows so near, that we may well discern the style of the one, in
the writings of the other. The Prophets therefore forged nothing of their own
heads: for thus says Moses; Thou shall be an astonishment, a proverb, and a
scorn to all nations, whether the Lord thy God shall lead thee: Deuteronomy.
28.20.37. Thus then he threatens to afflict this people in such wise, that
they should be a reproach unto all; for whosoever he were that gave himself to
cursing, this people should be a fit subject for such a one to exercise his
execrations upon, so as he might make them the foot of his cursing song.
Every one should have such a fling at them, that their name should fly abroad
as a common proverb from one to another, in every ones mouth that were
disposed to scorn. As for example, The name of a Jew justly execrable at this
day, howsoever it be honorable in it self.
the name of a Jew at this day (howsoever it be honorable in it self) yet
how odious and hateful is it? The Lord then pronounces by Isaiah these
horrible threatenings, to teach them that they could not be too severely
punished for their heinous offenses; and that when God should begin to visit
them, they should have no cause to complain of over hard measure, neither
should they think that the Prophet was too sharp in his reprehensions.

THE XLIIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Yet now hear O Iakob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen.
The cohere^ce of this verse, with the latter part of the former Chapter.
ISaiah having a little before taxed the wickedness of the Jews; and also
having pronounced that they were all worthy to perish eternally, in regard
that as well small as great, had defiled themselves in all things. He now
somewhat sweetens the sharpness of the chastisements, and begins to comfort
them. I expound the particle Vau here, Yet: as in many other places. Even as if
he had said; Albeit you are environed with many miseries, yet hear now what I
will do for your sakes. For this verse ought to be knit to the argument before
going, God will never suffer us to perish, though he lets us feel a little
smart for a time.
because the Lord shows he will never suffer the people utterly to perish,
though he be content they should feel much smart for a time.

Hence let us gather, that Gods wrath is never so far inflamed against his
Church, consolation, serving to mitigate the former severity.

Merits still excluded.
But lest we should imagine me^ deserved this by their good services, he adds,
whom I have chosen: for God calls us not to be his servants for any dignity
or merit he sees in us, but because he has made us meet (to be partakers with
the Saints in light) by his free election. Coloss. 1.12.
In this place then the two words, servant and chosen, have the same
signification: yet so, that election goes before. Election goes before vocation.
And therefore David says, that he was Gods servant before he was borne;
because he was received into his household from his mothers womb: Psalm. 116.16.

Verse. 2. Thus says the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb;
he will help thee: Fear not O Iakob my servant, Or, my beloved whom, etc.
and thou righteous whom I have chosen.
ALbeit he dealt roundly with the Jews in the latter end of the former
Chapter, Chap. 43.25.
to strippe them of all false confidence, and to humble them that he might
drive them to seek pardon: yet now he sweetly allaies that tartnes, with a
speech full of exceeding comfort, to assure them that they should lose nothing
by renouncing themselves. Therefore we must here supply some oppositions thus;
Some oppositions supplied.
True it is, O Jakob, that in thy self thou art nothing: but thy God that
formed thee will not despise the work of his own hands. There is no
worthiness at all in thee that can procure thy redemption from ruin and
destruction; but mine adoption, for the which I have vouchsafed as a merciful
father to receive thee, shall be more then sufficient to save thee.

But we must note what I have often told you before; to wit, See Chap. 43.21.
that the Prophet speaks not here of the first creation, as we be borne
naturally the sons of Adam, but of regeneration, which is only proper and
peculiar unto the elect, by which it comes to pass that they have place in the
Church of God. And to the end men should attribute nothing to themselves, as if
they had moved God hereunto, he adds, which formed thee from the womb: by
which words, he sets befote them that covenant which was at the first made with
their fathers, in the right whereof, God had set them apart also to be his
people, even before they were borne: which some refer unto the person of Iakob,
because by taking his brother by the heel, he gave an excellent testimony of
his election: but this is constreined. I rather therefore refer it further;
to wit, That the Lord showed himself liberal and bountiful unto his people
from the beginning: and thus he takes away from them all boasting of merits,
because he formed them at the first of his free grace, and has still from time
to time freely added new benefits to the former.

He will help thee.] Others supply the relative Ci, as if he had said, Thy
helper: notwithstanding, it seems best to read it apart, and the sense had
bin clearer if we had read it in the first person, I will help thee: but the
difference is not great. The sum of the whole comes to this; If God have
regenerated us he will surely help us.
that he which is the Creator of the people, will be ready to succor them when
the appointed time is come. In which regard it is free for every one to rest in
the exposition he thinks best: yet I had rather follow the plain and the less
constrained sense, without supplying any thing.

The word Ioshurun is diversely expounded, for some would derive it of Iaschar,
which signifies, To be upright, or, To please: others derive it otherwise: but
I agree rather with those who translate Beloved, deriuing it from the verb
above mentioned. Moses also has given this title to the Israelites in his
song, Deuteronomy. 32.15: for howsoever some translate the Hebrew word there upright,
as in this place, yet the old translation agrees best, which reads it, My
beloved is waxed fat. Now our Prophet adornes his people with this name, to the
end that by the remembrance of benefits past, they might conceive good hope for
the time to come.

A general and perpetual rule.
For the faithful are to hold this as a general and perpetual rule, that by
mercies formerlie received they ought to expect no less favors for hereafter,
otherwise we should savor too much of ingratitude; and should show our selves
not to rest at all in the promises: which if they were soundly and deeply
imprinted in our hearts, would work a settled peace and tranquillity of
spirit: not to make us idle, but to chase away al inordinate fears and
distrust.

For which cause he once again repeates, Fear not o Iaakob: whereunto also
belongs that consolation of Christ, Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for my
Father takes pleasure in you, and will give you the Kingdom. And questionless
among so many dangers which threaten us with death on every side, there is no
remedy more sovereign to appease our fears then this sentence, A sovereign
remedy to appease our fears.
namely, that God vouchsafes so far forth to favor us, that we shall be
everlastingly saved by him. By the word Beloved then he gives them the better
to understand, that their salvation depends upon the grace and good will of
God, who reserues and attributes wholly to himself all that which is found
praise-worthie in his people.

Verse. 3. For I will power water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing on thy buds.
HE continues on the same argument, In the form verse he promised them help:
here he describes the means.
and therewithal shows wherein this promised help shall stand. We must still
keep in mind therefore that these prophesies are to be referred to those
woeful and doleful times whereof mention has bin made before: to wit, when
all things were confused, the people forsaken, and all the promises of God
seeming as if they had been of none effect: the Prophet therefore meets with
these doubts, and compares the people to a dry and thirsty ground which has
no moisture left in it: which similitude David uses Psalm. 141.6. to set forth
his misery. Now howsoever they were overwhelmed with sorrows and had lost all
vigor, yet lest their hearts should faint within them in these extremities,
they were to set these and the like sweet sentences before them.

And we also are to have our recourse to such promises as often as dangers beset
us on every side, The use for us.
so as we can see nothing but present death ready to swallow us up quick: and
by this means shall we remain more then conquerors. But it is required that
we be such as have a sense and feeling of our thirst and poverty, that so our
fainting and parched souls may cheerefullie receive refreshing from these
floods.

By the word spirit, he tells us what is signified by waters and floods. The
spirit is also called water in Ezech. 36.25. but in a diverse sense. For when
Ezechiel attributes the name of waters to the holy Spirit, he calls them pure
waters: having respect to the purgations under the Law. Isaiah will
afterward likewise call the holy Spirit water, but in another respect: to
wit, in that it gives strength and vigor to fainting souls, by his secret and
inward power. But here the Prophets words have a further extent: for he not
only speaks of the spirit of regeneration, but there is an allusion to that
general virtue which it sheds into all the creatures, whereof the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 104.30. When thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created:
This word Spirit here not only signifies the spirit of regeneration, but that
general virtue which it sheds into all the creatures.
and thou renuest the face of the earth. Now as David there in the first place
shows that all the parts of the world are revived by that secret power which
God breathes into them: so afterward he attributes unto the Lord a sufficient
ability, forthwith (as soon as it pleases him) to renew the whole frame of
heaven and earth, that it should not fall to ruin. In the same sense does our
Prophet call water, the sudden restoration of the Church: as if he should
say, the restoring thereof is in the hand of God, as well as it rests in him by
dewes or showers to fructify barren and parched grounds. Thus the Spirit is
compared unto water, because without it all things would fade and wither with
drouth: he it is also that reuiues the world by a secret sprinkling of it with
his power, and redresseth the barrennes that proceeds of heat and drouth,
whereby the earth recouers a new face as it were: which is yet further
amplified by the word blessing, added in the end of the verse.

Verse. 4. And they shall grow as among the grass, and as the willowes by the
rivers of waters.
This verse is an amplification of the former.
THere is nothing contained in this verse, but that which I have alleged out
of the hundredth and fourth Psalm; to wit, that when God sends forth his
Spirit, then the whole face of the earth is renewed, and the things which were
before parched up with heat, shall begin to wax green and flourishing; even
as the herbs sprout, after they have been watered by the dewes from heaven. He
amplifies his speech by these similitudes, and shows more plainly, that it
shall be no less difficult for God to repeople his Church a new, which was
barren and deformed, in regard of the woeful estate in which she was, then to
give the earth power to bud, and bring forth g^asse and herbs. Moreover,
albeit he speaks not properly here of regeneration: yet may we refer this
sentence unto it, because he handles the doctrine of the Churches
restoration, Regeneration a principal part of the Churches restoration.
whereof regeneration is a principal part: for God thereby repaires his image
in his elect and chosen people. We might insist longer upon this matter, and
lay it out more fully, but we must first labor to attain the Prophets
meaning, and show the plain and native sense of his words.

Verse. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords: another shall be called by the name
of Iakob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and name
himself by the name of Israel.
Hitherto the Prophet has spoken under borrowed speeches, now he sets forth
the thing plainly.
HItherunto the Prophet has spoken by similitudes; but now he delivers his mind
plainly and without any figures, showing what these buds and herbs be,
whereof he has spoken; to wit, that the Lord will gather his people out of
all nations, and will bring them into his Church, which were far off before:
also that he would restore and augment the same, which in a manner seemed to
be brought to nothing: for all should run unto it out of all quarters of the
world, and should crave that they might be enrolled among the faithful:
according to that which is said in Psalm. 87. Behold, Philistia, Tire, and
Ethiopia; there was ^e borne. Which place of the Psalm, howsoever it has
seemed to be obscured by the ignorance of the expositors, yet it serves to give
light to this prophecy. For we know the number of those which returned from
the captivity were very few: the faithful therefore had cause to be
astonished, and to blush for shame: much more cause had they to be hindered
from comprehending the glorious and wonderful work of their redemption, which
was so highly extolled by the Prophets. The author of this Psalm therefore
labors to prevent this astonishment, and gives them to understand that the
Babylonians and Egyptians shall also become members of the Church: that the
Ethiopians, Tyrians, and all such as were strangers, should come and be
incorporated into the number of Gods chosen. As if he should say, Jerusalem is
now desolate indeed, yet will God not only gather together his banished, but
will also call from every part of the world, and make them one body, which now
are sundered, in such sort, that they shall rejoice that God has made them
Citizens with the Saints, and shall no less appertain to the body of the
elect, then if they had issued forth of the same.

Now for as much as we are wont to take their names, who are to be enrolled in
books, the Prophet having respect unto this custom, uses these phrases of
speech: One shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and shall name
himself by the name of Israel: another shall protest I am the Lords, and shall
call himself by the name of Jacob. By which words the Prophet signifies that
this shall be a new and extraordinary work, when he which before was a
mere stranger from God, should now rejoice that he was adopted of him. Shall
be called signifies here as much as we usually say, To be called by another
name: as in the fourth Chapter, where it is spoken of the women which desired
husbands, only to take away their rebuke and shame, We will eat our own
bread, and will wear our own garments: only let us be called by thy name.

Now howsoever Isaiah seems to make distinction here between such as in
express terms profess themselves to be Gods people; and those which desired
to be called by the name of Iaakob, yet the two members are to be referred
both to the one and to the other: for to be Gods child, and to be of Israel,
are things conioined with an inseparable band. Why so? Because God will be
Father to none, but such as have the Church for their mother. God wills that all
his children should acknowledge the Church for their mother.
And yet we also note, that there are no true Citizens of the Church, but such
as subject themselves under the Lords dominion.

If the Prophet had omitted this word Lord, and had only mentioned Iakob and
Israel, yet we must have risen from thence to the fountain of Iakob, of whom
all things in heaven and in earth are named. But to take away all ambiguitie,
he repeates this order twice; to wit, that those only are to be accounted the
children of Iakob, which submit themselves to God.

By this we may easily see the Prophets drift: The Prophets drift.
for he shows that the church no sooner feels the want of Gods blessing, verse.
3. but by little and little she falls to ruin, and withers away: on the
contrary, when the Spirit is shed abroad upon her, she by and by recouers new
strength and force; not only in regard of obtaining her first beauty and
glory, but contrary to all hope, she attaines wonderful increases. We are
also to note that the Prophet speaks not here of the order of nature, as if
the new children of the Church were borne so; for no man gets such a dignity
by his own industry: but when those which were strangers before, shall be
regenerated; then the Prophet says, they shall come and give in their names, to
testify, that they are indeed the children of God. A change far surmounting
all humane reason.
We see here therefore a description of a change which far surmounts nature,
and all reason of flesh and blood: to wit, when out of the cursed race of Adam,
there issues a spiritual Israel.

Some think that Isaiah notes here how small the number of the faithful
shall be, when it is said, one shall say: and another shall be called; and the
third shall subscribe: but this conjecture wants ground, and the very scope of
the text easily confutes their error. As I think therefore, we have rather to
gather, that the Church shall come in by troops out of diverse nations far
remote one from the other: in regard that God will bring home strangers under
his dominion, and so touch their hearts, that they shall glory not in words
only, but in truth, that they are of the number of his people. Hence also we
may observe, that true faith cannot be in the heart, but it will forthwith
break out into a voluntary and frank confession, True faith in the heart
will manifest it self by a voluntary confession. Psalm. 116.10. 2. Cor. 4.13.
Romans 10.10. Act. 4.20.
which may be gathered from these four distinct members: one shall say, I am
the Lords: another shall be called by the name of Iakob: the third shall
subscribe with his hand: and the fourth shall call himself by the name of
Israel. For the very truth is, that Gods servants ought not to be mute or
silent, but both by words and deeds to testify what is in their hearts, seeing
they profess: to obey him, and rejoice in his name the whole course of their
life.

Verse. 6. Thus says the Lord the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of
hosts; I am the first, and I am the last, and without me there is no God.
THe Prophet enters not in to any new discourse, but only confirms the former
doctrine, A confirmation of the former doctrine. The reason of it.
which it was needful for him to do: for men's minds are wonderfully inclined
to distrust, and they are quickly out of heart in the time of adversity;
neither can they be raised up by one or two exhortations. He spends no wast
labor then in confirming this doctrine with so many words, because we never
attribute so much to Gods power as we should. We are often distracted with
pensive cares, and are overmuch glued to the things of this life. The Prophet
therefore having fixed this unutterable name of Jehovah in the forefront, By
these two titles of King and Redeemer, the Lord sets forth his power and love.
he also calls him King, and Redeemer, because it is not enough to apprehend
his power, unless we be also assured of his fatherly love which he bears us.
That the promises of God then might have their authority with us, he not only
mentions his glory, but his goodness also, to assure us that it appertains
unto us. But it might seem rediculous that he calls himself King, seeing the
people were in a manner brought to nothing, yet were the faithful
notwithstanding to cleave fast to this promise, so as by faith they were even
in this servitude to apprehend a kingdom to come, though for the present they
saw not so much as any glimps of it. The faithful by the eyes of faith behold
glory in their lowest abasement.
And the very truth is, the former doctrine would never have entered into the
minds of men oppressed under so extreme a bondage (yea almost overwhelmed with
despair) had not this preface prepared a way and passage for it. But when God
familiarly inuites us unto him, showing that he indeed is ours, faith being
allured by so sweet a summons breaks forth though it were even out of hell it
self.

In saying I am the first, The use of this clause. I am the Lord.
he means not to magnify the eternity of God, but to set forth his
unchangeableness, that so the Jews might believe him to be such a one for the
time to come, as they had found him in times past. But what necessity was
there of this,

Verse. 7. And who is like me that shall call, and shall declare it, and set it
in order before me since I appointed the ancient people? and what is at hand,
and what things are to come? let them show unto them.
NOw the Lord compares himself with Idols, as we have seen before, Another
confirmation of the former doctrine.
Chap. 40.18.19. His purpose is to deliver the Jews from being discouraged or
offended when the victorious Babylonians should proudly triumph over them: for,
the reproaches wherewith the wicked loded them, were exceeding intolerable and
fearful, as, Wicked blasphemies.
Where is your God? Why does he not help you now? Such blasphemies were
sufficient to have shaken the hearts of the faithful in sunder, and so far
to dismay them, as to drive them into utter despair. The Prophet therefore
insists very carefully upon this point, that he might ever be confirming of
them against such assaults.

This lamentable desolation into which the people were then fallen, was as a
thick cloud which shadowed from them the sight of Gods loving countenance: and
the wicked on the other side reioiced, as if their gods had now obtained the
pre-eminence. But the Prophet intending to scatter the darkness of such mists
and clouds of errors, shows, that Gods glory shines as it were in certain
and infallible marks of his divinity, which discernes him from Idols. Why so?
Because the Lord foretold all things that should come to pass, to the end his
people might acknowledge him a just Judge in his chastisements inflicted upon
them, and yet might also above hope be assured, that he would be favorable and
merciful unto them.

To call, is taken here two ways: either it is to be referred to Gods
foreknowledge, or to the execution thereof: for as all things are governed by
his providence, so does he also know what is to come, and gives plain proofs
of his prescience. But we need not stand long in discussing the signification
of this word, seeing it plainly appears, that the Prophet attributes unto God
both prescience, and the administration of al things. Yet I rather judge, that
he refers it to the act: as if he should say; Shall there be found any among
the gods of the Gentiles, that can call: that is, can publish, ordain, and
raise up deliuerers? May you not easily discern by this, that there is none
other God but me? And thus he derides the Idols, to whom men attributed such
power causlesly.

By the verb to show, which is presently added, he sets forth the special
goodness of God, who vouchsafed to reveal his secrets to the elect and chosen
people, by the ministry of the Prophets. By the ancient people, some
understand the Gentiles, saying, that the singular number is put for the
plural; because the Lord no sooner furnished the nations with people, but he
separated them one from another, and established an order which should endure
for ever. Others extend it unto the creatures, so as the stars should be one
people; and the herbs, beasts, and such like, should be another. But when I
consider all circumstances, I am constrained to follow another exposition; to
wit, that the Lord speaks of his people, and calls them ancient, because he
preferred them before all others: and yet it is certain that there were some
long before them. The Egyptians, Arcadians, Egyptians, Arcadians.
and others, brag of their antiquity. As touching Abraham, Abraham. Genesis 11.31.
he came out of Mesopotamia, whilst the Caldeans flourished: and lived
solitarily in his house, as if the memory of his name should have been buried
in oblivion, when the neighbor Countries were replenished with people, and
with all sorts of benefits. Neither must we judge of the antiquity of Israel
by the length of years, or in respect of any thing external, but by Gods
election: We must fetch our antiquity from Gods election.
for which cause indeed, the foundations of Jerusalem are called everlasting.
It is as much then as if he had said; Before there were any men to forge or
frame Idols, I determined in my secret counsel to have a Church, which should
endure for ever. This people therefore is the most ancient and excellent of all
others, though others be before them both in years and in dignity. For as all
things were created for man, so all men were made to serve the Church: All men
made to serve the Church.
yea, there is not any nation whatsoever, be it never so high or mighty, which
is not much inferior. For the Church is the body of Christ, which far
surpasses both in age and excellency. The Church Christ's body, therefore
she is the most ancient and excellent of all.
We will not stand to recount fables, Fables.
as the Jews do, who affirm Jerusalem to be built from the beginning: for
the Prophet respects not beginnings of time here. And yet we must hold this
principle, A principle.
that the elect people are more honorable and ancient, then the strange
nations; because they approach nearer unto God, who is the fountain of
eternity.

Let them show.] This permission given, shows that men shall but lose their
time in looking for any answer from Idols, touching the foretelling of things
to come: Idols used equiuocatio^s.
and if they should, yet their answers would prove nothing but impostures and
words, having always a double signification, wherewith they were sure to be
seduced that went to ask counsel of them, as we have said heretofore.

Verse. 8. Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have I not told thee of old, and
have declared it? You are even my witnesses, whether there be a God beside me,
or a Or, strong.
God that I know not.
ISaiah shows now wherefore he spoke of the power of God; to wit, that he
might confirm the peoples faith: for this is the conclusion which he gathers
out of the former arguments: A conclusion out of the former arguments.
Seeing the Lord is so powerful, and gouernes all things after the counsel of
his own will, therefore the people whom he has taken into his protection, have
no cause to fear. In the next place he repeates that which was said before;
to wit, that God had not only succored the Jews in hugger mugger, in showing
himself at unawares, when none waited for his help; but had also vpheld their
faith by many prophecies, and gave them sufficient testimonies of his fatherly
favor: so as his divinity was manifested to the utmost. For what should it
profit us to know that God both foresees and is able to do all things, The
knowledge of Gods prescience and power should little avail us, if he manifested
not the same for our good.
if he did not therewithal manifest the same unto us concerning our salvation?
Albeit then it is his pleasure that many things should be unknown to us, yet
he communicates so much of his counsels, as is expedient and fit for us to
understand.

The word Meaz, signifies a long time: or, (if any had rather take it
otherwise) it notes out an opportunity or fitness of time: for the Lord
reueales his secrets unto his elect, when he sees the time to be convenient.
But the first interpretation seems to me the least constrained.

Wherefore you are my vvitnesses.] His meaning is, as I have touched before,
that the people could not pretend ignorance, if they contented not themselves
with one God, seeing he has so fully manifested himself unto them, that they
might be the best vvitnesses of his divine power. What is the end of our
knowledge then concerning Gods glory? Even openly to witness the truth of
God before men, as has been said before: unless we had rather be counted
smotherers of that light which he has manifested unto us by his holy Spirit.
Moreover, we can be no lawful vvitnesses of Gods truth, if he confirm us not
by his truth: for what validity is there in his testimony, who doubts of the
truth which he is to profess? We must therefore be both taught by Gods word,
if we will have such a faith and hope as accomplisheth salvation.

He attributes here unto God the title of strength, as in many other places;
because it is not enough to know the eternal essence of God, unless we
therewithal ascribe unto him power and strength. Otherwise, we should leave
him only a bare and naked title, as the unbelievers do; who indeed confess
there is a God with their mouths, and afterward attribute his power to this
and that creature.

Verse. 9. All they that make an Image are vanity, and their Or, desirable.
delectable things shall not profit them: and they are their own witnesses
that they see not nor know: therefore they shall be confounded.
THe Lord now on the contrary shows how miserable the Idolaters are which
err and vanish away in their inventions, being not fast grounded upon his
eternal truth, to wit, they are senseless and void of sound judgment. And as
he has heretofore justly condemned the ingratitude of the people, if by the
testimonies of Gods prescience and providence they were not encouraged to hope
well: so now on the contrary, he arms and fortifies them against the
superstitions of the Gentiles. The faithful armed against the superstitions of
the Gentiles.
But in regard the unbelievers were many in number, and flowed in forces and
riches, he denounces that all is vanity; and to be short, that all their
goodly shows would prove deceiptfull helps in the end. By their desirable
Desirable.
things, he not only comprehends their Idols, but also all their service,
vestments, pomp, and ceremonies, which fools are wont to honor them withal.
And he sets out these things by a very fit word: for seeing the chief end of
man's life The chief end of man's life.
consists in advancing the true knowledge and worship of God (wherein stands
the maine difference between us and brute beasts) so must it be preferred
before all things be they never so excellent: to this (I say) we ought to
refer all the thoughts and desires of our hearts. It is not without cause
then that the Scripture uses this word, when it speaks of Gods worship and
service: but it is used here touching a corrupt and furious zeal wherewithal
Idolaters are carried away after their Idols, and their services: for this cause
he says that all their desirable things about which they spend so much time,
are both vain and unprofitable. Oftentimes also this desire is compared to the
filthy lust wherewith men are so bewitched, or wholly blinded, that they can
not see their villainy, nor yet obey common reason, whereof we have largely
spoken in the first Chapter.

In that he adds, themselves are vvitnesses: some expound it that the Idols
bear witness against themselves, and plainly teach what vanity there is in
the^, so as they which perceive it not are wonderfully blinded. But I like not
of this exposition: I had rather follow those therefore which refer this to
the Idolaters, who can give sufficient testimony themselves of their vanity,
and know that indeed their Idols neither hear nor see.

There is an opposition in this place between Gods witnesses verse 8. and the
Idols witnesses in this verse, for the first yield a glorious witness to the
truth of God by the sight of his works, and the understanding of his prophesies
and promises: the others are constrained to stand mute and dumb, unless they
will lie falsely, and bear witness to vain things, having no truth at all in
them. I deny not but Idolaters brag of their services, Idolaters need no
better confutation of their Idollworship then their own blind consciences.
and extol them above the skies: but this blind conscience of theirs does more
then sufficiently witness how great vanity and wavering of mind there is in
that which they do: for they always tremble and are in continual unquietness,
though they carry it out with great stirs by their rebellions. Themselves
then are vvitnesses against their Idols: Simile.
as if one having an ignorant teacher, should plead against his insufficiency.
So the Idolaters shall testify that their gods neither know, nor are able to
do ought; because they are driven to confess that the matter whereof they
consist is nothing but wood and stone, or such like stuff wrought with hands:
and that things thus framed and fashioned can neither see nor feel ought at
all. The faithful therefore only are the lawful and true witnesses, in
affirming that their God both sees, gouernes, and effects all things done in
heaven and in earth. The rest must needs be confounded, albeit they stoutly
maintain their errors ^ow with fire and faggot, for their own consciences bear
them witness that their minds are enthralled with a vain opinion, and corrupt
imaginations.

Verse. 10. Who has made a God, or molten an Image, that is profitable for
nothing?
HE now derides men's madness who presume to be the forgers of gods: Idolaters
scorned.
for is it not an horrible and execrable thing that a mortal creature should
dare to make himself a Creator? truly there is no reasonable man that would
not greatly detest such a fury, and yet the most part are carried away with
such a senseles rage even to make gods; and no admonition whatsoever can
reclaim them. But they will answer me, that they have no such thought, and
that we do them great wrong to accuse them of such folly. And the Papists at
this day tell us that we belie them, Papists forgers of gods.
and offer them injury in using this and the like testimonies of ye Prophets
against them: but they endeavor in vain to justify themselves by such cauils.
For Isaiah very truly affirms that they are so bewitched, that they think
they can make a god: in regard they attribute a divinity to blocks and stocks;
Papists attribute a divinity to the Images which the caruer has made.
as soon as they be once framed and polished, then they forthwith run a
gadding after the^, they vow unto them, they pray and bow their knees before
them: in a word, they attribute that to them which belongs only unto God.

Which is profitable for nothing.] This is to be well observed, for by these
words it is evident that all figures, by which men would represent God, are
condemned for vain and unprofitable. Images made to repre ent God, good for
nothing.
Whence it follows, that God is not only blasphemed, and often times his glory
given to dead stocks, but that those which make and receive them, do also lose
their labor to their own confusion of face. The Papists allege that these be
lay men's books. Im^ges lay men's books.
But this is a weak and childish shift: for the Prophet testifies, that they
are profitable for nothing. I wish them therefore either to confess that their
Images are vain and unprofitable, or if they dare be so bold, to blot this
testimony of our Prophet out of his book. In a place before, Note.
he has expressed somewhat more: for Chap. 41.23. he says they teach nothing
but lies. But we have spoken sufficiently of this matter in the 40. and 41.
Chapters.

Verse. 11. Behold, all that are of the fellowshippe thereof shall be
confounded; for the workmen themselves are men: let them all be gathered
together, and stand up, yet they shall fear, and be confounded together.
A reproof both of Idol makers, and Idol worshippers.
He not only rebukes the workmen and forgers of Idols, but all Idolaters, who
are so blind and senseless, as to enclose the power of God within a truncke of
wood, as soon as it has but received a new form. His meaning is then, that
the arts men should not only be punished for their presumption, but those also
which shall be companions with them in their superstitions. These shall not
escape: for it is good reason that both being guilty of the same crime, See
Psalm. 97.7
they should both receive like judgment. Now they cannot by any means excuse
themselves, in regard they see that their Idols are vain and dumb, forged and
framed with man's hand: how can they be gods then?

Let them all be gathered.] As if he should say; Let Idolaters and their Idols
combine themselves together; yet shall they fear and be confounded, when they
shall stand up before Gods tribunal seat.

But it is not without cause that the Prophet threatens them with fear and
confusion: for Idolaters are wont proudly to advance themselves, and to despise
others. They glory much in their multitude, A multitude.
as the Papists do now adays; who in reproach and disdain, esteem us but a
small handful. They insolently insult over us, and band themselves with
wonderful pride both against God and his word. Isaiah therefore appeals here
to the consciences of such men: for howsoever obstinacy and extreme rebellion
of heart has possessed them, Idolaters forced to quake, will they nil hey,
because they have no firm resting place.
yet are they constrained to tremble and quake when they are alone, crying out,
What shall we do? especially when they look toward the end of all their
actions: for they have no stabilitie whereupon they may boldly rest. When their
rage pricks them forward, then they are audacious enough; but when they come
again to themselves, and at leisure bethink them what they have done, they
melt away for very fear. Their fury, pride, and multitude then, ought not to
terrify nor astonish us. Papists bold for a brunt.
Why so? Because all this will in a moment be brought to naught. Let us not be
much moved therefore at the combinations, brauadoes, and devilish plottings of
the Papists, seeing we know that all these things shall turn to their
overthrow; for the more they ouerflow in insolency, and advance themselves
against God, the more heavy and shameful shall their extreme fall be.

Verse. 12. The smith takes an instrument, and works in the coals, and
fashioneth it with his hammers, and works it with the strength of his arms:
yea, he is an hungered, and his strength fails: he drinks no water, and is
faint.

13. The Carpenter stretches out a line, he fashioneth it with a red thread:
he planteth it, and he pourtraieth it with the compass, and makes it after
the figure of a man, and according to the beauty of a man, that it may remain
in an house.


IT is not in vain that the Prophet makes this large description; The fury of
Idolaters amplified.
for his meaning is to rouse up the drowsy consciences of the superstitious,
out of their senseless blockishnes; if by any means he might either terrify,
or at least hinder the Jews from being made drunk with this poisoned cup: for
they were compassed about on all sides with an infinite number of idolaters. He
disciphers out every thing point by point, that he might give them clearly to
discern of their spiritual frenzy and madness. I grant he might have
condemned this their wickedness even in few words; but this large description
makes it very apparent, when he thus reckons up the Smith, the Carpenter, the
tools, labor, and diligence of these workmen; to bring us (as you would say)
even to the acting of the thing it self. For men who naturally have these
errors engraven in their understandings, are more moved this way, then by a
plain sermon. Neither can they be wakened from their sluggishnesse, but by
continual loud cries. All things therefore must of necessity be minced out
unto them by small morsels; yea they had need have it chewed for them, and put
into their mouths like young children, that so at the last they may comprehend
that doctrine, which otherwise seems new and strange unto them.

Yea, is hungry.] He expresses the zeal wherewith Idolaters are carried away
in forging their gods: for they are so fiery and vehement, that they can keep
no measure at all. Their lusts prick them forward as mad men, to run upon
their own destruction: they will not afford themselves time to eat nor
drink. This fury therefore may well be compared to the raging lusts of
whoremongers, as we have said before. In a word, they spare not their strength,
but employ all the faculties and powers both of soul and body in this
business; which is better understood by The strength of the arm. As if he had
said, They deprive themselves of diet and rest, they apply to the utmost the
strength of their arms: yea, they will scarsly allow themselves the common
comforts of nature. In a word, they spare neither pains nor cost to finish
their gods, which they so much desire: verse. 9.

Now, whereas he says, that though these saint, yet they give not over, but
endure hunger and thirst, rather then to hinder their work, it is to be
understood of the workmen: yet it may also as well extend it self to all the
endeavors of an inconsiderate zeal. For we see how the superstitious will
torment their bodies in their fervent devotions (as they call them.) But the
more they melt and pine away themselves to fall into perdition, the more vile
and abominable is our sloth, when we defraud God of that service which to him
appertains. But in the end he shows with what folly this diligence is
filled, seeing the whole fruit of their labor is to behold their Idols, idly
to rest without fear in whatsoever place they were fastened: as if some lazy
body should wallow in the ashes, or lie all day soaking in his bed.

Verse. 14. He will hew him down cedars, and take the pine tree and the oak,
and takes courage among the trees of the forest: he planteth a fur tree,
and the rain does nourish it.
In this verse the Prophet describes not only their violent fury, but their
wilful obstinacy.
THe Prophet sets forth not only the zeal and witless rage of Idolaters, but
also their obstinacy and rebellion. For in that he says, they cut down
cedars, and did plant a firre-tree; it is to show that they perseuered long in
their folly, and were not overtaken with any sudde^ passion, which drove them
to forge these gods. They are not content only to choose trees of sufficient
growth, but they also plant them young, water, and husband them, and vvait a
long while, till they be come to a sufficient stature to make an Idol of. When
we read these things, and see such an horrible rage, let us know that God
takes us by the neck (as it were) to pull us thence, and to continue us in
true piety. We must take these foxes (I mean these lusts) betimes, and kill
them whilst they be cubs, lest if we nourish them over long in our breasts,
they grow wild and impregnable. We are evermore to watch over our own hearts,
that a wicked lust no sooner creepes in to carry us away to the love of Idols,
but we forthwith root it out, for fear of falling into these deep gulphes;
because even the best of us all bears about with us some seeds of this
brutishnes, which by no means can be weeded out: nay, they will bud and sprout
up in us without ceasing, unless we be purged of them by the power of the holy
Ghost.

Moreover, seeing Idolaters are thus violently carried ^owne the stream in
serving their Idols, ^^ue not we cause to blush for shame, that a^^ so cold in
the service of our God? In that Idolaters are so vehement in their Idol
service, it ought to make us blush, that are so cold in Gods service.
Let us (^ say) blush and be ashamed of our sloth and l^kewarmnesse; nay, key
coldness, whilst ^^ose that worship Idols, are fire hot as it were with
zeal: and let us also bethink us of the count we are to make. With what
ve^emencie are the Turks Turks.
carried away, when the matter concerns the maintenance of their Mahomet
Mahomet.
and his blasphemies? Are they not ready to shed their own blood, and to give
their lives for the defense thereof? The Papists Papists.
are not behind them herein: for they are no less inflamed with fury to
uphold their superstitions. And we in the mean while can content our selves to
sit still; much ado there is to quicken up our zeal: nay, do we not often
even quench those good sparkles which God has kindled in us by his holy
Spirit? Hearke^ what Jeremiah says; Has any Nation changed their gods? But my
people has forsaken me the fountain of living waters, to dig unto themselves
broken pits that can hold no water: Ier. 2.11. This comparison therefore ought
to be well observed, Note.
lest we be found less constant in maintaining the truth, then Idolaters are
obstinate in defending lies.

Verse. 15. A man burns thereof; for he will take thereof, and warm himself:
also he kindles it, and baketh bread, yet he makes a god, and worshippeth
it; he makes it an Idol, and boweth unto it.

16. He burns the half thereof in the fire, and upon the half thereof he
eats flesh: he rosteth the roast, and is satisfied: also he warmeth himself
and says, Aha, I am warm, I have been at the fire.

17. And of the residue thereof he makes a god: he boweth unto it, and
worshippeth, prays unto it, and says; Deliver me, for thou art my god.


He worthily taxes their sottishnes, Experience, which is the Mistress of
fools, cannot make these fools wise in heart.
that manifest experience it self cannot lead them to conclude it for a thing
impossible, that a truncke of vvood should become a god. He also taxes their
unthankfulness, in defrauding God of his honor, seeing his power may easily
be discerned even in the growth of themselves. For when a man puts wood to
diverse uses, the bounty of God forthwith presents it self before his eyes, be
it in vvarming himself by it, or in baking bread in the oven, in rosting, or
heating his meat with it. In a word, as often as we warm us, and enjoy these
benefits by our fires, shall we not be convinced of inexcusable ingratitude,
if we therein consider not of Gods goodness, who has so provided, as to
destitute us of nothing, that is needful for us?

Hereunto appertains these words, Aha, I am vvarme: for this speech expresses
the joy of such as being freed from incommodities and wants, begin to bless
their own good estate. But can there be a more unworthy or unreasonable thing
committed, then for men in such comfortable manner to have the use of Gods
blessings, that their hearts are therewith filled with gladness, and yet never
to be thankful to the author from whom they proceed; nay, to abuse his great
riches to violate his honor? No doubt in the meat that is in their kitchins,
and in other commodities, they see that the wood is their servant and made for
their use, why then should they bow before a trunck of wood, that shall
resemble the shape of a man? Is not God robbed of his right by such a course?
And when they pray to their Images, rob they not the Lord of that sacrifice
which he principally requires? The very profane writers have sometimes
derided the folly of these Idolaters, which durst after their own invention
frame a god of a corruptible substance, whereof they made no reckoning before.
Thence came this flout of the Poet Horace, Horace.
who brings in an Idol speaking thus: I was the flock of a fig tree,
serving to no purpose, vvhilest the Carpenter not knowing whether it were
best to make me a seat to sit upon, chose rather to make me such a god as you
now here see me. But such folk notwithstanding could not see the fountain
from whence this impiety sprang, because they gave not themselves to consider
of that goodness and power of the only true God which shines in all his
creatures.

Now when the Prophets dealt thus bitterly against Idolaters in laying forth
their fury and sottishnes, no doubt but they complained as if he had offered
them great injury: neither wanted they their tricks, but to the utmost
colored over their errors with goodly pretenses: to wit, they confessed that
the gods were in heaven, as may be seen even in their own writings: neither
would they in express terms affirm the stone or wood was a God indeed. And
this shift also the Papists A shift of the Papists.
have found out at this day against us, because they would not be condemned of
so gross a blindness. But we have told you, that the Prophet stands not so much
here to debate about the simple essence of God, who also were no better then an
Idol, if nothing but that were given unto him: but the question prescience,
power, providence, justice, salvation, Nothing iarres more with Gods Majesty
then Images.
and yet those that worship them, endeavor to enclose God in heaven, and to make
him stoup to their lusts. The Prophet is justly displeased then with such
corruptions, and therefore gauls the furious desires of these superstitious
ones, seeing a man can not think of nor utter a thing more detestable.

Verse. 18. They have not known, nor understand: for Or, he.
God has shut their eyes that they can not see, and their hearts that they can
not understand.
HIs conclusion is, The conclusion.
that it were impossible for men endued with common reason to be thus
reasonlesse, if God had not shut up both their eyes and hearts. For had they
but a dram of wit in their heads, they must of necessity be drawn to consider
how absurd a thing it is to worship a fragment of that wood which themselves
had burned, and with their own eyes saw it consumed to ashes before them. But
in as much as they neither know nor understand any thing, nor will be brought
to believe their own senses, They are become brutish that will not believe
their own senses.
a man may well conclude, that they are become beasts: for this ignorance
wherewith Isaiah reprocheth them, is as much as if he had said; They are
beasts in the form of men. And howsoever ever many among them were otherwise
sharp witted enough, yet in this behalf they were more then sufficiently
convinced of their brutish senslesnesse.

The reason added in the latter member of the verse, is not to lessen their
fault, but to show how odious and hateful their sin is: for men would never
become so senseless, unless God in his just judgment had given them up into
a reprobate sense. Some supply God here: others, the false Prophets: blinded,
False doctrines blinds the eyes.
There are others who take it in another sense, and they refer it to Satan. But
because the first exposition is most used in the Scriptures, I rather allow of
that; to wit, that God blinded them justly. Unless any had rather refer it
to the Idolaters themselves, who wittingly are wont to put out the eyes of
their own reason: and in this sense there must be a change of the number; to
wit, they: a thing much frequented among the Hebrews: But I have set down
that which seemed fittest. You may also add, that it is very usual in the
Hebrew tongue, to conceal the name of God, when it mentions him.

Now it appears by many places of Scripture, in what sense God is said to
blind the eyes, and to harden How God is said to blind and harden.
the hearts; to wit, when he takes away the light of his holy Spirit, and gives
men up to their own lusts: so as they can no more be reclaimed by any
persuasion. He also arms Satan with the efficacy of error, by causing him to
lay such snares in the way of those that receive not the truth in love, as they
can never wind themselves out, but must still be subject to his illusions and
bewitchings. What remains then but gross darkness and blockish ignorance,
through which this tyrant, the father of lies and of darkness, gets free
egresse and regresse. For there is not left us so much as one sparkle of light
to scatter these mists of error: but we shall be driven on with the Spirit of
giddiness, wherewith the Lord smites the reprobates, so as we shall be
strangely haled to and fro at Satan's pleasure.

And yet we must not lay the blame of this blinding upon God, The blame of
blinding not to be laid upon God.
for he always finds just cause so to do, though many times it be hid and
concealed from us. Neither is it fit we should curiously pry into this secret,
nor to enter into his hidden counsel, unless we mean withal to bear away
the punishment of our own presumption. I grant the causes for the most part
are most apparent, as men's unthankfulness and rebellion against God: as Saint
Paul describes it at large in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 1.28. for their
blinding is the just fruit of their deserts. Howsoever men excuse themselves
then through ignorance, yet this will be no sufficient plea: for they had never
heen wrapped in such errors, if the Lord had not done it for their wickedness
sake.

Now from the just judgments of the one, we may draw sound and infallible
arguments from the iniquities of the other: for God is just, and therefore
never punishes any man unjustly; he blindes no man till himself has deserved
it, and has wittingly shut his own eyes: let the fault therefore rest wholly
in men, The fault must rest on man.
who of set purpose seek their own blinding and hardening. The Prophets
meaning then doubtless is, that men who ought to suffer themselves to be
governed by divine instincts, being naturally endued with some light of reason,
were worthily rejected of the father of lights, to be the bondslaues of Satan.

Verse. 19. Or, he returns not to his heart.
And none considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor
understanding, to say, I have burnt half of it even in the fire, and have
baked bread also upon the coals thereof: I have roasted flesh and eaten it; and
shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I bow to the stock of a
tree?
THis is a confirmation A confirmation.
of the former sentence, whereby the Prophet labors to prevent all excuses,
because unbelievers delight to maintain and uphold their own ignorance. And
whereas it commonly falls out that men have ripe wits in devising and
foreseeing things for their own advantage in the world, but are as blind as
Moles or Backs, in things belonging to Gods worship and service; the chief
cause is, that they are too eager in pursuing worldly profits and pleasures,
stare too slack in seeking first the kingdom of God. In this sentence
therefore the Prophet reproues this contempt of piety and religion, in that
having fetched such long circuits, yet these unbelievers consider not in
themselves whether they are in the right way or no, or whether they labor not
in vain in spending so much cost and labor in the pursuit of their errors and
superstitions.

He also proves that their sottishness is inexcusable, in that they give
themselves to such new found services. For if they did but weigh all
circumstances a little in an equal balance, they might easily perceive their
own gross folly: but seeing they be blind, it is a sign they mean to
deceive themselves, and to please themselves in their blindness. And therefore
there is no pretext of excuse at all left them, which can stand them in any
stead: ignorance they can pretend none, because they will not apply their wits
to search out the truth. Returning into the heart, is taken here for
consulting apart by a man's self: for there is scarce a child so rude, that may
not be a sufficient Judge to condemn so palpable a madness. The
superstitious therefore favor themselves too much; for they sin not
altogether of ignorance: neither is this vice so much to be attributed to man's
natural corruption, as to his obstinate and heady opinion.

Verse. 20. He feeds of ashes: a seduced heart has deceived him, that he
cannot deliver his soul, and say; Is there not a lie in my right hand?
THis verse again confirms the former sentence. To feed of ashes, Another
confirmation.
signifies as much as to be repleat with ashes: as, to feed upon wind, Hos.
12.1. signifies to be filled with wind; for the same may be said of the one,
that is said of the other. As on the contrary, Thou shall feed the truth;
Psalm. 37.3. for thou shall be saciate with truth: that is to say, filled.
Others again expound, Thou shall administer spiritual food: others, Thou
shall feed faithfully. But I had rather follow the first interpretation. Here
his meaning is to say, that men are swollen indeed, but in the mean while they
are windy and empty: for they are only stuffed with vanity, which has no
steadfastness in it. And therefore they rather burst with pride, then by being
any way satisfied with good nourishment.

Afterward he comprehends both the former points again; to wit, that they see
nothing, because they are entangled with deceitful baits; and yet that they
wittingly and willingly cast themselves into these snares of vanity. The
Prophet insists long upon this matter, to show that nothing pusheth forward
these Idolaters, and the superstitious sort to commit these outrages, but their
own free will. What reason have they then to lay the blame upon others, seeing
the cause of these evils proceeds altogether from themselves? which evils they
will needs retain and carefully nourish within them. They advance themselves
in wonderful pride against God, they are repleat with a false opinion of their
own superstitions: in a word, all unbelievers are ready to burst with pride.
Let us in the mean while feed upon the solid meat of sincerity and truth,
and let us beware we suffer not our selves to be misled by any such delusions.

Notwithstanding he taxes them (justly) you see, for pleasing themselves in so
foul a vice: for who is it that will pardon such a carelessness, as is joined
with the loss of men's souls? Men busy themselves tooth and nail for the
matters of this natural life.
We see how busily men bestir them, when the natural life is in ieopardie:
stands it not us much more in hand then, to awaken men out of the slumber of
their souls, which are in danger of eternal damnation; especially if we may
do it by putting forth our hand in pulling them out?

Moreover, it is said that he delivers his soul, which by repentance escapes
out of Satan's nets. And in that sense we are said to save one another, when we
bring men that have erred into the right way by our holy admonitions. Whence
comes it then that Idolaters run head^ong into perdition? The cause that
plungeth Idolaters i^^o p^rdition.
Because they take the bridle in their teeth, and wilfully rush into the same,
even as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Lastly, in the end of the verse he shortly shows, the mean whereby men may
recover themselves out of this danger; to wit, in considering their own
works, without flattering of themselves: Note.
for he that pleases himself in his error, and inquires not whether he does
well or no, such a one shall never be able to deliver his own soul. As for
example, our Papists will not examine upon what reason their divine service is
grounded, but content themselves to cover such a beastliness under the cloak
of simplicity; as if God meant to have a Church of rude asses, or as if he
had not commanded us to distinguish between that service he accepts, and that
which he reiects: or as if he had not commanded us diligently to search what
his good and acceptable will is, lest we should indifferently allow darkness
for light, and sower for sweet. For these things must be examined by the
touchstone of his written word: To the law and to the testimony. Chap. 8.
which if we shall do, it shall be easy for us to escape out of the dangers;
if not, then let us lay the cause of our ruin upon our selves. Why so? Because
our meaning is to perish wilfully, in regard we will not suffer our selves to
be brought into the right way, or will not bear the words of exhortation.

Verse. 21. Remember these (O Iakob and Israel) for thou art my servant: I have
formed thee: thou art my servant; O Israel forget me not.
Application.
NOw he applies that to the peoples use, which he has so long insisted upon
before, touching the lies and superstitions of the Gentiles; wherein the
ignorant deceived themselves, especially in the matters belonging to Gods
worship and service. Now he writ not this so much for them of his own time,
as for their sakes principally which were to succeed, and should afterward
remain captives in Babylon. In which regard, they by their long abode among
the Idols, were in danger to be corrupted, and declined from the true service
of God, if they had not been restrained by such bridles. The Prophet therefore
admonishes them, that howsoever they should be detained seventy years in
captivity, yet they should call these exhortations unto mind, thereby to
sustain their hearts in their greatest temptations.

Thou art my servant.] He adds this as the reason why they should remember
these promises; even to keep themselves from this common contagion. For it had
been a thing insupportable for the elect people, whom God had enclosed within
the limits of his law, thereby to separate them from others, if they confusedly
and indifferently should have mingled themselves among the pollutions of the
Gentiles. As if he should say; Wonder not you that the Caldeans are so rise in
their errors, neither follow their example: because I have formed thee to serve
me: that is to say, I have reformed and regenerated thee, that thou might
be heir of eternal life. Of this creation we have amply spoken heretofore; to
wit, that it appertains to the renewing of the inward man. Now the Scripture
is often wont to use this argument, to wit, You are called to holiness, and
not to uncleanness: 1. These. 4.7. Also Phil. 2.15. Walk as children of the
light, in the midst of a perverse and froward nation. With many the like places.

Hence we gather that we are worthy of many stripes, if by our carelessness
and negligence, we suffer that light of Gods grace wherewith he has
enlightened us, to go out; because our fault will be much greater then theirs
who have not tasted of the like favor. I grant the profane are worthily
punished; neither shall the excuse of ignorance be able to serve their turns:
but those that have received grace, and have abused it, shall be worthy to be
the more severely chastised.

Forget me not.] His meaning is, that it is impossible for those which were
once entered into the good way, to turn aside; unless it be by forgetting of
God. For as long as the remembrance of his Majesty remains imprinted in the
tables of our hearts, neither errors nor impostures shall ever be able to take
place. Errors will never take place in us, if the remembrance of Gods name be
thorowlie imprinted in us.
Is any revolted from God then to turn to superstition and impiety? Let him
impute it to his own malice.

What is the cause of apostasy then? The forgetfulness of God: for that by
little and little draws us out of the right way, till at the length we be
wholly revolted. But by the remedy here prescribed, he assures them that they
shall be out of danger to revolt, namely, if they exercise themselves in
continual meditation: for if our minds grow once careless herein, they
gather rust (as it were) which infects and corrupts all knowledge of God, till
it be clean eaten out.

Verse. 22. I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a
mist: turn unto me, for I have redeemed thee.
A consalatorie promise.
THe Lord promises deliverance to his people: for the truth is, that our minds
cannot be raised up to remember him as we ought, unless we first feel him
gracious and favorable unto us. That he might preserve his people which he
had formed for himself from reuolting then, he adds now a promise of
consolation; to persuade with them, that this their banishment should not
endure for ever: for God (as he is a most patient and loving Father) so
mitigates their corrections, When God forgiues the sin, he also remits the
punishment.
that he always forgiues the faults of his children.

As touching the putting away of their iniquities, it properly belonged to the
captives, which for their iniquities sake suffered that punishment. Hence it
followed therefore that God being appeased, their deliverance was at hand: for
it is an argument taken from the cause to the effect. An argument taken from
the cause to the effect.
If the fault be remitted, so is the punishment. For the Jews were no sooner
reconciled with God, but the punishment which they suffered for their
transgressions ceased.

Now in these words there is hid a close exhortation to repentance, not only
to to sigh under the burden of their afflictions, just recompenses of their
iniquities, whereby they had provoked God unto wrath. As often then as he handles
us roughly, We should not desire so much the remouall of our punishments, as
the blotting out of our sins. The fond distinction of the Sophisters met
withal again, touching the remitting of the fault, and retaining of the
punishment. Simile.
we must not crave so much to be disburthened of this our sorrow and misery,
as rather to begin at the forgiveness of our sins, that God would not
impute them unto us. And here we have cause given us again to meet with that
fond distinction of the Papists, who confess that the fault indeed is
forgiven, but not the punishment.

By the similitude of the cloud, he means that the Lord would no longer
continue to pursue them in his wrath, nor to correct them in his displeasure;
because their sins being put out of his sight, the punishment was
therewithal also abolished. For you see that in a fair day, the clouds which
before darkened the light of the Sun from us, are vanished and gone. Let us
therefore reject these devilish inventions of men, whereby they labor to
overthrow this comfortable doctrine of the free remission of sins, seeing it
flatly crosses the doctrine of the holy Prophets.

This clause which is added, return to me, return. As if the Lord should
have said; I know you think me to be far from you in this your distress, yet
be of good cheer, for I am mindful of you still. Now this latter exposition
pleases me best, because as I think it suits best with the text. For the
Prophet above all things studies how to confirm these poor captives in the
promises: yea, and if it were possible, to ingraue them in their hearts. Well,
he commands the Jews to turn unto the Lord, howsoever their long exile
hindered them from hoping that he would be their redeemer. As if he should have
said; Though I seem to be far from you, and to neglect you, yet be not
discouraged, for I am resolved to redeem you.

Verse. 23. Rejoice ye heavens, for the Lord has done it: shout ye lower
parts of the earth: brast forth into praises, ye mountains; O forest and
every tree therein, for the Lord has redeemed Iakob, and will be glorified in
Israel.
He now exhorts the Jews to giving of thanks, An exhortation to thanksgiving.
not only as a testimony of their duty, but also to assure them the more
fully of their deliverance. And thus he brings the people as it were to the
thing done, no less then if they had seen their deliverance before their
eyes. For such manner of speeches do affect us much more then if the promises
were delivered in naked and bare terms. Seeing then the people might stand in
some doubt of their return, because they languished long in their miseries,
and were almost consumed in them: the Prophet awakens them, and not only
frames them a song fit for the paying of their vows, but also shows that this
work of God shall be so glorious, that the very heavens and the earth, with
all the insensible creatures shall admire the greatness and nouelty of it.

Ye mountains sound forth praises.] We may well interpret, ye high heavens,
and thou earth below, sing praises: but because he makes mention of the
mountains, he calls those the lower parts of the earth which are even, as the
plains and valleys, to the end that all Countries on which side soever, might
be incited to celebrate and magnify the name of the Lord.

He adds afterward, that this work which all the creatures are called to
behold and admire, is the redemption of his Church: (for that is comprehended
under Iakob and Israel) and signifies that Gods glory shall wonderfully shine
therein. Besides, we are to consider that which I have said elsewhere; to wit,
that their return is not simply set out here, but the end thereof also is
comprehended under it: for they were redeemed out of their captivity, upon
condition that God in the end might gather under one head (to wit, Christ) a
Church composed of all nations under heaven.

Verse. 24. Thus says the Lord thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the
womb; I am the Lord that made all things, that spread out the heavens alone,
and stretched out the earth by my self.
A description of Gods power.
NOw the Prophet will forthwith according to his custom, fall into a
description of Gods power; because the promises would little move us, unless
the doctrine of Gods power were also added, to remove all doubts and scruples
out of our hearts. For it often falls out that by our obstinacy and distrust,
we diminish both the goodness and power of God, in attributing less unto the
same then we ought: for which respect the Prophet heartens on the faithful by
the excellent titles afterward mentioned, to the end they might hope above
hope. And yet he begins with the commendation of the goodness and fatherly
affection which God bears his Church to the very end: for the setting forth of
Gods force and power would move us but little, if himself should not
therewithal draw near to confirm us in the assurance of his goodness. We
must not begin at his Majesty then, nor mount so high, for fear of being
overwhelmed: but this love of his, by which he graciously draws us unto him,
must be embraced of us also.

The title of redeemer in this place, is referred to the time past, in regard
that the Jews, who were once redeemed out of Egypt (as out of a bottomless
gulf, and that by a miracle almost incredible) ought from the remembrance
thereof to be confirmed, in hope of the everlasting continuance of it from age
to age. He calls himself their former, in the same sense which we have often
expounded it before; Regeneration.
to wit, because in regenerating those by his Spirit whom he adopts, he makes
them new creatures. And thus by the way he puts them in mind of the benefits
they had already received; that from thence they might conclude, that God would
be sure in his promises concerning their deliverance for the time to come.

From the womb.] He adds this also, to teach them to acknowledge that all
the benefits they had received from God, were undeserved: for he had prevented
them by his mercy, even before they were able to open their mouths to ask any
benefits of him. And by this consideration David cheereth up his spirits in his
extreme distresses: It is thou O Lord, says he, that have drawn me out of my
mothers womb: thou gave me hope whilst I sucked my mothers breasts. I was
cast upon thee even from the womb: thou art my God from my mothers belly:
Psalm. 22.9, 10. But our Prophet speaks not here of that general favor which
is common to all men as soon as they are come into the world; but he magnifies
that covenant whereby God had adopted the posterity of Abraham, even to a
thousand generations: for doubtless he which has begun so good a work, would
finish the same unto the end.

In the next place follows the titles concerning his power; to wit, that it is
he which of his own good pleasure did spread out both the heavens and the
earth. By the word spreading out, his meaning is, that the absolute government
of the whole world is in his hands, and that all creatures are subject unto
him: for Gods word and power ought so to be joined together, that they must
never be separated.

Verse. 25. Idestroy the tokens of the soothsaiers, and make them that
conjecture fools, and turn the wise men backward, and make their knowledge
foolishness.
THe Prophet expressly adds this, because Babylon not only surpassed all other
nations in riches, men, and munitions: but also in a wonderful measure of
vvisdome, and that in such wise, as they seemed to pierce even the very skies.
For what inconvenience could befall them which foresaw things to come a far
off, and could prevent imminent dangers, as they imagined? Astrologers, which
then were in great request among them, foretold of great matters, and thence
came that bastard Astrology which we forsooth call Judicial, Bastard
Astrology, which is called judicial.
wherewith many good and toward wits at this day are corrupted. They vsurp the
name also of Mathematicians, Mathematicians.
that they may get them the more credit among the common people. But the
Egyptians gloried as the only authors of this science, because they held
themselves to be of greatest antiquity, and were the instructers of others.
But this contention we leave to them. Sure it is, that the Chaldeans were
practitioners of it from the beginning, and so highly esteemed of it, that both
Greeks and Latins have given the name of Chaldeans to the Astrologians. For as
much then as they trusted very much in this science, the Lord avouches that he
will scatter all things belonging thereunto.

Now by the word tokens, or signs, he understands the situation, concurrence,
and diverse aspects of the stars, from whence the Astrologers draw their
conjectures. In the next place he says he will make them fools. Some take the
word Baddim, for lies: as if he should say, The diuinations of Astrologers are
but impostures, and mere illusions: but I had rather take it for soothsayers,
it being often elsewhere taken in this signification.

But it may be demanded whether he utterly condemns the Astrology of the
Chaldeans,

I answer, siges whereby the Chaldeans coniectured, as if they could judge of
things to come: Whether Astrology be utterly condemned or no.
for the Lord pronounces that all such things are merely vain. It is not
without cause then that he forbids his people to ask counsel of Astrologers,
Southsayers, Prognosticators, and such like Magicians, and that no man should
have to deal with men of such professions under pain of death, Deuteronomy.
18.10.11. But if any could have gathered certain conjectures from the
situation and aspect of the stars, no doubt the Lord would never have
condemned such sciences. Seeing then without exception he forbids them, it
clearly shows they contain nothing but mere illusions, and therefore that
all his people should esteem the^ as abominations. whereof they be signs.
For we condemn not that Astrology which contemplates the course of the
stars, The course of the stars.
wherein Gods wonderful Majesty is to be seen: but we reject as vain such
curious heads as will thence conclude how long kingdoms and commonwealths
shall stand; What is to be condemned in Astrology.
what accident shall befall this City, or nation: that man, or such a woman,
for herein they pass their bounds, and abuse these signs, which were never
ordained to foretell things to come. Planets never ordained to tell things to
come.
I confess indeed that sometimes we are admonished by these celestial signs
to behold Gods wrath, which we have justly enflamed, and also the plagues
which hang over our heads, but not to make us so foole-hardie as thence to
conclude of every particular accident, much less to search out things hidden
and unrevealed, which it is not lawful for us once to enquire after. But above
all things we are to find out the cause and spring of this mystery of
iniquity which is in it: Wherein the mystery of this iniquiue consists.
for a man no sooner receives this error, to wit, that man's life is governed by
the stars, but Gods providence is by and by overthrown, and he turned out of
his judgment seat: or thus, that they may take from him the authority of
punishing the wicked any more, or, in his mercy to give life to those that
were lost. For such as think that the stars govern and rule men's lives by
their irreuocable mouings, do forthwith harden their own hearts with this
imagination of fatal destiny, Fatal destiny.
and so they leave nothing

He calls them wise, and attributes knowledge unto them by way of granting
them so much, for such kind of men are wont to glory much in the titles of
wise men, Wise men.
and in making show what knowledge they have in the stars, as if God had
called them to be of his privy Counsel. Thus then in a word he concludes,
that none of these vain maskes of vvisdome, nor knowledge, shall be able to
hinder the Lord from ouerturning of their estate, because he will bring all
their iuggling tricks to nothing.

Verse. 26. He Or, raises up.
confirms the word of his servant, and performs the counsel of his
messengers, saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be inhabited: and to the cities of
Judah, ye shall be built up, and I will repair the decayed places thereof.
NOw the Prophet applies that which he said before to his purpose: for albeit
he has spoken generally, yet he respected a certain end, that so he might
fit his speech to the purpose in hand, lest the Jews should be troubled with
this fained vvisdome of the Chaldeans, and so be brought to doubt whether God
would at any time deliver them or no. He opposes their vain predictions then
to Gods promises, Gods promises, opposed to vain predictions.
that no man should think this Monarchy was utterly exempt from danger. Now
the promise was this, Babylon shall fall, Chap. 21.9. But my people shall be
set at liberty.

The Chaldeans derided these promises, as if they should thus have said, Must
we needs fall? A sort of wise men no doubt: as if we could not foresee that by
the stars if any such thing should happen. The Lord therefore says, that he
will raise up, that is to say, will accomplish that which he has promised, and
will bring such things to pass, as the wise men neither yet had, nor were able
to conjecture. For the scorners esteemed no better of these prophesies then of
an unprofitable sound which should forthwith vanish. Against such an opinion
he opposes the word to raise, thereby showing that God would cause his word to
be believed.

The name servant, may be understood of all the Prophets, unless we had rather
say, that Isaiah is chiefly here specified, as the most apparent witness and
messenger of this deliverance. But there is no need why we should restrain
this to one in particular, seeing it is a thing common to them all, being all
called by one and the same name of Ambassadors or messengers of God: for he had
sent many unto them, that by a mutual consent they might the better uphold the
faith of the people.

Under the word counsel, he comprehends Gods decrees, but not all: for it is
unlawful to sound the depth of those secrets which he has not revealed to his
servants: but when he discouers that which he has purposed to do, we ought
to receive the same with as great reverence as if God himself had opened his
most secret counsels from heaven. See Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Let men beware then how they give scope to their appetites, to enquire further
of things then God has revealed by the mouth of his Prophets. To be short, his
meaning is to commend the authority of his word which is uttered by the
ministry of men, Wha^ authority God gives to his Ministers.
and that no less then if they revealed to us the eternal counsels of God.

Which says to Jerusalem.] After the Prophet has spoken generally, he fits
his speech in as particular a sort as he can to the present purpose touching
Gods promises, for otherwise the people could have reaped little fruit by them.
He names Jerusalem therefore expreslie, to give them to understand that it
should be restored. In this therefore we are especially to observe Gods power,
in that he is able as often as need is, miraculously to defend, yea and raise up
his Church even from the gates of death. Do we believe that he is true and
almighty? The Church shall always continue.
Then may we be assured that there shall always be a Church: and when
sorrowful times approach toward us, let us hope that he will speedily
redress all disorders; for that which is here said to Jerusalem, appertains
to the whole Church. If we be enforced at this day then to see her lie in the
dust, and her towers cast to the ground, so as nothing but pitiful desolations
every where appear; let us build upon this promise, that God in his time will
build and repair the decayed places thereof, and bring her to her perfect hue.

Verse. 27. He says to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy floods.
SOme think the Prophet describes Babylon here under a figure; neither do I
deny but it may be here comprehended: yet I cannot allow that it should be
only restrained to her. For I had rather take it for some unexpected mutation;
because he shows there will be a necessity of such a rare change, as if the
people were to be drawn out of the bottom of the sea: but he resolves them,
that God will be omnisufficient to overcome all lets and impediments. As I
think therefore, Isaiah rather alludes to that first deliverance, at what time
God brought the people out of Egypt through the midst of the sea: as if he
should say; I have done this for your fathers, hope for the like at my hands
now, and think not that the ways through which you are to pass homeward,
Experience should breed hope in us.
shall be stopped up against you.

Verse. 28. He says to Cyrus, Thou art my shepherd: and he shall perform all
my desire: saying also to Jerusalem; Thou shall be built; and to the Temple,
Thy foundations shall surely be laid.
The certainty of the prophecies.
THis is an excellent place. In which we may consider, not only the admirable
providence of God, but also a worthy testimony of the truth and authority of
his promises: for Cyrus Cyrus.
was named here a long time before he was borne. How may that be proved? There
was between the death of Manasses, who put Isaiah to death, and the birth of
Cyrus, more then an hundred years. But say he had now been borne, who could
have foretold that he should have come to Babylon, 2. Pet. 1.21.
from the furthest mountains in Persia? These things are worthy our
observation then; for they show that Isaiah spoke not by the will of man: for
who would ever have thought that one called Cyrus, should come with marvelous
swiftness from the remotest and most barbarous parts of the world, to deliver
Gods people? Whereas scoffers object, Cyrus himself was much amazed, when he
understood that God had appointed him to be the shepherd and leader of his
people Israel: yea, it is very likely also that it greatly inflamed his heart
with such a love toward the Jews, that it framed him with readiness of mind
to furnish the Jews with victuals and other necessaries for their journey.
Thus the Lord points him out with his finger, by whose hand he determined to
redeem his people; that so they might not gaze here and there for help in
their perplexities.

And says to Jerusalem.] This is the conclusion which confirms the former
things; and all to assure them that Jerusalem should undoubtedly be built
again. As also, that hereby they might conceive in what dear and precious
account God had them, when they should see the Monarchy of the East given up to
the Persians. And therewithal he shows for what cause Jerusalem shall be
restored: even that Gods pure worship and service might be there again
erected. For he promises not this restoration to the end men should seek
their own ease or preferment, but that the Lord may be called upon of his
servants, in peace, in purity, and in sincerity of heart: which it stands us
in hand to observe diligently, because many prefer their temporary pleasures
and profits, before the honor and worship of God. In regard whereof, Haggai
takes up a bitter complaint against those of his time; Is it time for your
selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house to lie waste? Again,
You suffer this house to lie waste, and ye run every man unto his own
house: Haggai 1.4.9. and yet it was the Lords pleasure they should chiefly have
regarded his house. To this appertains that which the Prophet adds, And to
the Temple; Thy foundations shall be laid. Indeed we at this day have no Temple
of wood and stone which we are commanded to build, What Temples God would have
built him now.
but the living Temples of the holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 6. to wit, our selves,
because he has chosen us for his habitation. These are the Temples which we
must build up by the wholesome doctrine of Gods word, that we may be framed to
an holy and an upright conversation, and to render him the service due unto
him. For this is the very cause why God will have a Church in the world; Why
God will have a Church still in the world.
namely, lest the memory of his blessed name should be clean abolished from
among us.

THE XLV. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose right hand I have
holden to subdue nations before him: therefore will I weaken the loins of
Kings, Or, vngird.
and open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut.
When God is determined to redeem his Church, no impediments can hinder the
effecting of it.
ISaiah continues forth the matter which he began to hand in the latter end
of the former Chapter. For he shows that God has not promised deliverance to
his people in vain; because he had before ordained and decreed the means how
to bring it to pass, according to his own purpose. When there is question
made touching our deliverance out of any danger, we forthwith inquire by what
means it may be effected; and also the reason of it. Now albeit God had rather
hold us in suspense, and so to conceal from us the means he has already in
his hand: notwithstanding in this place he applies himself to the weakness of
their minds, and is contented to name the party under whose conduct he
purposes to bring them home into their Country. For in regard their faith was
to be sharply assailed by diverse temptations of other kinds; he was willing
here to prevent this particular doubt, that so other troubles which befell
them, might not utterly crush them. To give the more efficacy then unto his
word, he turns him to Cyrus, saying; I have chosen thee to be my King. I will
take thee by the hand, and will subdue nations before thee; so as they shall
make passage for thee, and shall willingly yield themselves vassals unto thee.
For this turning of his speech to Cyrus, was much more effectual, then if the
Lord had spoken only to his people.

anointed, seeing this title only appertained to the Kings of Judah and
Israel, in regard that they represented Christ's person. For to speak properly
there is but one anointed of the Lord: according to which Habacuk says; Thou
wentest forth with thine anointed, for the salvation of thy people: Hab. 3.13.
For the kingdom was set up in the person of David, which was the image of
Christ; who for this cause among the Prophets, is called David, and the son of
David, in many places: Ezech. 37.24. Hose. 3.5. I grant that the anointing
which distinguished this priestlie kingdom from other profane gouernements
was the special: seeing then that this title appertains only to the Kings of
Judea, it might seem strange that it should here be attributed to an
idolatrous Pagan. For though Cyrus was instructed by Daniel, yet we read not
that he changed his religion: he reverenced indeed the God of Israel, Why
Cyrus is called Gods anointed.
and held him the sovereign God above all creatures; but he was never drawn
by this means to serve him in any sincerity, neither was he ever brought to
forsake his idolatries and superstitions. God honors him thus far then,
anointed; not with a perpetual style, but during the time he held the office
of a deliverer, and in respect he sustained the person of God, both to revenge
the cause of the Church, and to redeem the same out of the Assyrians hands:
which office indeed, properly appertained to Jesus Christ. This ordinary title
then given unto Kings, must be restrained to this circumstance, to wit, as he
was the redeemer of Gods chosen in setting them at liberty. Whence we may see
how greatly God esteems the salvation of his Church, when in regard of one
particular benefit, Cyrus an idolater is called his anointed.

I have holden thy right hand] By this phrase of speech he signifies that Cyrus
shall prosper in all his enterprises; because he shall fight under God as his
General. Isaiah affirms then that Cyrus shall have good success for the
Churches sake, that he may be fit to deliver her. And in this he again
magnifies Gods providence, who in the midst of such troubles, assured the Jews
that he would so dispose of things from heaven, that all should work together
for the salvation of his elect. Now in respect that Cyrus could not well go
into Babylon, because al Asia bent their force to disappoint him of his
purpose; the Prophet in these words shows, that God will overthrow all
contrary power, that shall set it self against him. And because man's chief
strength consists in his loins, or reins, the Hebrews take the vveakning of
the loins, for the dissoluing or weakening of the strength. We may also
expound it a little otherwise, to wit, that the Lord will spoil or vngird
them; according to the common phrase of the Scripture: for Kings at their
coronation, are girt wit a girdle, it being a part of their royal furniture:
Job 12.18. In which sense God says in the fifth verse following, that he would
gird Cyrus. I therefore rest my self rather in this latter exposition, that so
the opposition may suit the better. Hence it appears the^ that Kings have no
more power then the Lord gives them, Kings have no more power then God gives
them.
neither can they use it in the defense either of themselves, or their people,
but by his commission. For if he be pleased to dispoile them of their
principalities, they cannot defend the same against him, neither by force, nor
by any means else whatsoever.

And I will open the doors before him.] By this phrase, the Prophet means,
that fortresses cannot resist God, which (in general terms) all will
confess: but yet they cease not for all that to trust in their towers of
defense. For when Cities are environed with thick walls, The strongest
Fort^fications too weak, when the strong God minds to redeem his chosen.
and that the gates are fast shut, every one thinks himself in safety:
contrariwise the Prophet shows, that all fortifications are unprofitable, and
that the stopping up of passages are but in vain when the Lord will open the
way to their enemies. Now howsoever it is not to be doubted but the gates were
shut and surely barred: yet because Cyrus marched with an incredible swiftnes
through all places where he came, as if all Cities had given him way, the
Prophet rightly affirms, that all impediments shall be removed.

Verse. 2. I will go before thee and make the crooked straight: I will break
the brazen doors, and burst the iron bars.

3. And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and the things hid in secret
places, that thou may know that I am the Lord which call thee by name, and
name thee, though thou have not known me.


THese two verses depend upon the former: These two verses depe^ds on the
former.
but in a word they show, that Cyrus shall easily overcome, and that in short
time, because the Lord shall prepare the way for him; for this cause he
promises that the crooked way shall be made straight, in respect that God will
take away all obstacles. Now because money is the sinew of war, Money the
sinew of war.
and that Cyrus was to pass over the poor and barren mountains of Persia,
Isaiah tells him, that the treasures which before were hid, should fall into his
hands, that being enriched with ye spoil, he might furnish himself with all
necessaries, for by treasures of darkness, he means treasures hidden and buried
deeply in the earth. Now it appears plainly by the histories how these things
came to pass: for after Cresus king of Lydia Cressus king of Lydia.
was taken, who was the richest king in the world, Cyrus recovered great
treasures. A man would never have supposed then that he could have made such a
general Conquest, had not the cause of so good success been here expressed:
to wit, that the Lord called him forth, and guided him in his journey, that in
him he might manifest a notable sign of his power: for so much, that thou
may know, imports.

Cyrus no true convert.
I grant that Cyrus knew (as we have said) that God was ye God of Israel, and
did greatly reverence him: yet he became no true Convert for all that, neither
did he embrace the true worship according to the ordinances of Gods law. This
therefore was a particular knowledge, to wit, so far forth as he assisted the
Church, for whose deliverance he was ordained. It was needful then that he
should be in some measure touched with this knowledge, Cyrus was not endued
with a saving knowledge.
in regard of this work of God which he had to perform. He speaks not of
that knowledge then by which we are enlightened, or of the spirit of
regeneration, but of a particular knowledge, such as the profane and
unbelievers have.

Which call thee by thy name.] Some barely expound this phrase of speech, that
Cyrus was thus called of God before he was borne. But we have said heretofore,
Chap. 43.1. that by these words ye Prophet meant another thing, namely, that
God calls those by name whom he chooses and ordeineth to execute some special
work, in which respect he separates them from the common multitude, for this
signifies a nearer and a more familiar calling. And in this sense it is said,
that the good shepherd calls his sheep by name, John 10.3. because he knows
them distinctlie. But above all, this agrees to the faithful, whom God
accounts his flock, and of his family, which grace he never vouchsafed to
Cyrus. But in as much as he appointed him to be a special Leader in such a
special service, he stamped him as it were with rare and singular notes of his
power. And thus much touching the cause why this title of Calling is given unto
him.

These words, The God of Israel, must be well observed, because the
superstitious are wont to attribute their victories to their Idols. And in that
sense Abacuk says, That every one sacrificed to his god, Aba. 1.16. They run
riot then in their talk, and forge such a divinity as it pleases them to
conceive of, in stead of acknowledging the only and true God. Now all that
which is here said of Cyrus, may be applied unto us in a far better sense,
to wit, that we frame not to our selves such a knowledge of God as fits our
own appetites, but that we separate him so from Idols, that he may only be
rereceiued and acknowledged of us in one Jesus Christ, out of whom we can
worship naught but an Idol, nay the very Devil himself. Out of Christ we can
worship nothing but an Idol, nay, the Devil himself.
In this respect then let our knowledge surpass that which Cyrus had, to wit,
let us reject all superstitions and idolatries, that we may serve him in
holiness and righteousness (all the days of our life.)

Verse. 4. For Iaakob my servants sake and Israel mine elect, I will even call
thee by thy name, though thou know not me.
HE shows the reason why Cyrus shall prosper thus happily in all his
enterprises, even for the conservation of Gods people. As if the Lord should
have said, Thou shall obtain a glorious victory, but it shall be more in
respect of mine elect, then of thee: for, for their sakes it is that I have
subdued kings and nations under thine obedience. By these prophesies then the
Prophet meant to comfort the Jews, lest they should despair in the mids of
so many calamities: and yet no doubt he also meant to teach Cyrus that he was
beholding to the Jews for all his conquests, that by means hereof he might be
inclined to use them with the better respect.

In the second part of the verse there is a repetition which amplifies the
reason very much: and on the other side the Prophet shows by what right the
Israelites came to be Gods servants, even because it pleased him freely to
elect them. For it is not in the power of man to make himself the servant of
God, It is not in the power of man to make himself Gods servant.
or to obtain such an honor by his own free will. This word elect therefore
is added as an exposition of the former member, and yet the end of our election
is therewithal set down. For God finding us the very bondslaues of Satan by
nature, The end of election.
calls us by his free grace, that we being set at liberty, should become his
servants: notwithstanding he shows, that no man is worthy in himself of this
favor, but he which is elect. For who dares brag that he has merited so great
a benefit? Or what can we do, or offer unto God? We are not sufficient of our
selves, but the Lord makes us sufficient, as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 3.5. His
free election therefore is free, and is the very foundation of our salvation:
Gods free election the foundation of our salvation.
and the service is but the end, which we of duty owe unto him.

Now, howsoever this be restrained to the history of Cyrus, yet thence we may
gather a general doctrine. For when God causes such diversities of changes in
the world, he thereby procures the salvation of his Church, and wonderfully
conserues it, even in the midst of these tempests. We (for the most part) are
as blind as beetles in viewing the works of God: but yet we must hold it for a
sure principle, that he never forgets his Church, A sure principle: God never
forgets his Church.
no not then when a man would think heaven and earth would go together: nay
then by secret means he brings forth her light as the noone day, that all in
conclusion may indeed confess that himself is the protector and defender of
the same.

Lib. 11. Chap. 8. Josephus. Alexander the Great. Iaddus the hie Priest.
Josephus recites a memorable history of Alexander the Great, who having
besieged Tire, sent Ambassadors to Jerusalem to ask the tribute which the
Jews paid to Darius. Jaddus the high Priest who had sworn to pay this
tribute, would in no wise obey Alexander, but refused to pay it him: this
tyrant scorning such a refusal, and in a manner being ready to burst with
pride, determined the destruction of Jerusalem; and indeed having overcome
Darius, he fits himself for the execution of his deliberation. The hie Priest
Iaddus comes forth clothed with the Priestly robes, and with other Priests met
Alexander. Alexander no sooner beheld them, but he alights from his horse, and
fell down at the hie Priests feet in sign of reverence. As all stood amazed
at this, as at a thing extraordinary, and clean contrary to his purpose,
thinking he had bin besides himself; Alexander answered Parmenion, Parmenion.
(who only amongst the rest asked him what he meant) that he worshipped not
this man, but God, whose office Iaddus sustained. As also, that whilst he
remained at Dion a City of Macedonia, Dion, a City in Macedonia.
he had seen in a dream a man so apparelled, which presented himself unto
him in the person of God, willing him to take Asia: also, promising to be the
conductor of his army, that he might not doubt of the victory, and for this
cause he said he could not content himself with sufficient admirations in
beholding this hie Priest. Thus Jerusalem was delivered, the mouth of the Lion
stopped, who thought of nothing but gorging himself with the pray; nay, she
gat greater liberty of him then she inioyed before, besides great gifts and
large privileges. Why this history is alleged.


Now I have alleged this history to show that the Church of God is preserved
in the mids of all dangers by strange and unexpected means, for the times
were then very troublesome, and no one corner in the world almost remained in
quiet. But above all, Iudeah seemed to be appointed unto robberies and
spoilings; and yet behold the Church delivered as it were by a miracle, whilst
other countries were wasted, and the form of them utterly changed.

That which is added in the end of the verse, though thou have not known me,
serves for the greater amplification, not only to teach Cyrus that these his
endowments were no parts of his merits, but that he should not despise the God
of Israel, albeit he knew him not. The Lord often aduertiseth us that he
preuents men's industries, that he might utterly cast down all high conceits
of flesh and blood. But he had another end in preventing of Cyrus, for if he
had thought that God had given these victories unto him for his own sake, then
would he like enough have scorned the Jews, yea and would have used them but
as his vassals and slaves. The Prophet shows therefore that Cyrus his deserts
were no cause of this, but that he delivered the people out of their enemies
hands, because God favored them: for this poor blind Infidel would have bin
ready to have transported that over unto his Idols, which was due to the
living God; because being besotted in his superstitions, he would never have
given obedience to that God willingly who was a stranger and unknown unto
him, unless he had first of all bin instructed by this prophecy.

Verse. 5. I am the Lord and there is none other: there is no God besides me: I
Or, apparelled.
girded thee though thou have not known me.
HE confirms the former sentence: A confirmation of the former sentence.
for it is no superfluous repetition. Truly it was necessary that Cyrus should
be often urged with this point, that there was but one God, under whose power
all potentates and nations are tributaries, that being rid by this means from
all impostures, he might be wholly turned to the God of Israel. Moreover, the
Prophet more expreslie shows, that no divinity is to be sought out of him: No
divinity to be sought out of God.
as if he should say, Look that thou attributest not this victory to thine
Idols, neither conceive thou any confused god in thine own brain, as
foolishmen are wont to do: but be thou advertised that it is the God of Israel
only that is the author of this conquest. It is like enough that Cyrus made no
great use of this sermon, neither that he forsook his Idols to cleave to this
true God; yet no doubt he had many flashings in his mind, which made him after
a sort to acknowledge a Godhead, and that this God had the whole world at his
beck. But howsoever Cyrus neglected this doctrine, yet the members of the
Church ought to embrace it, that they may boldly reject all false gods.

I have apparelled, or girded thee. This apparrelling answers to the nakedness
whereof he spoke before, saying; The loins of Kings shall be ungirt: for he is
said to apparel such as he furnishes with strength to the battle:

He repeates again, though thou have not known me, to confirm this point
the better; to wit, that Cyrus obtained nothing of God, Jacobs sake: verse. 4.
first, that he might thankfully acknowledge so great a benefit:

Verse. 6. That they may know from the rising of the Sun, and from the West,
that there is none besides me. I am the Lord, and there is none other.
God would have the memory of his mercies retained in his Church.
THe Prophets meaning is, that this work should be so excellent, that all
nations should extol and magnify Gods name therein; yet was it not forthwith
accomplished. For albeit the fame of this victory was spread far and near, yet
few perceived that the God of Israel was the author of it. But after it was
manifested to those that dwelt near, it was divulged also to others, till at
last the news thereof came to the whole world. Neither does he foretell
what should by and by fall out; but that which was afterward to be
accomplished, notwithstanding these things were a long time concealed. The Lord
then would not suffer the remembrance of such a deliverance to vanish, but
would have the same to be called to mind by continual admonitions, to the end
the nations furthest remote, might celebrate the memory of this deliverance
from generation to generation, even to the worlds end.

We ought likewise to observe that which I have touched before, to wit, that
the Prophet ioines the first prophecies with the last, because the return of
the people was as a beginning and forerunner of the general deliverance to
come. And thus he speaks of the true and perfect restoration of the Church.
Add also, that although men by their malice and unthankfulness should bury
these glorious works in oblivion: See the first section after the seventh
verse, for the further exposition of this sixth verse.
yet it follows not thereupon, that the same should not clearly shine in the
view of the whole world; for they cease not to retain their glory still,
though the blind (worldlings) have no eyes to behold them.

Verse. 7. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create
evil: I the Lord do all these things.
AS if he should say; Those who were wont to attribute all things to fortune,
As I think, this whole section belongs to the sixth verse.
or to Idols, shall now know the true God: so as they shall attribute all power
and glory, yea and the administration of all things to him only. He speaks not
of a perfect knowledge; albeit the same be required to attain unto the
understanding of former things. Now seeing the Prophet affirms, that the very
Pagans shall understand, that this whole action is ordered and governed by the
providence of God; it ought to make those that bear the name of Christians to
blush, when they rob him of his power, to give it to diverse sorts of
governors, forged in the shop of their own brains; as they do in the
Papacy. For what an acknowledging of God call you that, to give him only bare
and naked titles? For as he is the true and only God, so must we ascribe unto
him his absolute and full authority, which he has in ordering and disposing
of all things at his pleasure, both in heaven and in earth.

By these words of light and darkness, under a figure he understands as well
peace and war, as prosperity and adversity. Light and darkness taken for
prosperity and adversity. Object. Ans.
Afterward, according to the phrase of the Hebrews, he extends the word
peace, to all good successes; which plainly appears by the opposition: for he
not only opposes peace to war, but to all other mishaps. Some giddy heads
wrest this word evil, as if God were the author of it: but it is evident
enough to him that has eyes to see, how shamefully they abuse our Prophets
testimony. For that which is plainly opposed, expounds the signification of the
word: add if you will, that the members ought to be referred one to another:
for he opposes peace to evil; that is to say, to wars, calamities, and other
adversities. If he had opposed righteousness to evil, they might have had
some pretext: but this opposition of things so directly contrary, is easily
understood. And yet the common distinction is not to be rejected; to wit, that
God is the author of the evil of punishment, but not of the fault. God is not
the author of evil, as some would have him. A common distinction. God the
author of the evil of punishment, not of the fault. A false doctrine of the
Sophisters. 1. King. 11.14 23.
But the Sophisters do expound it amiss: for although they confess that
famine, plague, war, unfruitful seasons, and such like scourges do come of
God, yet they deny him to be the author thereof when they befall us, by reason
of men. Which is a false doctrine, and utterly crosses the Prophets words: for
the Lord often raises up the wicked to correct us by their hand; as it
appears by many testimonies of the Scripture. I grant the Lord inspires not
evil into them, but he uses it as a means to chastise us, and therein
performs the office of a just Judge. Did he not so serve himself of Pharaohs
hardness of heart, Exodus 2.23. and 1.11.
and others, to afflict his people? Let us therefore hold fast this doctrine,
to wit, that God only is the author of all things: God the author of all
things, and how.
that is to say, he sends adversity and prosperity, howsoever he uses men's
industries therein; that so nothing may be attributed to fortune, or to any
other cause whatsoever.

Verse. 8. Ye heavens send down dew from above, and let the clouds drop
down righteousness: let the earth open, and let salvation and justice grow
forth; let it bring them forth together: I the Lord have created him.
The doctrine of this verse was very effectual to confirm the faithful in
the expectation of their deliverance to come.
SOme think this should be a form of prayer, which the faithful were to use
in waiting for that deliverance whereof the Prophet speaks. And thus they
join this verse to the former; The Lord will not deliver you by and by, it
shall be your duties therefore to solicit him by your prayers. But I expound it
otherwise, to wit, that the Prophet speaks still in the name of the Lord, who
in regard of his absolute power, has heaven and earth at his beck; and here
commands them in his name to apply themselves to further the restoration of
the Church. This verse therefore has great force in it to confirm the
faithful in the hope of their redemption to come: for which way soever the
Jews turned their eyes, they saw nothing but matter heaven, earth, they saw
nothing but tokens of his wrath to present themselves about them on every side,
so as they could hope for nothing that was good. Isaiah therefore confirms
their faith, and commands heaven and earth, which promised nothing but threats
and terrors, to bring forth justice and salvation: which kind of speech has
greater weight in it, then if God himself had promised that this should have
come to pass. For the elements, who are ready pressed at Gods commandment, are
in this sense said to receive and understand the charge inioined them of God.
Thus then the sentence runs all with a breath, which would be but abrupt, if
this verse were to be understood of prayer.

Now this phrase of speech is usual in the holy Scripture: as in the Psalms;
The mountains shall bring peace to the people by Justice: Psalm. 72.3. Truth
shall bud out of the earth, and righteousness has looked down from heaven:
Psalm. 85.11. Also, mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace
have kissed each other. In thse places David describes the kingdom of Christ,
and the felicity thereof, showing that righteousness and peace, mercy and
truth, shall reign therein together. And the very same thing the Prophet
touches in this place.

Now he alludes to those means that serve for our ordinary food; for our
natural life is sustained and maintained by bread, and the fruits of the
earth, in regard we stand in need of such helps. But the earth will not be sit
to bring forth these fruits, unless the heavens do refresh the same by often
raining down upon it out of the clouds, that afterward it may become
fertile, and bring forth fit nourishment both for man and beast.

By the word justice Justice.
he means nothing else but the faithfulness of the Lord, whereby he defends
and conserues his Church, in as much as he causes justice to distill from the
heavens; that is to say, a right order of government, the fruit whereof is
salvation. Salvation a fruit of Justice.
For he speaks here of the deliverance of the people out of Babylon; in which
deliverance the Lord showed himself to be the protector of his Church. Now
having attained the natural meaning of the words, we must thence descend to
Christ's kingdom, The Kingdom of Christ.
whereunto these words ought indeed to be referred: for God has not limited
these promises within the compass of a few years; but continued on his
benefits even to the very coming of Christ, in whom all these things were
absolutely fulfilled: no doubt then but the eternal justice and salvation
brought by Christ, is here set before us: but we must first restrain this
exposition, to the return of the people out of captivity.

Verse. 9. Woe be to him that strives with his maker, Or, let the pot contend
against the pots.
the potshard with the potshardes of the earth: shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, What make thou? or thy work, it has none hands?

10. Woe unto him that says to his father; What have thou begotten? or to his
mother; What have thou brought forth?


THis place is diversely expounded: The first exposition of this place.
for some understand it of Balthazar, who (as we see in Daniel) lifted up
himself proudly against God, in profaning the holy vessels of the Temple:
but this is too constrained an exposition. The second ^he second exposition.
may seem more probable; to wit, that the Lord gives and grants more to his
chosen, then a father will do to his children, or a workman to his work: for
those who expound the words thus, think that the Prophet speaks here by way
of comparison in this sense: If a son should rise up against his father, and
contend with him, should he get any audience? No: for a father will keep and
retain his own authority, and in this behalf would justly reject his son.
The like would also fall out, if the clay should rise up against the Potter.
Yet God permits us to contend with him, and offers himself freely to satisfy
any of our demands: and thus they join the tenth and eleventh verse together,
thinking that the patience of God appears, in that he deals thus favorably
with us, and humbles himself more then mortal men are commonly wont to do
toward their children. I grant that this exposition has more color then the
former, but both of them are far wide from the Prophets intention.

The third and most natural exposition.
The simple and plain meaning of the Prophet therefore as I think is this,
that Isaiah here represseth men's complaints, who murmr and plead against God
in the time of adversity. This admonition therefore came in due place, to
teach the Jews willingly to receive the consolation offered, that they might
be fitted to bear the cross patiently and with a settled mind: for as often as
God holds us in suspense, Murmurings a^ising from flesh and blood.
the flesh solicits us to grudge on this manner: Wherefore does he not rather
that which we would have him to do? What means he to vex us thus in deferring
his help so long? Now, that the Lord might beat back such a presumption, he
says, Shall the pot contend with the potter? Shall a son plead with his
father? And shall not I then much more deal with you as it pleases me? What
remains then but to bear his stripes patiently? For it is our duties to let
him freely execute his office, and by no means to withstand his sovereign
power and authority. As touching the word Woe, I take it for a particle of
expressing him that rebukes and corrects.

Let the pot strive with the pots. That is to say, let every one strive with
his equal, as we use to say in our common proverb, Let the pot cleave the pots
of the earth. For in sending men to their like, he taxes their boldness and
presumption, for not considering that in contending with God, P^ouerb.
they sought nothing else but how to plunge themselves into their own ruin. As
if he should say, Do ye know with whom ye have to do? Let them know that
God will ever be stronger then man, and they shall be constrained in the end to
give place. But if they so far forget their own brittlenes, that like Giants
they dare scale the heavens, then shall they prove by experience (it may be
when it is too late) that they meddled with their match, and that they have
contended with their Maker, who can easily dash his vessels in pieces one
against another, yea and beat them to powder, as the potter does the vessels
which he has formed.

Some expound the word Kerasim workmen, or potters, and understand it thus,
Shall the pot rise up against the potter? But they take one letter for another,
to wit, shin for sin, which they might easily do. I had rather therefore
follow the common reading, and content my self with this sense, Shall the clay
say to him that formed it? The Potter as we know has power to make what
vessel he will: the Father has authority to command his children; and shall
God have less power and authority? The Prophet therefore reproues those which
contend with God in adversity, in that they can not bear their afflictions
patiently. Such must learn to give ear to the admonition of S. Peter; Submit
your selves under God, says he; and humble your souls under his hand: Bow
your necks to his yoke, 1. Pet. 5.6. Strive not with him that is stronger then
thy self, if he exercise thee with diverse calamities, for power belongs unto
him to govern us according to his good pleasure. If we stand to dispute with
him, No disputing with God.
he will use such invincible arguments against us, that being convinced, we shall
be enforced to give place. But if it so fall out that he does not by and by
repress our pride, it is not because he is destitute of reason, but because in
equity we should leave unto him the right to dispose of us after his will: an
honor, which he justly reserues to himself, that his creatures presume not in
the pride of their hearts to ask a reason of his doings. Is there any thing
more dishonorable then to reject his judgments, when we list not to approve of
them?

S. Paul uses the same similitude, but it is in a matter of an higher nature,
for he disputes about the point of Gods eternal predestination, and manifests
men's blind conceits, who reason with God why he has chosen some, and rejected
others. Then he shows, that men at the least should give God as much
privilege as to a Potter or workman, and cries out, O man, who art thou that
pleadest with God! Job. 9.4.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the Potter power over the clay? etc. Romans 9.20.21. Who shall dare to
oppose himself against God? S. Paul and Isaiah accords together though with
some difference.
The Apostle then accords with our Prophet, though S. Paul uses the similitude
in a different matter and of greater consequence: and yet both affirm that God
has an absolute power over men, to the end they should suffer themselves to be
ordered and governed by him, patiently bearing all his corrections: the only
difference is, that Isaiah speaks of things which concern this present life;
and Paul, of those that concern life everlasting.

Or thy work it has no hands.] The Prophet observes men's usual forms of
speaking, as when we say, Set to the last hand, Mettre la dernier main.
when a piece of work is upon finishing, and that men's hands wax feeble
whilst the work is rough and unpolished. So, as often as men murmr against God
for not applying himself to their desires, they therein accuse him either of
sloth, or of ignorance.

Verse. 11. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his maker, Ask me
of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the works of mine hands:
command you me.
I Have told you already that I like not of their judgments who knit this
verse so with the former, as if God giving over his right, should give the
Jews free leave to enquire more of him then a child of his father. The other
exposition differs not much from this, to wit, that the Israelites are
miserable in that they understood not Gods will; yea, in that they refused to
know it, and would not seek for comfort, but rejected it when it was offered:
in a word, that their own folly was the cause why their afflictions
ouercharged them, and that they could find no consolation under them; because
they would not enquire at the mouth of the Lord. If we receive this exposition,
we must presuppose that he speaks of an other kind of inquisition. For though
it be a thing unlawful to enter into Gods secrets, yet of his goodness he
vouchsafes to discover to his Children so much thereof as is expedient for them
to know. And, it is also good reason that as often as he opens his sacred mouth;
we should carefully lend our care to all that which he manifests unto us. Now
we may also see the self same fault at this day in our selves; wherewith
Isaiah reprocheth the ancient people the Jews.

But it is more likely this sentence depends upon the former, so as it is an
application of the similitude, in this sense; It is not lawful for the son
to contest with his father, nor the clay to strive with the Potter; how much
less supportable is that liberty, which mortal men take unto themselves,
when they will prescribe rules unto God, how he is to order his children? for
otherwise the sentence should be both doubtful and dismembered. But these two
members suit very well together; the pot suffers his Potter to do what him
lists; and he which is begotten of a mortal man, dares not contend with his
father: shall not I then, who am the Creator and sovereign Father of all, have
as much power over my creatures and children? If any like the first exposition
better, then Isaiah blames men's folly, in that they neglect to ask of God, or
to learn from his mouth, the things that may comfort them: for they might
easily have perceived by the prophecies, The best remedy we can use for our
succor in adversities.
what care God had of them, and thereby might have come to the knowledge of the
end of their miseries.

And questionless the only remedy in adversity is, to go and ask counsel
at the mouth of the Lord, and not to fix our eyes upon the outward estate of
things present; but in our spirits to comprehend the salvation to come, which
the Lord has promised us. For he is faithful (as the Apostle says) and will
not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able to bear, but will give an
happy issue with the temptation, and will augment his graces in us: 1. Cor.
10.13.

As touching that which is by and by added, command you me: it is not to be
taken by way of an imperious authority; for what have we to command God, or
urge him contrary to his will? No, we are to be commanded and urged by him:
for none can profit in Gods word, unless he bring a modest and meek spirit.
In these words the Lord offers himself ready to teach us, to the end we might
be bold to ask of him concerning such things as are expedient for us to know.
As if he should say; Ask of me, I am ready to instruct you in things needful
for your comfort. And yet because this manner of speech should be somewhat
improper, me thinks that the complaint whereof I spoke before, is the fittest,
to wit, that God is stripped as it were of his fatherly authority, if he be
denied liberty to hold his Church under a profitable discipline.

And thus this word Command, is to be taken in evil part, when men having
shaken off all modesty, shall make no bones to summon God before them, and to
question with him of whatsoever comes in their brain, as if he were their
servant. Which yet appears better by the word ask: as if he should say; You
shall do well to teach me how to form and frame my work. In a word, the
Prophets meaning is, to exhort men to modesty and patience: for they no sooner
begin to fall a disputing with God, but it is all one as if they went about to
pull him out of his high and heavenly throne. Now in this, he speaks not only
to the Jews; but as was also needful to repress the blasphemies which then
walked apace through the mouths of profane Idolaters. It is as much to say
the^, as if God in these words meaning to maintain his own right, should
refute the murmurings and repinings of all the world: and that in this manner,
Whither will your pride and presumption stretch at last, seeing you will not
suffer me to be master in mine own workehouse, and to govern my family as I
think good?

Verse. 12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, whose hands have
spread out the heavens, I have even commanded all their army.
IT seems as if the Prophet meant simply to defend and maintain the power of
the true God against the false, This verse contains an argument taken from the
less to the greater.
as he has done before: so as this sentence should contain in it a secret
opposition between the true God, and the Idols whom the superstitious adore.
Fools are wont to inquire at their Idols, as if the world were by them ruled
and governed. But God on the contrary calls us to himself, telling us that it
is he only who has created heaven and earth, and has placed man upon it,
and that he has spread out the heavens, etc. Genesis 1.1.7. and 2.15. But, as I
think, it is better to apply this whole speech to the circumstance of this
place. For can any thing be more preposterous, then to leave men vnimpeached,
whilst they presume to call Gods authority into question, whose majesty
surpasses the very heavens? He covertly taxes then the rage of men, which
dare insolently advance themselves even above the heavens themselves: but
therewithal he aduertiseth them, that if God should be brought to make his
just defense, that he would find sufficient reasons to maintain his own
cause. For if he govern the whole world in general, then must he needs have a
special care of his chosen: neither respects he strangers so far, as to
forget his own household servants, now scattered here and there, and wandering
to and fro. Thus I expound this verse then, Must I, whose infinite and
incomprehensible wisdom and power, shines in the creation and government of
heaven and earth, not only be tied to men's laws, but be abased beneath their
condition? But if any misdoubt of mine equity herein, if I govern and order
all things by my power; shall I not much more be careful of those, whom I have
adopted for my children? shall I not watch for their salvation? And thus it is
an argument taken from the less to the greater: in which sense it agrees very
well with the Scripture.

We know we are adopted of God, upon condition that being received into his
protection, he should keep us by his power, so as none can hurt us without his
leave. If a poor sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his will (as Jesus
Christ says) Mat. 10.29. will he unadvisedly expose us to the rage and
cruelty of our enemies? us (I say) whom he priseth above many sparrowes?
Seeing God then nourishes and vpholds all creatures by his providence, he
cannot forsake his Church, which he prefers above the whole world. To this
providence of God ought we to run then, as often as things are in a desperate
estate; that so we may not sink under the temptations, by which Satan seeks
to assail us on every side.

Verse. 13. I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
ways: he shall build my City, and he shall let go my captives, not for
price nor reward, sath the Lord of hosts.
THe Prophet prosecutes that argument now, which he fell in hand withal in the
beginning of the Chapter: A prosecutio^ of that argument the Prophet began to
handle in the beginning of this Chapter.
for intending to assuage their afflictions, which were very sharp and
tedious, he gives the Jews hope of deliverance, and beckening unto them with
his hand (as it were) wishes them to wait for an assured redemption. As if he
should say; Albeit it seems you be now forlorn, yet the Lord will deliver you
from death. From the very matter it self then, it is easy to collect for what
cause Isaiah intermingled the former reprehension: for had he not broken off
his speech, to fall into this digression, the Jews might have been driven into
despair through impaciencie.

In righteousness, signifies justly anst truly, and is taken relatiuely;
because he renders a reason why God was determined to raise up Cyrus, to wit,
in regard that himself is that faithful guardian of his Church, who never
fails those that serve him Some expound; In righteousness: that is to say,
that he may punish the Chaldeans: others, that the just may reign more
justly. But the Prophet respected none of these things.

Justice is often in the holy Scriptures taken for faithfulness; Gods justice
especially shines in the salvation of his Church.
for Gods righteousness shines especially in defending of his Saints: in which
he shows a singular token of his sovereign and unspotted uprightness: Psalm.
5.9. and 7.18. and 22.32. For though there be not so much as one of Gods
works, in which there is not engraven a mark of his righteousness; yet the
most ample and excellent testimony thereof, appears in the salvation of the
Church. His meaning is then, that he raised up Cyrus to manifest his
righteousness, in that he was ordained the Captain to conduct the people
home out of captivity.

By these words, my City, he means Jerusalem, which he calls his, because
he would have his name there to be praised, and to be particularly consecrated
unto his honor: as himself declares Exodus 20.24. where he says, In all
places where I shall put the remembrance of my name, there will I come unto thee
and bless thee. Now there was none other City appointed for Sacrifices,
vows, Psalm. 46.4, 5. and 132.14.
and prayer but this: which is the reason why it is called the City of God;
The dwelling of the most high; because God is in the midst of it. And in an
other place; This is my rest for ever. But Cyrus built not this City with his
own hand: but only, by his decree forbad, that any should hinder the
reedifying of it. Read Ezra 6. from verse 3. to 15.
Besides, he gave to the people all things needful for their return.

Not for price: that is to say, for nothing. It is no ordinary matter for a
Conqueror to let loose his prisoners: For he either puts them to their
Ransom, or imposes upon them some very hard conditions. But Cyrus did none of
these things: Whence it followed, that such a deliverance happened not by the
will of man, but by the special decree of God. The word Captivity, is here
taken for Captives: because it is a noune Collectiue.

Verse. 14. Thus says the Lord; The labor of Egypt, and the merchandise of
Ethiopia, and of the Sebeans, men of stature shall come unto thee, and they
shall be thine: they shall follow thee, and shall go in chains: they shall
fall down before thee, and make supplication unto thee, saying; Or, only.
Surely God is in thee, and there is none other God besides.
He speaks again of the restoration, A note of true conversion, when we
worship that God which is acknowledged in the Church.
which was afterward effected by the permission of Cyrus: but we must
remember what I have said often before; to wit, that these promises do stretch
themselves further off: for they comprehend under them, all the time which
ran out between the return, until Christ's appearing. And if the readers
do ponder this well, and shall seriously weigh the Prophets form of speaking,
here will be found nothing superfluous nor excessive. Now Isaiah alludes to
that cost and charges which Cyrus was at, in furnishing the Jews with
necessaries to rebuild and adorn the Temple withal. For then was fulfilled
that which he says touching the labor of Egypt, and the merchandise of
Ethiopia, which should come unto the Jews: for these two Countries were
tributaries and subject to the kings of Persia. Of these tributes, the Temple
of Jerusalem was restored: which restoration was but a beginning of that which
was accomplished by Christ. Neither was this service of strange nations to Gods
people ought else, but a forerunner of that obedience which diverse Countries
were afterward to yield to the Church of God, after Christ was manifested to
the world. Moreover, under the name of Egypt, and Ethiopia, and the Sabeans
which now flourished, he also compriseth all other nations: as if he should say,
You are now oppressed under the tyranny of strangers, but the time shall come
that they shall serve you. This promise was not fulfilled the first day it was
made, but then only when Christ came into the world to subdue hautie and
stubborn hearts under his obedience, which were incorrigible before, for
afterward they meekly gave their necks to bear his sweet yoke, and yet the
Lord delivered his people out of Babylon, that he might preserve a Church unto
himself till Christ's coming, under whose dominion all nations were to be
subdued. It is no marvel then if the Prophet speaking of the return of the
Jews, bends his speech toward the mark of the Lords decree, The Text.
so making but one deliverance (as it were) of both.

They shall go in chains and shall fall down before thee.
Where he says, that the Israelites shall get the conquest over all nations, it
depends upon that mutual conjunction which is between the head and the
members: for in regard the only Son of God has so united the faithful unto
himself that they and he make but one, therefore often that which belongs to
him is attributed unto the Church which is his body and his fulness, Ephesians.
1.23. In this sense it is said that the Church gouerns: not to darken the
glory of her head by an ambitious superiority: The Church gouerns not to
darken the glory of her head by an hautie superiority.
or to attribute unto her self a proper empire, as if she had something
separate from her head: but in regard the preaching of the Gospel which is
committed unto her, is the spiritual scepter by which Christ manifests his
power. And in this sort, none can humble himself, nor fall down before
Christ, but he submits himself also to the Church, because the obedience of
faith, and the doctrine of the Church are things united, and yet so, that
Christ notwithstanding which is her head may reign alone; and may exercise his
power without the help of a second.

See 1. Cor. 14.25.
Surely God is in thee.] The Prophet shows what they shall say which by way of
honor shall make supplication to the Church, to wit, they shall confess that
God is in her of a truth. Some translate the word Ak, Only, which I reject not,
but confess that it fitly expresses the Prophets meaning: yet it will not
agree amiss to expound it affirmatively, Surely God is in thee. Now he
shows, how strange Nations shall be subjected to the Jews, to wit, in
acknowledging that there is no other God but him, whom the Jews worship.

If it be objected John 4.22.
In old time the Jews only knew the true God, and none had the true worship
but they: others being given to impostures worshipped their own inventions: in
which respect Christ speaking to the woman of Samaria, said, We know what we
worship, John 4.22. It is rightly said here then, that God is in thee, because
other nations knew not God. But because there is here a close opposition, I
willingly receive the particle Only, so as it serves as a testimony of the
sound conversion of the Gentiles, who contenting themselves with one only God,
shall utterly forsake their Idols.

The sum is, The sum of this verse.
that those who swelled with pride before, and despised the Church with a
scornful eye, should now subject themselves God is in thee, for God is in the
mids of it, because he has chosen his dwelling there, as in Psalm. 46. If we
be Gods people and do submit our selves to that doctrine of salvation which he
sets before us, then may we resolve upon it that he will assist us, because he
never fails those that seek him. This therefore is a perpetual promise, and
ought not to be restrained only to those times.

Verse. 15. Verily thou, o God, hidest thy self: O God, the savior of Israel.
NOw Isaiah breaks forth into an exclamatio^, showing, God will for a time
hide himself, before he manifests his glory for his Church deliverance,
thereby to make trial of her faith and patience.
that they must wait long for the inioying of Gods promises, for the people
were in danger of declining, seeing the wicked had the world at will, and that
all things went cross with them. I know well that many expound this place
otherwise, for the Hebrews for the most part interpret it thus, That the Lord
will hide himself from the Gentiles, but will manifest himself to his people.
The Christian Doctors bring another exposition, but as far from the purpose. I
grant that which they say sauors of wit, when they affirm that Christ is an
hidden God, because his divinity was hidden under the infirmity of his flesh.
But this has no affinity with the Prophets intention, who says, God is hid,
because he seemed as it were to estrange himself for a time, whilst he
suffered his Church to languish under diverse oppressions and calamities, they
were therefore to build up one another by hope, which as Paul says, is not of
things seen, but of things hidden, Romans 8.24. And in this sense Isaiah says
that God was hid, because they saw not the promises by and by performed: thus
he meant to draw their minds from the consideration of things present, and to
ravish them above the heavens.

So also must we do, if we mean to apprehend and embrace his help. We have
need of patience We have need of patience.
then you see, that when the promises are deferred, we may also be able to
hold our desires in suspense. He said erewhile that the heathen should feel
Gods presence, notwithstanding they were then blind and sottish: but because
the time of the manifestation hereof was not yet come, it is not without cause
that this exclamation is intermingled, to wit, that before God will manifest
his glory, he will hide his power for the trial of his servants.

Besides, from the epethite which is by and by added, where God is called the
savior, the Prophet speaks not of the essence, but of the want of his succor:
for he shows, that God hid himself from minding the deliverance of his
Church, in regard he withdrew his hand for a time, as if he had purposed
wholly to forsake the same. We must be content to suffer our salvation to lie
hid for a time, See Col. 3.3.4.
Our God will have our salvation lie hidden then as it were in darkness, to the
end that if we will have any part therein, we may make our accounts to go out
of this world, because this benefit will not by and by appear unto us: we must
therefore wait for this salvation with an invincible constancy, Yet we must
wait for it with an invincible constancy.
for it is expedient, and for our great good, that God by this means should
examine and prove our faith, that so when afflictions do diversely press us, we
yet cease not to rest our selves upon him, and upon his promises.

Verse. 16. All they shall be ashamed and also confounded: they shall go to
confusion together that are the makers of Images.

17. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation: ye
shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.


As God in the former verses took order for the salvation of his Church, so
here he decrees the destruction of his enemies.
THe Prophet here compares the Jews with the Gentiles, to prevent a difficult
and dangerous temptation wherewith they might be shaken, by seeing the Gentiles
to have all things according to their wish. For they might well think in such
streights that either God favored the Gentiles, or, that he neglected his
Church, or, that all things were hudled up together at adventure. The Prophet
therefore aduertiseth them, that howsoever the profane nations flourished for a
time, and seemed to be advanced above the clouds, yet their perdition was
decreed as well as the salvation of Israel. In a word, he admonishes them not
to judge of Gods power by the estate of things present, lest they should fix
their thoughts upon things of no continuance, but that they should rather lift
them up to the eternal salvation, and in the mean while being stricken with
Gods hand, patiently to bear their condition, without grudging at the
prosperity of the wicked, who were shortly to have a shameful fall, Psalm. 37.
This sentence then is knit to the former: for whosoever shall be well
instructed that God hides himself whilst he is a savior, will not much be
moved at the prosperity of the wicked, nor at the misery of the faithful
that are despised, and exercised with sundry afflictions, because the end of
the one is shame, and the end of the other glory.

Thus you see how the Lord proves our faith and patience, and yet, that
nothing of our eternal salvation which is prepared for us shall fall to the
ground: and that such who seemed the only happy men, shall in the end perish.
All the good they now enjoy shall turn to their extreme ruin, because they
abused the gifts of God, and like thieves, vsurp upon that which is none of
theirs, though they seem to be the just possessors of all things. As often then
as these thoughts shall

Verse. 18. For thus says the Lord (that created heaven, God himself that
formed the earth, and made it: he that prepared it, he created it not in vain:
he formed it to be inhabited) I am the Lord, and there is none other.
THis verse serves to confirm that which was said before, An argument taken
again from the less to the greater, as in verse 12.
for the Prophet would have the Jews fully resolved, that the Lord at last
would work their deliverance, albeit they were a long while oppressed under a
miserable servitude; and therefore some by the earth, understand the land of
Iudeah: but I rather take it to be an argument taken from the less to the
greater, as we said before in the 12. verse; to wit, That seeing Gods
providence reaches generally over all his creatures, by so much the more does
it extend it self to those whom he has adopted for his children, in regard he
has a special care over them. Thus stands the Prophets argument The prophets
Argument.
then, Seeing God has created the earth that men should inhabit it, much more
has he made it a place of abode for his Church; which he esteems more then
of all creatures besides: If he has settled the earth upon her foundations, in
giving it a certain form, and in ordeining it to a certain use and end, that
men might be nourished and sustained with the fruits it brings forth; no
doubt but he has given it to his children in the first place, Gods children
have or ought to have the first place in the earth. Our minds must be vpheld by
hope, by which we may manfully resist temptations.
and that in a sovereign degree of honor above others. I grant we see not
this come always thus to pass, and therefore our minds must be framed to be
vpheld by hope, that so we may stand firm and invincible against all sorts of
temptations. In a word, the Church of God shall stand as long as the
foundations of the earth remain, for it shall be established before God, as
the Sun and Moon in the firmament, Psalm. 89.36.37.

In Chap. 54.9. he will use an argument of greater force, to wit, If the
covenant which was made with Noah touching the constant estate of the world, be
firm, Genesis 9.9.
much more shall his promise made to his Church be sure and permanent: for the
world is corruptible and perishable, but the Church, which is Christ's kingdom,
shall remain for ever. The Church remains for ever.
The promises therefore which are made concerning her, must needs be more
firm and stable then any thing besides. Now because the earths principal
ornament stands in her being inhabited, the Prophet adds, that it was not
created to be waste, but for men to converse in.

If any shall object Moses uses the same word Tohu, that the Prophet here
does, which signifies, without form, ordained the earth for men's use and
abode. The Prophet then contradicts not Moses at all, seeing he has respect to
the use and end.

As touching that which follows, to be inhabited: it extends it self to all
mankind in general; to wit, the earth is ordained for all men to dwell upon.
For whence comes it to pass that the Lord nourishes us, prouides all
necessaries for us; yea and sustaines the very wicked? The reason why God
continues sinful man upon the earth.
Is it not that his decree might continue steadfast, because he has appointed
men to have their dwelling in it? Otherwise, it were impossible that he should
endure so many vices and wickednesses to reign, and not utterly to destroy man
from off the same: but he respects his own holy ordinance, and not our
deserts. Here is the reason then why states and kingdoms continue so long in
the midst of Barbarians and Infidels; The Lord will have the earth
inhabited. And howsoever for the sins of men, the Lord oftentimes brings some
Countries into desolation, and sowes it as it were with salt, in regard they
become barren, and are notable to sustain their inhabitants: yet, he ever so
mitigates his stroke, that the earth is inhabited by some, because God will
have his decree to stand inviolable.

But we must remember what I said before, to wit, whilst there is a world to
be inhabited of men, that God will have a remnant reserved, which shall call
upon his name. God will always have a remnant to call upon his name.
From hence then may all the faithful gather great consolation: for albeit the
world contemnes them, and that they be few in number; and on the contrary, that
the wicked surpass them in multitude, riches, power, and authority; yet how
little account soever be made of them, and that they be esteemed no better
then abiects, and the of-scouring of al things, yet are they precious in the
eyes of the Lord, because he acknowledges them for his children; and therefore
will never suffer them to perish.

In that he repeates it again, I am the Lord; it is not only to justify his
eternal essence; but to put a difference between his Majesty and Idols, that
he might still retain the Jews within the bounds of his pure worship and
service. The superstitious sort will confess indeed that there is one God, but
they forge that one God in their own brain: we must therefore know and
acknowledge that God, which manifested himself to the Patriarks and Prophets.
Neither speaks he here of Gods eternal essence only, as many think, but
likewise of all the offices which peculiarly belong unto him, to the end none
may dare to transfer that which is only proper unto him, and not unto
creatures.

Verse. 19. I have not spoken in secret, neither in a place of darkness in the
earth: I said not in vain unto the seed of Iakob, Seek you me. I the Lord
do speak in righteousness, and declare righteous things.
NOw he brings the people to the doctrine of the Law, because God cannot be
comprehended by the sense of flesh and blood. Howsoever then he be hid from
carnal reason, yet he fully manifests himself, and gives a remedy in his
word, which supplies our want, to the end we should seek no further then it:
were it not so, we should be left as men without any hope at all, and should
utterly quail. He therefore protests, that he called us not unto him in
vain, albeit his help be deferred; because that which he has promised, is
most sure.

As he has showed us clearly then whither we ought to flee, and upon what to
rest, so will he let it be seen by the effects, that the hope of such as have
stayed upon his word, shall not be fruitless. Hence we may see how abominable
their speeches are, who affirm that a man can gather no particular assurance
of his salvation An horrible blasphemy to affirm that a man can gather no
particular assurance to himself of his own salvation out of the Scriptures.
from the word of God: they also make it no better then a nose of wax, that
they might discourage Gods people from meddling with it. For these mastiues
bark thus, in regard they see it discouers their errors, and that the whole
foundation of their rotten building, is overthrown by the doctrine contained
in that little volume.

But with David we answer; Thy word, O Lord, is a lantern to my feet, and a
light unto my paths: Psalm. 119.105. With Isaiah and the rest of the holy
Prophets we answer; that the Lord has delivered nothing that is obscure,
doubtful, or deceiving: and with Saint Peter we confess, that the word of
the Prophets is most stable and sure; to which, as he says, we do well in
giving heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne,
and the day star arise in our hearts: 2. Pet. 1.19. And if this were said of
the Law, and of the Prophets, what shall we say of the Gospel, by which this
light is openly revealed unto us? Shall we not affirm with Saint Paul; If the
Gospel be yet hid, it is hid in them that are lost, whom (Satan) the God of
this world has blinded? 2. Cor. 4.3. Let the blind world then accuse it self,
when it cannot endure the brightness of this word: and as for us, let us stand
fast and abide by this heavenly light, which the faithless labor to dim and
darken with their mists and fogs of errors.

Moreover, it seems the Prophet alludes to the Oracles which were given out of
caves and the three footed stool of their Idols; for they were things
uncertain, and full of illusions. But Gods answers are free from such things:
for he speaks not in darkness, Prou. 9.3.
but in the highest places of the City; neither vtters he ought that can
deceive, or be turned two manner of ways.

Simile.
cannot accuse the Sun, in that they are not able to behold it. The fault is
in themselves. And yet this remains sure, that as many as are teachable; and
yield obedience unto Gods ordinances, shall not lose their labor, because the
Lord will show himself a faithful teacher toward the humble and meek. Psalm.
25.9.


The Scriptures easy to them that will understand: Prou. ^ 9.
Howsoever then all attain not to a perfection of knowledge, yet the study of
such as seek unto God unfeignedly, shall never return without fruit. In this
clause also the Prophet shows, that the end and use of the Law, serves to
bring men to God: for it is the only true happiness of man, to be knit again
to his Savior: and the sacred bond of this conjunction, consists in faith and
in true piety.

Now in the second member he not only protests that he spoke distinctly, and
without ambiguitie; but also sets forth the stedfastnes and certainty of his
word: The steadfastness and certainty of Gods word.
as if he should say; I make not these large promises to circumuent or beguile
pooore captives withal, as if I meant to feed you only with fair words; but
I will also surely perform whatsoever I have promised. And thus he conuinceth
their ingratitude, who being called, answered not: for Gods meaning is to make
us partakers of all the good things which he offers us, whereof otherwise we
are utterly destitute.

Where it follows, that God speaks in righteousness, it serves as an
exposition: as if he should say; Gods word never yet found deceitful to any
that rested upon the truth of it.
My word by which I seek to draw the Saints unto me, was never yet tainted
with any untruth, but contains things that are altogether righteous: Psalm.
19.9. The words of the Lord, says David, are pure words, as the silver tried
in a furnace of earth, fined seuenfold: Psalm. 12.6. In Gods word then we have
a clear righteousness shining out unto us; which having scattered all our
darkness, will forthwith inlighten our minds and understandings.

Verse. 20. Assemble your selves and come: draw near together, ye abiects of
the Gentiles: Or, those which carry the wood of their Idol, and which pray unto
a God that cannot save them, have no knowledge.
they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their Idol, and pray to a god
that cannot save them.
HE bids defiance to all Idolaters, and summons them to appear, that they
might have the matter taken up, All Idolaters summoned to appear.
upon some reasonable conditions; as we have seen before in other places. But
the issue will go wrong on their sides, because all their reasons will be
easily overthrown. As if he should say; They now please themselves in their
superstitions, but when their cause comes once to the trial, all pretexts shall
by and by vanish like smoke; so as it will be no masterie to put them all to
silence. Let them assemble then if they will by troops, let them consult,
conspire, and do their utmost by threats, frauds, and terrors, yet must the
truth needs prevail at length against them.

The Jews had great need of this confirmation, in regard they saw idolatries
and superstitions to have the full swinge on every side, and the true service
of God utterly to be extinct.

To this fortress also must we flee at this day, when we consider our
feebleness and weakness. The Turks possess a great part of the world. The
Papists advance themselves with their crests set up on high in every place:
and we in the mean while, which are but an handful, are esteemed no better
then the worms of the earth: but yet in the end, truth which is great, will
prevail, The truth will at length prevail.
and as a conqueresse, will pull down all that state and pomp which now
dazles our eyes.

Some translate the word Pelite, Rejected: others, Fugitive, or, escaped; and
think it is directed to the Jews which were returned home. But this sense is
too far fetched: it rather seems that the Prophet understands thereby, the
rejected of the Gentiles; because the verb Palate, signifies to reject. And yet
the Prophet speaks not here of the common nor worst sort, but directs his
speech to those that were the learned, richest, and of greatest renown among
the Gentiles. For he calls them rejected, in respect that they are nothing in
the sight of the Lord. And yet if any had rather expound the word; a far off;
I hinder him not: for it is as if he had said; Assemble you selves from all
parts of the earth.

In adding, those which carry the vvood: he shows with what fury Idolaters
are carried away, who worship the Idols which themselves carry upon their
shoulders in processions: or, we may (if you will) take this word, To bear, To
lift, or, set up in some high place: for it is the policy of Satan, to erect
and set up Images upon pillars and in high rood lofts, to strike men with an
admiration of them, and to draw them by the only view to proferre them some
sign of reverence and honor. And yet we may take it simply for the whole
service which is performed to the Idols, that he might plainly show how there
was nothing but vanity and folly in all that they did. For the superstitious
sort cannot be ignorant, that their Idols have more need of men's help, then
men have of theirs, Idols have more need of men's help then, they have of
theirs.
that can neither go, nor stand an end, unless men lend them their hands. And
to this appertains that which is added, that they pray unto a God which
cannot save them. For what folly is it to pray and make vows to a senseless
stock or stone, that neither hears nor sees? And yet the unbelievers ride
post (as it were) to dumb and dead Idols for help.

Verse. 21. Tell ye and bring them, and let them take counsel together, who
has declared this from the beginning? or, has told it of old? Have not I, the
Lord? and there is none other God besides me, a just God, a Savior: there is
none besides me.
A comparion between Gods predictions, and those of the Idols.
Again he protests against all such as might trouble the Jews or weaken their
faith by their scornings. For the Prophet aims always at this mark; to wit,
that he may fortify the peoples faith against the assaults of the Gentiles;
because the poor Jews, who were so extremely handled, were in danger of
staggering in the midst of so many great and violent temptations, had they not
had some pregnant arguments set before them to hold them in their faith and
obedience toward the true God. Thus then he permits the profane to bring in
whatsoever they can for the maintenance of their cause.

Where he says, let them consult together: it is added in token of the greater
boldness and confidence: for the Prophets meaning is, that they shall gain
nothing (as we have said before) albeit they conspire never so much together.
It may be also he meant to show how there was naught else but vanity and
deceit, in all that which the Idolaters dream of, touching the excusing of
their errors. Make what pretenses you will then, says he, to color your
inventions, yet shall Gods word be strong enough to sustain the faith of his
servants. He calls them therefore to a right examination of things, that they
may compare all the brags of the Infidels, touching the predictions of their
Idols, with the Law and the prophecies.

I willingly receive that which is affirmed by all; to wit, that the Prophet
speaks of the deliverance of the people. But in regard the overthrow of the
Babylonian Monarchy was joined therewithal, therefore I think one of these
things is compared with the other. And because one sentence is repeated twice,
these two words, Mikkedem, and Mean, are as much in effect as if he had said;
From the beginnig, and from the times past: for this prophecy was published
long time before the things (prophesied) were accomplished: whereby the
faithful might evidently perceive, that it was God which spoke.

To prescience he adds his power, as we have often said: and yet withal he
shows to what end God is powerful; even to save his people.

Verse. 22. Look unto me, and ye shall be saved: all the ends of the earth
shall be saved; for I am God, and there is none other.
HItherunto he has spoken only to the Jews, Now the Prophet turns his
speech from the Jews to the Gentiles.
as if salvation appertained to none but them. Now he extends his speech
further off: for he calls a great audience to him, even the whole world, to
partake of the hope of salvation: and therewithal condemns all nations of
unthankfulness, if in giving themselves still to be seduced with er^ors, they
obstinately shunned the clear light which was offered. For can a man commit a
greater sin, then directly to reject his own salvation?

God commands all then to look unto him: to which Commandment he adds a
Promise: for this has greater weight in it, and confirms the matter much
more, then if he had set it down simply by way of a command. We have in this
text therefore an excellent testimony touching the vocation of the Gentiles:
wherein we see how the Lord indifferently calls all sorts of men unto him,
the partition wall being broken down, which separated between the Jews and
the Gentiles. Ephesians. 2.14.


Moreover, we are here taught the true means how to obtain salvation; even
to look unto God, and to turn unto him with our whole heart. But we must
look unto him with the eye of faith, that we may embrace the salvation
promised to all, in Jesus Christ. For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but
have everlasting life: John 3.16.

Now when he exhorts all the ends of the earth, All have erred.
he shows that all men have hitherunto erred out of the right way, and have
had no respect unto the true God: for where infidelity reigns, there God
cannot be discerned from Idols. In a word, he shows that the condemnation of
the whole world, arises from doting upon their own inventions, whereby they
forsake the living God: for from the knowledge of him, flows eternal and
assured salvation. The way to salvation described.
The Lord then reaches out his hand to save all nations, and shows them what
way they should take to obtain it. And thus it appears it fell not out by
chance, that the Gospel was generally preached unto all nations under heaven:
but that it proceeded from Gods decree, who had ordained it so to come to pass
long before. Yet he accuses the Gentiles of blindness, as I have said ere
while, in that they turned their eyes after vanities, and ran which way
soever their giddie spirits led them. For howsoever by nature they could not
find out the true God, having from their infancy been trained up in
superstitions, and were bewitched with them; yet God had just cause
notwithstanding to blame them for the profane contempt of his grace.
Hypocrisy, you know, is always wrapped in ignorance, Hypocrisy always mixed
with ignorance.
so as men had rather be deceived through vain deceits, then to be led the
straight way unto God.

Verse. 23. I have sworn by my self: the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, O, that is, every knee, etc
that every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me.
HE adds a more manifest confirmation to the former sentence: A confi^mation
of the f^rmer sentence.
for because this calling was extraordinary and unheard of, he therefore adds
an oath, as men are wont to do in things that are strange and hard to be
credited. The Jews might have made replies, in regard they were then reputed
the only elect people. But in that he confirms it with an oath, all
contention is taken away. I grant the Prophet aims again at the same mark
that he did in verse. 6. to wit, that Gods glory shall so shine in the
restoration of the Church, that all the world, from the rising of the Sun,
to the West, shall admire the same: or, to tell it you in a word, that the
signs of Gods power shall so shine in this deliverance, that all nations shall
be confounded with fear and astonishment. In the mean while hence we may
gather that which I touched before; namely, the Gentiles are here equalled
with the Jews, so as God shall be the common father of all, and his name,
called upon in all places.

Now God swears by himself, because there is none more sufficient to be a
witness of his truth: for he is the truth it self. Men swear by greater then
themselves, The c^use of God^ oath.
as the Apostle says, Heb. 6.16. but God having no superior, swears here by
himself.

We must note the cause of this oath. It is even to sustain the infirmities of
the Saints, lest they should float up and down in uncertainties. What a
wonderful goodness of God is this, who to remedy our diffidence, disdains not
to use his own name, as if he laid it to pawn? On the other side, how gross
and vile is our incredulity, if this oath do not satisfy and content us?

Now seeing God reserues to himself the confirmation of all truth, we must
take good heed when we are constrained to call him for a witness in oaths,
Gods name not to be mingled with creatures in our oaths.
that we mingle not his name with Saints, or any other creatures whatsoever:
but using it with such reverence as is meet, let us reserve his honor full
and whole unto himself.

The word is gone forth.] The meaning is, that whatsoever the Prophet has
published at Gods commandment, is firm and sure. As if he should say; This
commandment passed not from me unawares. In this sense the word
righteousness, is often taken for a true speech, and such as shall always be
found so: and therefore he says, that his word cannot be called back.

To this appertains the other member; shall not return: that is to say, it
shall still grow to perfection, until it appears by the effects, that it came
from a God most just, true, and almighty: Men inconstant.
for man a will call back his word when he meets with any difficulty that
may hinder him from keeping the same. But because nothing can let God from
executing his determinations, God unchangeable.
the Prophet rightly concludes, that the course of this word cannot be stopped,
nor broken off by any inconvenience at all. The particle, That is, must serve
here for an exposition; to wit, Behold what this word is.

Every knee shall bow unto me.] By this he means that all nations shall bow
before God; because the deliverance of the Church shall terrify the whole
world. Yet withal it follows from hence, that his true worship shall also
be received among all nations. For we cannot truly bow the knee before God,
What it is to bow the knee to God.
till he has manifested himself unto us. Men may indeed present a kind of
service to the one God, whom yet they know not: there is nothing but vanity
and illusions in all this. He speaks here then of that true religious
service, which proceeds from such a knowledge of God, as is rooted in the
depth of the heart: for where no faith is, there can be no sincere worship.
True faith, as we know, stays not her self upon any uncertain or unknown
thing.

He sets forth the thing signified therefore, by the sign; The thing signified
see forth by the sign.
as the Scriptures are often wont to do. Whence we gather, that God requires
the outward service of the body: for the Prophet separates not the external
profession of religion, from the internal affection of the heart. It is in
vain then for such inconstant spirits to brag, A frivolous excuse of
temporisers.
that they can honor and worship God in their hearts, though they bow their
knees before Idols. It is in vain for them (I say) to make so frivolous an
excuse, seeing the inward belief of the heart cannot be divided from the
outward confession of the mouth. For with the heart, man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth he confesses unto salvation: Romans 10.10.
For this cause the Lord approoues of their integrity and uprightness in his
service, that had not so much as bowed a knee to Baal: 1. King. 19.18.

Saint Paul applies this text to the last judgment, where he says, that all
shall be constrained to appear before the judgment seat of Christ. Although
it is applied here to the peoples deliverance out of Babylon, to the spreading
abroad of the Gospel, and to the establishing of the kingdom of Christ. But
the Apostle holds it for granted, (which we also are not to be ignorant of)
that that which appertains to Christ's kingdom, ought not to be restrained to
some parts of it only, but to stretch it self throughout the whole course
thereof, even till the full and perfect accomplishment of the whole appear.
What is it then to bow the knee unto Christ? It is when his doctrine is
obeyed, What is meant by bowing of the knee to Christ.
and the preaching of the Gospel received.

But many still resist it, and boldly contemn it: Satan plots sundry
mischiefs, and with open mouth rages against it continually; so as the
accomplishment of this prophecy seems yet to be very far off. The knee shall
then truly be bowed to Christ, when he shall triumph, and has put down and
destroyed all his enemies, and when he shall appear in majesty and in glory
to all, which Satan and his supposts do now seek to abolish. And therefore S.
Paul teaches, that when Christ shall ascend up into his Throne to judge the
world, then shall that be accomplished which began to take effect from the
beginning of the Gospel, which we also see to draw near from day to day.

The verb to swear is put for service, reverence, or subjection, by the figure
called Synecdoche, when a part is taken for the whole. An oath also is part of
the honor which is due unto God, An oath, part of Gods honor.
for by it we confess and acknowledge that he is the author, father, and
lawful protector of all truth, and that all things are naked and bare before
his eyes, Heb. 4.13. When this honor therefore is given to Idols, Gods Majesty
is thereby violated with an execrable sacrilege: thus then, those which serve
him purely, swear only by his name, and by nothing else. See Chap. 19.18.
But we have spoken of this matter in another place.

Verse. 24. Surely he shall say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength:
he shall come unto him, and all that provoke him shall be ashamed.
We must proceed from faith to feeling.
HE shows what true faith is, and what worship God approues of, to wit, when we
have not only a bare knowledge of him, or think in our hearts that there is
one God, but when we also feel what a one he is to us. Whosoever he be then
that contents himself with a naked apprehension of God; is far off from that
faith which so knits us unto him, that we feel him dwelling in us, according
as S. Paul would have us not only to know Christ, but that he also should dwell
in our hears by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. For he that contemplates of an idle god in
the heavens sitting bow his knee before him

Now because righteousness and strength God the author both of righteousness and
strength.
are the two maine points of our salvation, the faithful acknowledge God to be
the author of both in them, and thus they wholly attribute the glory of their
happiness unto him: and in confessing that it proceeds from his free grace, it
is to testify to all that by nature they are deprived of such gifts. They
therefore confess that they can find neither strength nor righteousness in
themselves, but do seek the same only in God, that he may not be defrauded of
his proper right.

He shall come unto him.] The expositors agree not touching the interpretation
of these words: for mine own part, I understand this place only of the
faithful, who submit themselves unto God, that so we might see the reason of
the opposition which is between them, and those rebels which cease not
obstinately to resist God. Thus I expound it then, Those who confess their
righteousness and strength to be from God, shall come to him. For his meaning
it, that we have access unto God by faith, so as all those which confess
that their salvation consists in him, shall also come unto him, and feel him
present with them.

Truly, None comes willingly to God, til they feel their reconciliatio^ with
him.
a man can never voluntarily draw near unto God, till he be reconciled with
him: for the more we feel the terror of his Majesty, the further off we flee
from him. The Prophet in this place then magnifies this joyful fruit of Gods
favor, by means whereof, those that were strangers far off before, Col.
1.21. Ephe. 2.13.
shall now come and be made near unto him. To this agrees that in the 65.
Psalm. Because thou art a God that hear prayer, therefore shall all flesh
come unto thee.

Now Isaiah having showed that God will gather in strangers from their
dispersions, and entertain them in his own house, he denounces an horrible
judgment against contemners and despisers, who give themselves the raines, as
if there were no God at all; and scorning all piety: wallow themselves in
worldly delights. Faith, the mother of obedience.
For as faith only brings forth obedience, so the Prophet shows that it is
infidelity only which prouokes God to wrath and displeasure. When he brands
the unbelievers with this mark, Infidelity, the mother of rebellion.
that they are rebels to God; yea, that they provoke him to the combat:
therewithal he pronounces that they shall be covered with shame, howsoever
they make their triumphs in the sight of the world.

Verse. 25. The whole seed of Israel shall be justified, and glory in the
Lord.
He now preuents an objection The prevention of an objection.
which might be made against this doctrine, to wit, it seems strange that the
Lord should call those nations unto him which were far off before: as if they
should say, Has God then chosen the posterity of Abraham in vain? Shall his
promises so often repeated Genesis 15.5. and 17.7. vanish into the air? To this
he answers, that the Lord will not cease to be true in his promises still, so
that howsoever God has made choice of the Gentiles, yet notwithstanding the
covenant contracted and made with their fathers shall stand still inviolable,
because the elect Jews shall hold their sovereign prerogative. For he
speaks not here of their reiection as in many other places, but the Prophet
only delivers this point, that Gods grace which shall now be extended to all
nations, shall still flow from this fountain, I am thy God, and the God of thy
seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. whereas the most part of the Jews then were
rejected; this overthrew not Gods covenant, because the remnant that were
adopted always remained the true and lawful seed: and albeit they were few in
number, yet were they the first borne in the Church.

Moreover, all those among the Gentiles which were grafted into this body,
began now to be the children of Abraham, as in Chap. 44.5. one shall say, I
belong to Iaakob, another shall subscribe with his hand, and say, I am begotten
of Israel. From this title it is that we at this day are reputed by good right
the Israel of God, though Iaacob begat us not. Gal. 6.16.
The Prophet adds this then, that they should not think the covenant of God
was abolished: as also, that they were not so to glory in their race and
stock, that they should therefore utterly despise the Gentiles.

The whole seed of Israel.] He stretches this seed further off, lest they
should imagine it to be wholy restrained to the posterity of Abraham. For
the Lord gathers his people indifferently both out of Jews and Gentiles. In
this place then he speaks in general of all mankind.

Neither righteousness nor glory out of God.
We have further to observe, that the Prophet says, we are justified, and shall
glory in the Lord, for we must neither seek righteousness, nor glory out of
him. Now glory is added, because it depends upon righteousness, and follows
it. For which cause S. Paul says, Where is thy rejoicing? It is excluded. By
what law? of works? nay, but by the law of faith, Romans 3.27. Also, if Abraham
were justified by works, he had wherein to glory, Those justly glory that
seek their justice in God only.
but not with God, Romans 4.2. It follows then, that those shall justly glory,
who seek their justification in God only, acknowledging that in themselves
there is no matter at all of rejoicing.

THE XLVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Bell Or, quite ouerthrown.
is bowed down: Nebo is fallen: their Idols were upon the beasts, and upon the
Or, Mares.
Cattle: they which did bear you were Or, thrown down.
laden with a weary burden.
The coherence of the sentences rather to be considered now and then in this
prophecy, then the division of the Chapters.
ISaiah continues forth his former argument; for we must not stand
ouer-strictlie upon the dividing of the Chapters, in regard they were not
always aptly observed: but we are rather to consider of the sentences which
cohere very well, as I have said; notwithstanding, if any had rather have it
the beginning of a new Sermon, in regard that he forthwith speaks of the ruin
of Babylon, I do not much contradict him. Bell and Nebo, were Idols which the
Chaldeans worshipped, and it is very likely they were their chief patrons, for
Idolaters always make choice of some principal gods, Idolaters will always
make choice of some principal patrons.
under whose protection they think to be safe. We may also conjecture that
this Nebo was an inferior god, added to the great god Bell, as Mercury was to
Jupiter. And under the names of these two the Prophet also comprehends all
other Idols, foretelling by the spirit of prophecy that all the abominable
Idolatries and superstitions of the Gentiles should be abolished, when God
(having subdued ye Idolaters under his feet) shall in triumph lead them
captives, for then it should be manifest to all that he was the just auenger of
his Church. The Chaldeans proudly boasted of the protection they had under
their false gods; but the Prophet refutes this vain confidence, saying, that
the God of Israel will not content himself only to root out the profane
people, but will also overthrow all their gods to their utter shame and
disgrace.

And therefore he says, that they shall be borne upon mares, in regard they
should be thrown into some cart, or other to be transported and tumbled upon
heaps together as it pleased the carters to dispose of them: that is it which
he signifies by the word put down, because the soldiers should lay all the
gods on heaps which were so highly advanced before. And no doubt but this was
accomplished when the Medes and Persians took Babylon: for the Monarchy being
translated to them, these Idols also were taken away as part of the spoil. Now
howsoever Isaiah prophesied these things in respect of the Babylonians, yet
doubtless he specially aimed at the coming of Christ in the flesh, at whose
appearance all Idolatries and superstitions should be abolished. For when his
kingdom is once established, Where Christ's kingdom is established, there all
Idols fall to the ground. Se^ 1. Sam. 5.4.
all Idols forthwith fall to the ground, for it is not possible that false
religion and superstitions can stand with his true knowledge: he expels all
darkness by his brightness, so as he leaves no room neither for the false gods,
nor any of their services: for what communion has light with darkness, or
Christ with Belial? as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 6.15.

But withal we must observe that the Prophet respected the time in which the
Jews were held prisoners: for they saw the Chaldeans perfume their Idols, and
attributed unto them a sovereign power, as if the issue of all things had bin
at the beck of these puppets, and in the mean while they scorned the God of
the Jews, as if he had bin insufficie^t to defend his people, (or if he were)
yet that he did not much regard them. He shows then that there shall be such a
change, that the gods of the Chaldeans which were highly exalted should fall,
and that the true God who seemed to be thrown to the earth shall be exalted,
and shall revenge the outrages done unto his servants.

Verse. 2. They are bowed down, and fallen together, for they could not rid
them of the burden, and their soul is gone into captivity.
THe Prophet derides the vanity of these goodly gods, who had neither strength
nor motion, neither were they able to stand upon their fees, nor to defend
themselves, seeing the poor beasts were feign to carry them. A close
opposition between the true God, and Idols.
Here is a close opposition then between their Idols, and the true God, who
stands in no need of any help at all. But the Prophet to their further disgrace
adds, that the mares (whereof he speaks in this verse) were bowed down with
the burden, See verse 1.
of which they would gladly have rid themselves. And thus these false gods,
after they suffered their worshippers to be deprived of them, were now become
troublesome to the poor bruit beasts.

Their soul.] It is an Hebrew phrase; by which the Prophet mockes these Gods
who had neither sense, nor any understanding at all. He speaks it then by way
of contempt against the vain and dumb Idols; to wit, that they and their
soul were led into captivity.

the sign of his presence: for thus it seemed, that the Lord himself was in a
manner led prisoner.

The answer John 4.23.
The Arc then was not worshipped in Gods stead, but was a sign by which the
people were led as by the hand, Col. 3.1.
to set their affections on things above, even upon the Lord himself:
contrariwise, the Gentiles doted only upon their puppets, and attributed unto
them a divine power. We may also affirm, that the Philistims were at last
well scourged for their presumption; so as they felt how they had to deal with
the true God: 1. Sam. 5.7.

that howsoever the Lord communicates himself with us by signs and
sacraments, yet he will be sought of us in heaven. Moreover, himself had
foretold by memorable prophecies, that the Philistims in their conquest led him
not prisoner, but that be willingly exposed his Arc as a pray to his enemies,
to avenge him of the wickednesses of the people. 1. Sam. 3.11.
Also when the Temple was destroyed and burnt, and the vessels carried into
Babylon, the Jews could not be ignorant but the same God which they had
worshipped in Jerusalem, was the author of this chastisement, in regard he
had so often foretold that by his Prophets, which then came to pass.

Verse. 3. Hear ye me, O house of Iakob, and all that remain of the house of
Israel, which are borne of me from the womb, and brought up of me from the
birth.
THe Prophet here elegantly shows what great difference there is between the
true God and Idols: A conclusion upon the premises.
for he said before, that the gods of the Babylonians should be carried upon
carts, and drawn by beasts, because they were dead stocks: here he
attributes a far higher propriety unto the God of Israel; to wit, that he
carried his people, as the mother carries the child in the womb; which being
borne, she always carries in her bosom. We may justify God to be the true
God by our own experience.
Now he calls the Jews to give ear, that they might make answer from their
own experience; for they ought to be the more affected, in regard they had
felt by the effects, that God had continually supported both them and their
burdens. He uses a very fit opposition then, and from the former words thus
concludes; Acknowledge your birth, you cannot be ignorant, but must needs know
the greatness of my power. For the Lord is not only powerful for himself,
but extends it to all his creatures, that we might truly feel the efficacy
thereof.

Which are borne of me from the womb.] This similitude, by which God compares
himself to a mother that bears her child in her womb, is very fitting for
his purpose. Now he speaks of the time past, in which he began to give unto
his people testimonies of his grace: unless any had rather expound these
words more strictly; to wit, that God has in mercy advanced them, and borne
them in his arms as a child borne of his mother: Psalm. 22.9, 10. But because
God began not only to be a nurcing father to this people from their natural
birth, but also begat them spiritually; it is not amiss to extend his speech
even to that, to wit, that they issued as it were out of Gods womb, into
newness of life, and to the hope of the eternal inheritance.

If any object No similitude or borrowed speech sufficient to express Gods
infinite love to his children.
there is no similitude therefore that can express his inestimable love.

If we only understand it, that from the time God begat them, he has borne
and tenderly nourished them in his bosom: this will well suit with that which
is written in the song of Moses; He nourished and carried them, as the Eagle
does her little ones upon her wings: Deuteronomy. 32.11. To be short, the Prophets
meaning is, that unless the Jews forget their original, they must of
necessity conclude, that they were not begotten in vain, but that God, who
has performed unto them the office of a loving father and mother, will never
leave them, but always will assist them. And besides, that by continual
succession of time, they so felt his power, that they were at no hand to do
any homage to Idols.

When he mentions the remainder, it is to show, Chap. 10.21.
as we noted before, that the greater part by their rebellion, made a
defectio^ from the Church: and thus the hope of the redemption, appertained but
to a small handful. For this cause he craves audience, because the unbelievers
were become no less deaf at his voice, then the profane nations. Now
howsoever the estate of the people at that time was far from perfection, and
that the remnant of this dispersed people was exceeding small, yet the Lord
commands them to consider how miraculously they were preserved and kept unto
that instant; that so they should not doubt but he would continue a loving
father and mother unto them in like manner for the time to come. And in that he
requires them to hearken to his speech, The true and only way to ^edresse our
miseries.
he shows that the true and only remedy of all our miseries consists in
depending upon Gods mouth, and in hearkening to the promises of his grace: for
then we shall have strength enough to bear all our afflictions. As on the
contrary, there is a wide gate set open to rush us into despair: yea, and to
expect nothing but ruin and destruction, when we stop our ears, and will not
hear his voice.

Verse. 4. Therefore unto old age I am the same, even I will bear you until
the hoare hairs: I have made you, I will also bear you, and I will carry you,
and I will deliver you.
I Expound this particle Vau, Wherefore: which we are diligently to observe.
God not only begins, but perfects the work of his grace in us.
For thus he concludes; I have begotten you and brought you forth; yea I have
borne you in mine arms, whilst you were yet in your swaddling clouts: and
therefore I will be the protector of your life even unto the end. And thus
David reasons; Thou, O Lord, did draw me out of the womb, thou gave me
hope even at my mothers breasts. I was cast upon thee even from the womb: thou
art my God from my mothers belly: Psalm. 22.9, 10. God promises the Jews then,
that he will always be a father unto them. The Lord, says David, will finish
the good work he has begun in me: thy mercies, O Lord, endure for ever;
therefore thou will not forsake the work of thine own hands: Psalm. 138 8.

This word, I; (six times repeated) is of great weight in my judgment,
although the interpreters expound it simply as a pronoune demonstratiue. But it
signifies here not only Gods eternal essence, and that he will ever be like
himself; but it is also spoken in regard of us, showing that we shall always
find him one and the same.

Where he says unto old age: this might seem a strange speech, seeing we
grow to be perfect men, after God has once drawn us out of our childhood. But
let every one examine his own strength as he ought, and we shall easily
perceive, that none of us have so profited, but we shall still feel that God
had need to uphold us daily by his power: for otherwise the most perfect would
fall down flat at every turn. Which David also expresses in Psalm. 71. Cast
me not off O Lord in the time of mine old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails.

J have made you, I will also bear you. He renues the same argument again:
as if he should say; God will not look to your deserts, but to his own work:
and therefore will continue forth his grace toward you. Hence we may thus
conclude; Seeing thou have not only created us to be men, but also to be thy
children, thou will doubtless continue to bear that affection to us, which
fathers and mothers do toward their children, and wilt always have care over
us.

Verse. 5. To whom will ye make me like, or make me equal, or compare me,
that I should be like him?
THe Prophet brings in the Lord here complaining of the Jews, We must not
think the better of Idolaters because they seem to prosper in their sin.
for distrusting his power and goodness; as also for comparing him with Idols:
nay, for abasing him beneath the^. For in seeing the Chaldeans to have the
world at will, they judged themselves hopeless, and that the memory of the
covenant was so abolished, as if there had been no God left in heaven to have
taken care of them. The Lord takes up a complaint therefore against them, in
that he perceived they attributed some power to the Idols, and in so doing,
obscured his regal authority. He handled the same argument in the 42. and 43.
Chapters, and in those that follow: and therefore we have the less need now to
insist any longer upon every word. That they should not measure Gods power
then, by the view of things present, he commands them to raise up their minds
higher. The like advertisement were fit to be made to us at this day, if in
beholding the prosperity of the Papists, we should therefore imagine that they
had the true religion on their side: for otherwise, what were it but to compare
the living God with Idols? This circumstance is diligently to be noted, because
many expositors baulking, and neglecting it, do lessen the weight nf this
sentence: for they think the Prophet cries out only against the
superstitious, who attribute some divinity to wood and stone, because Gods
glory is defamed, when he is compared to dead Images. I nothing doubt
therefore but he taxes their perverse judgment, and crooked conceits,
wherewith the people were transported and carried away in adversity, to think
that God respected the Babylonians above them. For, if God had favored the
Babylonians, it would thereupon have followed, that he had also approved of
their idolatry: and thus his glory should have been given from him, unto
senseless creatures. To conclude, hence we may gather a general doctrine A
general doctrine.
(as S. Paul fitly applies it, Act. 17.25.) that God is robbed of his honor,
when we liken him to dumb and vain Idols.

Verse. 6. They draw gold out of the bag, weigh silver in the balance, and hire
a Goldsmith to make a god of, and they bow down and worship it.

7. They bear it upon the shoulders; they carry him and set him in his place:
so does he stand, and cannot remove from his place. Though one cry unto him,
yet he cannot answer, nor deliver him out of his tribulation.


THe Prophet told us the same thing before, which he now repeates again, that
he might ingraue this doctrine the more deeply in our minds: for
superstition has taken such rooting in our hearts, that it cannot be plucked
up, unless God wholly alter and change our nature. All that we have heard
against the folly of Idolaters, will by and by slip out of our memories,
because we always retain in us some seeds of superstition, there being
nothing to which we are more inclined, then to file ourselves in this dunghill.
He says then that to forge Idols, one prouides stuff, another imploies his
art and skill to fashion it: and thus there must be two fathers of whom these
Idols are begotten: first, Two fathers of whom Idols are begotten.
the rich churl, who disburseth the gold, or silver: secondly, the Goldsmith,
who gives a form unto them. And now behold a new forged god.

Wherein he plainly taxes the senslesnesse of those that seek a godhead in
their purses, and in the hands of the artificer. For who would imagine that from
so sudden a change, men would prostrate themselves before a piece of metal, A
goodly God, that stands men in, so much the stuff, and so much the forming.
having put some shape unto it, according to their own fantasies? For it is
such a god, as stands them in so much the stuff, and so much the fashioning.

The particle Aph, put before the verb To worship, sets out this their
madness: for there might be some excuse which deserved to be pardoned, if
being suddenly overtaken with this error, they should fall down and worship
some false god: but these persisted obstinately in their frenzy.

This bowing and worshipping being added after the former circumstances, does
much aggrauate the obstinacy, and shows that they were utterly bewitched.
This blockishnesse then, as I have said, is too gross, when men will worship
a god forged with their own hands.

The same amplification is added in the verse following; They bear it upon the
shoulders, etc. For being deprived of all common sense, they run and cry for
help to such gods: and must they not needs be stark bedlems then?

Verse. 8. Remember this, and be ashamed: Or, return into your heart.
bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.
The Jews reproved for having revolted for so light an affliction.
THis verse is expounded two ways; to wit, that God speaks both to the Jews and
Gentiles. For such as are but meanly instructed in the Law, are easily
deceived, in yt they quench the knowledge wc God has kindled in their
understandings. Again, there is no man but has some seeds of religion sown
in his heart by the very light of nature: but he either transgressors. For they
were thrown down with a very little blast of temptation, and were revolted
from the true God: as if their seventy years captivity must needs have
blotted all the benefits of so many hundred years out of their hearts. In
regard then that they had trodden under foot all right affection of piety, he
sharply taxes their ingratitude, in that they were so easily slid into
superstitions.

When he commands them to return into their heart, it is to show that they
were not well in their wits before. Others translate, Bring back; which is
nothing at all to the purpose, because even now he commanded them to remember,
and will repeat it by and by in the verse following. He brings them now then to
their own hearts, in regard the forgetfulness of Gods former benefits proceeded
from a kind of folly.

Be ashamed.] Others translate, Be strong, or of good courage: and thus they
drawing it from the word Ish, which signifies to behave a man's self valiantly.
Others, from Ashish: which is as much to say, as foundation. As if he should
say; Be of good courage; think not that I will destitute you of convenient
succor. But I rather agree with Saint Ierom, S. Ierom.
who draws it from the word Esh, which signifies fire: for it better suits
after their shame is discovered, that they should blush as red as fire, then to
be valiant or of good courage. And yet I give every one leave to choose which
of the readings he likes best. He would they should blush for shame then, in
regard of their carelessness, unthankfulness, and wickedness, that afterward
they might turn unto God.

Verse. 9. Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is nothing
like me.
THis is the exposition of the former sentence, An exposition of the former
sentence.
for he shows more fully that which he was speaking of before; to wit, that
God has showed sufficient testimonies of his power and majesty; not only for
two or three years past, but of old. For he had continued his benefits, and
had made them to feel the tokens of his favor in a constant course
continually. Thence he gathers that the signs of his Deity were sufficient
to hold them from turning out of the right way. We have also to observe that
he contents not himself to be called God, but to be acknowedged the only
God; God the only God.
as we have said before. He will therefore be separated from all gods that men
forge, that we may wholly rest our selves in him: for he no sooner receives
any to be a companion with him, but his throne will be made either to totter,
or to fall quite down: for there must be one only God, or none at all.

Verse. 10. Which declare the last things from the beginning, and from of old
the things that were not done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do
what soever I will.
An implification.
NOw he shows more at large after what manner he would have ye Jews to think
of the time past, to wit, because they were daily instructed by continual
prophesies so far forth as was expedient. But having made this preface, he
comes in the next place to mention the hope of their deliverance. Neither are
we to wonder that he repeates one thing so often, because it was a matter whereof
they could hardly be persuaded, for the people were not only slow to believe,
but with their infidelity they joined rebellion. He admonishes them then that
they had bin often taught for a long time together, how safe a thing it is to
trust in God, who does not so much commend his foreknowledge unto them, as to
show what he had ordained to fall out by the ministry of his Prophets. Neither
had there bin any truth nor stedfastnes at all in the prophesies, unless the
same God which had foreordeined this or that to come to pass, had not also the
events thereof in his own power. And withal he aduertiseth them that in all
prophesies he spoke nothing but the truth: for he published his decrees, to the
end they should not doubt to rest boldly therein as soon as the Prophets had
spoken. But because I have handled these things largely before, therefore I
touch them the more briefly for the present.

Verse. 11. I call Or, the th^ught.
a bird from the East, and the man of my counsel from far; as I have spoken,
so will I bring it to pass: I have purposed it, and I will do it.
THe Prophet having spoken of the prescience and power of God, An application
of the general doctrine to a particular use.
now applies his general speech to a particular use, for he means to comfort
the Jews: to wit, that they were not in such perpetual slavery under ye
Babylonians, as that no hope were left them touching their deliverance. He now
comes to a specialtie then, and promises that Cyrus Cyrus.
shall come with haste, howsoever it seem impossible in the eyes of flesh and
blood. Where I have translated the word Aait, thought, almost all the
Interpreters translate Bird, which is the true signification of the word: but
because we may gather out of the second of Daniel, verse 14. that it is
sometimes taken for counsel, or thought, I had rather follow this
interpretation, which is also approved by certain Hebrews: yet it may be, the
Prophet therein alludes to a bird; as if he should say, It shall be a swift
thought or counsel; neither do I deny but he notes the swiftnes of Cyrus his
voyage.

Where he calls Cyrus, the man of his counsel, it is a repetition much used
amongst the Hebrews, whereby also it appears, that the word Aait is put in ye
first member for thought, or decree. Now he calls him a man of his counsel,
because he shall be the executioner of this judgment. Notwithstanding if any
had rather retain the word Bird, I will not gainesay him, in regard of the
near affinity that is between the similitudes: for Cyrus his coming was so
sudden and unexpected, as that he seemed to come string as a Bird. He besieged
and took Babylon whilst the Chaldeans thought all passages were shut against
him. Also, if this interpretation be better liked, we may say that Isaiah
alludes to those diuinations which they made from the flying of Birds,
whereunto the Chaldeans were exceedingly given: for as they practiced judicial
Astronomy, Judicial Astronomy.
so observed they the flying and chirping of Birds, thinking that herein
consisted a certain knowledge of things to come, but the Lord tells them he
will send a bird which they could not foresee. Notwithstanding, the first
exposition contents me best, to wit, that he has respect to the swift passage
of Cyrus, signifying, that the ways can not be so shut up, nor the fortresses
so strong, that they should hinder him from approaching suddenly unto Babylon.

Where he adds from the East, it serves not only to make the promise certain,
but also to assure the Jews that no distance of way should be able to let or
foreslow this work of God, and therefore by way of exposition he adds in the
second member, from far. Hence let us learn to what end we ought to refer
all that which we read of Gods prescience or power in the holy scriptures, for
these things are not said to hold us in suspe^se, but to the end we might the
better apply them to our use.

He also closely opposes Gods counsel to our thoughts. Why so? Because he
will so deliver his Church, that men shall not be able to conceive the reason
thereof in their minds. Howsoever then that which God promises seems
incredible, yet he shows that he will easily open himself a way, to the end
we should not measure his incomprehensible counsels within the [narrow
scantling] of our reason.

I have thought it. Others translate, I have formed it: but I think the verb
Iatser agrees best, being taken here for to think. He therefore confirms that
which he said before, to wit, that this was thus ordained of him before, and
therefore should remain steadfast and inviolable. And whereas he adds, As I
have spoken, so will I bring it to pass, it is as much as if he had said,
that he foretold no thing in vain, and that this prophecy which was published
at his commandment, ough^ to be accounted of, as if it were already
accomplished. He has put this first member then to gain credit to his words:
and then he adds in the second, his thoughts, with his word preached: which
we are dilligently to observe, because we are tossed with diverse distractions,
doubting whether God has spoken in good earnest or no; because we imagine him
to be such a one as our selves; that is to say, [in plain English] an
hypocrit, or a dissembler. But he protests that nothing proceeds from him, but
that which has issued from his mature deliberations: so as the preaching of
the word, is no other thing but an assured testimony of his secret counsels,
which he has purposed to manifest unto us. Gods promise and the performance
go together.
As often then as the Lord vtters his voice, we ought to build upon the assured
accomplishment of it.

Verse. 12. Hear ye me, ye stubborn hearted that are far from justice.
The rebellious nature of the Jews described.
HE sharply rebukes the Jews again, who would neither give credence unto God,
nor receive any consolations at all in their adversities. This was a galling
reprehension, which no doubt went very near the quick: but they well deserved
it, in regard neither threatening, nor promise of God, were it never so sweet
and amiable, was available to tame them. These two epithetes which he here
uses, are to be noted: whereby he gives us to understand, that the afflicted
and miserable, shut up the passage of Gods help from them by their own
rebellion. For by their murmurings and grudgings, they shake off the fear of
God, and in thus doing, rush themselves headlong into such desperate courses,
that they make open war upon him. Now he speaks to the Jews, who were ready
to burst with malice and pride: notwithstanding afflictions oppressed them to
the utmost. And thus having shaken off the fear of God, they fell into open
raging, which [I would to God] many among us were not guilty of, who wax worse
by their calamities. Thus then they would accept of no remedy nor medicine at
al to cure their evils. If any would have the word justice to be taken here
for Gods succor, as in the verse following; I leave it free for them so to do:
for it is no strange thing to see the obstinate, who repel God, and reject his
grace, to be unable to rest upon his sweet promises, or not to suffer that
any should do them good, albeit help be offered them.

Verse. 13. I will bring near my justice: it shall not be far off, and my
salvation shall not tarry: for I will give salvation in Zion, and my glory
unto Israel.
An oppositio^ between the injustice of man, and the justice of God.
IF any had rather retain that which I was saying; to wit, that such as are
far from justice, and incapable of Gods grace, are here called to
repentance, the sense will be all one: but if we say that the Jews were
far from justice, in regard they were given up to a dissolute behavior as
men past grace, then there is an apt opposition between the justice of God,
and the justice of men. Although the Jews then were far from justice, and
had cast off all study of piety; yet God affirms, that his justice is near.
As if he should say; I must confess incredulity is a maine let and
hinderance, yet shall it not hinder me in the end from manifesting the force of
my truth. What though some did not believe, says Paul? shall their unbelief
make the truth of God without effect? God forbid. Romans 3.3. Yea, let God be
true, and every man a lier. And to say the truth, if he did not overcome men's
stubbornness by his goodness, we should incontinently perish. For which of
us receives the bounty of God, or his grace when he offers the same, as we
ought? Why God withdrawes his favor from us for a time.
Does he withdraw his mercy or his truth from us? It is for no other cause,
but for that we be far from justice. Contrariwise, though we resist him, yet
he draws near unto us, that he may manifest his justice, albeit we be utterly
unworthy of it. Yet he does this in such wise, as the wicked receive no fruit
at all by it. For the Prophet comprehends not those cursed apostataes, as if
this salvation promised belonged unto them; but only affirms, that God has
means ready to make his justice appear.

But here it is needful for us to consider in what state this people stood,
to whom this speech was directed. They were all in a manner tainted with the
sin of infidelity, and those that rested upon the promises were but very
few: All are gone out of the way.
even the elect sometimes showed themselves but too obstinate; so as they
seemed to be no less infected with this contagion then the rest. He taxes
them all in general then, as well to convince the reprobates, as to gall the
elect, and to bring them into the right way. But he chiefly sets himself
against the rebels, as I have said, who obstinately and stubbornly rejected all
hope of grace.

And my salvation.] Hereby it appears what he meant by the word Justice; to
wit, the help and succor of God promised in fit and due season to his people.
He takes justice and salvation then, for one and the same thing, because it is
an excellent testimony of Gods justice, when he conserues and protects his
distressed ones. It is not added superfluously, that it shall not be far off,
and shall not tarry: Note Gods great clemency.
for herein he expresses Gods exceeding great mercy, in that he will finish
the course of his justice, albeit the people should resist the same.

And will put.] The letter Vau, is here put for a particle of rendering the
cause, thus; For I will put. Now this is a confirmation of the former
sentence: as if he should say; Seeing the Lord has once determined to save
Jerusalem, she cannot be disappointed of such a benefit. He ioines his glory
with the salvation of the faithful: as also Saint Paul takes the word glory,
Gods glory and our salvation lincked together.
for mercy: Ephesians. 1.6. and 3.16. For then Gods glory shines fully, when he
draws his children out of the bands of death, and sets them at liberty,
because he will have the salvation of his Church and his justice, to be
conjoined with an indissoluble knot.

THE XLVII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin, daughter Babel, sit on the
ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shall no more
be called Tender and delicate.
Gods decree put in execution.
NOw Isaiah sets that down at large, which he mentioned before touching Gods
counsel, and the execution thereof. For he speaks here in plain terms of
Babylons fall, Babylons fall.
because there was little or no hope that the people should ever return, as
long as the Babylonicall Monarchy flourished. He therefore conioined these two
things together; come down: it has greater weight in it then if he had
directly threatened she should come down: for thus he speaks with authority,
as if he were already set in a throne of judgment: for he spoke nothing but
what he had warrant from God to deliver; and therefore he boldly pronounces
what should happen. And this commission we see the Lord gave to Jeremiah;
Behold, I have set thee this day over kingdoms and nations, that thou
should pluck up and destroy, No power so high, but it is subject to the
authority of Gods word.
and pull down and plant: Ier. 1.10. For there is no power at all that is not
under the check of Gods word.

Lastly, his meaning is to bring the Jews as it were, to view the thing done,
for they could not without much difficulty conceive how this change should
happen, unless God should destroy their enemies with thunder and lightning
from heaven. Touching this word daughter of Babylon; it is a figure much used
among the Hebrews, when they speak of Cities and nations. He calls her
virgin, not in regard of her chastity or shamefastness, but because she was
tenderly and delicately entertained, as virgins be, and was not as yet forced
nor ravished by the enemy, as it was said of Zidon in Chap. 23.12. The like
may be said at this day of Venice, Venice.
and of other Cities flowing and abounding in riches and pleasures: in which
regard, they seem most happy in the eyes of the world. But they have no less
cause to fear the change of their estate, then the Babylonians, howsoever they
seem now to be far off from danger. For thou shall be no more: that is to say,
those that esteemed thee happy, shall rejoice no more with thee for thy
prosperity.

Verse. 2. Take the milstones, and grind meal: lose thy locks, make bare the
feet, uncover the leg, and pass through the floods.
ALl this description tends to this end, Notes of extreme slavery.
namely, that Chaldea shall taste of a wonderful change. For this City which
before was in great honor, shall be brought into extreme dishonout, and every
way put to such drudgerie, that all shall perceive evident and apparent signs
of Gods wrath therein. Behold then the marks of a most servile bondage, Take
the milstones, and grind meal. For they were wont in ancient time, to put
slaves of the basest and abiectest condition to the mill. Their condition then
must needs be miserable, when they were held no better then horses: for in
war, those that got the conquest, handled some of their prisoners with much
better respect. But here the Prophet propounds nothing before the Chaldeans,
but a woeful condition in all points, to the end the faithful might assure
themselves that they should go forth freely; The righteous escapes out of
trouble, and the wicked shall come in his stead: Prou. 11.8.
when the Chaldeans, who held them captives, should themselves be captiuated.
Now howsoever we read not that the great states of the land were thus
dishonourably used, yet it sufficed for the accomplishment of the prophecy;
that Cyrus suffering them to enjoy some base offices, made them incapable of
any rule or authority, by constraining them to cease from all honest exercises,
and liberal sciences.

And because they ouerflowed in voluptuousness, Virgins but too curious in
setting forth their hair.
by the locks he alludes to the trimmings of virgins. We know they are but
too curious in tricking and setting out their hair. Isaiah therefore on the
contrary describes here a dressing far discrepant from the former; to wit,
that from the head down to the feet, they should be covered with ignominy,
with filth and mire, in stead of that brave and costly attire they were wont to
wear. Maidens and virgins will scarsly be seen to pass through the
streets, much less through high ways: but the Chaldeans must pass through
the floods, and that with the thigh or leg uncovered.

Verse. 3. Thy filthiness shall be discovered, and thy shame shall be seen: I
will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.
THis is the conclusion The conclusion.
of the former sentence, as if he should say, As long as Babylon flourished she
kept her reputation, and was greatly esteemed: for oftentimes under riches and
authority there lie many ulcers, as under vailes, which being taken away, the
filth is discovered to the great shame of the parties, as Demosthenes speaking
of Philip king of Macedon says, Whilst men's bodies are in good plight, the
weakness which is hidden in some of the members is not espied, A saying of
Demosthenes, speaking of the estate of Philip king of Macedonia.
but if the body fall into any dangerous sickness, then all is out of order,
here is a breach felt, there is a sinew perished, or somewhat else out of tune.

The same we see to happen in kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Cities ill
governed; for the filth and corruption which before was covered under the
glory of their estates, A Simile.
being now a little troubled, are discovered; when their pomp and riches are
taken from them, then their cruelties, treasons, robberies, periuries, unjust
taxes, and other impieties, by which they purchased to themselves honor in
time of prosperity, begin to turn to their dishonor in the time of
adversity.

I will take vengeance, and will not meet thee as a man.] It is as much as if
he should say, Think not thou have to do in this case with a mortal man,
whose violence thou may resist: for in other places where mention is made of
man's hand, it signifies a kind of moderation. But here the Prophet shows that
the Chaldeans shall find no relief at all, because God will utterly root
them out. Others translate, I will not meet a man, that is to say, I will
accept of no man that shall entreat for them: Let who will come forth and
intercede for them, yet I will not remit their fault, neither lessen nor
assuage the punishment one whit. This sense agrees well, but it is a little
constreined, in regard of the disposition of the words: for thus, the verb
Paga, which signifies to go before, must be taken in the passive
signification, which cannot be. Moreover, the Prophet says not simply that
God will not be entreated, but that he will not be appeased. Thus the first
exposition suits best, if we consider rightly of the order of the words: yet
every one may follow whether of the senses he will, for take which you list,
the sum will be, that the Lord will race them out without pity or mercy;
only this I say, the first exposition likes me well, because it agrees best
with the text.

Verse. 4. Our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the holy one of Israel.
The end of Gods judgments is to manifest himself the redeemer of his Church.
THe Prophet shows to what end God would take vengeance upon the Chaldeans,
even in regard of the peoples salvation, as he said in Chap. 45.4. But this
sentence has much greater force in it, in regard it comes in abruptly, and as
one wakening himself out of a dream when he saw Babylon ruinated, which
before made it her trade to subdue and tread other nations under her feet. And
he shows that this shall come to pass for none other cause, but to the end
the Lord may manifest himself to be the redeemer and auenger of his people.

The holy one of Israel.] As if he should say, This people was not elect, nor
separated from other nations in vain: his meaning is then to set forth a
testimony of his power in this particular, and that is the reason why he
ioines this title holy unto it.

Verse. 5. Sit still and get thee into darkness, o daughter of the Chaldeans, for
thou shall no more be called, The Lady of kingdoms.
HE continues on the same argument still, By how much the more the peoples
deliverance seemed incredible, by so much the more is the Prophet forced to set
it forth by sundry descriptions.
and shows, that the end of the Chaldean Monarchy draws near. But because
this seemed somewhat incredible, he repeates the same thing in many words,
which he might have dispatched in one sentence. He uses these descriptions
then to set the thing done (as it were) before them. Where he bids them sit
still and be quiet, it is in sign of shame and contempt. And yet this silence
may be opposed to her first estate, wherein she reigned as a Lady: for then she
not only lifted up her voice with authority like a Mistress, but she caused her
words to give such a sound, that the noise thereof terrified all the East. Now
the Prophet commands her to sit still and leave her cackquet, in regard her
condition is so changed, that where she was wont to speak so loud before, she
shall not dare now to mutter one word distinctlie from between her teeth.

Now in that he bids her enter into darkness, I willingly receive the first
exposition: for those who are fallen from a prosperous estate into adversity,
sit down and put their mouths in the dust with shame, and dare scarcely so
much as gasp. For thou shall no more be called. We know that this Monarchy had
a large extent, and was Lady over many great kingdoms, for she was the head of
all dominions, it was needful then that these poor captives should be
fortified with these promises, and advertised of Babylons ruin, that they
might be put in hope of their deliverance.

Verse. 6. I was wroth with my people^ I have polluted mine inheritance, and
given them into thine hand: thou did show them no mercy, but thou did lay
the very heavy yoke upon the ancient.
THis is a prevention, A prevention.
whereby he admonishes the Jews (as he often has done heretofore) that their
captivity was a scurge inflicted upon them by God: for if the stroke had come
from the hand of another, then the remedy had not bin in him. That they might
be persuaded then that he which had smitten them was able to heal them, he
wills them to impute it to the desert of their own sins that they were so
hardly dealt withal; yet he exhorts them to hope well, in regard God was
minded to keep a measure in chastising of them; and withal touches the cause
why the Chaldeans should be overthrown, namely, that God, who is the just
revenger of wrongs and injuries, has much more just cause to revenge the
outrages cruelly misused the prisoners whom they had vanquished.

Now whereas he says that he was wroth, and therefore polluted his heritage,
let us not think that having changed his mind he was so far offended as
utterly to neglect the care of his people, so as to think no more upon his
covenant: no, the contrary plainly appears as well by the event, as in that
he vouchsafes to call them his people, notwithstanding the greater part became
Apostataes from him, and were justly rejected of him as profane. But in
speaking thus, he had respect to his covenant, for he had an eye to the
foundation and original whence they issued: so as those who came of Abraham
according to ye flesh, are reckoned for the people of God, albeit there were
very few which were his children by the right of adoption, for all in a manner
falsely challenged to themselves the title of Abraham's offspring. Thus the word
wrath in scripture is not to be attributed to any passion in God, Wrath, not
any passion in God.
who ever desires the salvation of his people, but unto us, who provoke him by
our wickednesses. For he has just cause to be angry, albeit he cease not
still to love us. God may justly be angry with us, and yet love us.
He so prophanes his Church then, that is to say, prostitutes it, and gives it
up as a pray into the enemies hands,

If the Lord pollute his Church then for a time: if tyrants cruelly oppress
her, let us not be out of heart, but let us flee to this promise, A consolation
of great use.
to wit, that he who avenged himself upon the insolency of the Chaldeans,
will not let the rage of our enemies go unrecompensed. Moreover we are
diligently to observe, that men ought not to abuse their victories, to handle
their prisoners hardly, as often it falls out, Show no cruelties upon the
vanquished.
for when they cast off all humanity, they become like wild beasts, and spare
neither old nor young, men nor women, when they have gotten the masterie: in a
word, they utterly forget their condition. Now howsoever they abuse their
power, yet we may resolve upon it, that God will meet with them in the end,
for such shall have judgment merciless, as will show no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

But it may be demanded how the Chaldeans could exceed the bounds which God had
prescribed them; Zachary of the same unruliness of profane nations, who
violently rushed upon his people to destroy them, though his wrath was not
much moved against them. I am greatly angry, says he, against the careless
heathen, for I was angry but a little, and they helped forwards the
affliction, Zach. 1.15. Here then he amplifies their fault, in that they spared
not the ancient, whose age naturally procures some reverence. Whence we may
gather how insupportable their wrath was against those which resisted them.

Verse. 7. And thou saydst, I shall be a Lady for ever, so that thou did not
set thy mind to these things, neither did thou remember the latter end.
HEre he taxes the pride of the Babylonians, who promised unto themselves a
perpetual domination, and never thought of any falling from their greatness by
any inconvenience that might happen. See how the children of this world are
bewitched with their prosperity, contemning all others in respect of
themselves. But Isaiah scorns such pride, and shows, that there is nothing
more abominable in the sight of God. To say, is taken here to conclude in a
man's self of a thing: which will better appear anon. For the proud are not
wont to utter such words in public before every one, but these high conceits
are boiling evermore within them, although they make no show thereof outwardly.
Now this is a folly insupportable, that men will so far forget their own
fragilitie as thus to exempt themselves from the common rank of others, for in
so doing they think not of what mould themselves be made of, to wit, dust and
ashes. I grant the faithful may be secure, in regard they are prepared with
patience to expect and look for the worst that may befall them, because they
are covered under the wings of Gods protection, and yet they are not free from
the consideration of those evils to which they are subject, The faithful
secure, and yet not free from fears.
in regard that there is no estate permanent in this world. The profane then
lift up their crosts against God, as often as by their fond imaginations, they
promise to themselves some rest in the midst of the continual tempests
wherewith this world is tossed.

Now to set forth the Babylonians fury, he adds that the length of time made
them never the more moderate. It was no great wonder if upon hot blood they
played the bedlems: but to exercise their cruelty from day to day, having got
the conquest, and to insult over poor captives without ceasing, was a thing
utterly insupportable, and more then barbarous. But all this flowed from pride
(as I have said: Psalm. 55.19.
) for they thought of no changes: they imagined their mountain stood so
strong, as there was no remoouing or altering of their firm estate. Here is
the second reason then wherefore the Lord brought Babylons Monarchy to the
ground.

Neither did thou remember the latter end thereof.] Some think there is a
change of the person here, but without any good ground. For mine own part, I
take it he speaks of the end of Jerusalem: and this is the most received
opinion. For the Lord often speaks of his Church, without mentioning her name,
by way of excellency: as we also do, when we would express the vehement
affection we bear to some that we love dearly. But the wicked are ignorant
of the end of the Church; Zach. 2.8.
neither do they know wherefore the Lord corrects her: they make themselves
merry with her mournings, because they would gladly behold her utter
subversion; never thinking that God cares for her.



Verse. 8. Therefore now hear thou that art given to pleasures, and dwell
careless: she says in her heart; I am, and none else: I shall not sit as a
widow, neither shall I know the loss of children.
Babels intolerable pride.
Here the Prophet threatens the Babylonians their ruin again: wherein hev seth
very fit words to confirm the peoples hearts in good hope, lest being amazed
at the prosperity of the Chaldeans, they might happily faint, and be brought
out of heart. And yet he speaks not to Babylon, as if he meant to forewarne
her; but it is rather said for the consolation of the faithful. He adds that
she was drunken in pleasures: for howsoever prosperity in it self is not to
be condemned, Prosperity in it self not to be condemned.
in regard it is the good gift of God; yet we are not ignorant how the
children of this world are wont to abuse it, by falling into riot and excess.
Moreover, he now touches in a word, what it was which she said in her self
in the former verse; to wit, a secret persuasion, whereby she concluded that
things should come thus and thus to pass. For so the proud are wont to do,
howsoever for modesties sake they dissemble and cover it, because they would
not that every one should be privy thereto.

I am, and there is none but I.] What an insupportable insolency call you
this? she prefers her self above all the world. First, she thinks she stands
by her own power: secondly, she makes that the rest of the world are not
worthy to be compared with her: thirdly, she promises her self a rest
unchangeable. For the first, none can say truly I am, but God only, None can
say truly, I am, but God only.
to whom it belongs properly to say, I am that I am: Exodus 3.14. For by this
title he distinguishes himself from all creatures. Thus then Babylon took
from God the honor due unto him, when she imagined that she stood by her
own power: and in advancing her self thus, she bid battle unto Jehovah.
Moreover, she wronged the whole world, in abasing them thus under her feet.
But these haughty minds first endeavor to begin with God, that so they may
make him their enemy: and then they set themselves against men, that so they
may leave none exempt either in heaven nor earth, against whom they make not
war by their ouerweening. The third member, which contains the height of her
pride, consists, in that she resolves upon a state that cannot be moved; never
thinking what little hold worldlings have of things present: for often times,
the higher men are advanced, the lower is their fall.

Verse. 9. But these two things shall come to thee suddenly on a day, the loss
of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for
the multitude of thy diuinations, and for the great abundance of thine
inchanters.
WHereas Babel thought her self exempt from fear of al dangers, the Prophet
here denounces an extreme calamity to befall her. Babels fall.
She promised her self that she should never feel loss neither of husband
nor children: on the contrary he shows, that both these evils shall overtake
her: so as she shall be made a woeful spectacle for all to behold with
contempt, in regard of her desolatenesse. He adds that it shall come upon her
in perfection: that is to say, there shall not one jot or tittle thereof fail:
for she shall know the misery of widowhood, with a witness; as they say. And
thus there is a close opposition between the moderate corrections, in which
some mitigation may be expected, and that horrible vengeance of God, which
brings forth no other issue but a final desolation: for the more the wicked
exalt themselves in their pride, the lower will the Lord abase them in his
indignation and wrath. The higher the proud exalt themselves, the lower the
Lord will abase them.


Because of the multitude, etc.] Others translate; Of thy soothsaiers. But me
thinks the word should rather note out the vice, then the persons. Some take
the letter Beth, for a particle of rendering the cause, and expound it, Because:
in which sense it is often found in the Scriptures: albeit we may expound,
that the Chaldeans shall find no help nor succor in their deceivable
diuinations, in which they gloried so much: and so it may be translated,
Notwithstanding.

As if he should say; Notwithstanding the multitude of thy diuiners and
coniecturers, these things must needs befall Babylon. For he derides the
confidence which they put in these fond prognosticators, through whom they
thought to foresee things to come. But in regard he will insist longer upon
this point in the 12. and 13. verses, therefore I willingly consent, that he
here recites one of the causes of their destruction; to wit, that they
despised all dangers, upon the confidence they conceived in these impostures
and illusions.

Verse. 10. For thou have trusted in thy wickedness: thou have said; None sees
me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, they have caused thee to rebel; and thou
have said in thine heart, I am, and none else.
HE explanes that which he said in the former verse, though we may extend it
further; to wit, that he taxes the Chaldeans for their fraud, oppression,
outrages, and wicked practices, whereby they so highly magnified themselves.
For all these great kingdoms lightly become great dens of thieves, as an
archtheefe which once reigned among them said: because they can never enlarge
their territories, but by plucking from others by force and violence; therefore
they drive the lawful possessors out of their houses, that they may be Lords
and Kings within themselves. Now he calls that wickedness; which he adornes
afterward with these goodly titles of vvisdome and knowledge. For thus tyrants
are wont to compass their devices: they forget all equity and right, that
they may make the poor to fall in their nets. But the Lord detects and
discouers their trecheries, so as every one may see they dance but in a net.
After Job has said, that God catches the wise in their wisdom: to show what
this wisdom is, he calls it craftiness: Job 5.13.

As touching that which by and by follows; namely, that Babylon said none saw
her wickednesses: this sets forth with what freedom she committed the same.
For seeing reverence or shame holds men in some awe, he that fears not God as
a witness of his behavior, and thinks men notes nothing he does; such a one
will not stick to practice any villainy. I grant that the most wicked are
sometimes stung with the worm of an evil conscience: but they close up their
eyes, and plunge themselves into a benummednes and deadness of conscience, as
Moses within the ground. In a word, their confidences are seared up with an hot
iron. But above all we see how they scorn God with a desperate presumption, as
if by their fetches they were able to dazzle his eyes. For when they purpose to
beguile the simple, it suffices that they may do it closely: as if belike,
they could deceive his eyes [who in all places beholds both the evil and the
good: Prou. 15.3.] But they flatter themselves in their cunning in vain; for
the Lord will easily pluck off their vizards. Let all men detest such
vvisdome then, by which men deceive their own souls, and pull inevitable
ruin upon their own heads.

I am, and none else.] He again repeates those blasphemies mentioned in the 9.
verse: that all might know how much God abhors them; and how near such are to
endless perdition, that exalt themselves higher then is fit.

Verse. 11. Therefore shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know the
morning thereof: destruction shall fall upon thee, which thou shall not be
able to put away: destruction shall come upon thee suddenly, ere thou be
aware.
HE continues still to scorn the vain confidence of the Babylonians, Babels
sudden downfall.
who thought all things safe, by reason of the foresight they had touching the
situation of the stars. He therefore denounces against them, that which the
Scriptures affirm to hang over the heads of all contemners of God. When they
shall say, Peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them: 1.
These. 5.3. So as they shall not know in the morning, what shall befall them ere
night. Now it appears sufficiently out of Dan. 5.30. how certainly these
things came to pass.

Verse. 12. Stand now among thine Inchanters, and in the multitude of thy
Soothsayers (with whom thou have wearied thy self from thy youth) if so be
thou may have profit, or if so be thou may have strength.
THe Prophet speaks to the Chaldeans, Babels confusion remediless.
as we are wont to speak to common ruffians or harlots, who will receive no
admonitions. Hold on your course still; you shall see in the end how the world
will go with you. So he says; Thou shall tell me one day what good thou have
gotten by thy soothsaiers and coniecturers. By the word Stand, he alludes to
the gesture of diuiners, who stand still in a place, til some bird fly that
way. Also, the Astrologers stand observing the course of the heavens, and will
not miss the least point. If any had rather expound it Divines, then
Diuinations; I do not much contradict him, because the word Kabarim is
ambiguous.

If thou may be strengthened:] As if he should say, Thy diuiners can not
turn away that destruction which is ready to fall upon thine head, for he
insults over their perverse confidence: foretelling, that after they shall have
used all ye shifts they can, yet they shall prove fruitless and bootlesse.

Verse. 13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels: let now the Or,
binders of the heaven.
Astrologers, the starre-gazers, and Prognosticators Or, come forth.
stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
A plainer description of that which before was delivered obscurely.
NOw he describes that more plainly which he said a little before somewhat
obscurely, to wit, that all the counsels which Babel took in times past shall
turn to her destruction, in regard she nourished within her a vain hope
wrought in her heart, from the persuasion of her wisdom and power, as if
nothing had bin able to have done her hurt. He speaks not of counsel in the
singular number, but of counsels, and, of multitudes of them, to show, that
they boasted and bragged in vain, though they were never so witty and cunning
to deceive; for the fuller their counsels were of fine conueiances, and the
more they were in number, the more should they be vexed that were the deuisers
of the^.

This is a general sentence therefore against all such, as trusting in the
excellency of their wit, build Castles in the air, resting upon their own
providence, and invent by all means how they may circumuent and catch the
simple in their ginnes, for God will scatter all their plots, and overthrow
their counsels, as he threatened before in Chap. 30.1. Woe to them (says he)
that take counsel, but not of me; that cover with a covering, but not by my
spirit. What is the reason then that men prosper not in their counsels? Surely
because they seek not at all unto God, Iam. 1.5.
from whose mouth we ought to look for all wisdom and counsels in asking it
at his hands. The more such kind of persons consult then, the more trouble they
put themselves unto, and the less fruit they gain thereby, as Solomon well
says, They rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of
carefulnes, travailing for nothing, Psalm. 127.2. for he speaks there of the
unbelievers, who have not learned to cast their care upon the Lord, but
trusting in their own industry, enterprise many things rashly and
unadvisedly. The Lord derides such confidence, and causing it to become
frustrate, in the end they feel by experience how little good they get by
their plots and endeavors, and thus they are corrected for their boldness,
whilst Gods children enjoy his blessings with quiet sleep, as it is further
added in that Psalm: not that they are utterly exempt from all troubles, but
because first of all they vex not themselves: secondly, they commend the issues
of all their affairs with quiet minds to the blessing of God.

Come forth] Here we see what these counselors are of whom the Prophet
speaks, to wit, those diuiners who gat themselves much credit among the people
under the vain title of wise men, as if forsooth they had known all things by
beholding the stars: but we have spoken before Chap. 44 25. of the vanity
that is in this Judicial Astronomy. Judicial Astronomy.
If any object,

Now he adds very pleasantly, that they bind the heavens: in regard they stick
not to auerre that their dreams are as certain as if they had the world tied
in a string, or as if they had the stars clasped in their arms. Yet if any
had rather translate enchanters, the sense will not be amiss, for the Hebrew
word signifies both the one and the other. Now howsoever it be not evil in it
self to consider of the situation of the stars, yet the Prophet
notwithstanding says, that such as will foretell things to come, do pass the
bounds of this science. To consider of the situation of the stars, allowed to
foretell things to come, thereby condemned.
It also seems, that to make these speculators the more odious (in regard they
did discredit all divine predictions) he closely opposes them to the true
Prophets, for when we fix a fatal necessity to the stars, Gods judgments
must needs be put out of mind.

Verse. 14. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they
shall not deliver their own lives from the power of the flame: there shall be
no coals to warm at, nor light to sit by.
HE here inueyes more sharply against these Astrologians, A terrible
denunciatio^ against these Astrologians.
who aggrauated Babels pride by their vain brags: for such deceivers are wont
to bereave men of all fear of God, by attributing all things to the
disposition of the stars, so as they leave nothing to Gods providence. See
from whence the contempt of God and of all his threatenings springs, Whence the
contempt of God and all his threatenings springs
namely, from not attributing the punishments which he sends to his hand, but
to destiny, and to a meeting of second causes, which wizards fondly imagine in
their own brain. This is the reason why he takes up the Chaldeans in such a
rigorous sort, resembling them unto stubble set on fire, which is consumed in
an instant; for he compares them not to vvood with which one may make a fire
of some continuance to vvarme himself by, but to stubble, or hemp-stalks, to
show, that there is nothing of so short continuance as such kind of men.

Verse. 15. Thus shall they serve thee with whom thou have wearied thee, Or, and
wi h those with whom thou have traded.
even thy merchants from thy youth: every one shall wander to his own quarter;
none shall save thee.
He now directs his denunciation against the Babylonians.
Having denounced destruction against these Star-gazers, he returns to the
Babylonians; and tells them that they are not to expect help from them, whence
they thought to have it: for they should but lose their time in resting upon
such counsels, after which they had so long and so painfully traveled. Now in
speaking of such as traded with her, he means those whom we commonly call
Pettifoggers: which is a similitude taken from Merchants who have infinite
shifts to beguile: for there is no kind of subtle fetches, but they have them
at their fingers ends. Princes in regard of their greatness traffic not; but
they will use such fellows to serve their own turns, and to traffic for
them. Now howsoever this may be understood of all those that were in league
with the Chaldeans, and had succored them, yet the Prophet aims specially at
her Diuiners.

Where he adds, from thy youth: it is to aggrauate Babels iniquity, who of
old was poisoned with this fond opinion: so as it was become another nature
unto her.

Every one shall wander to his quarter] Some think the Prophet speaks of the
Astrologers flight, in regard every one should be constrained to shift for his
own life: and I will willingly agree to this exposition. But yet I also think
that he alludes to the regions of heaven, which the Astrologers part and
measure out, to draw their prognostications from thence. He derides their vain
brags then: as if he should say; They retire to their regions, but they shall
wander in their imaginations, and shall find no place of refuge. If any had
rather understand it of their revolt, from whom Babel looked for present help
in time of need, I gainsay him not.

THE XLVIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Hear ye this, O house of Iakob, which are called by the name of
Israel, and are come out of the waters of Judah: which swear by the name of
the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel; but not in truth nor in
righteousness.
Now the Prophet directs his speech to the Jews.
NOW he directs his speech to the Jews, whom he chiefly respected in the
whole chapter before going.

For he was not sent to the Babylonians; but so speaks to the^, that still his
meaning is, the Jews should make their profit of it; for whose good he was
principally appointed, The drift of Isaiah in this Chapter.
and ordained to that high and excellent calling. He has foretold the ruin of
Babel then, to the end the Jews might in patience and silence wait for their
deliverance: and yet, that the greatness and power of their enemies in the
mean while, might not daunt nor discourage them. But resting securely upon
these promises, they might stand with invincible force against al temptations.
Now in as much as the Jews were somewhat obstinate, and would not easily be
brought to credit these promises: as also that Isaiah by the spirit of
prophecy, well foresaw how stiff necked and rebellious they would prove, even
in their captivity; he therefore reproues them thus sharply. Ezech. in Chap.
33 31. shows at large how great their incredulity was, when they murmured
against God and fell off the hooks, making no more account of these promises,
then of so many fables. It is not without cause then that Isaiah is so
vehement: showing that they much dishonored the Lord, in that they would not
rest upon his truth.

He speaks to Israel; but so, as to Israel, degenerate: Israel in name, and
not Israel in deed. He gives them not this title then, by way of honor; but
rather to convince them of their false confidence, in that they wrongfully
usurped this honorable title, and nothing at all answered the truth thereof in
their practice. For why did God dignifie his servant Iakob with this name, but
because he showed himself valorous and invincible in adversity? Which
appears by that wrestling he had with God, who pitcheth the field as it were
to make war upon us, when he exercises us with diverse tribulations: Genesis
32.28. How could this title agree then to his successors, Prou. 24.10.
when they fainted and forsook their confidence in the day of adversity? He
afterward reprocheth them, in that they nothing at all resembled the holy
fathers, from whom they were descended.

By waters, under a figure, he means the fountain and spring from whence
the Jews issued: for I allow not of the Rabbines ridiculous gloss; who by the
word waters, understand that sperm whereof children are engendered, because it
is moist and waterish: but it is a similitude very fitly drawn from waters
which flow from a spring. Now having taxed them for bastard and degenerate
children, he adds that they falsely cover the same title under the cloak of
piety and religion; from the truth whereof, they were also revolted.

Now because an oath is a part of Gods worship, An oath, a part of Gods,
worship.
he here puts it for the whole, under the figure synecdoche. For as the
Idolaters offer God great wrong in swearing by their Idols; so the true
worshippers do highly honor him in swearing by his name, for thereby they
protest to have but one God, whose name they thus glory in. But in this place
the Prophet inueyes bitterly against the hypocrites, Hypocrites taxed.
who had nothing in their mouths but the name of God, and tossed it
continually upon the tip of their tongues, but in the mean while their hearts
were far off from him, as it is in Chap. 29.13. for this cause he says, But
not in righteousness, which word he takes here for vprightnes and soundnes of
heart, without which nothing we do is acceptable before God. Or, truth and
righteousness may be taken for words of one signification, as if he should say,
There is nothing but hypocrisy and vain shows in all your doings; you
profess your selves to be the servants of the God of truth, and behold, you
let all the world see that you are stuffed with disloyalty and lies.

Verse. 2. For they are called of the holy City, and stay themselves upon the
God of Israel, whose name is the Lord of hosts.
An amplification of the Jews hypocrisy.
HE holds himself to the point still, and in other words refutes their vain
shows, for falsely they gloried to be citizens of the holy City, and yet they
stuck not to pollute and defile it with their leaud practices.

Jerusalem was worthily reputed holy, in regard God had sanctified it for the
place of his abode, but it was profaned with so many abuses, that there was no
holiness at all in a manner left in it. In the 15. and 24. Psalm we see who are
worthy to be esteemed the true citizens of Jerusalem, but seeing the Jews
blushed not to play fast and loose with God, they thought it enough to cover
themselves under this veil, Iere. 7.
of the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.

Where he says, they stayed upon the God of Israel: he speaks not of a true
confidence, but of a malepart boldness. For as the faithful stay and rest
upon the Lord with their whole hearts, so hypocrites do falsely mask
themselves with his name, and are besotted with a vain and fond persuasion:
they contemn all things, yea, they fear not impudentlie to disgorge this
brag; Tush, God will surely help us, he will never forsake his people, as if
God were a softerer of such a profane crew. To be short, they cast his laws
behind their backs, and tread them under their feet, and yet protest with high
terms that God is the stay of their salvation. But to the end they should not
think to escape unpunished for such dallyings, the Prophet affirms, that Gods
majesty and glory shall no whit be impeached, though hypocrites endeavor to
transfigure him at their pleasures. For in calling him the Lord of hosts, he
adds it as a threatening, to the end they might know that the God of Israel,
under which title they vainly covered themselves, was also the Lord of hosts
to punish such hypocrites, and that could not endure to be thus mocked and
trifled withal.

Verse. 3. I have declared the former things of old, and they went out of my
mouth, and I showed them: I did them suddenly, and they came to pass.
HE accuses the Jews of ingratitude, Before he taxed their hypocrisy: they
now their ingratitude.
in regard they distrusted GOD who had showed them infinite testimonies of his
goodness to confirm them in a true and sound faith, and thus he bereaues them
of all excuse, in telling them that he has declared former things. Now it
seems he speaks not only of their redemption from their captivity, but of
other benefits which the Lord had done for his people; as if he should say, I
began of old to tell you what should ensue, neither have I promised any thing
which is not accomplished: but notwithstanding so many experiences, you believe
nothing that I say, no not the most certain and the infallible truth.

We may also suppose, that the Prophet spoke not only to those which then
lived, but likewise to such as were afterward to survive them in the
captivity, that when the calamity should befall them, they might call to
mind what was foretold them, for God meant to have this prophecy renoumed,
that during their exile, they might know how these things fell not out by
chance, and therefore were to gather consolation thence. Isaiah reprehends them
sharply then, in regard that albeit they knew the truth of these prophesies by
the event, yet they would not acknowledge Gods hand in the^, neither would they
rest upon his promises. Had he not good cause then, think you, to rebuke them
thus sharply, and to condemn their obstinacy? Yes doubtless. For they
resisted that hand which offered them relief, and rejected his mercy: they
limited the holy one of Israel, in that Cyrus did but dally with them, only
permitting them to go, that having gadged

I so understand these predictions then whereof the Prophet speaks, that under
them I also comprehend the ancient prophesies, in which the Lord had said to
Abraham, that his posterity should be led captive, and should after be
restored to their first liberty, Genesis 15.13. And so we must come to other
prophesies of this nature by degrees, which successively followed one anothet,
for even this prophecy was many times confirmed now in one age, and then in
another. His meaning is then, that the Lord yet never foretold any thing, but
the issue and event answered unto the beginning. God yet never foretold any
thing, but the event was answerable to the beginning.


Verse. 4. Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass.
The Jews obstinacy and inpudencie discovered.
THe Lord here protests by his Prophet, that he spoke of things to come,
because of the peoples obstinacy. As if the Prophet should say; I have done
more for you then stood with my calling. Not that he only bent his speech this
way, for we know that the principal drift of his sermons appertains to the
godly, who quietly obey, and willingly give ear. But Isaiah, that had to deal
with a froward people, rightly affirms, that God would have used a most
sovereign remedy, in ratifying his law by many prophecies, and that
successively one after another. For as he had foretold nothing but the truth
to their fathers, so he shows that he continues still so to do, that hereby
he might batter down the obstinacy and rebellion of this people.

He says their neck was as an iron sinew; because it could not be bowed. I
grant that sinews are stiff, yet they are bowable. But here he says,
nothing will bow them, because they are as untamed heifers. Afterward he
adds, a brow of brass, to set forth their impudency. Two things holds us in
awe: Two things keeps us in awe.
first, teachablenesse, if we willingly submit our selves to the wholesome
admonitions unteachable and shameless. Notwithstanding when the Lord cannot
otherwise remedy such a mischief, yet he so far supports our rebellion, as
to admonish us of things to come. And thus, transforming himself as it were,
he is ready to try all the ways he can, that he might allure us unto him,
and set us again in the right way.

Verse. 5. Therefore I have declared it unto thee of old; before it came to
pass I have showed it thee, lest thou should say, Mine Idol has done
them, and my earned Image and my molten Image has commanded them.
Again he propounds the same thing unto them, that the people being delivered
out of Babylon, might acknowledge that God himself had done it, lest they
should attribute this redemption either to their Idols, or to fortune. Idols,
seeing the Jews professed to worship but one God: I answer, Ezechiel
complains of this in his eight Chapter, verse. 3. For there being carried in a
vision into Jerusalem, he saw the Sanctuary of the Lord polluted with diverse
idolatries and abominations. It is no marvel then if our Prophet put them in
mind of God, the only author of all benefits, to the end they might
acknowledge their redemption to be his work.

Lest thou should say.] He means that the Jews should be inexcusable, if
they did not confess this benefit of being set free from bondage, to proceed
from Gods hand. For that which was foretold so long before came it came to
pass, could not fall out, neither fortune nor chance. He ioines Gods
prescience then with his power, showing that he has not only foretold these
things, but has also performed them. Here then we may behold as in a glass,
the frowardness of our own hearts, A looking-glass wherein we may take a view
of the frowardness of our nature.
which are always plotting how to bereave the Lord of his deserved praise,
even as often as he sends us any help, or bestows any benefit upon us, whereby
he stretches out his hand to becken us to himself. But the world resists God
in this behalf, even with an high hand, evermore attributing that to
creatures, which proceeds from God: as in the Papacy, where we see they
ascribe the benefits of God, unto the Saints departed; as if he sat idle in
heaven, or were fallen into a dead sleep. It is needful therefore that the
light of Gods word should always shine before us, for the rectifying of our
judgments: for we shall always miss the mark in considering of Gods
works, unless he give light unto our steps, by the lantern of his blessed
truth.

The same thing often befalles many at this day, which Isaiah bewailes touching
his nation; to wit, that notwithstanding all admonitions, yet they cease not to
forge Idols, which they adorn with Gods spoils as it were. The Apostles,
Peter and John, in their life time, Act. 3.12. cried with a loud voice, that
they did no miracles by their own power or godliness: Peter and John made to
work miracles by the Papists now they are dead, who protested they did nothing
by their own power being alive.
and yet we see how the Papists, whether they will or no; yea as it were to vex
them, will burden them now they are dead with infinite miracles. Well,
howsoever God at this day foretelles us not of things to come, yet shall the
Law and the Gospel be of no less force to condemn our unthankfulness, then
if we had seen the wonders (whereof God showed himself the author) contained
in the prophecies.

Verse. 6. Thou have heard; Or, see all.
behold all this. And will not ye declare it? I have showed thee new things
Or, from.
even now, and hid things which thou knew not.
BY this we may better discern that the Prophet speaks of the captivity to
come, God spoke plainly, but we are dull of hearing.
and of the redemption that was to ensue. Wherein he as well provided for the
good of the people of his own time, as for theirs that were to succeed: that
so, albeit those which then lived, made no right use thereof, yet at least
those that suruiued them, being hereby admonished, might amend. For it often
falls out that the word moves not such as are present: nay, they having heard
it, go their ways and contemn it: but their successors on the contrary,
receive it with more reverence.

Where he bids them behold: some think the Prophet so propounds the event of
the thing, as if he should say; God never said any thing, but the truth thereof
has manifested it self. But I expound this word behold, or See, thus; Seeing
the Lord has spoken: it is thy duty to think well of that he has uttered,
and to give diligent attention thereto. Whence we may gather, that our dullness
is the cause why we suffer that which proceeds out of Gods mouth, to fall to
the ground; and that many do therefore cover themselves with the veil of
ignorance in vain. For the Lord speaks distinctly enough, uttering to every
man's capacity, as much as is needful for them to know; if the auditors were
but as attentive as they ought, and did advisedly consider what is said.

But the Lord requires somewhat more of his people besides hearing and
understanding of his word; to wit, that they should publish the wonders whereof
they have had experience. And thus undoubtedly he instructs his servants, upon
this condition, that being taught themselves, they should labor in the next
place, to bring others to confession of the same faith with them.

From now, is as much as if he had said; Note this day in which the Lord
foretelles thee by my mouth, that which thou knew not: for it cannot be
apprehended nor foreesene by any humane conjecture.

Verse. 7. They were created now, and not of old. And ever before this thou
heardst them not, lest thou should say; Behold, I knew them.
Neither the peoples captivity nor deliverance happened by chance.
THe Prophet shows that he disputes not about things known, or understood, by
long use: first, to correct the pride which is naturally grafted in all men,
(for they usurp upon that which belongs to God only:) and secondly, that none
should attribute the least jot thereof unto fortune, or to any second causes
whatsoever. Men use many shifts to deprive God of his glory, applying al their
wits, to see how they may part among the creatures, that which is his proper
right, that they may leave unto him no more but his naked and bare titles. Lest
the people should imagine then, that they were either overcome by the power of
the Chaldeans, or set at liberty by chance, therefore the Prophet so often
repeates, that all is Gods work.

Where he affirms, that they heard not: some expound, that the people
rejected Gods admonitions, and would not obey the wholesome counsels which were
given them. But I think he meant another thing, to wit, that that which could
not be known by humane reason, of which also the Jews were ignorant, was so
manifested unto them, that they could not well defraud the holy Ghost of his
just praise. And this is evident enough by the scope of the text.

Verse. 8. Yet thou heardst them not, neither did thou know them; neither
yet was thine ear opened of old: for I knew that thou would grievously
transgress; therefore have I called thee Or, a rebel.
a transgressor from the womb.
THe Prophets meaning is, A confirmation of that wherewith they were taxed,
verse. 4.
that the Lord has not insisted so long upon this matter without cause, but
has been thus instant in exhorting the people, to the end they might
acknowledge that they were chastised, and in the end delivered from all their
miseries, by the immediate hand of God. For they (being of an obstinate nature)
might complain, that it was needless to trouble their heads with so many
repetitions of one and the same thing. The Prophet answers, that it is no
wonder, seeing he has to deal with a sort of transgressors: and thus in other
words, he confirms that which he said in the fourth verse, touching the iron
sinew. The sum is, that God knowing the peruersitie of this people, omitted
no good means to win them to his obedience: by how much the more then they
have been convinced by sufficient and infallible testimonies, so much the less
shall they be excusable before him. Now having pulled off their vizard of
holiness, to wit, their glorying in the name of Israel, (as in the first
verse) he imposes upon them a more proper name, and flatly calls them rebels.

By the womb. I understand not their first estate, by and by after they were
separated to be the Lords people; but from their deliverance out of Egypt,
which was as a birth of the Church: Exodus 12.21. But howsoever this people had
had infinite experiences of Gods great goodness toward them, yet they never
ceased to behave themselves disloyally against so good a benefactor; nor to wax
more and more untamed: so that he had just cause to tax them with the titles
of rebels and traitors.

Verse. 9. For my names sake will I defer my wrath, and for my praise will I
refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off.
Having reproched the people touching the malice which flowed from the fathers
to the children, and so to their nephews: The scope of the former
reprehensio^s manifested in this verse.
now he shows that they are still vpheld by Gods mercy, whereas they were
otherwise worthy to perish an hundred times. The use it was fit they should be
humbled to acknowledge that their deliverance proceeded wholly from the mere
grace and good will of God. And thus we see that the former reprehension tended
to teach them, that it was the Lords hand that drew them out of Babylon as out
of a grave, not for their deserts, for they were well worthy to have bin
utterly destroyed.

Distinction of the Sophisters.
which they affirm not to be free, because we must make satisfaction for the
same unto God. But our Prophet teaches, that God freely remits it, and that
only for his own names sake. For he speaks here of the punishment which he
might justly inflict upon the Jews. He had very good cause then to have
consumed them, if he had not respected the maintenance of his own glory.

Verse. 10. Behold, I have fined thee but not as silver: I have chosen thee in
the furnace of affliction.
God so corrects his Church, that in the mean while he thereby procures her
salvation.
THe Lord shows, that he used such measure in correcting his Church, that
therewithal he provided for their salvation. In the former verse he said that
he spared, or would spare them, because he respected his glory: now he shows
that he has chastised them in deed, yet so, that he did it for their good; for
he corrected them, to fine them, but we are not wont to try and fine that
which we mind to cast away: seeing then he had none other end, it follows that
he did it to procure their benefit and salvation thereby. Besides, he mentions
this trial by way of prevention, lest any should object, that Gods love little
appeared in so sharp afflictions. The Prophet, I say, does in fit season
prevent such a conceit, and tells them, that God has skill enough to correct
his Church in mercy, and yet not utterly to forsake her.

Moreover, he adds that he has not fined us as silver, Simile.
for then we should have bin utterly consumed. There is some purity to be
found in silver, but in us there is nothing but dross: and were it not that
the Lord made us silver, we should be burnt to ashes, yea to nothing, even as
tow or flax. Corrections would draw from us no purity at all. Corrections
would rather consume then refine us, if God should not moderate and sanctify
them to us.
The Lord in trying of us then has respect to our ability, lest he should
pass measure, as Psalm. 103.13.14. then he makes our chastisements profitable
unto us by the work of his own spirit, which would otherwise prove mortal
and deadly unto us.

To choose, is taken here to discern: for we ordinarily make choice of that
which we desire to keep, as we have said Chap. 7.15. where it is said, that
Christ should eat butter and honey, till he had knowledge to choose the good,
and refuse the evil. He shows then by this word what difference there is
between the stripes wherewith the faithful are smitten, and those which the
wicked are to sustain, wherewith in deed they shall be overwhelmed. But
howsoever the Lord tries and smites us, yet are we acceptable in his sight, A
Consolation. Psalm. 34.20. Hab. 3.2.
and he reserues still a fatherly affection toward us, even in the midst of
our afflictions, and in the end he brings us forth bright as silver, and so
makes our sufferings to become a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor in his
nostrils. To conclude, his meaning is, Exodus 3.2.
that God cease not even then to be good to his Church, whilst he seems to
consume her to nothing.

Verse. 11. For mine own sake, for mine own sake will I do it: for how should
my name be polluted? surely I will not give my glory unto another.
HE repeates that which he said before, but he adds an interrogation, A
repetition of that he said verse. 9. with an interrogation added.
which the Hebrews are wont to use when they speak of absurdities, as here,
Can it be that my name should be profaned? The second member, I will not give
my glory etc. serves for an exposition of this interrogation. Isaiah then
amplifies that which he spoke before in few words, and flies an higher pitch in
his style; for it is not only a bare amplification of the former sentence, but
rather a beautifying and adorning of it for ye greater confirmation thereof.
Now by these words he means that men as much as in them is, do profane Gods
name, and give away his glory unto creatures; only the Lord in his admirable
providence stops the course of this mischief, and keeps his glory
unblemished. Although we by our fault then do expose this glory of God to
contempt, yet will he preserve it as long as he shall continue our protector.
Hence we gather a very sweet consolation, to wit, that the Lord ioines his own
glory with our salvation, as we have often showed you before.

I will not give.] That is to say, I will not endure that any should rob me of
my glory: but this had fallen out if the people had bin utterly consumed, then
would they have scorned the God of Israel; for the wicked were wont in the
afflictions of the Saints to disgorge these blasphemies, Where is now their
God? Psalm. 79.10. Psalm. 42.3. Moses also alleges, that the Lord withheld his
hand from destroying the people for the same cause: I fear, says the Lord,
the fury of their adversaries, lest they should wax proud, and lest they
should say, our hie hand, and not the Lord has done all this, Deuteronomy. 32.27. And
questionless, as often as the Lord terrifies the faithful, by manifesting unto
them the signs of his heavy displeasure, the only remedy then left us is
this, that he will yet remember his own covenant of grace made with us in
Christ, lest he should prostitute his holy name to the outrages and blasphemies
of the wicked. Neither did the Prophet only stir them up hereby to give
thanks to God, and to confess that their prosperity proceeded from his free
mercy; but he did likewise put a form of prayer into their mouths, and a
shield of defense upon the arms of the faithful, wherewith they might repulse
all the fiery darts of the devil.

Verse. 12. Hear me, O Iakob, and Israel my called. I am, I am the first, and
Or, yet.
I am the last.
WE have told you heretofore why the Lord speaks of his eternity; Chap 41.4.
and 44.6. God changes not, and therefore we are not consumed: as it is in Mal.
3.6.
namely, to teach us that he is always like himself, and that we should not
measure his power by the narrow scantling of our own ell. He here calls for
audience, because the only thing that deceiues us, and makes us wander after
so many false opinions is, that we have no ears to hear. Where he says
Israel is his called: he opposes it secretly against that reprobation, whereof
he spoke in the beginning of the Chapter. For he there showed that the Jews
wrongfully usurped this title, and falsely gloried therein; because they showed
not themselves to be true Israelites in deed. But here he declares that
Israel is his own called: Simile
as if a father in rebuking his son, should in anger call him bastard; and
yet being appeased, should afterward term him his son. Thus the Lord shows
that the calling of them, which they could not abolish nor make unfruitful by
their malice or unthankfulness.

The particle yet in this place, signifies a continuance: for the Prophet
means nothing else but that God is always like himself: that is to say, he
repents not, nor changes not his mind, as men are wont to do: and therefore
he says, that he is the first and the last. Now we have also in these words to
note, that Isaiah speaks not here of God his eternal essence, but applies
this doctrine to our use: signifying that he will be such a one to us, as he
has ever been in times past: as also that we should remember to separate him
from Idols; lest our minds being distracted by new inventions, should err
from his true fear.

Verse. 13. Surely mine hand has laid the foundations of the earth, and my
right hand has spanned the heavens: when I shall call them, they stand up
together.
As God is unchangeable, so is he almighty.
THe Prophet shows here more plainly, what his meaning was in the former verse.
For having said that God is always one, and neither changes his affection nor
will toward us, he now magnifies and extolles his power, in regard of his
visible works which we daily behold. And thus the Lord coming forth of his
Sanctuary, does after a sort manifest himself familiarly unto us in them.

Whether we turn the words, my right hand has measured, or, has sustained;
the sense will be always alike: neither is it needful that we should stand
much about the interpretation of the word Tipak. For the word To measure, notes
out the admirable wisdom of God, Note.
in that he has so aptly proportioned all the parts of this fair curtain of
the heavens, that it should neither be higher nor lower from the earth then it
is: but that they constantly keep the order prescribed them of God: so as in
this round and ample vastness, we can behold nothing deformed or misplaced.
If any had rather retain the word To uphold, it is also a commendation of Gods
singular wisdom and power, who bears up this infinite weight, and great mass
of the heavens in their continual motion, and yet keeps it from tottering or
reeling from one side to another.

But the last member where he says, that all things stand up together when he
calls them; has some more difficulty in it. For it is either to be referred to
the first creation of the He spoke the word, and it was done. But if we
accept of this exposition, the word together, which is added, seems not to
suit well with the history of the creation mentioned by Moses.

And yet for mine own part, I willingly extend this sentence to the perpetual
government of the world. As if he should say; Heaven and earth obeyed Gods
voice, and yielded to his absolute power: so as these creatures so far remote
one from another, Simile.
willingly consented and agreed together, with an incredible harmony; neither
more nor less then if they were turned about with one wheel. And howsoever
the space be wondrous great between earth and heaven above, yet the Lords
voice was distinctly heard in every part of them. There was no need of
messengers then to teach or publish his will, but himself in an instant
executes the same at his pleasure. Simile.
Shall a man find any Prince that can have all his servants by and by about
him at his call? No, Gods power then is infinite, it is dispersed far and near,
and extends it self to all parts of the world, as the Scriptures do manifest,
Psa. 47.1, 2.
and faith by experience makes us feel.

Verse. 14. All you assemble your selves and hear: which among the^ has
declared these things? The Lord has loved him, he will do his will in Babell,
and his Or, his work.
arm shall be against the Chaldeans.
God permits the I^wes to bring in their allegations.
NO doubt but the Lord directs his speech to the Jews, though he vtters
nothing here which ought not to be known of all. But because the heathen and
profane people had no ears, therefore he summons not them to hear. We know
that the Jews had this privilege above other nations, that God manifested
himself to them: as it is said in the Psalm; God is known in Judah, his name
is great in Israel: Psalm. 76.1. and 147.19, 20. And thus their senslesnesse was
the less excusable, in that they rejected their own happiness. For whence
sprang this lightness and inclination to apostasy, but from the little or no
regard they had of this inestimable treasure of the heavenly doctrine? They
well deserved then to be thus sharply chidden, and that he should thus
closely tax them for their malicious and manifest conspiracies to darken the
grace of God.

Now it seems the Lord permits the Jews to bring in their allegations which
they had, as those who trusting to the goodness of their cause, dare thus defy
their adverse party: Bring in thy reasons, and if thou have any metal in
thee, show it. The Lord then prouokes them first, and bids them tell if they
can, whether the gods of the Gentiles have foretold any such things or no. And
this may also be applied to the Soothsaiers and Prognosticators, who attributed
to themselves the knowledge of things to come, which they could not foresee at
all. And in the same sense he repeates that which follows in the verse
insulng: I, even I have spoken it. The sum comes to this then, that the Jews
waver, yea and fall; because they have not well informed themselves how
singular a grace of God it is, to learn from his sacred mouth, whatsoever is
needful to salvation. In the latter part of the verse, he recites one
particular; namely, God had foretold the end of their captivity in Babylon.
True it is that he names not Cyrus as the dispenser of this benefit: Cyrus.
but in speaking of some certain personage well known, he says, God has
chosen him to surprise Babel by force.

The word To love, is not taken here simply, but for some special respect:
and therefore he restraines it to the happy issue of his voyage. And so we may
say that Saul was beloved of God for some private end; Example.
namely, that he might reign for a time, and might have the gift of
prophecy: 1. Sam. 10.10. But there is an higher matter to be considered of
touching the faithful, whom God loves with an everlasting love: for he will
never suffer them to be separated from him. John 13.1. Iere. 31.3.
The Prophet then meant to say, that Cyrus shall vanquish Babylon, because he
shall undertake that business under Gods authority and leading; not of his
own motion, but after such a manner, as God thrusts forward the blind and
ignorant, whither him lists: or as he uses sometimes to serve his turn of
men against their wills. For Cyrus is not praised for his voluntary obedience,
but it is rather indeed an extolling of Gods singular providence, by which he
disposes of all sorts of men to perform his will, and to execute his decrees.

By arm, (under a figure familiar amongst the Prophets) we may understand his
work. And thus the speech will run better; He shall execute his will
against Babylon, and his work against the Chaldeans. And we know that the
Prophets are wont to join Gods counsel and work together. Now he privily
taxes the Jews for their ingratitude, in that they would not believe Gods
promises, though he pointed out the thing before them with his finger, and
spoke far otherwise then did the Chaplains of the false gods. To conclude, he
meant to inform the Jews, that the surprising of Babel by the hand of Cyrus,
shall be a work of the Lord, under whose direction all things shall be so
carried, that the Church in the end shall be delivered.

Verse. 15. I, even I have spoken it, and I have called him: I have brought him,
and his way shall prosper.
He brings the Jews again to the prophecies, and attributes this honor unto
God, that having in fit time revealed the thing, he takes away all doublings.
Afterward he adds, that whatsoever was foretold, shall be confirmed. And
thus there is a double force in the doubling of these words, I, even I. As if
he should say; It is none but the God of Israel that has spoken these things
which are hidden, and to come: secondly, he being true, and one that never
deceiues, he will undoubtedly accomplish whatsoever he has promised. Isaiah
then propounds two ends here unto himself: First, that the poor captives
should wait for their deliverance: secondly, being delivered, that they should
acknowledge God to be the author of so excellent a benefit, and not to ascribe
it either to the arm of flesh, or to haphazard. Now he shows that Cyrus his
good success in his enterprises, shall proceed from Gods calling of him. Not
that he was worthy of so great a favor, neither that he obtained it by his own
industry and power; but in regard that the Lord used him as his servant to
deliver his people. For where he called him his beloved in the former verse,
and here says that he has called and brought him; I told you erewhile that
it is not to be referred to that love of God, whereby he adopts us for his
children, by calling us to himself. Cyrus was neither loved nor called in this
kind: How Cyrus is said to be loved and called of God: See Chap. 45.3.
for howsoever he were endued with excellent virtues, yet was he tainted with
very odious crimes, as ambition, desire of swaying Kingdoms, covetousness,
cruelty, and many other vices: Cyrus had a miserable end.
for his woeful and unhappy end manifested sufficiently what he was. The
Prophets meaning is then, that God will be favorable to Cyrus in prospering him
outwardly: not to adopt, nor to show him that favor which he only communicates
to his chosen. The cause must be considered then for which he gives him these
titles, to wit, that he will use his ministry for the deliverance of his
Church, as we have said before.

Verse. 16. Come near unto me: hear you this: I have not spoken it in secret
from the beginning: from the time that the thing was, Or, done.
I was there, and now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me.
God rebukes the people for their ingratitude.
HE directs his speech again to the Jews, and in commanding them to draw
near, he meets them half way (as it were) gently to receive them, and yet he
covertly taxes their revolt, showing, that they were unfit to entertain
wholesome doctrine, unless they departed from their errors. Surely it was a
detestable fault in them to be so far separated from God, with whom they
ought to have bin so nearly conioined: but their separation co^sisted not so
much in distance of place, as in the want of consent in affections: our
approaching then consists in a readiness to hear, having subdued our own
carnal reason. But this is a work of his own grace; for who will be ready
to direct his heart unto God, John 6.
if himself draw him not?

J have not spoken in secret.] The expositors expound this place diversely.
Some apply it to Jesus Christ, whereas Isaiah had no such meaning: and it
stands us in hand to avoid all wrested and const^eined interpretations. Wrested
expositions are to be avoided.
Others refer it to the Prophet himself: but this suits as badly as the
former, for this speech can agree to no man. I think then that Isaiah brings
in God speaking, and blaming of the people touching their ingratitude, in that
from the beginning, that is to say, since the day he began first to manifest
himself to their fathers, he has not spoken in secret, nor obscurely. Whence
it follows, that the ignorance which is in them must needs be imputed to their
own malice, in regard they did wittinglie shut their eyes against the clear
light.

from the time, etc. It signifies, that he performed that by his power Isaiah
shall be present in spirit when the Lord shall bring again his Zion, offer
violence to the Prophets words, and are every way far wide from his intention.

And now the Lord and his spirit, etc.] Here Isaiah speaks of himself
indeed, and applies this sentence to the former doctrine, protesting therein
that God who spoke from the beginning, speaks also by him, How we ought to
make our benefit of former miracles.
so as they were to give no less credit to that which he now pronounced by the
mouth of his servant, then if himself were there present in his own person.
Hence we may gather a profitable doctrine, to wit, that we are carefully to
think upon all the miracles which the Lord has done, to confirm our hearts
in his truth. For it is no small confirmation of our faith that the Lord has
had a remnant from the beginning, to whom he has manifested himself,
instructing them, and making them assured promises, which he has fulfilled, so
as there never failed nor fell to the ground the least jot of that which he
has spoken. For what has he pronounced with his mouth that he has not
fulfilled with his hand in due and convenient season? As often then as we be
surprised with doubtings, we must have our recourse to these and the like
examples, and thence conclude thus with our selves, God has of old bin wont to
keep touch with his servants: it is not since yesterday that he has begun to
speak: neither did he ever hold his people in suspense by ambiguous or
doubtful speeches, but has always spoken perspicuouslie and plainly. Thus
the Prophet shows he vtters nothing from his own brain, but was sent of God,
who has showed himself just in all his sayings.

He mentions the Spirit, not to note out a thing diverse from God, seeing he is
of one essence with him. The holy Ghost of one essence with the Father.
For in one essence of God we acknowledge three persons: but he names the
Spirit, because he is the only teacher and conductor of all the Prophets. S.
Paul says, Three distinct persons in one essence.
That none can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: and by and by
after he says, that the gifts of God are diverse, and yet it is one and the
same spirit, which works all things in all, 1. Cor. 12.3.4. In this place also
we have a manifest proof of the divinity of the Holy Ghost, A manifest proof
of the divinity of the holy Ghost.
because he sends the Prophets, which appertains to none but God, even as
Ambassadors are sent by the only authority of the Prince. Seeing the holy
Ghost sends the Prophets then, and directs and gives them power and efficacy,
he must needs be God. Besides, hence we gather, that we are to abandon all such
as have not this direction of Gods spirit, notwithstanding they crake, they be
sent of God: I mean this troop of popish wolves, who glory in the titles of
Pastors, and Teachers, Popish wolves will needs deck themselves with the titles
of pastors and teachers.
and impudentlie brag of their sending; seeing they are wholly destitute not
only of the holy spirit, but of his doctrine. For in vain do they boast that
they are instituted and sent of God, when they are utterly unfurnished of
those gifts and graces of the holy ghost which are fit for the execution of
such a charge. Moreover, it is too great a saucines in them to pretend the
illumination of the spirit of Christ, seeing themselves are wholly void of
faith, Few of the horned Bishops in the Papacy that know the first rudime^ts
of religion.
and knows not a B from a battle-dore in the doctrine of salvation. There are
horned Bishops which sit in the chair, and God wot the most part of them as
ignorant as beasts: nay, there is not ten of them among three hundred who
have so much as tasted the first rudiments of piety, Is any thing more absurd,
then to say that such an assembly is governed by the holy Ghost?

Verse. 17. Thus says the Lord thy redeemer the holy one of Israel, I am the
Lord thy God Or, teaching thee profitable things, leading thee, etc
which teach thee to profit, and lead thee by the way which thou should go.
I Join this verse with the four verses ensuing, This and the four verses
following, depend one upon another.
because they tend all to one end, in which God promises deliverance to his
people, yet in such wise, that he first shows how they were brought into
bondage by their own fault, and that to the end they should not murmr in
obiecting that it had bin better for them to remain in the country, if the
Lord meant to help them then to be brought back after they were led away. For a
Physician deserves not praise so much for curing a disease, as for hindering and
preventing it. The Prophet preuents them, and says, that this happened through
the peoples fault, for they might have escaped this judgment if they had but
diligently atte^ded unto Gods commandments, but they would not, therefore
such an obstinacy well deserved such a punishment: for it was not the Lords
fault that the affairs of the people succeeded ill, but they had rejected his
favor which was tendered unto them, and yet he says, the Lord will overcome
this rebellion by his great goodness, because he is not minded his people should
perish, though for a time he afflicts them.

Teaching thee profitable things.] By this he means, that Gods doctrine is
such, that it is able to preserve his people in good state if they would
constantly follow the rules therein prescribed. Now the Lord takes pains to
teach us, not to procure his own good, but ours. For what good are we able to
do him? By his holy doctrine then he prouides for every one of our saluations,
that being rightly instructed by it, we might reap the fruit thereof, which
is, an happy and blessed life. But when by our unthankfulness we reject the
benefit freely offered, what remains but that we should worthily perish? Isaiah
then had just cause to reproach the Jews, that if they had not wittingly
deprived themselves of the fruit of this doctrine, they should have bin
ignorant of nothing that tended to their profit and salvation.

Now if it be affirmed touching the Law, that by it God taught his people
profitable things: how much more may it be said of the Gospel, by which
whatsoever is profitable and necessary, is fully revealed unto us? And here
also we see how execrable ye blasphemies of the Papists are, Papists give God
the lie.
who aver, that the reading of the Scripture is dangerous and hurtful, that
they may dissuade the laity (as they call them) from meddling therewith. What?
Dare they indeed give the lie to God, who by the mouth of his holy Prophet
pronounces that they are profitable? See 2. Tim. 3.16. Whether is it better we
should believe God or them? Let them disgorge their blasphemies then as long as
they will with an whorish forehead, yet ought not we to refrain the study of
them: for we shall perceive that Isaiah has spoken the truth, if we read
the holy Scriptures with fear and reverence.

Guiding thy way.] These words show yet more clearly, the profitablenesse
before mentioned. For the Prophets meaning is, that the way of salvation is set
open to us, if we hear God speaking; because he is ready to lead us through
the whole course of our life, if we will submit our selves to his lore. And
thus Moses protests that he set before the people life and death: Deuteronomy 30.19.
Also, This is the way, walk in it. For the rule of a godly life is contained
in the Law, the which cannot deceive. I command thee this day, says Moses,
that thou love the Lord thy God, that thou walk in his ways, and that thou
keep his commandments, ordinances, and judgments, that thou may live,
that the Lord may bless thee in the land whither thou go to possess it:
Deuteronomy. 30.16. The sum is, that such as are teachable, shall never be
destitute of light, understanding, nor counsel.

Verse. 18. Oh that thou had hearkened to my commandments! Then had thy Or,
peace.
prosperity been as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
IN regard the people might have complained of their being led captive, the
Prophet to prevent such grudgings, A preuentio^.
shows the cause why it came to pass; namely, because they rejected the
doctrine of salvation, without reaping any benefit by it. No doubt but he had
respect to Moses his song, where there are almost the same words repeated. Oh
that they were wise, then they would consider their latter end! Deuteronomy. 32.29.
The particle Lu here, signifies a wish, Oh that, or, Would to God. But the
Lord not only complains that the Jews lightly esteemed the good and
profitable things offered them: but he also bewailes their misery, as a father
does that of his children. For he takes no pleasure in afflicting us, God takes
no pleasure in our afflictions.
neither would he show himself severe, but that we constrain him thereto by
our frowardness. God then is here moved with compassion in beholding their
ruin, who had rather wittingly perish, then to be saved: for he was ready to
have dealt all sorts of blessings liberally amongst them, if they by their own
rebellion, had not repelled and put him back.

Now it were preposterous to enter into Gods secret counsel, Who art thou that
disputest with God?
and to inquire wherefore himself made not the external word effectual upon
them, by the work of his holy Spirit. For the question is not here of his
power; but man's rebellion is here only reproved, that they may be left
without excuse. Truly as often as God calls us to himself by his word, there
is a full and absolute felicity offered us, which we obstinately resist.

We have told you before that the word peace, signifies all happy events. It
is then as if he had said; Thou had had abundance of all good things, and
should never need to have feared any change, in regard the blessing of God
upon his servants is a fountain that can never be drawn dry. As touching
the word justice, Tondroit.
joined unto peace, we may take it for that which we commonly call thy right.
But I had rather understand it of a Commonwealth well governed, where all
things are ruled orderly and well: as if he should say; All things had
prospered and had gone well with thee, and thou had had a flourishing State.

He worthily ioines such an estate with peace: for if good government be
overthrown, all goes out of frame; for it is not possible to enjoy a right
peace, where justice is wanting: Not possible to enjoy a comfortable peace
where justice is wanting.
that is to say, unless matters of state be managed with equity and
uprightness. If we love peace then, let us forthwith be instant with the Lord
to obtain this happy estate, which is blessed of him. Some descant here upon
spiritual justice, and upon remission of sins: but they miss the mark, and
stray quite from our Prophets meaning, who speaks plainly and simply.

Verse. 19. Thy seed also had been as the sand, and Or, the children.
the fruit of thy body like the gravel thereof: his name should not have been
cut off nor Or, abolished.
destroyed before me.
THis also appertains to an happy estate, namely, when posterity is
increased: for by their help, the aged are comforted and refreshed in their
labors, and the adversaries repulsed. The Psalmist, you know, compares such
children to arrows shot from the hand of a mighty man, and pronounces him
blessed that has his quiver full of them: Psalm. 127.5. that is to say; who
has many such children. In mentioning of sand, it seems he had respect to the
promise made to Abraham; I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand by the sea shore: Genesis 22.17. Afterward he repeates
the same thing in diverse words, according to the custom of the Hebrews,
calling children and gravel, that which he had called seed and sand. In a
word, he shows that the people hindered God, from causing them to feel and
taste the fruit of his promise.

Afterward, coming to the interruption of this grace, he plainly reprocheth
them; namely, that themselves had sought their own ruin and destruction;
whereas God had multiplied them wonderfully by his power. For by the word name,
he understands the lawful estate of the people, which had always flourished,
if the course of Gods blessing had not been stopped.

And whereas he says the people were abolished, this must be understood in
respect of the land of Canaan, out of which Gods people being vomited, Leuit.
18.25.28. they seemed to be banished the house of their father. For the Temple
whereof the Jews were deprived, was a sacrament unto them of Gods presence,
and the land it self was a pledge unto them of their heavenly inheritance.
Canaan a pledge to the Jews of their eternal inheritance.
Being exiled thence then, they were in a manner excommunicated, and cast out of
Gods presence, and had had no testimonies of his succor left them, had not
these promises relieved their miseries. Now it is for us to consider well of
this their misery: for being banished far from their Country, they had
neither Temple, sacrifices, nor assemblies. Now those amongst whom at this day
there is no form of a Church, use of Sacraments, nor preaching of the word,
they ought to think that God has in a manner cast them out of his presence.
Let them learn then to call and cry instantly with ardent prayers, that God
would plant his Church in their coasts.

Verse. 20. Go ye out of Babel; flee ye from the Chaldeans with the voice of
joy: tell and declare this; show it forth to the ends of the earth: say ye;
The Lord has redeemed his servant Iakob.
THis is the second part of this complaint, Isaiah speaks of a thing to come,
as if it were already come to pass.
by which the Lord protests that he will deliver his people, how unworthy or
ungrateful soever they be. For having told the Jews that he has performed
the office of a good teacher toward them, and that they would not lend their
ears; so as by their own default they were sent into captivity: now in
setting before them his invincible patience, he adds, that he will not cease
to assist them, till he has drawn them out of their bondage. He commands
them then to go out of Babylon where they were captives. Whence we gather,
that how just cause soever God has to complain of us, yet by his inestimable
goodness, he is ready to sustain our miseries, and to aid those that are
unworthy; yea such as have frowardly resisted his grace.

That which is added touching the voice of joy, serves to confirm this
deliverance: for he meant to add this confirmation to that promise, which was
utterly incredible. That he might remove all doubtings then, he highly
commends this benefit.

Declare.] He expresses the greatness of that confidence which he meant to
erect in the hearts of the Jews: for we are wont to publish that plainly and
openly, whereof we have good experience and assurance: but if we doubt, we
dare scarce open our mouths, but remain mute and dumb. Now Isaiah speaks of
a thing to come with that resolution, as if it were already come to pass,
that the people might in their hearts conceive the more sure and certain
confidence: and therefore he uses this commandment, which has much more
efficacy in it, The use the Jews were to make of this commandment.
and moved their minds more then if he had told it them in bare terms.

Verse. 21. And they wear not thirsty: he led them through the wilderness: he
caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: for he claue the rock, and
the waters gushed out.
Isaiah puts the^ in mind of their first passage out of Egypt, to correct
their infidelity.
IN regard the Jews saw no way open to return home, and that there lay
between many great and vast wildernesses, the Prophet alleges Gods power,
from whence he propounds some examples, that so the Jews might be dispossessed
of all fear and doubtings. He would have them then to consider, whether God
was not sufficiently able to deliver their fathers out of Egypts bondage, and
to bring them through horrible deserts: in which notwithstanding he furnished
them with viands, water, and all other necessaries, Exodus 16. and 17. If he
were able to do the one, why should they misdoubt his ability concerning the
other? The Jews here according to their manner coin fond fables, Fables
inverted by the Jews.
and invent ridiculous miracles which were never done nor heard of. And this
they do, not so much of ignorance, as of impudency, whereby they give
themselves liberty to publish any thing that may carry a fair show, though
it be utterly senseless. But our Prophets meaning was to put them in mind of
that first passage out of Egypt, and of the miracles which the Lord then did.
For when the Prophets mean to extol Gods works, it is their custom (as we
have often showed) to mention this first deliverance. And thus David setting
forth the victories he obtained, says, that the mountains trembled and
shook, the air cleft in twain, and the Lord appeared from heaven, which he
never saw notwithstanding, Psa. 18. but he therein follows the description of
the deliverance out of Egypt, to show, that God was the author of it, and that
he also fortified and guided him to overcome his enemies, and that his power
was no less manifest in this victory, then in those wonderful signs and
miracles.

And thus the Prophet now would have the people consider of these wonders of
old, to correct their incredulity, and not to be tempted with diffidence: for
it was the custom of Gods faithful servants to cast their eyes always upon
this deliverance, that by the remembrance of so great a benefit, they might
confirm every man's heart in faith and hope. We have also told you before that
they were from age to age to feel the fruit of this redemption, that the Lord
by a continual progress might still be acknowledged the protector of that
people whom he had so redeemed at the first. Our Prophets meaning is then, that
the Lord will easily overcome all impediments, and will set open the passages
that are shut, will furnish them with water in abundance that they faint not
for thirst, for he will work for them as in old time he did for their fathers,
when extraordinarily he caused waters to issue out of the rock, they making
their account to perish for thirst. Exodus 17.6. and therefore there was no
cause why they should call the assurance of their return into question, if
they would but only meditate of that power of God whereof themselves by
experience had tasted.

Verse. 22. There is no peace, says the Lord, to the wicked.
SOme enclose these words, says the Lord, A prevention in regard of hypocrite^.
in a parenthesis; but we may keep this order in the text, to wit, That the
Lord denies the peace to the wicked, whereof they are unworthy. Now this is
expressly added, lest the hypocrites according to their wont, should conceive
any vain hope in these promises, for he says, they belong nothing at all to
such, that he might wholly exclude them from all hope of salvation. But it
seems Isaiah respected some other thing, for in regard the greatest part of
the people ouerflowed in impiety, and rejected this benefit, many infirm and
weak ones might stagger, and be offended at their multitudes: for at this day
there are many weak consciences troubled, when they see the doctrine of
salvation contemned by the greater part of the world. Seeing then there were
many in great danger of stumbling, he turns their minds from this temptation,
that the multitude of the wicked and unbelievers (who rejected Gods grace, and
this happy estate mentioned verse 18.19.) might not trouble them, but rather
without gazing upon such kind of persons, might comfortablie embrace and
possess this benefit themselves.

THE XLIX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Hear ye me, o Isles, and hearken ye people from far, The Lord has
called me from the womb, and made mention of my name from my mothers belly.
From the treatise of their redemption, h^ comes to speak of Christ.
Having discoursed of the redemption to come, he now descends to speak of
Christ, under whose leading, the people were delivered from the captivity of
Babylon, as in old time they were out of Egypt. Now it was needful the former
prophecy should be confirmed with this present doctrine: for they would hardly
have bin drawn to expect this redemption from the Lord, had he not set Christ
Jesus before their eyes, in whom all Gods promises are Yea, and Amen, All the
promises are Ye^ and Amen in Christ.
2. Cor. 1.20. who only also is able to cheer up and refresh the fainting
spirits: for we are no less to look for temporal salvation from him, then
that which is eternal. Add, that the Prophets are wont in speaking of the
restoration of ye Church ever to mention Christ, not only because he is the
minister thereof, sound judgment do confess, that this place is to be
understood of Christ only. But all have not kept the order which we have noted.
For the Prophet speaks not of Christ at the first brunt, but uses this
preface, for without it the people could look for no redemption, in regard
their reconciliation with God depe^ded thereupon. Now that it might have the
greater efficacy, he brings in Christ himself speaking, not only to the
Jews, but to the nations beyond the seas, and to the strangers far remote
from the common wealth of Israel, who are specified here under this word isles,
as we have showed in another place.

The Lord has called me from the womb.] Some ask what this vocation is? for
seeing we were elected in Christ before the foundations of the world, Ephesians.
1.4. it follows that he is before us, because he is the beginning and
foundation of our election. It seems the Prophet therefore has spoken less
then the thing imports, in affirming that Christ was called from the womb,
seeing he was before all time. But the answer to this is easy, for the
question is not here touching Gods eternal election, whereby we are adopted
for his children, but only of the establishing and consecration of Christ
ordained to this office, that we should not think he intruded himself
thereinto at randon. Christ thrust not himself into his office without a
calling.
For no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron, Heb. 5.4.5. So Christ took not upon himself the office of the high
Priest, but he which advanced him to it, said, Thou art my son, this day have
I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7.

Moreover, the Prophet defines not of the beginning of time, as if God had then
begun to call him from the womb, but it is as if he should have said, Before I
came out of my mothers womb, God ordained me to this office, as S. Paul says,
That God had chosen him from his mothers womb, Gal. 1.15. though
notwithstanding he had elected him also from before the foundations of the
world. It is also said of Jeremiah, Before I formed thee, I knew thee, Iere.
1.5. In a word, the sum is, that Christ took our flesh by the ordinance of
his Father, that he might fulfill the work of our Redemption unto which he was
destinated. Hereunto appertains the last member of the verse, for the
mentioning of his name, signifies as much as a familiar knowledge of him. He
separates him then from out of the common rank of men, because he is chosen to
a rare and singular piece of service.

Verse. 2. And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword: under the shadow of
his hand has he hid me, and made me a chosen shaft, and hid me in his
quiver.
HE uses two similitudes; to wit, the sword and quiver, to express the
efficacy of his doctrine: Two similitudes expressing the efficacy of his
doctrine.
and then he shows to what end he was called and dignified with so noble a
title; namely, that he might teach: for that is it he signifies by the word
mouth. Christ then was not sent of the Father to conquer by force of arms, as
earthly Princes do; but his conquest is obtained by the sword of the Spirit;
Christ conquers not by force of arms, but by the sword of the spirit.
that is to say, by preaching the whole counsel of God, in which he will be
sought and known: for he is not to be found elsewhere. Now he shows what the
force of his mouth is; that is to say, of the doctrine which proceeds out of
his mouth, when he compares it to a sharp sword. For the word of God is lively
in operation, and more piercing then all two edged swords: for it diuides
between the soul and the spirit, and the ioints and the marrow; and is a
discerner of all the intents of the heart. Heb. 4.12. Psalm. 45.5.
He compares it also to an arrow, because it not only hits near, but also a
far off, and comes even to them who seem far remote.

But after Isaiah has spoken of the efficacy of his doctrine, he adds, that
God will maintain both Christ and it by his power: God will main^aine both
Christ and his doctrine. The Gospel no sooner preached, but it is opposed by
enemies.
so as nothing shall be able to hinder the course thereof. For as soon as
Christ opens his mouth; that is to say, as soon as the Gospel begins to be
sincerely preached, the adversaries band themselves on all sides, and infinite
enemies conspire how to suppress it. So as this efficacy whereof he speaks,
and which he attributes to his doctrine, would not stand, unless Gods
protection and shadow came between, to abandon the adversaries.

But he speaks not here only of Christ, but of the whole body of his Church.
I grant we must begin at the head, but from thence we must descend to the
members, and apply it to all the Ministers of the word; which is here spoken
of Christ, in regard this efficacy of the word is given them, that their voice
should not beat the air in vain, but that it should enter to the pricking of
the heart: Acts 2.37. The Lord also causes the trump of his word to sound, not
in one place only, but to the utmost ends of the earth. Lastly, in regard, the
Lord faithfully keeps them under the shadow of his hand, though they be
subject to many reproaches, and that Satan on every side assailes them; yet they
break not off their course, which experience might well have taught us. For
there is not one of us, but we had long since been utterly rooted out by the
secret and open practices of our enemies, had not the Lord been our defense.
And truly I cannot but wonder, that any one Minister of the Gospel should
stand safe, A miracle that a faithful Minister should stand.
in the midst of so many and so great dangers. But the cause is, the Lord
keeps them under the shadow of his hand, and hides them as shafts in his
quiver, that they should hot be hurt nor destroyed of their enemies.

Verse. 3. And he said unto me; Thou art my servant Israel; for I will be
glorious in thee.
THis verse must be joined with the former. This verse depends upon the former.
For hereby it appears, that he speaks not of one man, but of the whole
people: which the expositors have not considered: for this place neither ought
to be restrained to Christ's person, nor yet referred to Israel only. But we
must here observe the course of the Scriptures. When the body of the Church is
mentioned, then Christ is placed in the middle, as it were, who under him
comprehends the children of God. We hear what Saint Paul says; The promises
were made to Abraham, and to his seed. He says not to his seeds, as speaking
of many: and to thy seed, which is Christ: Gal. 3.16. For he comprehends not
the multitude of children which came of Abraham according to the flesh, seeing
all were not partakers of this blessing. Ishmael was rejected: Ishmael
rejected. Es^u reprobated.
Gal. 4.30. Esau was hated: Mal. 1.3. and many others were cut off.

When the people were delivered from under the captivity of Babylon, the
number of those which returned were very small; for the greatest part rejected
this excellent benefit of God. Where was this seed then? Even in Christ who is
the head, and under him contains the rest of the members: for in him, by an
inseparable band, is the whole seed assembled and knit together in one. And in
the same sense that Isaiah has noted out Christ under the name of Israel, so
also has he comprehended the whole body, as the members under the head. Which
is no new thing. For when Paul speaks of that union which is between Christ
and the Church, The union which is between Christ and his Church.
having set it forth under the similitude of a man's body, he adds, even so is
Christ: 1. Cor. 12.12. And in this place the name of Christ is attributed unto
Israel: that is to say, to the whole company of the faithful, which are
united to Christ as the members to the head. Afterward, the Lord gives this
title to the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, as the wife is dignified
with the name and title of her husband.

Now he calls Israel his servant: that is to say, his handmaid the Church; for
she is the pillar and ground of truth, because he has committed his word
unto her, as a pledge to keep; that by her ministry it may be published
thorowout the world: 1. Tim. 3.15. In the latter part of the verse, he shows
what the end of this ministry is, and why those that preach the Gospel are
called thereunto of God; to wit, that they make his glory by all means to
shine clear in respect of themselves, and to advance it also among others.
Which Christ teaches in the Gospel saying; Father, glorify thy Son, that
thy Son also may glorify thee: John 17.1. But does not God show us a
singular favor, when he appoints us, base and vile wretches, to be procurers
of glory unto him? Oh! let this quicken us up to obey him carefully, and to
employ our selves faithfully in his service. And yet the Prophet meant to
express somewhat more, namely, that howsoever Satan and his imps lay all the
plots they can, yet Gods power shall overthrow them all: so as Christ shall
triumph notwithstanding gloriously, and God his majesty shall shine most
bright in his Gospel still.

Verse. 4. And I said; I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in
vain and for nothing: but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my
God.
THe Prophet adds a grievous complaint here, A bitter complaint,
in the name of the Church; yet so, as he begins at the head, as we have said
before. Christ then with his members complains, that he has in a manner
utterly lost his labor: for after he has greatly praised and commended the
efficacy of that word which issues out of his mouth, verse. 2. now he shows
that it has done little or no good notwithstanding: so as this glory which God
requires to shine in the ministry of his word, appears very little. For
Christ says, he has labored in vain, because men will not repent, Why this
complaint is add^d.
nor turn to God by the preaching of the heavenly doctrine. It was to great
purpose that the Prophet added this. First, to teach us that this fruit whereof
he spoke, shall not always appear in the eyes of men; for otherwise we should
be ready to call the truth of Gods word into question; and would also be
brought to doubt, whether this doctrine, which is rejected of so many with such
impudency, were the word of God or no. Secondly, that we might bend all our
forces with invincible constancy to perform our duties, and to commend the
success of all our labors unto the blessing of God, who will not suffer it to
be fruitless in the end. And thus the Prophet meant to meet with a dangerous
temptation, that by the rebellions of men, we should not faint in the middle of
our course. And truly Christ so begins here with a complaint, that he yet
comforts himself by and by, knowing that nothing shall be able to direct him
from the performance of his charge. And the text would be somewhat plainer, if
we read it thus: Although my travail be in vain, and that I have spent my
self without fruit; yet it suffices that my work is approved of my God.
Unto which appertains that which is added; but my judgment is before the Lord.

Albeit then the fruit of our labors appear not before us, An encouragement
for Ministers.
yet must it content us that they are done before that God whom we serve, and
to whom our service is agreeable. For Christ exhorts and incourageth the
faithful Ministers to fight valiantly, until they have overcome this
temptation: so as, setting light by the malice of men, they cheerfully go on
still in their calling, without suffering discontentments or carelessness to
hinder their course. If the Lord have a purpose then to try our faith and
patience, so far as that it shall seem we labor in vain, yet must we
satisfy our selves with the testimony of a good conscience. But if this
consolation take no place in us, then is it certain that we are not carried
forwards with a pure affection: neither do we serve God in this function, but
the world and our own ambition. Wherefore it is needful for us to have our
recourse to this sentence in such temptations.

In the mean while we may note that the whole world, is accused here of
ingratitude, The whole world taxed of ingratitude.
both by Christ and his Church: who so complain before God, that
notwithstanding they expostulate with the world, in regard the doctrine of
the Gospel, which is so effectual in it self, works no better effects in
the inhabitants thereof. But this fault wholly rests in men's unthankfulness
and obstinacy, who reject the grace which God offers them, and choose wittingly
to perish, rather then to be saved. They therefore which charge the Gospel of
unfruitfulness, and wickedly belie and slander the blessed truth, scoffing at
our labors as being idle and unprofitable, and babble that it is the cause of
commotions, A caveat for scorners.
and sets men together by the ears; let them now come forth and accuse the
Son of God: let them consider well with whom they have to do, and what
profit their impudency will bring them in the end. For men are in all the
fault, in that themselves make frustrate and void, the preaching thereof, as
much as in them lies. But the faithful Ministers who are vexed in their
souls to see men perish so miserably by their own fault, who also wast and
kill themselves with sorrow when they have trial of such an obstinacy, ought
notwithstanding to arm themselves with this consolation, and not to be so
disquieted as to caft down the bucklers, though at sometimes it seems best for
them so to do. Let them rather meditate that Christ is partaker with them in
this their burden: for he speaks not only of himself, as we have said
before, but of all his faithful servants, who here in all their names, as a
careful protector, enters their accusation for them. Let them therefore rest
themselves upon his defense, and leave the maintenance of their cause unto him.
Let them make their appeal The Ministers appeal.
(as Paul does) to the day of the Lord, 1. Cor. 4.4. and never stand to break
their brains about the lies, slanders, and outrages of their enemies; for as
their judgment is before the Lord, though the unthankful world disgrace them
an hundredth times, so will God be the faithful approuer and rewarder of their
service. Contrariwise, let the wicked, profane contemners of the word, Tremble
and sin not ye profane contemners of the word.
and all hypocrites tremble; for when Christ shall accuse them, all their
defenses will not be worth a rush, neither shall any be able to absolve them
from his just sentence of condemnation. We must look to it then that the fruit
which should come of the Gospel, perish not by our fault, for God manifests
his glory, that we may be made the disciples of Jesus Christ, and bring forth
much fruit, John 15.8.

Verse. 5. And now says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his
servant, that I may bring Iaakob again to him (though Israel be not gathered)
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my
strength.
A co^firmatio^ ioned with a more ample consolation.
HE confirms the former sentence, and sets before us a more full consolation by
a repetition of the duties of his calling, and the testimony of his own
conscience. And this ought to be a strong tower for us to run unto; for nothing
disquiets nor troubles our minds more, then when we be uncertain under whose
leading it is that we enterprise this or that. Isaiah therefore brings us to
the certentie of our vocation. First then the faithful God has formed them, in
regard he always endues them whom he sends and calls to the office of
teaching, with necessary gifts, for they draw all the graces wherewith they
are furnished from the only fountain of grace the holy Ghost. Thus then in the
first place God has set his seal upon Christ: next unto him, upon all his
Ministers, gather the scattered flock of Christ together, that all his sheep
may be folded under him into one body. For there is a woeful scattering in the
world, but in Jesus Christ all are gathered in, as S. Paul says Ephesians. 1.10.
other band of unity there is none.

As touching the word created, or formed. many trifle in descanting about the
humane nature of Christ, which indeed was created: for it is more clear then
the Sun at noone day that this creation is to be referred to his office.

Though Israel be not called.] The Jews read this by an interrogation, Shall
I not bring Jacob again, and shall not Israel be gathered? But this reading is
constreined, neither do they consider of the Prophets meaning, but as much as
in them is, corrupt the text, that they might cover the shame of their nation.
Others expound, He shall not be lost: or, He shall not perish. For the verb
Asak signifies, to trusse up; for, they gather together that which is to be
kept, or to be consumed: and so when we speak of one that is dead, we commonly
say, he is trussed up.

This sense agrees not ill, I am sent, that Israel perish not, but I had rather
follow another exposition. Although all Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorified: for in this place we may see that two contraries are opposed one to
another. If the Ministers of the word be ordained to save men, it is a great
honor to them when many are brought to salvation; if not, it makes them abashed
and ashamed: for S. Paul calls those whom he gained to Christ, his joy, and
his crown, Phil. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. Contrariwise if men perish, we bear
shame and disgrace by it, in regard it seems God curses our labors, in that
he vouchsafes us not that honor, as to be the aduancers of his kingdom by our
Ministry. Notwithstanding our Prophet affirms, that such as have served
Christ in this office, shall be glorified: for he comprehends the members under
the head (as we have often said before.)

Will not Israel be gathered then? yet shall Christ's Ministry lose no jot of
glory thereby. For if men be not gathered, the burden will lie wholly upon
their own necks. In which sense Saint Paul affirms, that although the
preaching of the Gospel be a savor of death unto death in the reprobates, yet
even that is a sweet savor unto God, who by the means of preaching, will
make the wicked the more without excuse. God is glorified double, if the effect
answer his desire. But, if the Ministers of the word, having omitted no part of
their duties, shall (to their grief and smart I confess) see no fruits to
come of their labors; yet let them not repent that they have herein pleased
God, whose approbation is here opposed to all the perverse judgments of the
world. As if the Prophet should say; Be it that men abhor you, and charge you
with many faults; yet must you swallow this, and much more too with patience:
for God has another end, and will crown your patience with glory and honor,
which the wicked so proudly and scornefullie despise.

He adds in the same sense, that it ought to suffice them that God is their
strength, to the end that neither the multitude nor power of their enemies do
astonish them, seeing in their God consists their strength.

Verse. 6. And he said; It is a small thing that thou should be my servant,
to raise up the tribes of Iakob, and to restore the desolations of Israel: I
will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my
salvation to the end of the world.
He goes on further and shows, that the labors of Christ and of all his
servants, shall be glorious indeed; not only before God, but also before men.
For howsoever they be esteemed vain and unfruitful in the beginning, yet in
the end the Lord will cause them to bring forth fruit contrary to all the
opinions of men. It was enough that in the first place God approved their
labors: but in that he now adds, that the same shall not prove unprofitable,
no not in regard of men: this ought to be as a spur to put life into them,
and much to comfort their comfortless spirits. Whence it follows, that we
ought to hope that the issue of that which is committed into Gods hands, shall
be good, because the blessing which he promises to our labors, shall in the
end appear; so far forth, as he sees it expedient, and for his own glory.

Besides, he adds that this labor shall not only fructify among the people
of Israel, but among the Gentiles also: which (blessed be our God) is now come
to pass. Nay, more then that; for seeing the Jews with an obstinate
hardness, became so graceless as to reject Christ; the Gentiles are now
grafted into their stock. And thus Christ is appointed of God to be a light
unto the Gentiles, and his salvation manifested to the utmost parts of the
world.

This consolation then was very necessary, as well for the Prophets, as the
Apostles: Acts 13.47. For they had but too woeful and daily experience more
and more, of the frowardness of the Jews. In which regard, they might have
called the certainty of these promises into question, seeing so little fruit of
them appeared. But understanding that Christ was also sent to the Gentiles,
they were not so unwilling to go through thick and thin, as otherwise they
would have been. I grant it was a thing incredible; nay, prodigious: but thus
the Lord is wont to work far above the reach of man's reason. Saint Paul calls
it a secret hidden, Ephesians. 3.9. from the foundations of the world, and is yet
unknown to the very Angels: 1. Pet. 1.12. further forth then it is manifested
unto them by the Church: Ephesians. 3.10. Thus then, although the Jews were once the
only wise people under heaven, Deuteronomie, 4.6. yet they are here matched
with the Gentiles: neither is there any more distinction now between them
before God: Romans 10 12.

The Rabbines read this verse by an interogation; Is it a small thing? As if
he should say; that it is enough, and that nothing greater nor further is to be
required. But they do maliciously pervert the native sense of the Prophets
words; and make themselves believe, forsooth, that they shall one day become
Lords over the Gentiles, and reign over all nations. But the true meaning is,
that this shall be an excellent and glorious work in it self, when God shall
restore and reestablish the Tribes of Israel. And yet this work shall be much
more glorious, in respect that he will join the Gentiles to the Jews, that
they may with one mouth and heart, profess the name of one Christ. He speaks
not in this place of the reiection of the ancient people then; but of the
increasing of the Church, when Jews and Gentiles shall be made one body. I
grant that after the Jews fell away from the covenant of grace, the Gentiles
supplied their emtie place: so as their revolt was the cause that those which
were strangers before, were now made children by adoption. But here (as in
many other places) Isaiah foretelles that the Church shall have a large extent,
when the Gentiles shall be received in, and made one body with the Jews.

Now albeit the word light, may be understood joy and felicity, yet I doubt
not but the Prophet respects the doctrine of the Gospel, which gives light to
our understandings, and pulles us out of darkness. He also says, that this
light which Christ shall bring, shall be salvation: for as Christ is called the
way, the truth, and the life, because we obtain life by the knowledge of the
truth: so in this place he is called the light and salvation of the Gentiles,
because he inlightens our minds by the doctrine of the light of the Gospel,
that he may bring us to salvation. Let us observe these two things then: first,
that our eyes are opened by Christ's doctrine: secondly, that we which were
dead, shall be raised up to life; or rather, that life is restored unto us.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord the redeemer of Israel, and his holy one, to him
that is despised O^, in himself.
in soul, to a nation that is abhorred, to a servant of rulers; Kings shall
see and arise, and Princes shall worship, because of the Lord that is
faithful: and the holy one of Israel which has chosen thee.
ISaiah goes on with the same argument, that the people might conceive a better
hope in their mind, touching their estate and condition, when they should see
themselves afflicted under so many tedious calamities. And the rather to
confirm his saying, he calls God, who promised to perform these things, the
redeemer of Israel. But may some object; redemption and sanctification become,
seeing the people had just cause to complain of their poverty and calamities?
I answer, We must not cease to believe, though God for a time defer his
promise.
out of which we may gather how carefully we ought to believe God when he
speaks, albeit he do no forthwith accomplish that which he has promised,
but suffers us to languish under afflictions a long time.

Some translate the word Veze, Contemned: others, Contemptible; which I
approve of. But this augments the misery of the people, when the Prophet
calls them despised Or, in himself.
in soul: for many are despised of others, who notwithstanding are worthy of
honor, in regard of the graces wherewith they be endued: or being puffed up
with pride, cease not with an higher contempt, to tread under their feet the
contempt of others. But Isaiah affirms, that the Jews are not more despised
and contemptible in the eyes of others, then they are in their own. Thus then
he notes out an exceeding ignominy and low estate; therewithal comprehending
the affliction of the Spirit: to teach them that God shall come in fit time to
succor them, when they shall be thoroughly humbled.

I see no reason why some have changed the number in the word nation, seeing
the Prophet uses the singular number Goi; it being certain that he addresseth
his speech to the posterity of Abraham. Afterward he calls them servants of
rulers: as if he should say, that mighty tyrants oppressed them: for by the
word Moschelim, he means those that have so much force and power, that it is
an hard mat^er to escape their hands.

When he says that Kings shall see, he speaks in high and glorious terms of
the delivery of his people; but in the mean while, he is contented they
should be tried in the furnace, to prove their faith and patience: for where
were the trial of faith, if God should forthwith give that which he has
promised, (as we said before.)

In the word Princes, there is a repetition much used among the Hebrews. But
we will speak it thus shortly; Kings and Princes shall see, they shall arise,
and bow down.

By the verb To bow down, he expounds what he meant by arising: for we rise
up to give honor. The sum is, that the greatest Princes of the world shall
be awakened to confess that the restoration of the Church is an excellent
work of God, and worthy of respect and reverence.

Because the holy one of Israel who has chosen thee, is faithful. See the
cause of this great astonishment, touching the honor which Princes shall
perform to God; to wit, because they shall acknowledge his faithfulness and
constancy in his promises. God would not be held to be faithful by a bare
imagination, but from good experience.
For the Lord would not be acknowledged faithful from a bare and naked
imagination, but from experience it self; to wit, in the preservation and
protection of his people, whom he has adopted. Hence therefore let us learn
not to judge of Gods promises by our present estate, but by his truth and
faithfulness: so as when we perceive nothing but death and the grave to
compass us round, yet we may remember this sentence, by which the Lord calls
us to him, even the vile and contemptible. 2. Cor. 7.6.


Hence also we are to consider how glorious and admirable a work the
deliverance of the Church is, in that it constraines Kings, be they never so
proud (thinking nothing, be it never so excellent worthy to behold them) to
behold, to admire, yea and to honor and reverence the Lord, whether they will
or no. This new and extraordinary work then, is here greatly recommended unto
us in this behalf. For not to mention ancient histories; by what means has
God delivered us out of that woeful tyranny of Antichrist? Truly we were as
those that dream, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 126.1. especially if we do
but seriously consider of the thing it self: for the Lord has wrought a
miracle in bringing us to do homage unto Christ.

In the end of the verse, the Prophet repeates that which he touched before; to
wit, that this people were set a part to be the Lords. But in election we must
seek the beginning of sanctification: for the people were the holy
inheritance, because God had vouchsafed of his mere grace to choose them.
Isaiah, then means that secret will of God, from whence sanctification flows;
that Israel might not think they were chosen for their own deserts. As if he
had said, The Lord which has elected thee shows, that thou art so indeed by
the effects. As we ought then to acknowledge Gods faithfulness and truth in our
salvation, so must we attribute this salvation only to our free election. And
yet it behoues every one that will partake in so great a benefit, Neither truth
nor salvation out of he Church.
to be a portion of the true Israel, that is to say, of the Church, out of
which there is neither truth nor salvation to be found.

Verse. 8. This says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in
a day of salvation have I succored thee, and will preserve thee, and give thee
for a covenant of the people, that thou may raise up the earth, and obtain
the inheritance of the desolute heritage.
FRom this verse we may yet more clearly gather that which we have handled in
the beginning of this Chapter, to wit, that the Prophet so speaks of the whole
body of the Church, that he begins at the head thereof. And this, as I have
said, ought to be well observed, for the expositors have bauked it, and yet
without it we shall not be able to make these verses to cohere. S. Paul plainly
shows this, in applying this very sentence to the whole Church, 2. Cor. 6.2.
But yet that which follows, I will give thee for a covenant of the people,
suits to none but Christ only. How shall we make these things agree then? To
wit, if we shall consider that Christ is not so much his own as ours. Christ
not so much his own as ours.
For he was not borne; neither died be, nor rose again for himself. He was
sent for the salvation of his people. He seeks nothing at our hands: for he
stands in need of nothing. Thus then, God makes his promises to ye whole
Church: and Christ, who is as it were the surety or pledge between both,
receives these promises, and procures nothing to himself by them, but
altogether for the Churches behoof, for whose salvation he was sent. He
speaks not then of Christ, as singling him out by himself, but as of one that
is joined and made one with his Church for ever. It is an inestimable favor
then which the father shows us when he hears his son for our sakes: yea,
that he directs his speech to his son whilst he is speaking of our
salvation. For by this we may perceive how near the conjunction is between
Christ and us. Our union with Christ again noted.
He represents our person. He has nothing which is not ours: and is heard of
his Father in respect of us.

By the acceptable time, the Prophet meant to keep the faithful within their
bounds, that they should not be too eager in their desires, but might
patiently wait the Lords leisure even till his prefixed time were come, in
which sense S. Paul calls the coming of Christ the fulness of time, Gal. 4.4.
He would have them then to depend upon the will of God, and in the mean while
to bear his wrath with a quiet and meek spirit. Moreover, albeit the Prophet
meant to exhort the faithful to patience, and to learn to subdue their wills
to the will of God, yet he therewithal teaches, that our salvation flows
from the free favor of God. For his free accepting of us is the foundation of
our salvation. And salvation is the effect of this grace. We are saved because
we please God; not for our own merits, but of his mere goodness. And yet
withal he shows that our salvation is certain, in that we have so sure a
pledge of Gods grace: for in assuring us of his favor, he remoues all doubtings.

This place serves to set forth the commendation of Gods word, No salvation
without the word.
without which, there is no enquiring after salvation: as also S. Paul says,
2. Cor. 6.3. where he shows that Gods favor is plainly manifested unto us in
the preaching of the Gospel, so as that which is written here touching the
day of salvation, is thereby accomplished. Thirdly, the Prophet admonishes us,
that when the Gospel is sent to any place, there God discouers a sure pledge
of his favor, Where God sends his Gospel, there he discouers a sure pledge of
his favor.
and good will. For is it not evident that he pities us, when he so graciously
allures us to himself? He might let us err in darkness without this light, but
it comes unto us only from his free grace, that so he might remove all
doubtings and stumbling blocks out of our way. Let us lay it up in our hearts
then, to wit, that this mercy wholly depends upon God his free will.

If it be asked, Because it was Gods good pleasure so to have it. For S. Paul
in the place before alleged, brings us to this point. Behold now the
acceptable time, behold now the day of salvation; which place will help us much
to understand the Prophets meaning, that so we may learn to join Gods free
accepting of us, and our salvation together. A pledge of which favor we have in
the preaching of the Gospel.

We are also to note that these prophesies were not to be restrained to a
certain time, seeing they appertain to the Church to the worlds end. These
prophesies appertain to the use of the Church to the worlds end. Three
redemptions.
For when we begin at the redemption out of Babylon, we must come forward til
the redemption purchased by Christ, of which the first deliverance was but as
it were a preparatiue. And seeing there are still certain relics of this
servitude remaining, it must continue to the worlds end, at which time all
things shall be restored, and set again into their perfect estate.

J will give thee for a covenant.] Hence it appeeres, that whatsoever was said
of Christ before, was not promised in regard of his own particular profit, but
for our sakes. For he was ordained to be the pledge of the covenant, because
the Jews by their sins made a divorce between God and them, who had
contracted a perpetual covenant with them. The renewing of this covenant then,
which was broken or disanulled, is attributed unto Christ. In which regard,
that which Paul says, Ephesians. 2.14. and 17. is to be noted: Christ is our peace
which has made of both one, and has preached peace as well to those that are
far off, as to those that are near. But our Prophet had a special eye to that
horrible dissipation, which none but Christ alone was able to remedy. It
remains now then, that we apply this grace to our use: we (I say) who were
strangers and enemies, far from the covenant of grace in respect of the Jews,
before the Gospel was published; without which, we had never tasted of our
reconciliation with him. Christ then was given for a covenant to the people,
because there was no other way to come unto God, but through him. The Jews
were then the only people; Why Christ was given for a covenant to the people.
but the partition wall being broken down, all, both Jews and Gentiles have
bin gathered into one body.

That thou should raise up the earth, which was desolate. For the return of
the people was as a new creation: as we have showed elsewhere. Unto which also
appertains the words of the Prophet, that we might know there is nothing but a
woeful waste and scattering in the world: for Christ is sent to raise up that
which was destroyed and fallen to the earth. If all things stood in a perfect
estate, then he should be sent to us in vain. We ought therefore diligently
to consider of our estate: for in our selves we are strangers from God, and
excluded from all hope of salvation; but Christ has raised us up together with
him, and has reconciled us to his heavenly Father. Besides, Isaiah adds the
benefits which we obtain by Christ, after we be reconciled.

Verse. 9. That thou may say to the prisoners; Go forth: and to them that
are in darkness; Show your selves, they shall seek in the ways, and their
pastures shall be in all the tops of the hills.
Neither light, liberty, nor succor out of Christ.
BEhold here a description of the change, that happens at Christ's coming.
Notwithstanding it is very sure that the Prophet meant in this place, to give
some consolation to the Jews, things being then in such a desperate state, to
the end their restoration might not seem incredible; no, not albeit they lay
in darkness of death. Yet in general terms, he shows wherein the office of
Christ consists; to wit, in restoring the desolate heritage: verse. 8. For
before his coming, we lie manacled hand and foot under a miserable slavery,
and are plunged into the darkness of hell. By these two similitudes then he
shows, that we are wrapped in all sorts of miseries, as long as Christ is
absent from us. For by darkness, he excludes us from all the benefits which
appertain to Christ's kingdom^^^ as faith, righteousness, holiness, truth,
and the Show your selves: we are bound till he cry, Go forth. Now there is
great weight in the clause; That thou may say: for he shows that the
preaching of the Gospel, is the means by which we are delivered. If we then
desire the liberty and the light of Gods kingdom, let us hearken unto the
voice of Christ, for else we shall be oppressed under the perpetual tyranny
of Satan.

Where is now the liberty of our free will? Free will.
For whosoever attributes to himself light, reason, or understanding, can
never have part in this deliverance by Christ. Why so? Because liberty is
promised to none but to such as acknowledge themselves captives; nor light and
salvation to any, but to such as confess themselves to sit in darkness. No
liberty but to such as fell their captivity: nor light, but to such as
confess they sit in darkness.


Moreover, in that he promises Gods children that their pastures shall be in
all ways, and in all high places: by these similitudes he shows, that those
who are under the protection of Christ, shall fare well: for he is a vigilant
and careful shepherd, and furnishes his flock with all things necessary:
so as nothing can be wanting unto them, that appertains to their sovereign
good. This advertisement was of great use for the Jews, in that time in which
they were to pass through hot and scorched paths, and to come at length into a
land wasted and desolate. The Prophet therefore says; that albeit humane
helps should fail, yet God of himself is rich enough to supply all their
wants. This is the reason why the Spirit of God delights so much in comparing
the faithful to sheep; that feeling their own weakness, they might willingly
and wholly submit themselves to be governed under the protection of this good
shepherd: John 10.11.

But withal it is very likely that the faithful are admonished not to affect
great delicates, The faithful must learn to want, as well as to abound.
for they shall never taste of such abundance, but they shall feel many wants
mingled therewith. Besides, it is not fit they should be pampered or full fed,
in regard they are subject to many dangers: for we know that the ways are
fraught with thieves and enemies, and the tops of the mountains are for the
most part barren and dry. The Church of Christ is so defended then, that she is
never far from assaults and outrages of enemies, and so replenished, that yet
she dwelles in waste and terrible deserts. Note.
But howsoever her enemies inuiron her on every side, yet the Lord protects her
from their violences. If we be in hunger or want, See verse 10.
he is ready to furnish us with all necessaries in abundance, and to nourish
and sustain us: yea, in these necessities, we better perceive the care he has
of us, then if we were in a place of the greatest safety.

Verse. 10. They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty, neither
shall the hear smite them, nor the Sun: for he that has compassion on
them, shall lead them, even to the springs of waters shall he drive them.
THe Prophet confirms that which was said in the former verse; A confirmation
of the former verse.
to wit, that God has provision ready to sustain the Jews in the way; so as
no necessaries shall be wanting unto them. And no doubt he puts them in mind
of that time in which their fathers were ready to perish in the desert for
want of food; in which necessity, God gave them Manna from heaven the space
of forty years: Exodus 16.35. Also in speaking of the shadow against the heat,
it is certain that he has respect to the pillar of a clowd, wherewith the
Lord covered them by day, to the end they should not be parched up with the
heat of the Sun: Exodus 14.21. For the Prophets are wont, as we have said, to
mention the peoples departure out of Egypt, as often as they were to confirm
their hearts in the assurance of Gods goodness, either toward all in general,
or toward any one in particular. In that he mentions the springs of waters,
he also alludes to those waters which issued out of the rock, when the people
were almost dead for thirst. For these things fell not out in the deliverance
of Babylon, but in putting them in remembrance of former benefits, the Prophet
sets before them the power of God, which has always bin sufficient to procure
the salvation of the Church.

Verse. 11. And I will make all my mountains as a way, and my paths shall be
exalted.
God ^he Churches companion in her pilgrimage, providing her of all necessaries.
HE here expreslie and fitly mentions the peoples return: for to what purpose
should he promise such felicity unto the Church, unless they had been
restored to their first liberty? He signifies then that all obstacles and
impediments shall be removed, which might any way hinder their passage: and
that the mountains, the tops whereof might seem impossible to be climbed,
shall be made passeable and easy to be attained. In a word, that he will
make all rough and hilly places smooth, that they may with ease return into
Iudeah. When the Church then was to be restored to her perfect estate, no lets
whatsoever, were they never so great, were able so to ouermatch the Lord, but
that in the end he would easily overcome them all.

And in that he calls them his mountains; it is to show, that he has not
only power to command them to give his people way; but he further expresses,
that it shall be himself who will bring the Jews home; no less then if he
went in person before them. He carried them up (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.13.) to
the high places of the earth, when they passed through the wilderness. Also he
says, that the Lord went before the Israelites, when they departed out of
Egypt: Exodus 13.21. Here we see then what singular love the Lord bears to his
Church, in that he vouchsafes to be a companion with her in her journey, and
takes upon him the whole care touching her necessary provision therein: so
that in succouring her, he seems to provide for himself.

Verse. 12. Behold, these shall come from far: and lo these from the North,
and from the West, and these from the land of Sinim.
WHereas some think the Prophet notes out here the four quarters of the
world, it has no great likelihood. Isaiah so prophecieth the Jews return,
that therewithal he also comprehends the kingdom of Christ.
And yet I reject not this opinion altogether, because it is probable, and
agrees with many other texts of Scripture. First he says, these shall come
from far: then he adds some particulars, for an exposition of the general
sentence. In stead of Sinis, some read Sinius: and the Hebrews themselves
read it diversely. Saint Ierom S. Ierom.
thinks it is meant of the south part from Mount Sinai, lying toward the
South. And this is the most received opinion. Others think it to be the name
of a city or region, called Sienes, situated toward the turning of the Sun,
when it is at the highest. But these opinions make nothing for the explanation
of our Prophets meaning, which is clear and manifest in it self. For
doubtless he speaks of such as were far remote, and scattered in diverse
quarters, whether they were to be gathered in from the North parts, or beyond
the seas. Isaiah then so promises the return from Babylon, that therewithal
he also extends this prophecy to Christ's time: as we may easily gather from
that which we have said, Chap. 36.6. For we must still hold this principle, A
principle.
that the second birth of the Church under the Kingdom of Christ, is here
described: for he not only promises that the Jews shall return to Jerusalem
to reedifie the Temple; but that those also, who before were strangers from the
Church, should be gathered from out of all quarters of the world.

Verse. 13. Rejoice, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth: brast forth into
praise, O mountains; for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy
upon his Or, poor.
afflicted.
THough he exhorts and stirs up all the faithful to thanksgiving: A
thanksgiving, in which is included a confirmation of the former promises.
yet he has a special drift to confirm that promise, which otherwise in it
self seemed doubtful. For our consciences waver, and are perplexed in
affliction: so as it is an easy matter to settle them firmly upon the truth
of Gods promises. In a word, either men stagger, tremble, fall, or utterly
despair. For if the least fear, distress, or affliction do but arise, much
ado there is to fasten any consolation upon us. For this cause we have need
to have our faith confirmed by all sorts of arguments. See the reason then why
Isaiah speaks so gloriously of the benefit of this deliverance; namely, to
the end that the faithful, who saw nothing round about them but ruin and
death, might notwithstanding be of good co^^ort, and in hope to wait for an
happy change. He sets the deliverance therefore before their eyes, as if it
were already accomplished; that so they might have all matter of joy and
reioicing: though at that time there appeared nothing but cause of sorrow and
mourning.

As often as the Lord therefore promises any mercy, Praises must be joined to
the promises.
let us ever be mindful to join praise and thanksgiving thereunto, though we
see not the accomplishment thereof: that so we may the better vvaken our
drowzie spirits: next, let us lift up our eyes also to Gods power, by which he
ouerrules all creatures both in heaven and in earth: for he no sooner beckens
with his finger, but they all stand up together, as it is in Chap. 48.13. to
fulfill his commandment. If the signs of his admirable power then do every
where appear, shall we think he will not make the same much more glorious
and admirable in the salvation of his Church? Under this figure then Isaiah
teaches, that neither the heavens, nor the earth can yield a more acceptable
service unto God, then when they join and combine themselves together to aid
the Church.

Moreover, that the faithful should not sink under the weight of the
calamity, before he promises that God will comfort them, he exhorts them
quietly to sustain their sorrows. For by the word poor, he signifies that
the Church in this world is subject to many afflictions. Therefore that we may
be fit to partake of Gods mercy, let us learn under the cross, and under
many miseries, tears, and groans, to wait till we attain unto the possession
of it.

Verse. 14. But Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten
me.
A correction of the Jews infidelity.
THe Lord minding further to amplify his grace, complains that the hearts of
the Jews were so closed up, that they had almost discouraged him, had not his
infinite bounty surmounted all their perverse imaginations. Yet therewithal
he endeavors to correct this vice, that they might joyfully embrace, and (as it
were) see the promised deliverance before hand which was offered them: as also
that seeing his forwardnes to succor them, they on the contrary might prepare
themselves to hope well. But this doctrine does now also appertain to us, for
when God deferres his help, all of us for the most part are too much perplexed,
we think by and by God has forsaken and rejected us. And thus despair
easily preuailes, unless we be wise to prevent the same betimes: which we
ought to do, lest we be bereaved of Gods grace.

Truly our infidelity manifests it self to the utmost in such doubts, in that
we neither quietly rest upon Gods promises, nor patiently bear his
corrections, which lead us to repentance: nor yet the trial of our faith, by
which he disposes us to mortification: neither any other afflictions, which he
uses for our humiliation. For God justly complains of the Jews, who by
their distrust rejected his salvation offered, and could not endure to hear of
his help. Now he restraines not this only vice to a few, but comprehends also
the whole Church, to show that he will be liberal and beneficial toward the
Jews far above the measure of their faith: yea, he will oppose himself
against their incredulity, that he with his salvation may pass through all
the lets and impediments which stand in his way. Let every one of us beware
then how we flatter or sooth up our selves in this vice, for the Lord pleades
against his Zion, that is to say the whole Church, because she uses such
speeches as savor and proceed from a (bitter) root of distrust.

Verse. 15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion of the son
of her womb? though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee.
TO correct this distrust, to the complaint he adds an exhortation full of
sweet consolation. An exhortation, full of sweet consolation.
For by a very fit similitude he shows what great care ye Lord has over his
Church in comparing him to a mother, whose entire affection and care is so
great toward her child, that the fathers love in comparison thereof is as
nothing. He propounds it not then, you see, in the example of a father, which
notwithstanding is often used: Deuteronomy. 32.6. 2. Cor. 6.18. but that he might the
better express his singular love, he rather compares him to a mother: and he
names not children only, but the fruit of the womb, to which usually the
woman bears much greater affection. For the love that a mother bears toward
the little one which she nourishes and suckleth at her breast, is almost
unutterable. Also what care does she use, even to spend many nights together
without sleep, by reason of the frowardnes of the child! And to speak all in
a word, she spares not to wast and consume her self daily, so as her love
makes her clean forget her self. And this care we see is not only in the
reasonable creatures, but in the unreasonable also: yea, even in wild beasts,
who yet are gentle and loving in this behalf, howsoever otherwise they be of
cruel and fierce natures.

Now in regard women sometimes prove more unnatural then wild beasts, yea,
and overcome them in cruelty, by neglecting the fruit of their bodies, the
Lord adds, that if this should fall out, that yet he will never forget his
people. For the firm and immovable affection he bears us, far surmounts
the vehement love and amity of all fathers and mothers in the world. Let us
then call to mind what Christ says, Math. 7.11. If you which are evil can
give good things to your children, how much more will your heavenly father! Is
it possible that he should empty himself of this fatherly affection? No
verily. Men which are of perverse natures, and love themselves, yet will not
neglect their children, and will the Lord (the fountain of mercy, who needs
nothing, but gives to all men liberally, and has not the less) neglect his
Church? Wherefore howsoever it falls out sometimes that mothers reject and
forsake their children (which yet is prodigious) yet notwithstanding, God, who
loves his children with a stable, constant, and perpetual love, will never
reject them. To conclude then, Chap. 27.23 Hebr. 13.5.
our Prophet here sets out the inestimable care of God, who watches night and
day for our salvation, to assure us, that he will never leave nor forsake us,
though we be tossed to and fro with many and great calamities.

Verse. 16. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of mine hands: thy walls
are ever in my sight.
Gods love to his Church set forth by another similitude.
BY another similitude he sets forth this inestimable care that God has over
us. We use to say in our common proverb, That one has that upon his fingers
ends, which is seriously imprinted in his memory. And when Moses commands a
daily meditation in Gods law, he says, Thou shall bind them upon thine hands.
Deuter. 6.8. that so they might always have Gods commandments before their
eyes. Here our Prophet uses the same similitude, as if he should say, I can
no sooner look upon my hands, but I behold thee there: I bear thee so
engraven upon my heart, that nothing is able to blot out the remembrance of
thee: In a word, I can not forget thee, but I should also forget my self. True
it is that GOD has neither hands, nor any bodily shape: but thus it pleases
the holy Ghost to stoop down to our slender and weak capacities, that he
might the better set forth the infinite love which he bears us. And because
the Church is in many places called the Temple, or City of God (whence also
comes that similitude of building so much frequented in the scriptures, Psalm.
102.16. Ier. 24.6. Math. 16.18.) therefore the Prophet brings in the similitude
of wales: by which he notes out the quiet and peaceable estate of the
Church: as if he should say, I will always see that Jerusalem shall flourish,
and be in good plight. Whence also we observe, that here is set forth unto us
a right order of government and discipline, A right order of discipline
described.
whereof the Lord will be the perpetual protector and defender, as himself
here protests. Let us also remember that this prophecy took place in that
woeful desolation when the walls of Jerusalem (which were the lively image of
the Church) Ierusalems walls a lively image of the Church.
were thrown down, the Temple raced, good government abolished, and in a
word, when all things were out of joint, and almost brought to utter confusion:
for he promises that all the Churches privileges shall forthwith be restored
to their first perfection.

Verse. 17. Thy builders make haste: thy destroyers, and they that have made
thee waste, are departed from thee.
HE amplifies that which he touched in brief in the former verse: An
amplification of the former verse.
for his speech might have bin esteemed ridiculous and vain, concerning this
continual care that God has over the Church, and her walls, which he now
suffered to be raced to the very foundations. For this cause, I say, he adds
an exposition, to wit, that it is ruinated indeed, but ere long it shall be
reedified anew.

From this word builders, we may gather wherein the right way of repayring the
church consists; The right way to repair the Churches ruins.
namely, if the Lord be pleased to send forth master Carpenters and Masons to
frame it anew. Secondly, in driving out the destroiers, which build not, but
break down. For albeit God can build up his church without the help of men,
yet is he pleased to use their labors: and howsoever he finisheth the whole
building himself alone, by the secret work of his holy Spirit, yet he
blesses the endeavors of his servants, that the same should not become
altogether unfruitful. To him we must pray, and from him alone we must expect
workmen; for he is able to fit them with gifts and graces, and to appoint out
to every one his task, as Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 3.5. Thus we are then,
not only to pray that God would send forth laborers into his harvest, but
also that he would furnish them with power and efficacy, Mat. 9.38.
that they may not bestow their pains in vain. Is the doctrine of the Gospel
then preached with some fruit? It comes to pass by the singular goodness of
God.

But this were not enough, unless he therwithall should drive far off the
destroiers: for Satan inuades and assaults the Church by infinite ways: neither
wants he his supposts and catchpoles, who employ all their forces either to
slake, hinder, or overthrow the Lords building: and therefore we ought
continually to pray, that God would still defeat all their enterprises. But if
that good be not done, which we desire, let us accuse our selves and our own
ingratitude; for the Lord is ready to bestow his benefits upon us in great
abundance.

Verse. 18. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold; all these gather
themselves together, and come to thee: As I live, says the Lord, thou shall
surely put them all upon thee as a garment, and gird thy self with them like a
bride.
HE awakens the Church by setting her deliverance before her eyes, The Church
is exhorted to behold her glory in the midst of her greatest ruins.
to the end she might view this so glorious a work, and might behold the
troops of men which should flow in unto her on every side. Now as this
gathering together, served to sustain the minds of the faithful in
captivity: so was it their duties, who saw it accomplished indeed, to render
thanks unto God. Whence it appears, that this prophecy was of good use in
both the times; as well whilst their deliverance was yet hidden under hope, as
when it was ratified by the effects. And albeit also he speaks to the Church
in general, yet this speech belongs to every one in particular that so, all
generally, and every one particularly, might embrace these promises.

When he commands them to lift up their eyes; it is to show, that the cause
which moves us to faint, is, in that we do not so diligently observe the work
of the Lord as we ought; but suffer out eyes to be covered as it were with a
veil, by reason whereof, we cannot see three paces before us. Thence also it
comes, that we can hardly conceive any hope, but are ever and anon plunged into
despair, when the least troubles arise.

Now if this be said of the whole Church, let every man examine his own
heart,

In that he says, the children of the church shall be gathered; the meaning
is, to be one body with Christ, and as one fold under one shepherd, we must
be gathered into one lap of the Church. For Christ holds none other to be in
the number of his sheep, but such as are joined into one body by the unity of
one faith: Christ ^^lds none for his sheep, but such as are made one with him
by faith.
John 10.16. Whosoever then would be accounted among Gods children, let him
be a child of the Church: for as many as are separate from her, shall always
be held as strangers before God.

As a garment, or, ornament.] The Prophet shows wherein the chief ornament of
the Church consists; Wherein the chiefest ornament of the Church consists.
to wit, in having many children gathered into her lap by forth, and governed
by the Spirit of God. Behold the true beauty; behold the glory of the Church;
which otherwise is deformed, and ill favored, yea torn and rent in pieces, if
she be destituted of these ornaments. Hereby we see that the Papists have
great skill in discerning of the right ornaments of the Church^ for they please
themselves in nothing but crucifixes, With what ornaments the Church of Rome
deckes her self.
paintings, images, stately buildings, gold, precious stones, and glorious
vestments: that is to say, in bables and puppets, fit for little children. But
the true dignity and glory of the Church is all inward: Psalm. 45.13. because
it consists in the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: in a word, it consists
in faith, and in good works. Faith and good works the beauty of the Church.
Whence it follows, that she is then clothed with royal robes, when people
being knit together by faith, do assemble into her lap, and worship God in
spirit and in truth.

Now that this promise might have the greater weight, the Lord adds an oath,
that he might draws to credit the same; to the end that when the Church (as we
think) is at the very pits brinke, we should then wait and expect her
restoration. Which doctrine, if ever there were need of it, it is now much
more. For whither soever we turn our eyes, what see we else but horrible
desolations? The use to us.
What are we to do then? Let us deliver our souls from despair, by staying
our selves upon this oath, As I live? And let not our small number dismay us,
though for that cause the world despises and disgraceth us. No, the Lord, we
doubt not, has his elect scattered here and there, whom at the length he will
assuredly gather into his Church. Let us pluck up our spirits then, and lift
up our eyes by a true faith, that we may not only extend our hopes to one
age, but to many.

Verse. 19. For thy desolations and waste places, and thy land destroyed, shall
surely be now narrow for the^ that shall dwell in it: and they that devour thee
shall be far away.
HE confirms that which went before, A confirmation of the former sentence.
but in other words; to wit, that the change by him promised, is in Gods hand,
who will cause his Church, which has a long time lien desolate and waste, to
be suddenly inhabited again; and that in such wise, as the land shall not be
large enough to contain so many inhabitants. He uses a similitude of a City
broken down, whose walls and buildings are reedified: unto which also the
people flow in such troops, that the bounds thereof must be enlarged, because
the first circuits are too narrow for them all. And thus he not only speaks
of the peoples return from Babylon, but also of that restoration wrought by
Christ, when the Church was not only spread thorowout Judea, but also
thorowout all the quarters of the world.

Moreover, he adds that succors shall be in a readiness to defend the Church
against her enemies, which would molest her with outrages and injuries. These
shall not be able to hurt her. Why so? God will drive them far away: not that
the Church had ever any perfect rest in this world, The Church attaines not a
full rest in this world.
or could be exempt from all violence of enemies: but howsoever it be, God, who
still supports the infirmities of his servants, has always resisted the
wicked, repressed, or utterly defeated their plots, that so the kingdom of
Satan might never wax great by the ruins of the Church.

Verse. 20. The children of thy barrennes shall say again in thine ears; The
place is strait for me, give places to me that I may dwell.
ISaiah goes on with the same argument, The same argument still prosecuted.
and under another figure, promises the Churches restoration. Now he compares
her to a widow (or rather to a wife) that is barren: to set forth the miserable
and desolate condition of this people, who were oppressed under so many evils,
that the memory of that nation was in a manner extinct: for they were mingled
among the Chaldeans, who held them prisoners; so as they were almost
incorporated into one body with them. We are not to marvel then if he
co^pares the church as a barren wife, for she conceived no more children in
her womb. In former time the Jews flourished; but now their kingdom was torn
in sunder, their power utterly overthrown, and their name in a manner buried
in oblivion, when they were led into captivity.

He promises then that the Church shall come forth of these sinkes, and that
she who now sits solitary, shall return to her first estate. Which is
signified by the word again ^^ for thereby he assures them, that God was able
to render them that again, which in former time he had bestowed upon them,
though now for a season he had deprived them thereof.

Whereas many take children of barrennes for orphelins, me thinks it suits not
with the text, because widowhood and barrennes is referred rather to the person
of the Church. And therefore by way of amplification he calls them so, who
beyond all hope were given to her that was a widow and barren.

Give place:] That is to say, for my sake give way. Not that it is seemly for
the faithful to drive their brethren out of ye place wherein they dwell: but
the Prophet borrowed a phrase of speech which is commonly used, to signify,
that no inco^moditie whatsoever shall hinder many from desiring to be received,
and that place may be given them. This came to pass when the Lord gathered an
infinite number of souls from all parts of the world. For in a moment, and
above man's reason the Church which was empty before, was replenished: her
bounds were enlarged, and extended far and near.

Verse. 21. Then shall thou say in thine heart, Who has begotten me these,
seeing I am barren and desolate, a captive, and a wanderer to and fro? And who
has nourished them? Behold, I was left alone: Whence are these?
The Church brought in, admiring her extraordinary exaltation.
BY these words he shows, that the restoration of the Church whereof he now
speaks, shall be admirable: and therefore he brings her in wondering, yea
astonished, that she is exalted by so extraordinary and unexpected a manner.
And to say the truth, this is no superfluous description. For the children of
God, and of the Church, are not made new creatures by the will of flesh and
blood, but by the secret virtue of the holy Ghost; neither are they borne into
this world as we see men daily have a new offspring to replenish
commonwealths, for naturally we have no part in the kingdom of God. If any
man then will but consider of this new and unaccustomed change, and then by
what means the Church was multiplied and nourished a long time in her poor
estate, he shall be constreined to admire and vvond^^ thereat.

Now he shows that this shall be no fained admiration, in which art
flatterers have great skill, but it shall proceed from a true affection of the
heart. Why so? Because there shall be just occasion to vvonder, in regard the
Lord has so long, and in so many dangers not only preserved his Church, but
has made it multiply into a new generation unhoped for. For who would have
imagined that when the Jews were in the most contemptible condition that might
be, covered over as it were with miseries and reproaches, that any one of the
Gentiles would have desired society with such: Moreover, there was no
likelihood that men's minds could feel so sudden an alteration as to join
themselves to such a religion as themselves both hated, and despised before:
nay more then that, the wall of separation then stood, which shut out all
strangers and uncircumcised ones from entering into the Church of God.

But he adds the reason of so great an astonishment, to wit, that she was
barren before, and therefore was utterly destituted of children. For the word
of God which is the spiritual seed wherewith the children of the Church were
begotten, ceased: the sacrifices also were broken off: in a word, whatsoever
served to maintain a state in perfection, was abolished.

Besides, the Church is called barren, not because God ever forsakes her, but
in regard his gracious presence does not always appear. We saw a woeful
spectacle of this barrennes A woeful spectacle of the Churches barrennes seen
in our times.
when the Lord to punish men's ingratitude took from us his blessed truth, and
suffered us to walk and err in darkness, then we might well say that she was a
widow and barren indeed, when she was left quite destitute of children. Hence
also we may perceive how foolish the Papists are, in that they will always
have Christ so to dispose of his Church, that she must never know the state of
widowhood nor barrennes. For howsoever the Lord at no time utterly reiects his
Church, yet he often withdrawes from her the signs of his presence, because of
the worlds unthankfulness.

Who has nourished these?] Those who are banished and often remove their
habitation can not well nourish nor bring up children: So, when the law and
doctrine of godliness sounds no more in the Temples, spiritual nourishment must
needs fail. But the Lord who stands in no need of humane helps, begets unto
himself children after an extraordinary manner, by the incredible virtue of
his holy Spirit, and these he nourishes, how, and in what place it pleases
him. Now to accomplish this prophecy, he has contrary to all hope, raised up
nurses, so as the Church admires not without cause at the fostering and
bringing up of her children.

When we read this prophecy we are admonished not to vex our selves above
measure if at any time we see the Church lest like a widow.

Verse. 22. Thus says the Lord, Behold I will lift up mine hand to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons
in their arms: and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.
ISaiah co^firmes that which he said erewhile, to wit, A confirmation added to
the Churches admiration.
that ye Lord would cause the Church which a long time was a widow and barren,
to bring forth an innumerable of spring, so as her self should be constrained
to admire at her own fruitfulnes. And this he does to remove all scruples and
doubtings, which peradventure might arise in their minds. But the Lord
pronounces, that he will not only give children to his Church among the Jews
(as in former time) but among the Gentiles also: and yet he shows, that this
generation shall be spiritual, to wit, by the grace of adoption. To which
purpose appertains the similitude of the standard, for thereby he incourageth
the faithful to hope for a new kind of generation, far different from that
which we see in the common course of nature. It was necessary then that the
Lord should set up his standard, and to discover his secret power by the
preaching of the Gospel, that among so many sorts of languages and differing
dispositions, he might bring children to the Church, and to be made one with
her in the same faith, even as brethren gather together into the lap of their
mother.

Those are deceived who by the metaphor of the hand, and standard, think the
preaching of the Gospel is only signified, separating it from the efficacy of
the holy Ghost, for both must be conioined together. The preaching of the
Gospel, and the efficacy of the holy Ghost must go together.
The virtue of the holy Ghost must in no wise be separated (I say) from the
preaching of the Gospel, witness hand of God, and to this standard, when we see
the Church oppressed under the tyranny of the wicked. For albeit they be ever
plotting all sorts of mischief utterly to ouerturne it, yet is Gods hand
stronger then all, Job. 9.4.
and men in the end shall gain nothing by resisting him, for at last he will
subdue and bring down their rebellion, that his Church may have some breathing
time in despite of them all. In that he promises the children of ye Church
shall be brought in between the arms, and upon the shoulders, it is a
figurative manner of speech, in which he would signify that God will no way be
hindered, when he means to gather his Church from the scattering, wherein he
shall find her, because all the Gentiles shall help him. And howsoever this be in
the first place to the banished and dispersed Jews, yet no doubt it is to be
extended unto all Gods elect in all places, who are, or shall be received in,
to participate of the same grace.

Verse. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy
nurses: they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick up
the dust of thy feet: and thou shall know that I am the Lord: for Or, all.
they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.
Having spoken of the obedience of the Gentiles, he shows, that it not only
appertains to the common people, but even to Kings also, whom he compares to
foster fathers, who bring up other men's children, and Queens to milch nurses,
which are hired forth for that purpose. Why so? Because Kings and Queens shall
furnish ye Church with all things necessary for her children. For whereas
before they banished Christ out of all their coasts, now they shall from
henceforth acknowledge him for their sovereign King, and shall yield him
honor, homage, and service. And all this came to pass after God manifested
himself to all the world by his Gospel, for the great Kings and Princes thereof
not only submitted themselves under the yoke of Christ, but also employed their
wealth and riches to restore and maintain the Church, so as they became the
protectors and defenders of it.

Whence we note, that a special and particular duty is here required of
Princes, A special and particular duty required here in Kings and Princes.
besides their ordinary profession of the Christian faith. Why so? Because the
Lord has clothed them with power and authority, to the end they should
provide for the Churches good, and also procure the glory of God. I grant this
duty belongs to every one, but by how much the greater power Princes are
endued withal, the more careful should they be to employ their studies and
pains about these things. That is the cause why David expressly names them, and
exhorts them to be wise, to serve the Lord with fear, and to kiss his Son,
Psalm. 2.10.11. Hence also we may discern of their folly and madness, who
affirm that Kings can be no Christians unless they give over this office and
dignity. The folly of such as affirm that Kings can be no Christians unless
they give over their dignities.
For this was accomplished under the kingdom of Christ, when Kings being
converted unto God by the preaching of the Gospel, came to this hie degree and
dignity, which far surmount all sorts of rule and principalities, to wit, to
be the nursing fathers, and defendors of the Church.

The Papists think none can be right nursing fathers to the Church unless
they leave unto Priests, Monks, and idle bellies, great revenues, large
possessions, and fat prebendaries, to fatten them up as swine in a stie. But
this nourishment tends to a far other end, then to cramme and stuff the guts
of such a company of insatiable gulphs. After what manner Kings ought to be
nursing fathers to the Church.
For the question is not here touching the enriching of their houses, who under
a fained pretense of holiness will needs be taken for the Ministers of the
Church (who have bin the only poysoners and corrupters of the Church of God,
with the deadly venom of the whores cup) but

When Kings have taken order for these things, then are they also to furnish
the Pastors Pastors.
and Ministers of the word with all things necessary, let them relieve the
poor, and look that the Church sustain not by their negligence beggerie, or
indecent wants. Then let them erect Schools, and endow them with sufficient
pentions The poor Schools erected and endowed with sufficient pensions.
Building of Hospitals.
for the teachers: let them foster and cherish Studients, let them build
Hospitals for the aged and diseased, and perform other offices which serve for
the maintenance and conservation of the Church. But these excessive expenses
superfluouslie bestowed toward the founding of Masses and Oratories, and
employed for the making of vessels of gold and silver, rich and gorgeous
vestments, in which Papists glory and brag; only serves for a pomp and
ambition to corrupt the pure and sincere nourishment of the Church; yea, to
choke and extinguish Gods seed, which is the only food by which the Church
lives.

Now when we see things otherwise carried at this day; to wit, that Kings in
stead of nurcing fathers to the Church, become tormentors and destroiers of the
Church, If Kings in stead of nurcing ^a hers to the Church, become tormentors
of her, ^t is the just ^eward of ou^ sins.
that the true doctrine is rejected, the faithful Ministers banished, and that
greasy idle paunches, insatiable gulfes, and supposts of Satan are put in
their rooms, (for to such, Princes distribute their riches: that is to say,
the blood of the people which they have sucked) when also those Princes, who
otherwise being faithful, yet wanting power, and therefore having little or no
courage to defend the word, or to maintain the church. Let us acknowledge that
this is the just reward of our iniquities, and let us confess that we be
unworthy to enjoy such good nurcing fathers. Notwithstanding after these so
horrible ruins, we must be ever waiting and looking for the restoration of
the Church; and for such a conversion of Kings, as that they shall show
themselves fathers and protectors of the faithful, and such as shall
constantly uphold the doctrine of the word in their dominions.

They shall lick the dust of thy feet.] The Papists in like manner offer
violence to this place, to establish the tyranny of their Idol: as if
forsooth, Kings and Princes could not otherwise show themselves the true and
lawful servants of God, unless in his stead they should fall down at the
feet of their disguised head of the Church. This they account a testimony of
great service done to God, when they will abase themselves to kiss his feet
with great reverence. But first of all, if they will know what an opinion we
ought to conceive of such an idolatrous and barbarous reverence, let them
learn it from Saint Peter, S. Peter.
whose seat they brag to hold: for he would not suffer Cornelius the Centurion
to do him such reverence: Act. 10.26. Let them also learn it from Saint Paul,
S. Paul.
what to do in this case, who rent his garments, and rejected this honor with
great detestation: Act. 14.14. Is any thing more absurd then to say that the
Son of God, in stead of ordaining a Minister of the Gospel, should
consecrate a profane King, The Pope a profane King.
exercising a Persian-like pompous state, utterly insupportable? But let us
remember that whilst the Church is a pilgrim in this world, that she may be
humbled, and that she may be conformed to Christ her head, she is subject to
the cross. And if her enemies give her any rest, The Churches chiefest glory
consists in humility.
yet you shall perceive that her chiefest glory and beauty consists in
modesty. Whence it follows, that she is stripped of her ornaments, when she
is decked with a profane arrogancy.

The Prophet then by these words understands nothing else but that adoration by
which Princes humble themselves before God, and that obedience which they yield
to his word in the Church: for we must carefully bear in mind what has been
said before; to wit, that the honor which is done to the Church, must never be
separated from her head. The honor done to the church, must never be separated
from her head.
For this honor and service appertains unto Christ: and if it be in any sort
attributed to the Church, it is in such wise, that it always remains entirely
to her only head. Add also that Kings do not submit themselves to the true
religion, that they should bear the yokes of men, but that they might submit
themselves to the doctrine of Christ. Who ever he be then that reiects the
Ministers of the church, and refuses to bear the yoke which God imposes upon
all his servants by her hand: He is no child of God, that will not bear the
yoke which he imposes upon him by the Churches hand.
such a one has no communion with Christ, neither can he be the child of God.

For those that vvait for me, etc.] I take the word Ascher, for a particle of
rendering a reason: for the words run on so in a line, that those who divide
them, do much darken the Prophets meaning. For by this argument, he proves
that it is good reason Kings and Princes should cheerfully bow under Gods
government, and need never be squemish to humble themselves before the Church;
because God will not permit any that wait for him, to be ashamed. As if he
should say; This shall be no slavish, but an honorable and an amiable
subjection. No slavish, but an honorable subjection, to humble our selves
before the Church.


Now he ioines his truth with our salvation: as if he should say; Let me be
held neither for God, nor true of my word, if I accomplish not that which I
have promised. Hence we gather an inestimable fruit. For as it is impossible
that God should lie or repent, so is it necessary that the stablenes of our
salvation, which the Prophet draws from the truth of God himself, should ever
remain steadfast, without being moved or shaken.

Verse. 24. Shall the pray be taken from the mighty? O the just captivity
delivered?

25. But thus says the Lord; Even the captivity of the mighty shall be
taken away, and the pray of the tyrant shall be delivered: for I will contend
with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.


Having answered an objection in the former verse, God testifies in these
verses, that he will oppose his power against the power of such as tyrannize
over his Church, be they visible or invisible adversaries.
which might arise in the minds of the faithful: now he confirms this
solution yet better. For it seemed a thing incredible that the Jews should
ever be delivered from under the hands of so mighty an enemy, who held them
prisoners by the law of arme^, and had justly subdued them under bondage. He
adds this interrogation then (as it were) i^ the person of all the common
people, who, as it is likely, had this speech rife in their mouths: to which
he makes answer, as we shall see anon. But first we must observe the
similitude, in that the Church is called the pray of the mighty, and the just
captivity: that is to say, lawful. For he is called a just possessor, which
has gotten it lawfully: as in a just war, he that takes the spoil, is the
just possessor of it. Such was the condition of this ancient people, whilst
they were in exile; for they lost both their Country and liberty together,
and the vanquishert will only was a law?

But yet we are diligently to observe this similitude; to wit, that the Church
should be oppressed by the tyranny of Princes, and made a pray to the throat
of wolves: and yet notwithstanding she should be esteemed good purchase, yea
esteemed a just captivity. What is more unjust? But thus were our fathers
handled: and are we better or more worthy then they? But let them boast as long
as they list of their just captivity, and let them glory at their pleasure in
this vain title, the Lord pronounces them abominable (cut-throtes) and
thieves, in affirming that he will be avenged of them, and pluck the pray out
of their teeth: for God uses not to overthrow just poscessors. Whence it
follows, that the dominion which they usurped over Gods people, was an unjust
tyranny, and plain robbery. Neither could their weapons nor munitions hinder
the Lord from taking from them, that which they unlawfully detained.

And this promise stands in force not only against tyrants, and visible
enemies, but also against the tyranny of Satan, from which we are now delivered
by the admirable power of God. I grant, Satan is a powerful adversary; but
the Lord which is stronger then he, will bind him, and take away his weapons,
and cast down his strong holds, that he may restore us unto liberty: Mat.
12.29. Have we tried the power of God then in this behalf? The greater reason
have we to rely upon his deliverance still, 2. Cor. 1.10.
as often as our enemies tread us under their feet, and tyrannize over us with
cruelties.

Now when he says he will contend for our just occasion given them to
tyrannize over her.

Is not this consolation more then needful then; to wit, that God will
maintain our innocence, and by his allegations, will cause the vain pretext
to vanish, which may any way serve to augment the cruelty and impudency of
the godless? Therefore it is that he adds once more, And I will save. Here
then you see we have a singular consolation, knowing that we are made one with
the Lord in so fast a covenant, that he opposes himself against all those
that contend with us. So as he will bless those that bless us; and on the
contrary, will curse those that curse us: in a word, he testifies that he is
an enemy to our enemies. From this word save, we must also note, that when we
are set free from bondage, and defended against the fury of our enemies, or
sau^; hat we impute not these things to the work of flesh and blood: lest any
should ascribe that to his own industry, which God commands us wholly to
expect and vvait for only from himself, See Chap. 26.12.
in regard it is a singular benefit that proceeds from his hand.

Verse. 26. And I will feed them that spoil thee with their own flesh, and
they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh
shall know that I the Lord am thy savior, and thy redeemer, the mighty one of
Iakob.
IN the first place he shows what shall become of the enemies of Gods Church,
The churches enemies shall at length turn their swords points against
themselves, which they drew forth to massacre her withal.
threatening that the time will shortly approach, in which tney being enraged and
set on fire with heart burnings one against another, shall at last butcher one
another. Truly it is the Lord which depriues them of reason, and plungeth them
into frenzies, and that in such wise, that they bend against themselves the
very weapons, which in times past they had drawn forth to massacre the Church
withal. And thus they turn their swords points one against another, till they
have sought their own utter ruin, as the Madianites did: Judge. 7.22. The
sum of all is, that the Church shall have no need of man's help, nor of any
preparation at all, when God is minded to confound and bring the wicked to
naught: for having first smitten them with giddiness, they shall fall to eat
and devour one another, being set on fire with the furies of hell, every one
against his fellow.

And all flesh shall know.] He repeates the same thing which we have seen in
verse 23. namely, that the time shall come, in which the God of Israel shall be
acknowledged of all, the true and only God: because he has saved his people
from destruction. For he would have this to be noted as a special testimony
of his Divinity, when he appeared in all men's sight the savior and redeemer
of his people. Some read the name of Jakob in the vocative case: but I expond
it in the genitive. For the Lord shows that he is the savior, redeemer, and
the mighty one of Iakob; that his people might learn to rest themselves
securely under his sauegard and protection.

THE L. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Thus says the Lord; Where is that bill of your mothers diuorcement,
whom I have cast off? or who is the creditor to whom I sold you? Behold, for
your iniquities are you sold; and because of your transgressions is your mother
forsaken.
The Lord proves the lawfulnes of the Churches divorce, under two similitudes.
THis place is diversely expounded: but very few have attained ye Prophets
meaning. To the end we may have the sum briefly, we must note this
conjunction, whereby the Lord in many places testifies, that his people are
obliged and bound unto him: namely, that he is as it were our husband, and we
his wife: for it is a spiritual marriage consecrated by his eternal word, and
sealed up with the blood of Jesus Christ. Our spiritual marriage with God
consecrated by his word, and sealed up by the blood of Christ.
As he then for his part receives us into his protection as his beloved wife,
upon condition that we keep faith and loyalty toward him: so when we play
false with him, he reiects us; and then it is rightly said, that he puts us
away: even as if a husband should banish an adulterous wife his house. Now,
because we could not easily conceive the reason why God should reject the
Jews which were pressed under so many and great calamities, it was necessary
she should here come to manifest the cause of this divorce. But for as much as
we are ordinarily too eloquent in covering of our own faults, and strive to
lay all the blame where we should not; that is to say, upon God himself: so
the Jews also then murmured at their estate, as if the Lord had done them
wrong so to reject them. Why so? Because they could not be brought to
acknowledge that the promises were made vneffectual, and the covenant abolished
by their leaud behavior. At least they could not be drawn to make this
confession, but with much ado: for they posted over their fault to their
predecessors, as if they forsooth had borne the punishment of their offenses.
From thence proceeded those complaints recited by Ezekiel; Our fathers have
eaten sower grapes, and our teeth are set on edge: Ezekiel. 18.2. Now because such
proverbs at that time went current among them, the Lord bids them bring forth
that letter of divorce, by which they might justify their own innocence, and
prove that God had unjustly put them away.

It was the custom then to give a woman unjustly divorced, The first Simile.
a letter in her hand: for thereby her husband was constrained to testify,
that his wife had lived chastely and honestly with him: that all might know that
she was not put away for her own fault, but because she pleased not her
husband. And thus the wife was set at liberty, and her innocence approved;
and the fault was laid only upon the husband, to whose discontented mind the
cause of this rent was imputed. Moses ordained this law, Deuteronomy. 24.1. in regard
of the peoples hardness of heart, as witnesses our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat.
19.7. The Lord by a very fit similitude then shows, that he is not the author
of this divorce, but that the people put away themselves by their own fault,
and so pursued their lusts, that they utterly dissolved the marriage knot. This
is the cause why he asks for this letter, whereof they boasted so much: for
there is great weight in ye pronoune demonstratiue that; by which the Prophet
meant to tax their vain excuses. As if he should; You have skill to put the
fault far enough from you, and to reproach the Lord; you have your defenses in
your hands ready to show; and yet in the mean while your selves have violated
the faith of marriage: neither are you able to allege any just matter for your
selves, whereby to disprove the lawfulness of your divorce.

Where is the creditor? Here he sets forth the same thing by another
similitude: when any was so far indebted, The second Simile.
that he could not satisfy his creditors, he was constrained to give his
children in payment. The Lord now asks if he were forced to do this; to wit,
whether he has sold or given them to pay his creditor; or whether he was like
to those unthrifts, who fondly waste their substance: or to those householders,
who suffer themselves to run over shoes in debt. As if he should say; I am
sure you are notable to charge me with any such matter. And therefore it is
evident to all, that you have been sold and brought into bondage for your
iniquities. And thus the Lord maintains his own justice against all false
imputations; which by this second member he thus repulseth, in regard the
Jews were sold and put away by their own fault.

Saint Paul uses the same similitude when he says. We are sold under sin:
Romans 7.14. but in a diverse sense. Besides, the Hebrews are wont thus to speak
of wicked ones, 1. Kin. 21.25
who give over themselves to commit sin with a reprobate mind. But here the
Prophet only meant to convince the Jews, in regard that by their own
offenses, they had wittingly pulled all the evils they sustained upon
themselves. If any ask; but can the Lord reject his heritage? Can he disanull
or break his covenant? No verily: but it is said he forsakes and prophanes
his heritage: as in Psalm. 89. Ezech. 24. because we can judge no otherwise of
it by outward appearance. For in that he bare not that affection toward them
he was wont, it was a kind of divorce or reiection. To be short, we must note
these oppositions, either that the wise is divorced by the Again, that the
children are sold, either by reason of their fathers poverty, or for their
own unthriftiness. And thus the context of this text will be easily
understood.

Verse. 2. Wherefore came I, and there was no man? I called, and none answered:
is mine hand so shortened that it can not help? or have I no power to deliver?
Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea: I make the floods desert: their fish
rotteth for want of water, and dies for thirst.
IT may be the Prophet renders a reason here why the people having provoked
the holy one of Israel to anger, has not only pulled upon themselves a sea of
evils, but are also worthily cut off by their own obstinacy from all hope of
pardon and salvation. But I rather think the Lord proceeds yet further. The
Lord proceeds on in proving his plea to be just.
For having showed that he had good cause given him to reject this people, who
willingly choosed rather to live a servile life then to be free, he adds,
that it is none of his fault that they were not forthwith delivered. And as in
the former verse he showed that the fault wholly rested in the Jews, so here
he proves that their own malice was the cause why they grew old and putrified
in their miseries, for there wanted neither will nor power in the Lord to have
helped them if they had not stubbornly refused his grace and liberality. To
shut it up in a word, Isaiah shows that both their entrance, and continuance in
this calamity came only from their own fault, that he might free God from
blame: and signifies, that the Jews did wickedlie when they accused him to be
the author of their miseries; or in complaining, that he came not soon enough
to their succor.

First then the Lord says, that he came. But to what end? To reach the Jews
his hand. Whence it follows, that they are justly destitute of help, in
regard they despised his favor. Now the Lord comes, when he gives us Moses,
that saw such signs and wonders as thou have done, or that has heard the
voice of God speaking out of the mids of a fire, and live? Deuteronomy. 4.33.34.
Seeing such a daily summons served to no purpose; and that in setting hope of
mercy before the^, he sought to draw them to repentance, does he not justly
complain as of a prodigious thing, that they would not come forth to meet
him? They are co^uinced of ingratitude then, that whereas they ought to have
sought unto God, they would not vouchsafe to meet him. For what a vile
unthankfulness is it, not to receive that grace which is freely offered?

In that he says, I called, he repeates the same thing in diverse words. When
God calls us we ought to give ear, and to offer our ready and willing
obedience. For this is the answer (which he complains is not given him) to
wit, that we submit not our selves wholly under his command. But this word
suits very well here to the circumstance of this place, in that they wilfully
despised God, who offered them present deliverance out of their troubles. It
auailed him no more to speak unto them therefore, then if he had spoken to so
many deaf and dumb men. Thence he concludes, that their deliverance was
deferred only in respect of their own backwardnes, which he confirms unto
them by former testimonies, in that he had in former time manifested to their
fathers the sufficiency of his power.

Now lest they should cavil and excuse themselves in affirming that they were
not saved, though they desired it: God on the contrary affirms, that they
must seek the cause of such a change elsewhere then in him. For sure it is,
his power was not diminished. He would not have bin slack in reaching out his
hand to them in their affliction, if they had not obstinately rejected his
offer.

Now by this Interrogation, he expresses the equity of his cause, as one that
maintained a thing clear and manifest. For who dares object that his power is
lessened? And to that end he puts them in mind of that power of his, by which
he brought them out of Egypt, lest they should imagine ye same were now
diminished, but might rather acknowledge that their vices stopped the course of
this power, that it could not now manifest it self. At his rebuke he says the
sea is dried up, as if he had terrified it, in rebuking of it. For by his
commandment the waters parted in twain to give his people passage, Exodus
14.21. And Iordain fled back, Josh. 3.16. Psalm. 114.5. so as the fishes being
destitute of water, died and rotted.

Verse. 3. I clothe the heavens with darkness, and make a sack their covering.
HE also mentions the thick darkness which was spread over the whole land of
Egypt for the space of three days, It was not for want of power in God that he
succored not the Jews: but it rested wholly in their own unthankfulness.
Exodus 10.22. for then the heavens were in a manner clothed with mourning
weeds, because as a fair and clear day glads our hearts, so a dark and
gloomie day brings sadness and heaviness with it. Therefore it is said that the
heavens were covered with a sack, or with a mourning garment, as signs and
testimonies of affliction. And if any had rather take them for general
sentences, he may do so if he will. But as I think the Prophet has respect to
the history touching their deliverance out of Egypt. From whence they might
gather, that God who had delivered their fathers after so wonderful a manner,
was now let from succoring the^ in the miseries which oppressed them, by
reason of their own unthankfulness.

Verse. 4. The Lord has given me a tongue of the learned, that I should know
how to minister a word in due season to him that is weary: he will raise me up
in the morning; in the morning he will awaken mine ear to bear, as the
learned.
Having twice convinced the people of ingratitude; now, according to his
custom, he adds a consolation: After a double reprehension, he adds a
consolation.
for the Lord so shames us, that he forthwith minds to free us from shame and
confusion. Albeit then upon good grounds he has proved, that the people were
justly rejected, and perished by their own deserts; yea, and had made
themselves utterly unworthy of deliverance: notwithstanding all this, he
promises them help and succor. Now because in a matter so difficult, there
was need of more then ordinary authority, the Prophet says, that God sent
him, and fitted him with ability to execute that which was inioined by him.
All in a manner do refer this place unto Christ, as if it suited not to the
Prophets person, when he says he was smitten. We read not indeed that Isaiah
was so handled: and yet it follows not therefore that their argument is sound
enough. For David complains that his garments were divided; which properly
appertained unto Christ: and yet it follows not that the like befell not
David. For mine own part, I am out of doubt that Isaiah brings in himself as
one representing the person of all Gods servants, as well touching those that
were before him, as of those that were to succeed him.

Now he says that the Lord gave him a tongue; to the end the promises,
whereby he seeks to cheer up the peoples hearts, might have the greater
weight: for our faith soon begins to waver, if we once deem that men speak
without warrant. Besides, the condition of this people was so forlorn, that
they could not be drawn nor allured by any reasons that could be alleged to
hope or expect deliverance. The sum is then, that the message of their
present deliverance is brought them from heaven: so as if any will refuse to
credit it, such a one shall show himself no better then a rebel against God.

Now howsoever the Prophet endeavors to purchase authority unto himself in
this behalf: yet hence we may gather in general, that none are fit to teach,
unless they be first taught and instructed of the Lord. None are fit to teach
others, but such as have first been taught of the Lord.
Thus then all faithful teachers are admonished to crave that of Gods Spirit,
which otherwise they can never have. I grant they ought to study diligently,
lest they should get up into the chaue without sufficient preparation: but yet
we must hold this principle, that whatsoever serves to furnish them for able
Ministers, must be so many gifts of the holy Ghost. And to speak the truth,
what boldness and presumption is it to represent themselves in the public
assemblies in the name of God, if they be not the organs and instruments of
the holy Ghost.

That I should know.] Somewhat must be supplied here (which we also have
done) that is, to minister or publish. Under the word To know he comprehends
that wisdom and dexterity which a Pastor of the word ought to have that
means to preach the word faithfully and fruitfully. As if he should say; I
have been well instructed in Gods school, and therefore I have attained
sufficient skill to speak a word in due season, for their comforts that are
laden with the burden of their sins.

He calls them vvearie, who were broken with many afflictions, Chap. ^0.29.
as we have seen before. I give strength to him that is vvearie. And Christ
speaks thus, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all you that are vvearie and laden.
Thus he means then that God has instructed and taught them, that he might
be fitted to comfort the afflicted with apt and fit words: so as the broken
hearts might be healed by the sense and feeling of Gods mercy in Christ. Hence
we gather, that the Ministers of the word ought chiefly to extend their care
over such as are in distress, Over whom the Ministers ought to extend their
chiefest cares.
and to comfort those that are oppressed, and in a manner overwhelmed with the
weight of their calamities: and then to teach them wherein the true rest of the
soul consists: as we have showed, Chap. 29 18.12. Moreover, here we see what
every one of us ought especially to search after in the holy Scriptures;
namely, What every one of us ought especia^ly to seek in the scriptures.
how to arm and fit our selves with proper and apt sentences to minister
consolation to our own souls in the time of need. He then that shall be able
to cheer up and sustain his own spirit with solid comfort when things are
perplexed; nay, when they seem altogether desperate: let such a one assure
himself, that he has well profited in the Gospel. I confess the doctrine of
the holy Scriptures has many other uses. For they not only contain in them
matter that is meet and profitable to comfort the weak and afflicted, but also
sharp rebukes and threatenings against the obstinate: 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Tim.
3.16.
But Isaiah here shows, that his principal charge was, in due season, to
minister or bring a word of comfort to the Jews, who were now in a manner
comfortless.

He will vvaken me in the morning.] Here the Prophet witnesses, that the
Lord is so careful of the miserable and oppressed, that he will give them
comfort in the morning: that is to say, in time convenient. I grant we are
often left destitute of consolation: but howsoever the Lord suffers us to
languish for a time, yet the fit times and seasons are in his own power, in
which he will prevent our necessities by his succors. And if it so fall out
that he tarry long, let us impute it to our negligence: for we stop and hinder
the course of his mercies from flowing in unto us by our own sloth: or rather
indeed, by our rebellion. But howeuer it be, yet he watches always carefully
for our salvation, and makes speed to succor us: nay, whilst we flee from
him and resist him, he then allures us to himself, that he might refresh us by
his love and favor.

He repeates the word morning twice, thereby signifying a daily continuance:
lest we should think there were any passions in him, as there are in men, to
reject and despise them afterward, whom he has once taken into his custody.
No, contrariwise, he makes them always to feel his goodness even unto the
end, and never destitutes them of consolation.

That I may hear as the learned.] His meaning is, that his ear was attent,
not like to one that is ignorant, or dull witted, but that he was fitted and
well instructed for the purpose. And yet withal he shows by his example, that
God teaches all such Ministers as he sends forth, for the salvation of the
Church with efficacy: for it were to small purpose for them to be endued with
humane learning, unless there withal they had the inward teaching of the holy
Ghost. By this we see yet better, how true that is which we have said before;
namely, that none prove good teachers, but such as have first been good
disciples. He shall never become a good Doctor in the Church, that has not
first been a good disciple.
Such the Prophet calls them taught and learned: for those that will not
vouchsafe to learn, as thinking that they know enough, are twice mad and
foolish. For by Gods own censure, none are truly taught and learned, but such
as suffer themselves to be taught, before they take upon them to teach others;
that so they may have the certain knowledge of the things which they mean to
teach them. Now to publish ought abroad to the world, which they may not with
good conscience protest they have received from God. To shut up all in a word;
those are learned, who in learning daily disdain not to grow still in
learning.

Verse. 5. The Lord God has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious; neither
turned I back.
HE repeates that again which he said before, and here comprehends whatsoever
is fitting for the office of a teacher. For the opening of the ear, ought not
only to be referred to doctrine, but to the whole, vocation: as first, to his
entrance: secondly, when he that is to be sent, receives his charge, touching
all that which he is to perform; to wit, the commandment it self, and
authority to execute the same. Besides, the Lord not only opens the ear,
when he manifests his will, but when he touches the man's heart with
efficacy, and so mooues him, that he yeeldes him his obedience. As in the
forty Psalm; Thou have pierced mine care. And Christ says; Whosoever has
heard and learned of my Father, he comes to me: John 6.45.

Hitherunto appertains the second member, where the Prophet says, he was not
rebellious. The sum is, that he undertook nothing at randon; but being well
assured of the calling of God, he performed the office of a teacher:
notwithstanding it was heavy and tedious to bear, because he was made fit and
willing to obey.

Verse. 6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers: I hid
not my face from shame and spitting.
HE opposes the invincible force wherewith he is endued, to the reproaches,
scorns, and outrages of the wicked: as if he should say; Albeit the contemners
of God use many devices, yet will he overcome all their injuries: so as he
will never repent himself of that labor which he has taken in hand.
Moreover, this place manifestly shows, that the Ministers of the word cannot
faithfully discharge their duties, Ministers must make account to meet with
oppositions in the discharge of their duties.
but they must therewithal prepare to buckle against the world; yea, to
sustain sharp assaults on all sides. For Isaiah no sooner affirms that he
was ready to obey Gods commandment, but by and by he adds, that his person
was exposed to the smiters. Wherefore the faithful servants of God cannot
avoid this condition, in preaching the word as they ought; but they must look
for stripes, reproaches, hatreds, slanders, and diverse assaults of the
adversaries, who repine at the liberty which the true Ministers of God must
needs use in their reprehensions and admonitions. Let them arm themselves
therefore with faith and constancy: for there is a terrible combat prepared
for them.

But he not only expresses what measure the Prophets shall have at the hands
of the wicked, but also the contempt of the world: for the wicked will have men
suppose that their cause is good and just, even whilst they oppress the
Ministers of the Gospel, and persecute their doctrine: for they will have Gods
servants reputed as evil doers, that by this means they may bring them into
disgrace and hatred. John. 18.30.
That is the cause why they rent and tear them with variety of false
imputations, and belch out all the outrage they can. And have not we
experience hereof at this day? Do not our adversaries load us with the
nickenames of seducers, seditious, schismatikes, and heretics, and disgorge
many other reproaches, wherewith they have heretofore taxed Christ and his
Apostles?

Now he complains that he was smitten and spitted upon, not only by strangers
and open enemies, but he touches the wrongs which were done him by those that
made show to be of the Church. For it is always seen, that out of the lap of
the Church there arises wicked contemners of God, who are the surliest enemies
that the Prophets of God have. Those then who will serve God purely, must fit
themselves aforehand to bear all these things with patience, that so they may
pass as well through good as evil report, 2. Cor. 6.8. Yea, let them not only
despise bands, tortures, banishments, and death, but reproaches and spittings
also, though sometimes these things seem harder to bear then death it self.
This doctrine appertains indeed to all the faithful, but especially to the
Ministers of the word, who ought to be the ringleaders to others, and to be as
standard-bearers.

Verse. 7. For the Lord God will help me, therefore I shall not be confounded:
therefore have I set my face as a flint, and I know that I shall not be
ashamed.
To those oppositions of men, the Prophet sets the help of God.
Here the Prophet shows from whence this great magnanimity proceeds, wherewith
he and other the servants of God were endued to sustain the violence of all
comers, namely, the help of God: for by faith therein Isaiah affirms, that he
has hardened his face as a flint against all the injuries of the ungodly.
Having then with a stout courage, wherewith he is endued, set light by all his
adversaries, he also labors to draw others to the same constancy with him; and
(as in a glass) describes to the life what the state and condition of all
Ministers of the word is, and shall be. For thus he would turn them from the
love of the world, that they might give themselves wholly unto God, and to
fix their eyes altogether upon him, for there is no combat so sharp, in which
they shall not be more then Conquerors under the leading of such a Captain.

By the similitude of a flint, he shows, that come what come will, he will not
shrinck an inch, for the signs of fear and astonishme^t, and of all other
affections appear by and by in the face, which plainly vtters to all how
matters go within. When Gods servants are handled thus shamefullie, they must
needs quail under so many injuries, if they had not brows of brass and iron
to repulse them. And in this sense it is said, that Jeremiah was set as a
defenced City, and iron pillar, and wales of brass against the Kings of
Judah, against the Princes, and against all the people, Iere. 1.18. Ezechiel
also had his forhead made as hard as the adamant, which is much harder then the
flint, that he might not recoile back from the obstinacy of the people, Ezech.
3 9.

This sentence, I shall not be ashamed, is not to be taken in the same sense
with that in the former member: for there it is referred to the affection, and
here to the effect, or the thing it self. When in the beginning of the verse
then he glories that he shall not be confounded be ashamed, signifies to be
disappointed. For they that conceive a vain hope, are subject to mocks and
reproaches. Here we see then that the faithful teachers and Ministers of the
word have promise of a special defense. Let Satan and the world bend their
forces together then to assail them with all their power: the more they
assault them, the stronger shall Gods defense and protection be over us. Thence
we must conclude, that all such as are fainthearted and quail when they come
to the trial, were never yet well fitted to execute their office. For he that
has not learned to fight, is neither apt to serve God nor his Church; 2. Tim.
2.5.
neither is he fit to preach the doctrine of the word.

Verse. 8. He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? Let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? Let him come near to me.

9. Behold, the Lord will help me: who is he that can condemn me? Lo, they
shall wax old as a garment: the moth shall eat them up.


WE must always remember that the Prophet speaks nothing here that is
proper to himself only, A Minister that has a good conscience, may have also
great boldness.
but testifies what a one God will, and ever shall be toward the faithful
Ministers, that so being assured of their lawful calling, and executing their
offices faithfully, they might boldly contemn all adversary power, and never
slack their duties an inch for any slanders. Why so? Because the Lord who
iustifies them, has, and ever will be ready to maintain and defend his own
truth. Now whosoever he be that will indeed boldly protest this, he ought to
have a pure conscience. For if he have unadvisedly intruded himself, not
having a sure testimony of his lawful calling: Intruders can not challenge to
themselves this privilege.
or if he be such a one as brocheth his own dreams and fancies, in vain
shall he boast of this promise, for it appertains to none but to such as being
called of God, do faithfully and purely discharge their duties.

Now howsoever mockers and despisers of God will never cease to make many
replies against his servants, yet Isaiah still offers himself to plead his
masters cause, and that as boldly, as if none durst enter the lists against
him, or to forge any slanders for their defense. Not that he was able to charm
their tongues, but because he was well assured they should gain nothing by all
their tattle. Thus then he shows, that notwithstanding all the false
imputations which the adversaries lay upon the word and the Ministers thereof,
they must not be discoraged. For there is no crime with which they do not
charge us. But all in vain. Why so? Because the Judge that defends their
innocence is near. The faithful Ministers therefore may (by S. Paul's
example) summon the false and sinister judgments of men before the Judgment
seat of God, who will give a just sentence, 1. Cor. 4.4.

Let us stand together.] The faithful teachers ought to be so confident, as
without fear to challenge all their enemies the field. For Satan with all his
supposts dare not at all times stand to their tackling openly, but especially
when they encounter us with lies. But they have close and secret practices, and
iugling tricks under board to surprise such as stand not upon their watch. Yet
the servants of God fear not to show their faces, nor to enter the lists
against the adversary: neither are they abashed to reason and debate the
matter, if the enemy dare appear. For the truth is of such strength, that it
flees not the noone day, as we see here, that Isaiah fears not boldly to egg
and provoke all those to the fight, whom he saw to lie in wait to trap him. And
here he urges them again saying, Let him come near me. For the true Pastors
ought to be always ready to yield a reason of their doctrine. But where is he
that vouchsafes to hear them patiently, or that will consider what his
doctrine is which they preach. I grant the adversaries are ready enough to
draw near, but it is only to draw out their swords, and to cut the throats of
Gods servants, or to whet and file their tongues, that they may be fit to
defame them by all sorts of slanders. In a word, their best defenses consists
in fraud, and tyranny, for with reasons orderly gathered from the Scriptures,
they dare not encounter, we therefore being well assured of the equity of our
cause, are ready with a christian fortitude to challenge them the field. For
though they condemn us without hearing our defenses; yea, and though the
numbers of the^ be great, which subscribe to their sayings, yet will we not be
outfaced, for God, whose cause we defend, is the Judge, who at the last will
give sentence on our side.

It seems S. Paul alludes to this place, where he says, It is God that
iustifies, who shall condemn? Romans 8.33. For we may boldly appeal to the
Judgment seat of God, when we are clothed with his free righteousness in Jesus
Christ. But Isaiah handles another argument here. For he speaks not now of
man's salvation in general, but of the ministry of the word, whereof the Lord
will be the protector against all the assaults of the wicked, neither will he
suffer his servants to be overwhelmed with their false packing nor violences.
In the end of the verse he shows that he vaunts not of his fortitude as one
out of gunshot, or as if he meant to fight with his own shadow, but he
protests that he will keep his standing in the face of the proudest of them
all that dare assail him. For whosoever they be that bid battle to Gods word,
shall but dash themselves upon their own destruction by reason of their own
brittlenes, and shall forthwith vanish to nothing.

Now as if he had had the thing before his eyes, he uses a particle
demonstratiue, Behold, or lo, they shall wax old as does a garment, the moth
shall consume them. The Psalmist uses the like similitude, when he compares
the men of this world with the children of God, Psalm. 49. For albeit the
worldlings brave it out, and that they shine as precious stones, yet shall they
perish. But the faithful who now lie covered with filth and rubbish, being
once decked with new beauty, shall in the end shine as the stars. But in
this place Isaiah properly speaks of these mad dogs, who hate and bark at the
faithful Ministers of the word. Now howsoever such profane wretches are in
best esteem with the world, and in great authority in the midst of the^,
yet all their brauadoes shall fall and come to naught, even as the beauty of
garments that are defaced by the gnawing of the moth.

Verse. 10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord? Let him hear the voice of
his servant: he that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.
Having spoken of the invincible succors which God gives to all his Prophets,
Here the Prophet turns his speech to the faithful.
Isaiah now directs his speech to the faithful, admonishing them to suffer
themselves to be governed by Gods word, and to yield themselves teachable.
Whence we may gather how far he insulted over those with an holy pride which
were his detractors. For in regard the wicked among the Jews at that time
prevailed, in respect of their multitudes, the little flock were in danger to
have their faith extinguished by them. In that he asks where those were that
feared the Lord? it is to note out the fewnes of them. And yet he calls these
few to take part with him, that they might separate themselves from that great
rout, lest they should consent with them in their wicked plots, so much
condemned of God. As in Chap. 8. Say ye not a conspiracy, etc. Thus then
howsoever Gods enemies make a great army in regard of their multitudes, yet
Isaiah assures himself, that there is a remnant left who will profit by his
doctrine.

Now he speaks to such as fear God, for where religion and the fear of God
is wanting, there wholesome doctrine can take no place. We see how those who
otherwise will be taken for great clerks, and sharp witted, do yet reject the
same. Why so? Surely those that are swollen with pride, and hate modesty and
all humility, prove more then doltish when the matter concerns the discerning
of this vvisdome of God. It is no marvel then that Isaiah lays this as the
foundation, to wit, the fear of the Lord, that so the word may indeed be
diligently and attentively received and heard. Whence also it appears, that
there is no true fear of God where the hearing of his word is contemned. For
hypocrites will make great brags of piety, and the fear of God: but by their
contempt of it they plainly manifest their rebellion, in that they obstinately
reject the doctrine of the Gospel, and all sound admonitions. Take a sure
trial here then of such kind of persons, that so you may pluck off their
vizard wherewith they would cover their faces.

Let him hear the voice of his servant. He might even as well have said the
voice of God, The voice of Gods Ministers the voice of God.
but he chooses rather to say, of his servant. For God will be no otherwise
heard of us, but by the voice of his Ministers, whose service he uses for our
instruction. Isaiah then speaks first of himself, and next of all his fellow
brethren, who have the same office of teaching with him. And thus here is a
close opposition between the audience which he requires, and that licentious
contempt of holy doctrine, which being basely accounted of among the impure,
they by their pride drew others, as witless and giddie headed as themselves,
to the like base estimation of it.

Now because the faithful might reply, that the fruit of their fear and
piety did not yet appear, but that they were contrariwise in miserable
servitude, as if they had been wicked livers; the Prophet meets with this
complaint, and affirms that the faithful, who hitherto had been hardly dealt
withal, should not for all that lose their labor, in yielding obedience to
God and his word: for though they have vvalked in darkness, yet they shall at
the length enjoy the light of Lord.

Darkness taken for afflictions.
By darkness the Prophet means not ignorance, nor blindness of mind, but the
afflictions whereby Gods children are in a manner overwhelmed. And this is the
consolation whereof he spoke verse. 4. where he said, that the tongue of the
learned was given him, that he might know how to minister a word in due season
to him that was weary. And he also here promises, that those who hitherto
have been almost drowned in so many calamities, shall be comforted.

Verse. 11. Behold, all you kindle a fire, and are compassed about with sparks:
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This
shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
The difference between Gods comforts, and those of our own devising. Verse
10.
He reprocheth the Jews because they chose rather to make a fire alone by
themselves, to walk in the light thereof, then approach to Gods light. This
place has bin ill expounded. And it we would have the right meaning of it, we
must note the opposition which is between Gods light, and man's light: that is
to say, between the consolation which the word of God brings, and the vain
comforts of men, who will endeavor to put away their sorrows, by things
ridiculous and of no value. Having spoken before then of light and darkness,
and having promised light to such as gave care to the voice of the Lord; he
now says, that the Jews rejected this light, to kindle one of their own: and
in conclusion affirms; that they shall be consumed as with a fire, by their
own light.

In this sort Christ reprocheth the Jews, for reioicing in John Baptists
light: John 5.33. Because they abused his person, to darken, nay rather to
quench the glory of Christ. For in opposing John's person against Christ's, to
darken his glory: what did they else but put out the light of God, shining in a
mortal man, to kindle themselves another? Which yet directed them not to walk
in the right way; but made them wander in bypath, wherein they had small
cause to rejoice.

In saying that they were compassed above with the sparks, he taxes their
froward imaginations, which harried them to and fro: and therewithal derides
their vanity, in that they ran swiftly and with great alacrity, whither
soever their deceivable lusts led them.

Walk.] As if he should say; You shall feel by experience how vain and
vanishing your light is, when your uncertain hopes have failed you. And thus
by this so taunting a permission, he signifies that they shall both lose their
time and their labor. Others expound, that the wicked kindle against
themselves, the fire of Gods wrath. But the Prophet has an higher drift;
neither do I think that this exposition agrees to this place.

Of mine hand.] In regard the wicked being beguiled with a false confidence,
think themselves utterly out of danger, and do boldly contemn all after
claps, by trusting in their light; that is to say, in the means wherewith they
have furnished themselves: the Lord shows that they shall lie down in sorrow,
and that this shall proceed from his hand. In a word, that such as forsake the
light of Gods word to seek consolation elsewhere, shall miserably perish.

THE LI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Hear me ye that follow after righteousness, and ye that seek
the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
whence ye are dug.
A consolation or exhortation unto patience.
NOw the Prophet exhorts the Jews not to faint, though they were few in number:
for they were so humbled and diminished, that they seemed near their utter
ruin: even as if they had been hopeless of any posterity to succeed them. He
therefore brings them to their original; to teach them that howsoever they
were but a small handful now, yet God was able to increase and multiply them.
Then he commands them to look unto their father Abraham, who being but one
man, yet grew into a great number, and God gave him children as the stars in
the firmament: Genesis 15.5. (and as the sand upon the sea shore: Genesis 22.17.)
Thence they might collect, that if God in so small a space was able so
admirably to multiply their fathers, he was no less powerful to make them
increase hereafter, seeing his power is no whit abated, nor his will changed.

Look to the rock.] Some think that Abraham is here called a rock, because
he was strong in faith: as Saint Paul says, Romans 4.19. Others allege a
reason clean contrary to this similitude: for they think Abraham is here
called a rock or stone, because he was unfit to beget children: and that Sara
was called a cave, because she was barren. But all of them, as I take it, are
deceived: for it is a plain similitude taken from stones. He says then, that
they were hewn or dug out of Abraham and Sara, as stones are hewn or
dug out of a rock or cave. There was exceeding need that the faithful
should be vpheld by this admonition, in the ruin of the whole nation. God had
promised (as we said before) that Abraham's seed should be as the stars, Genesis
15.5. and 22.17.
and as the sand. This promise in outward appearance was abolished in the
destruction of Jerusalem: for then those that remained, were like a small
cluster of grapes that remains after the vintage. But in regard they had
already proved how powerful God was, to create a great people of nothing;
the Prophet exhorts them to hope well still, that they may not be taxed of
unthankfulness toward God. And thus he directs his speech properly to the
faithful, who had much ado to sustain so sharp temptations: for he speaks
not to all in general, The Prophets always make a distinction between the
faithful and the hypocrites.
but to those only that rested upon the promises, whom he calls followers of
righteousness.

The Country was filled with unbelievers and hypocrites, who had for along time
been apostataes from the exercise of piety: the more praise those deserved
then, who constantly followed a godly and a sincere course. Where there is a
desire of righteousness, there God has audience: Note.
but where infidelity reigns, there is no place at all for the promises. Thus
then, albeit they boasted they were Abraham's children, yet all were not capable
of this doctrine. In the next place the Prophet shows the way how to follow
this justice, to wit, in seeking the Lord: for it must needs be that such as
seem to follow righteousness, and yet aim not at this mark, do err in all
the parts of their life. These two things then, to follow righteousness, and
to seek the Lord, must be joined together.

Verse. 2. Consider Abraham your father, and Sara that bare you: for I called
him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.
The application of the former consolation.
THis application shows sufficiently whereunto the Prophets exhortation tended;
namely, to confirm the peoples hearts in the hope of a better estate. He says
he called him alone, not only because Abraham had no companions with him when
he was called to forsake his Country; but because the Lord suffered him to
inhabit the land of Canaan, without having issue, till his old age: so as he
looked not to have any at all. And besides that, Sarah his wife was also
barren: but at the last they had a son given them to comfort their old years
in their afflictions. Which was no sooner given, but it seemed that God had
appointed him to the slaughter: and yet for all this, the Lord furnished him
with a great number of children. I told you ere while, how necessary this
consolation was for the Jews; which we may also judge by that woeful and
miserable estate in which they then were; as histories do at large record.

It is also no less needful for us at this day, blessing, whereby we see how
the Lord in Abraham's old age, weakens, yea and out of death it self multiplied
his offspring. Which promise appertains not only to the Jews, but to other
nations: and therefore his name is no more called Abram, but Abraham: Genesis 17.5.

Verse. 3. Surely the Lord shall comfort Zion, he shall comfort all her
desolations, and he shall make her desert like Or, a place of pleasure.
Eden, and her wilderness like the garden of the Lord: joy and gladness shall
be found therein, praise and the voice of singing.
THe Prophet shows that the example propounded in Abraham's person, After
darkness, light.
agrees to all ages. For as the Lord created so great a stock out of one man
in a moment; so will he replenish his Church by extraordinary and unknown
means: not for once only, but as often as in the worlds account she is become a
widow and barren. And thus after S. Paul has spoken of Abraham's faith, and
commended the excellency of it, he applies the same doctrine to every one of
us in particular: Romans 4.24.

Where he adds, and shall comfort all her ruins; it may be thus expounded;
The Church must be very low b ough^ before she is fit to receive comfort.
The Lord will comfort his Church, not only whilst she florisheth, but even
when she shall be brought to desolation and solitariness. And it was necessary
indeed that she should be wasled and deformed even to the utmost, before she
could rightly taste the help whereof he here speaks. Whereas it follows,
that her desert shall be as a place of pleasure, the Prophet has respect to
that place of Moses, where he shows how man at the beginning was put into the
garden of Eden: Genesis 2.15. The Garden of Eden, a place of pleas^re. Genesis 3.23.
that is to say, into a place of pleasure: whence by his own fault he was
banished. Now we which are deprived of this benefit and blessing which God
bestowed upon our first father, are also scattered upon the face of the earth,
and deprived of these pleasures. Wherefore when many desolations befall us, and
that we see the order of nature ouerturned, and nothing to be perceived but
miserable wastes and scatterings, let us acknowledge that this is the just
punishment of our infidelity, and of the rest of our horrible iniquities. Let
us also remember the sentence pronounced against our father Adam, A good
meditation for us in the Churches desolation.
or rather against his whole posterity, which as we are to do in the whole
course of our lives, so then principally when we see the desolations and
wracks of the Church. For the earth which otherwise of it self would abound
with all sorts of pleasures, is now brought into a wilderness by our fault,
and the Church which every where flourished, is destroyed and laid waste. Now in
the next place the Prophet adds joy and gladness, whereby he signifies, that
there shall be such a wonderful change, that the Church shall mourn nor lament
no more: for whilst she was oppressed under so heavy a bondage, there was
nothing heard but sighs and groans, but being restored, she shall rejoice, and
sing praises unto God. Here then we are admonished to praise and bless the
name of God, after we have tasted of his liberality, Psalm. 14.7.

Verse. 4. Hearken ye unto me, my people, and give ear unto me my people: for a
law shall proceed from me, and I will bring forth my judgment for the light of
Or, peoples.
the people.
Our slow attention causes God to d^uble his exhortation: See verse 1.
IT is not without cause that the Lord so often calls for audience: for we
have too woeful experience how dull we are of hearing, and chiefly in
adversity. When we stand in greatest need of consolation, then by our
impatiencie and faint-heartednes we put it far from us. Wherefore it stands
every one of us in hand to pluck up our spirits, especially when adversities
do pinch us to the quick, that by this means we may rouse up and awaken our
spirits, and banish all slothfulnes to receive co^sort. Such an attention the^
is here required as may confirm our hearts in patience, till the time of
grace be come. And thus the Lords meaning is, that he will reign again, and
restore his Church to her first estate, in which he will have his name called
upon.

Albeit the word Law signifies as much as the Edict which the Lord will publish
when he is determined to gather together his scattered Church, How God will
reign in his Church.
yet therewithal he shows by what means he will reign, to wit, by his law,
and by the doctrine thereof. And thus we see that where the doctrine of the law
is rejected, there God reigns not: that is to say, there men acknowledge him
not.

By Judgment, he means the rule of a well ordered government, by which he
will restore his kingdom. He says, that this Judgment shall be for the light
of peoples, because miserable men by nature are drawn out of darkness when God
begins to reign, and are then enlightened by the doctrine of the word.

The verb J will bring forth, is diversely translated by the Interpreters,
because the Hebrew word Raga has diverse significations, for sometimes it
signifies to cut, and to open, sometimes to rest. Some then expound, I will
cause to rest: that is to say, I will make firm, and this sense agrees not
ill. Many among the Jews understand it otherwise, but I will not trouble the
reader with their harsh and intricate expositions, I rather willingly receive
this translation, I will bring forth; or cause to come forth: that is to say, I
will manifest my judgment, for this I think suits best with the former
member. Now we know that the Hebrews are wont to use many repetitions. And
therefore albeit the Lord repeates one thing twice, yet the sense is but one
and the same. For where he said, that a law should proceed from him, now he
promises to bring forth, or to manifest his judgment.

Verse. 5. My righteousness is near: my salvation goes forth, and mine arms
shall judge the people: the Isles shall wait for me, and shall trust unto mine
arm.
HE confirms the former doctrine. A confirmation of the former doctrine.
The righteousness of the Lord has relation unto men, who have experience that
he is just. When the people were oppressed under so sore a bondage, they had
good cause to think they were justly chastised for their sins. But they
might wonder they were thus left and forsaken, that Gods worship was dissolved,
and his holy name blasphemed by the profane and ungodly, who committed many
outrages against him without punishment. That he might give them some
consolation then, Isaiah promises that God will shortly assist them, that so
his truth and righteousness may be published throughout the whole world. But by
the word Justice, he means not that recompense, which he gives to every one,
but that faithfulness of the Lord, who protects his Saints, and bestows many
graces upon them, and keeps his promise touching their deliverance, in not
suffering them to be overwhelmed. This appears yet better to be so by the
member following, where by way of exposition he adds, that his salvation is
gone forth: for the righteousness of God appeared in the salvation of the
people. The captivity of the Jews in Babylon was unto them as a kind of
death, and this is the cause why he calls this deliverance salvation.

Mine arms shall judge.] By arms he signifies the manifestation of his power,
for it is a figurative manner of speech much used in the Scripture. Now because
Gods sovereignty and power seems to be limited within very narrow bounds;
yea, sometimes appeeres not at all, therefore he mentions his arms, thereby
signifying that his kingdom shall be spread far and near.

Verse. 6. Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath:
for the heaven shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old as a
garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner: but my
salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
Whilst we see so many changes fall out in the world, and that ye Church as
we often think shall be violently swallowed up therein, The stabilitie of the
Church.
it is very needful that our minds should be gathered up far above the whole
order of nature, otherwise the salvation of the Church shall seem to hang in a
net, and to flote up and down in the midst with what vvisdome God gouernes
all things secondly, with what a fatherly care he vpholds and preserues his
work, and the whole frame heavens, as in the earth, by which he has
constantly continued from the creation that goodly order by him then
established. He adds, that although these things seem to fall to decay, yet
it is impossible that ye Church which has her sure foundation in God should
ever be shaken. As if he should say, Heaven and earth shall perish an hundredth
times rather then the promise (upon which the salvation of the Church is
grounded) should be abolished. He therefore puts salvation in the first place,
and then he adds righteousness, which is the solid foundation wherewith this
salvation is vpheld: when dangers threaten us on all sides then, let us learn
to flee to this city of refuge.

Unto this sentence also belongs that which is in Psalm. 102. The heavens shall
wax old as does a garment, but thou, Lord, art the same, and thy years shall
not fail: and therefore thy children shall dwell, etc. Both places do admonish
us, that the favor which God shows in the conservation of his Church, far
surpasses all the rest of his works in excellency; for the whole matter and
substance of the heavens and earth is but perishable and transitory, but the
salvation whereby God preserues his Church neither is nor can be liable to such
changes and alterations, because it is eternal.

Verse. 7. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
heart is my law. Fear not ye the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
rebukes.
A third exhortation to attention: see verse. 1. and 4.
BEcause the wicked having all things at their wish, deride and scorn our
hopes, and make themselves sport with our miseries and calamities, the Prophet
exhorts the faithful to suffer with patience, and not to fear their rebukes;
neither to be discouraged for their outrages, because the felicity which they
enjoy, Verse 8.
shall be but of short continuance. For notwithstanding their meriments stuffed
so full of derisions and proud disdainings, they are already ordained to be
meat for mothes and worms: as on the contrary, that God holds the salvation
of the faithful (which for a time he seems to neglect) safe in his own hand.
But we are again to note the repetition of this verb, To hearken, Verse. 1. and
4.
for this is the third time the Lord has required audience in this Chapter:
for when we be in perplexities, and tremble in regard of our miseries, we have
much ado to apprehend or embrace the promises. There is great need then that we
should often be rouzed and wakened up to attention, until we have wound our
selves out of all entanglings.

But he directs not his speech here to the hypocrites, but to such as know
righteousness. The faithful again distinguished from hypocrites. See verse 1.
For howsoever the faithful do not of set purpose reject the word of God, yet
they often shut the doors against this righteousness, and so hinder the same
from having any entrance, because in adversity they stop their ears, and
nourish discomfortable thoughts within them. To the end then that they might
give the promises entrance, and suffer themselves to be comforted, the Prophet
awakens them again, and bids them give ear.

The order of his words is also to be noted, for first he shows who they be of
whom the know righteousness: secondly, expounding the people in whose heart my
law is written and planted, for there is no righteousness without Gods word. Let
men make never so many laws, and that in the best form they can devise, yet
they can not bring us to true righteousness: they may well bring us to some
shadows of it, but they shall never attain so far as to express it to the
life. He also therewithal shows the way how to profit in the law of the Lord:
for the law has not his seat in the brain, Note.
but in the heart, that so being leauened with this heavenly doctrine, Math.
13.33. we may be wholly transformed into it, 2. Cor. 3.18.

Verse. 8. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation
from generation to generation.
BEcause the faithful servants of God were to endure many injuries and wrongs
which the enemies of the world would load them with: A prevention of an
objection.
therefore the Prophet exhorts them again to bear these things patiently: for
the disgraces and checks which we often receive from the wicked, wound us more
to the heart then their fires or swords. But we must hold it our glory and
crown of reioicing, that we be contemned of them, and accounted as the
of-scouring of all things. Thence arises that fortitude; though the world
reiects us as the scumme of the world: for God holds us precious in his sight,
in regard our cause is his own. Let us then with Moses, esteem the rebuke of
Christ above all the riches of Egypt, Exodus 2.11. Heb. 11.26. Let us with the
Apostles rejoice, who went from the Council with glad hearts, in regard they
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke and wrongs for the name of the Lord Jesus:
Act. 5.41.

Now because it were little joy to us to see the wicked brought to naught,
unless we might enjoy our freedom and safety; the Prophet shows what our
condition shall be, namely, never to be destituted of the righteousness and
salvation of God. But this comparison seems not very fitting, when the ruin
of the ungodly is opposed to his righteousness. For it might have been more
properly and plainly affirmed, that howsoever the wicked rejoice, yet they
shall shortly perish, and the faithful, who now resemble dead men, shall live.
For seeng he mentions not them at all, but only recommends unto them the
perpetuity of his righteousness; it might be objected, what profit shall we
have by this, that Gods righteousness shall remain for ever, whilst we in
the mean while, are overwhelmed with miseries? But the Prophet in these words
aduertiseth us, that the consolation which belongs unto us in afflictions, must
arise from hence, that our health and salvation is after a sort shut up in God.
For whilst men rest in themselves, they cannot conceive so much as the least
dram of hope, which will not forthwith vanish. And therefore he turns our
eyes unto God, whose mercy indures for ever, upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness upon their childrens children, as David says, Psalm. 103. In
regard that our salvation then is founded on Gods mercy and truth, Isaiah
brings us unto it, that all men being accounted as nothing, we may wholly
trust in the salvation of the Lord. For thus we must reason; Salvation is in
God; Salvation in God, not for himself, but for us.
not for himself, but for us: as also his righteousness, which he is ready
to manifest for our defense. From the salvation and righteousness of God then,
we ought to gather that his servants can never perish. Which we have also
proved from the testimony of David; Thou art always the same, and thy years
shall not fail: the children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed
shall stand fast in thy sight: Psalm. 102.27, 28. We see then how he applies
this perpetuity unto Gods children, who stand not by their own strength, but
in God, who is the rock of their salvation.

Verse. 9. Rise up, rise up, and put on strength, O arm of the Lord: arise as
in the old time in the generations of the world. Art not thou that arm.
the same that has cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

10. Art not thou the same which has dried the sea, even the waters of the
great deep, making the depth of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over?


Gods promises must beget in us the affection o^ prayer.
THe Prophet here teaches, that when God raises us up by his promises, we on
the other side ought instantly to entreat him to accomplish that which he has
promised. For he gives us not comfort to nourish us in idleness; but the more
to inflame us with a greater affection of prayer, and to a daily exercising of
our faith. Now the Prophet speaks here according to our understandings. For we
think that God sleeps, as long as he deferres to relieve our miseries: and
yet the Lord bears with us thus far, that he suffers us to pray with such
words, as savor somewhat of the infirmity of our natures. The faithful then
pray that God would arise, or awake: not as if he were idle, or asleep in
heaven; but they rather acknowledge therein their own dullness or
slothfulness, in regard they cannot conceive ought else of God, as long as he
deferres to help them. Notwithstanding howsoever the flesh imagines that he
sleeps, and neglects our miseries, yet faith looks higher, and apprehends his
infinite power.

The Scripture therefore is wont to say, In what sense God is said to wake, etc.
that God awakes, and puts on strength, when he manifests some testimonies of
his presence and power: for without this, we esteem him either idle or asleep.
Now when the Prophet calls it the arm of the Lord which was then hid; he sets
it here before them, as if it were present, that they might conclude; surely
our enemies could not afflict us thus cruelly, if that the Lord had not
withdrawn his arm, and helping hand from us. We have showed you the cause of
this delay in Chap. 50.1. namely, for their revolt from God.

By the days: of old he shows, that they ought to remember all the
wonderful works which God had in former time wrought for their salvation. For
howsoever he seems to sit still as one utterly careless of us, yet is he the
same God still, who of old has governed his Church, and therefore can never
now reject or abandon those whom he has received into his protection.

In the generations of old.] We must meditate on Gods works of old.
This repetition does yet better express, that we ought not only to consider
what was done yesterday, but those things also which were done long ago: for
we must extend our thoughts even to the most ancient generations, that we may
overcome those temptations, which otherwise would seem to ouerwhelme us. The
Prophet does here then gather together in one, all the testimonies of Gods
favor, which he has from time to time manifested to his people, that if two
or three were not sufficient, yet at least the great numbers of them might
wholly confirm the faith of the elect.

Now because it was too tedious to draw a long catalogue of all, he names this
first and excellent miracle among the rest; namely, the wonderful deliverance
of the people out of Egypt. For by Rahab, I doubt not but he means proud and
cruel Egypt: as in the 87. Psalm; I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon,
among those which know me. Also, Ezechiel calls the King of Egypt a dragon:
29.3. Behold, I come against thee Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great dragon, that
lies in the midst of the rivers. Thus it sufficiently appears, and all (in a
manner) are of the same opinion, that the Prophet here puts them in mind of
that strange deliverance of the people out of Egypt. If the pride and
loftiness of Egygt was at that time brought low; if the dragon was then
slain; why should we not still hope for the like?

Art not thou that arm?] The Prophet reasons from the nature of God: for this
cannot be said of the arm of flesh: the strength whereof (be it never so
great) yet decaies and diminishes in succession of time. Milosigheth.
Milo, who was the stoutest and strongest among many, waxing old, and looking
upon his arm, sighed, because he felt himself destitute of that force which
once he inioied: but it is not thus with God, for his power can never
diminish. These words then, Art not thou that arm? must be read with a
certain vehemency: for the Prophet shows that the Lord is the same which he
was wont to be, in regard he continues always one and the same.

Now howsoever Isaiah recites not all the miracles which God did, when he
delivered his people from under the bondage of Egypt; yet he meant in a word to
comprehend whatsoever Moses expresses at large; that the Jews being
admonished by this brief sentence, might from thence call to mind after how
many ways God did then manifest his power.

He mentions the red sea, which was dried up; not only for the rareness of
the miracle, but because all the former miracles tended to this end, that the
people being now set free from an unjust oppression and tyranny, might pass
out of Babylon into the land of promise: and therefore he makes express
mention of the way which was opened for the redeemed. From this example we may
consider what a one God has been toward us, that thence we may conclude, that
he will for the time to come, be always like himself, as plainly appears
by the coherence of the text.

Verse. 11. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with O^,
a song.
joy unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow, and mourning shall flee away.
An amplification.
NOw he shows that more plainly, which he briefly touched before: for having
recited the wonderful works of God, whereby in times past he manifested his
power in Egypt, for the deliverance of his people, he concludes that neither
the high rocks, nor the bottomless gulphes, no nor the gates of hell
themselves shall be able to let him from bringing back his people out of
Babylon. Now the better to confirm and apply this, he calls them the
redeemed; to teach them that God intitles not himself to be the savior of
his people, but for their sakes: and also to assure them, that he will show
such a testimony of his power for their deliverance, as he once did; in
regard the cause is now the same.

Unto Zion.] That is to say, unto that place where he once appointed his name
to be called upon, that so he might assure them that the Temple should be
reedified, and Gods pure worship established. For when the Jews who were in
Babylon, were to look for that deliverance which their fathers formerlie had,
in regard God was also the redeemer of their children: they had yet a
privilege above their fathers, because God had chosen Mount Zion, in which he
had promised to rest for ever: Psalm. 132.14. But because the work of God
promised here by Isaiah, was extraordinary, therefore he exhorts the people
to thanksgiving. The word Rinna may be simply taken for joy: but because it
often signifies that praise, which we yield unto God in the acknowledgement of
his benefits, I had rather take it for a song in this place. The Prophets
meaning is then, that there shall be an unwonted, and an unexpected change; so
as the faithful shall have an exceeding cause of joy and thanksgiving.

In saying that everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; he alludes unto
those crowns and garlands of flowers, wherewith they were adorned at banquets.
He adds, that they shall obtain joy: meaning thereby a firm and solid joy.
Lastly, for amplifications sake, he says, that all sorrow shall flee away:
and this was to confirm them against that ordinary fear which men have;
namely, when as all their joy in a moment is turned to mourning. And yet
heerewithall the Prophet admonishes them to wait patiently for that happy
issue which he has promised, though for a while (if need be) they are in
heaviness and sorrow.

Verse. 12. I, even I am he that comfort you. Who art thou, that thou should
fear a mortal man, and the son of man, which shall be made as grass.
THe Lord not only promises salvation and grace here to the Jews, A
complaint against the peoples inordinate fear, proceeding from infidelity.
but complains that they would not believe his word, neither would they make
that account of his power, which they should have done. For what an unworthy
thing is it, that the threats of men should so terrify us, as to make us set
light by the promises of God, who is ready to manifest his power, that so at
the least we might be fortified against all assaults? We show our selves flat
contemners of God then, when we nourish in our selves an inordinate fear of
men. Whence it appears how odious a thing it is to make a tumult in our
minds, by reason of men's threats, when God calls us to rest quietly in him.
Truly the ingratitude of men is too gross, if in hearing that God is of their
side, they conceive not hope from so many famous promises, to cry with
boldness; If God be with us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. That is the
cause then that when dangers appear, they stand as men amazed; and attribute
more power to a mortal man to harm them, then to God to help them. He justly
reprocheth the Jews then, that they had fortified themselves no better with
these promises, and that by them they were no better armed against all dangers.
For what greater dishonor can we do unto God, then to call the truth of his
promises into question, which yet falls out, when men so affright us, that we
can not quietly rest in the things revealed?

This repetition I, I am, has great weight, because he that promises this
consolation is true, neither can the forces, nor deceits of men defeat him of
his purpose. Who art thou, etc He shows how frail, transitory, vain, and
brittle man's nature is, the better to bewray the sottishnes of this people,
whilst they preferred bubbles, a smoke, and shadows to ye strong God. But
withal he shows, that men can not be overwhelmed with fear as long as they
retain within them the remembrance of Gods power. Do we then stand amazed
when dangers approach? Prou. 24.10.
It is a sign that we have forgotten God, and therefore he adds,

Verse. 13. And forgettest the Lord thy maker that has spread out the heavens,
and laid the foundations of the earth? And have feared all the day continually
because of the rage of the oppressor which is ready to destroy? Where is now
the rage of the oppressor?
We must beware how we fear the creature above the Creator. See Chap. 43.15.
IT is not enough to imagine that there is one God, but we must acknowledge and
embrace him by faith. In calling himself a maker, it must not be referred to
the general Creation, but to spiritual regeneration, as we have noted before
in diverse places. And in this sense Paul calls us the vvorkemanship of God,
because he has created us unto every good work, Ephe. 2.10. If we remember
then the work of our Creation and adoption, from this beginning we may hope of
perseverance unto the end, lest we should prove unthankful unto God, when
after so undoubted testimonies, he has manifested his faithfulness and truth
unto us.

Besides, the Prophet ioines Gods infinite power with his special goodness
which he showed to his people: and this power he opposes to man's imbecilitie,
who in the former verse he compared to grass. He shows by his works what his
power is, so as those which perceive not the same therein, are more then
blind. For which way can we turn our eyes but we must needs behold most ample
and large testimonies of Gods power and goodness? which he notwithstanding notes
out here in a word, when he speaks of the spreading out of the heavens, and of
laying the foundations of the earth. It is our brutishnes then, and matchless
sensuality to fo^get the same, seeing there are so many infinite testimonies
of Gods power, which may daily refresh our memories.

And have feared.] He continues the same comparison. For what are man, says
he, that thou should so fear them, if thou comparest them with God, who
has promised to relieve thee? Truly it is an exceeding dishonor done to his
Majesty, if we believe not that he has more power to save us, then the
enemies have to destroy us. See 2. Kin. 6.16. 2. Chr. 32.7. 1. Ioh. 4.4.
The Lord therefore would have us to consider well what and how great he is,
and how far his power extends it self that we should not fear the rage of
the oppressor, nor the fury of a mortal man, who vanishes as a puff of
wind, or as the smoke.

Verse. 14. The captive hastes to be loosed, and that he should not die in the
pit, nor that his bread should fail.
THis verse is diversely expounded: A thousand years with the Lord is but as
one day.
for some think it is to be referred to Cyrus, and so they expound the word
Tsoch (which we have translated banis^ed) he which causes to remove. But the
most received opinion is, that this word is to be taken for him that is bound
or oppressed: or, for one exiled, wandering hither and thither. The Jews were
not only banished, but were so held captives, that it was impossible for them
freely to return home into their country: and therefore I expound this of the
Jews: but yet it may be taken both ways, either that the

But is it not strange that he says, the people shall shortly return, seeing
the captivity endured so long a time. But it is not without cause that God
says, his deliverance which he deferred to a fit time should forthwith be
accomplished: for albeit the same seem very long to us, yet is it but short in
deed, because it is the fittest and best time. And truly if we shall consider
the estate of this so great and mighty a Monarchy, which had not then so much
as any appearance of ever being ruinated, we may safely affirm that the time
was very short.

Thus then, whereas we think Gods promises long in performing, we shall
esteem the time but a moment; provided that we lift up our eyes unto the
heavens, Psalm. 123.1. This exposition is yet better confirmed by that which is
added, that he die not in the pit. See how the Lord hastens then to deliver his
elect in due season, that out of the dark dungeon they may come forth safe and
sound. Neither does he promise his people a speedy dispatch, to free them from
their bonds only, but also that he may do the^ good after their deliverance;
for he promises them all things necessary for this life present, that so they
may rest wholly upon the Lord, who is not wont to aid his people for once
only, but is wont to be with them, even till their latter end.

Verse. 15. And I am the Lord thy God that divided the Sea when his waves rored:
the Lord of hosts is his name.
HE mentions his power again. For men's distrust and slothfulness is so great,
that albeit the same his power be manifested in their sight, yet the least
temptation that is, proves sufficiently that they are not well persuaded
thereof. For they always turn to their old bias again, when the evil
presses them; neither can they conceive how this power which is in God,
appertains any whit unto them. He speaks not here generally but alleges
that work of wonder, so often mentioned heretofore: for in that redemption of
their fathers, he gave hope of eternal salvation to all their posterity. He
therefore rightly affirms himself to be that God, who long since divided the
sea, Exodus 14.21. Then he adornes this miracle, in saying, that at his voice
the roaring and boiling waves were appeased. Let us know then that there are no
floods so violent, but the Lord can still and assuage them, for the deliverance
of his Church: Psalm. 93.3, 4. For it is he that calmes the sea by his power,
as Job says, Chap. 26.12. though it be very boisterous and untamed. He also
raises the tempests when it pleases him. But the Prophet, as I have said,
chiefly respected the history of their deliverance out of Egypt.

He gives God the title of the Lord of hosts; to teach us how far his power
extends it self; which he is ready to manifest, as often as he purposes to
give relief unto his Church.

Verse. 16. And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have defended thee in the
shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of
the earth, and say unto Zion; Thou art my people.
He returns again to the doctrine by him propounded before; namely, that
God, who comforts his Church, and says I, even I am he that comfort you,
verse. 12. affirms here, that he has put that into the m^^^hes of the
Prophets, which they have in charge to deliver. Hence we may gather, that these
things proceeded not from man, who commonly is mutable; but from God, that
cannot lie. The Lord spoke to all the Prophets: first, to Isaiah; then to
others successively; but at last we must come to Christ: and yet we need not
restrain this to Isaiah, nor to Christ; but to extend it to all the Prophets.
Moreover, it is the Lords meaning that we should hearken as diligently to the
consolations of the Prophets, as if he taught them us in his own person: yea,
he says here, that it is he which speaks by their mouths. Hence we
gather, that others need not draw near to give comfort to the Church, but
such us by whose mouth God speaks: for we ought to reject all such as broach
their own inventions, albeit they shroud themselves never so much with the
title of Gods name.

But let us a little see into the Prophets meaning. For having showed that men's
consciences always waver, till the Lord have secured them; it teaches us to
hold this principle, that it is God, who speaks by his Prophets: Acts 28.25.
Heb. 1.1.
for otherwise our consciences would remain in doubtings and perplexities
still. There is also great weight in these words, in that he recites the
commandment of God: for by the authority hereof, he was hartened on to
perform his office.

And have kept thee in the shadow of mine hand.] Though this was said in Chap.
49.2. yet was it no needless repetition. God will always protect his
Ministers.
For hence we learn, that God will undoubtedly defend his Ministers at all
times, that so being vpheld by his succor, he may fit them to pass through the
pikes. Now that we may be covered with this shadow, two things are required:
First, that we be well assured that we publish nothing

The end of the embassage is added; that J may plant the heavens, says he:
that is to say, that I may bring all things into their right order. I grant
this is diversely expounded: but the most native sense, as I think, is, that
heaven and earth are renewed by the doctrine of salvation; because in Christ
(as Paul speaks) all things both in heaven and earth, are gathered together in
one: Ephesians. 1.10. For in regard that since the fall of the first man, The world
renewed as it were by the the Gospel preached.
we see nothing here but such horrible confusions as burden the very
insensible creatures, and make them as it were to bear the punishment of our
sin: Romans 8.22. this disorder can no way be repaired but in Christ. Seeing
then that the whole face of the earth is disfigured by this woeful desolation,
it is not said without cause, that the faithful teachers do renew the world,
even as if God did cast heaven and earth into a new mould again, by their
hand. By this let us take a taste of the grieuousnesse of sin, seeing such an
horrible downfall has succeeded in the nature of things. It is said then that
the heavens are planted, and the earth set upon her foundations, when the Lord
establishes his Church by the ministry of his word. This he does by the
hands of the Ministers, whom he directs by his holy Spirit, and defends them
against all the fury and plots of their enemies, that they may effectually
accomplish the work imposed upon them.

Lastly, he shows that this ministry tends to an higher end, then to the
visible form of this world, which suddenly vanishes away; to wit, that he
will raise up and nourish in the hearts of the faithful, the hope of the
blessed life. For the true restoration of the Church, and of the world,
consists in this, that the elect may be gathered into the unity of faith, and
that they all with one accord may aspire unto God, Verse 15. and in this verse,
Thou art my people.
seeing he so lovingly allures them by these words, I am thy God. By this we
may see what account God makes of his Church, and the salvation thereof, in
that he not only preferres it above the whole world, but shows that the
stabilitie of the world depends upon it. We are also to observe what word it is
which God will have preached: for in it we have the rule of a godly life
prescribed; and besides, it testifies unto us our adoption, wherein especially
consists our salvation.

Verse. 17. Awake, awake and stand up O Jerusalem, which have drunk at the
Lords hand the cup of his wrath: thou have drunk the dregs of the cup of
trembling, and wrung them out.
IN regard the Church was to sustain and endure many afflictions, the Prophet
furnishes her with consolation, and meets with a difficulty that might come
between; namely, the enemies tyrannizing over the poor Jews, when as in the
mean while, they felt no fruit of these promises. His meaning is then, that
the Church should be restored and shall recover her full strength, though now
she be afflicted, and tossed up and down with diverse tempests. And by the word
awake then, he raises her from death, and as it were out of her grave. As if
he should say; No ruin can be so woeful, nor any desolations so horrible, that
can let God from effecting of this restoration. Such a consolation doubtless
was of singular use: for when sorrow has seized upon our hearts, we by and by
think that the promises belong nothing at all unto us. It is very needful
then that we be often put in mind of this, and may also have it ever in our
sight; namely, that it is God who speaks and thus calls, not such as are in a
flourishing estate, but those that are brought low, yea and dead: for these he
can awaken notwithstanding, and raise up by his word: for this doctrine of
salvation is not ordained for those that are in good plight, but for the dead,
which have lost all hope.

Which have drunk, etc. The cup of wrath, is taken two ways: for sometimes
it is said, that a cup of wrath to drink, when he smites us with
giddiness, and depriues us of sense: and this we see often befalles His, is
thereunto added. Neither does this cross that which is said; to wit, that the
Church was amazed and drunk: for this happened in regard the Lord chastised
her so severely. Now this is a similitude much used in the Scriptures, by which
the Lord calls his rod, wherewith he corrects his children, a drink or
potion, divided to every one. Notwithstanding when it speaks of the elect, this
word cup, serves to set forth the measure which God keeps in his judgments:
for he favors his blow, though he chastises his people sharply. See Chap.
27.8. Ier. 30.11.

I take the word Taraela, for anguish, or trembling, wherewith men are seized,
when they feel themselves oppressed with grievous afflictions. We may also
say they be drunk, in regard they have swallowed all that was in the cup; so as
their calamity and misery is grown to the height: and to this belongs the
word pressing, or wringing out. Besides, the Church is here advertised, that
all her calamities whatsoever which befell her, proceeded from Gods immediate
hand; to the end she should not imagine that she was wrongfully afflicted, or
that her miseries fell out by chance: for the Prophets drift is to let the
people see, that they be justly punished for their iniquities. Neither can a
man ever be raised up, unless he confess first of all that he is fallen; nor
rid out of his misery, except he acknowledge himself miserable by his own
fault. In a word, what have we to do with consolations, unless the doctrine
of repentance goes before?

The dregs then are not to be taken in this place, as they are in Jeremy 25.15.
where he speaks of the reprobates (whom the Lord chokes and stifles with the
drink of this cup) but for a just and ample punishment, which yet the Lord
meant somewhat to moderate. After he has chastised us then after his own will,
and is purposed to put an end to our miseries, he says; the dregs are drunk
up: as we have seen, Chap. 40.2.

Verse. 18. There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she has
brought forth: there is none that takes her by the hand of all the sons that
she has brought up.
THe Prophet here describes a pitiful estate wherein the Church was: The
Church often times finds least relief of those that come out of her own bosom.
for what greater grief, then when the children which she had brought forth,
would not yield her any relief or comfort at all? But he sets forth this her
misery in this wise, to reach her to wait for consolation from God, albeit she
were in this pitiful plight, because God will never forsake his servants, no
not although they were plunged into the depth of hell. The doctrine is then,
that albeit the Church be forsaken of men, yea of her own children, who^ she
has nourished up in her lap, yet God will assist her. A mother cannot be more
pinched at the heart, then to see her children to abandon her, of whom she
expects love for l^^^. This ingratitude and inhumanity cuts her much more then
the cruel rage of her enemies: for why does she nurce and bring up children,
but that they may be a staff unto her in her age? But when children neglect
their duty, what can she else imagine but that she has lost her cost and
labor? Thus then, howsoever the Church had performed the office of a Mother,
and had brought forth, and brought up her children to man's estate,
notwithstanding Isaiah pronounces, that there is no suppers nor succor to be
looked for at the hands of the ungrateful.

And yet the Prophets speech has a further scope, to wit, that the children
that will not relieve their mothers necessities, are bastards and degenerate,
that so she might the more quietly bear their destruction. It was a very
heavy and dolorous thing to see the Church stripped of all her of spring, and
to be left a widow. And yet this befell her. But the Prophet aduertiseth the
Church, that her children deserve not to be bewailed of her, but that she
should rather desire to have others in their stead, as it is in Psalm. 102.18.
that the people which shall be borne, shall praise the Lord.

Moreover, that misery which the Prophet here describes belongs wholly to
our time. Many now brag that they are the children of the Church, Who takes the
miseries of the church to heart?
but which of them takes the miseries of their mother to heart? Who laments her
ruins? Who feels his spirits so moved thereat, as to put his shoulders to
undergo the burden with her? How many are there which betray; and more
cruelly persecute her under this title, then the open and sworn enemies? And
therefore after all the rest of her miseries this comes in at the last to make
up the measure of them to the full. Again, those which will be reputed the
pillars of the Church, and not only boast that they are children, but brag that
they are her fathers, are even they who cowardly and treacherously have
forsaken her when she called them to succor her. What marvel is it then if God
cut them off, that he may hereafter give his Church natural children which may
assist her.

Verse. 19. These two things are come unto thee: who will lament thee?
Desolation and Or, brusing.
destruction, and famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?
THe Prophet uses the like words in a manner touching Babylon in Chap. 47.
These two things shall come to thee suddenly in one day, the loss of children,
and widowhood. But here the Prophet promises a better issue and end to the
Church, The Church must make her account to meet not only with inward, but
outward calamities also.
because the Lord will draw her out of this bottomless gulf of miseries: yet
he threatens an extreme misery, that he might fit the faithful for patience,
and that in the mids of their anguishes they should not cease to lift up
their prayers and supplications unto God. The sum is, that the Church shall
be so oppressed under all sorts of calamities, that she shall seem even to be
overwhelmed with them. How so? two great evils whereof the Prophet speaks. But
yet this division seems not to agree, for after he has mentioned one evil,
to wit, that none shall give the Church comfort or consolation, he names four
kinds of evils, desolation, sorrow, or breaking, sword, and famine. Some
expound that the Church was famished within, and vexed vvit^^^ by her enemies.
But I am of another opinion, as I have already showed. For it is a phrase of
speech (to speak by an interrogation) much freque^ted among the Hebrews, when
they purpose to deny a thing absolutely. And this has its elegancie among
them, though it has not so much grace in another language. Isaiah then
mentions these two evils, the one outward, in regard she was wasted and
destroyed with war and famine, which he has signified by the four former
kinds. The other inward, in that she shall be left destitute of consolation,
and none would lament her. For by the interrogation he shows that she should
have no consolation. This verse then answers to the former, where we have
already told you to what end the Prophet describes this so lamentable and
woeful an estate of the Church.

Verse. 20. Thy sons have fainted, and lie at the head of all the streets as
a wild bull in a net, and are full of the wrath of the Lord, and rebuke of thy
God.
HE sets forth this sorrowful condition of the Church at large, when he says,
A misery to a mother to see her sons slain, from whom she expects succor.
that her sons lie prostrate. What sorrow is more bitter to a natural mother
then to see the throtes of her children cut, and not only one or two of them,
but the streets to be paued with the multitudes of them thus slain? He adds
a similitude taken from a Bear, or from some other wild beasts, thereby
showing, that the strongest among the Jews were snarled as it were in the nets.

In saying that they were full of the wrath of the Lord, it is to advertise
them, that it came not to pass by fortune. For he would not have them impute
this work to chance; neither yet to accuse God of hard dealing, in that they
were afflicted so sore. Why so? Because his judgments are always just and
right: which he shows further, in telling them, that this plague proceeded
from Gods rebuke, or threatening. But withal, we must note his meaning, which
I have touched before, namely, that the faithful should not cast away the hope
of their salvation, notwithstanding their many miseries and desolations daily
solicited them thereunto.

Verse. 21. Therefore hear now this, thou miserable and drunken, but not with
wine.
NOw he shows more plainly, why he has spoken of the calamities of the
Church, A mitigation of the Churches sorrow in this and in the next verse.
Quest.
namely, that the faithful should not doubt of the Lords readiness to comfort
them, though they endured many and great extremities. But wherefore calls he
the Church miserable? Is there any estate so blessed as to be in Gods favor,
especially seeing this blessedness cannot be taken from us? For it is not
said without cause in Psa. 144.15. That the people are blessed which have the
Lord for their God. The Church miserable only in appearance. See Hos 14 4
I answer, she is miserable only in appearance. Also the Lord calls her not
by this name in vain, for himself is the helper of the miserable, and of
those that be destitute of succor; as we have said before.

Where he calls her drunken: we must note that the faithful do not always
endure their afflictions with such patience and constancy, that they are not
sometimes astonished: but notwithstanding their amazedness, they ought to
conceive that the Lord chastises them justly; and also to be assured, that he
will succor them. For he speaks not to the strong and valiant, but to the
feeble, miserable, the humbled, and to such as resemble those that are drunk:
to such he promises comfort. To be short, by this word he asswageth the
Churches sorrow, and shows that he keeps a measure in the greatest
afflictions, that he may draw her out of perdition; as if he raised a dead and
rotten carkase unto life.

Verse. 22. Or, Thus says the Lord, thy ruler and thy God, the protector of his
people.
Thus says thy Lord God, even God that pleads the cause of his people;
Behold, I have taken out of thine hand, the cup of trembling, even the dregs of
the cup of my wrath: thou shall drink it no more.
IT is not without cause that he adds three ruler, or patron: Secondly, thy
And lastly, the protector of his Church. For we must always consider what
acquaintance we have with God, who is such a one as beckens us to come unto him
in familiar manner; because in making himself one with us by a perpetual
covenant, he manifests that he has once chosen us to be his people. The
Jews in their time no doubt, were encouraged by this preface, boldly to
embrace that which is here promised: and the new people, whom God has now
created, Psalm. 102.18
and received into his safeguard and protection, as well as the people of old,
have no less cause to embrace the same promises with them.

Now the Lord attributes to himself the title of protector; to teach us that
when we see great dangers approaching, and that we suppose they will work our
ruin; even then to run to this strong tower, namely, that God is the protector
of his people. It ought also to be a shield of defense unto us, as well
against all Satan's fiery darts, as against the assaults of our visible enemies.

Behold I have taken.] He propounds unto the^ matter of good hope, to wit, that
God chastises his Church but for a time. By which, God afflicts his Church but
for a time.
the Jews were to learn, that all the calamities which threatened them, were
just recompenses of thou transgressions: as also that the cup: and this place
does sufficiently confirm that which was said there. God mentions the cup of
his wrath then, which caused his Church to tremble, as if she had bin smitten
with giddines: notwithstanding the Prophet uses the word Taraela, which some
translate Anguish: others, Trembling. By the dregs, he means that the measure
of Gods vengeance shall be full; so as God, for the love he bears to his
children, will be satisfied.

Verse. 23. But I will put it into their hand that spoil thee, which have said
to thy soul; Bow down, that we may go over: and thou have laid thy body as
the ground, and as the street to them that went over.
THis is the other part of the consolation, where he promises, God corrects
his own first, but the wicked must keep their turn next: Prou. 11.8. Hest.
7.10.
that the Lord will not only content himself to deliver his Church out of so
many evils, but will also send upon her enemies, all the calamities wherewith
she was afflicted. Are we pressed then, and persecuted? A time will come,
wherein God will speedily turn our captivity, and our (enemies in their
turn) shall be plauged to the utmost. For it is just with God (as Paul says)
to render affliction to those which trouble you and to you that are troubled,
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto the^ that know not God,
nor obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 2. These. 1.6, 7, 8.

The temporal punishments then which God inflicts upon them in this life, are
the beginnings of their endless torments in hell, to which at the last they
shall be adjudged. And the better to describe the insolency and pride of
their enemies, (the like whereof we taste at this day from our adversaries) he
sets down their words, Bow d^wne, etc. True knowledge makes us lowly:
ignorance makes us proud and cruel.
in which they shamefully tyrannized over the children of God: for pride and
cruelty are the inseparable companions of impiety: for a^ the true knowledge
of God makes men lowly; so the ignorance of God makes men proud and cruel. We
see how such as know not God, flatter themselves, and proudly do they insult
against the Lord, and against his faithful servants. I grant this is a thing
full of misery, and a great indignity; but seeing he is pleased to suffer his
name to be exposed to the outrages of the wicked, let us not much be moved, if
we be wronged for his names sake: for we are not beter then he; John. 13.16.
neither must we expect better usage from our adversaries now, then the Church
of old had from theirs. David uses another similitude, when he resembles the
Church to a field that is plowed and dressed many ways: 129.3. Whereby he
signifies, that she must be often afflicted and trampled on; to teach us, that
we must look for no better measure here.

THE LII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Arise, arise, put on strength O Zion; put on the garments of thy
beauty, O Jerusalem, the holy City: for henceforth there shall no more come
unto thee, the uncircumcised and the unclean.
He confirms the former doctrine, A confirmation of the former doctrine.
that he might the better awaken and rowze up the peoples minds, which were
drenched in grief and anguish: for it was necessary this should be added to
the former, as a spur to quicken them up, and to make way for this doctrine,
that it might the more easily enter into their amazed and insensible hearts. He
speaks to the Church, as to one astonished and in a slumber, and bids her
arise to gather new forces, and to resume her soul afresh. Which he repeates
twice, and not without cause: for it is very hard to awaken, and to cause such
to take heart again unto them, that are smitten; nay, laid flat upon all four
with the feeling of Gods wrath.

Put on thy strength.] As if he should say; Thou have hitherto wallowed thy
self in dust and ashes, as one forlorn, by reason of thy anguishes: but now
arise, and fit thy self to receive that happy estate into which the Lord is
purposed to set thee. He opposes strength then to faintheartednesse, with
which we are usually combred, when things grow desperate; and the beautiful or
glorious garments, to filthiness and nastinesse.

Then he adds the reason; to wit, that God will henceforth suffer the wicked
no more to take their swinge, as they have done in wasting and spoiling his
Church at their pleasures. She has now cause therefore to rejoice, being rid
out of the tyrants hands: and also for her safety, wherein there is plentiful
occasion of joy and gladness ministered unto her for the time to come. But
herewith Isaiah summons us to a common and general reioicing, when the Church
is received again into Gods favor: for questionless, if there be any spark
of true godliness in us, we ought to be exceedingly moved at her happiness,
Romans 12.15.
and to laugh and sing for joy when she florisheth, and to weep with her when
she is persecuted. In a word, she should be the very fullness of our joy:
according as the Psalmist says; Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy: Psalm. 137.6.

By the word come, he means that which we say commonly, To have entrance:
Auoir ent^ce.
for the Lord shuts up the passage against the wicked, that they cannot range
abroad at their pleasures unpunished, as they were wont. By uncircumcised and
unclean, he means all such profane ones, as corrupt the pure service of
God, and oppress men's consciences by their tyranny. They are wont to call all
them uncircumcised, who were strangers from Gods Church, who had the sign of
circumcision; for with that all the faithful were marked. But in respect that
many bare this badge of the covenant, who were no whit better then the rest; to
remove all ambiguitie, he adds, the unclean. For the cutting away of the
foreskinne, The sign of circumcision auailes nothing, unless the purity of
the heart does concur therewith.
was nothing in it self; and is by Saint Paul accounted as uncircumcision, if
the purity of the heart be not joined therewith: Romans 2.25. Gal. 3.6. Thus
the Prophet shows then, that such kind of persons shall have no place in the
Church; that all corruptions being abolished, and the true worship of God
restored, she may enjoy a perfect and happy estate. In the mean while, I
consent to those who refer this to the open enemies of the church, whom the
Prophet brands with these odious names; that the severity of this chastisement
might put the Jews in mind of the greatness of their iniquities.

Verse. 2. Shake thy self from the dust: arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem:
loose the bands of thy neck, O thou captive daughter Zion.
THe Prophet describes the Churches deliverance more at large, An amplification.
and sets it forth in very excellent terms. In bidding her to shake off the
dust, and to arise, let us not by and by gather, No free will in us to that
which is good.
that we have free will in our sleeves to use it when we think good: for it
belongs to God only to pull us out of the dust, and to set those that are
fallen, upon their feet, and to let loose the prisoners, by taking off, or
breaking asunder their bands and fetters.

The word to sit, signifies a flourishing estate, and is opposed to the verb to
lie, whereby is meant an extreme misery. I grant, that sometimes to sit
down, signifies to be made low: as when it is said to Babylon, Sit thou in the
dust, Chap. 47.1. But it is here taken in another signification, for having
commanded her to arise, he by and by adds, and sit down, meaning, that she
should no more lie along, but should be restored to her former estate, and
should no more afterward be trodden down by her enemies.

Verse. 3. For thus says the Lord, ye were sold for naught, therefore shall
you be redeemed without money.
It will be as easy for God to redeem his Church, as it was for him to suffer
her to be sold.
THis verse has bin ill expounded by many, who have descanted here too
subtilty, for they have invented many things besides the Prophets purpose. Now
this agrees with that which he has said in the 50. Chapter verse. 1. where he
asks for the creditor to whom he sold them: and here he says in like manner,
you were sold for naught: as if he had said, that he took no money, neither
was he engaged to any creditor at all that could challenge them by right of
sale. This serves greatly to confirm the promise: for the Jews might doubt
touching the truth of this promised freedom, in regard the Chaldeans the
mightiest of all nations, held them prisoners a long time. But the Lord
preue^ts this doubt, saying, I neither sold, nor pawned you. You were sold for
naught, and therefore I may require you again, and claim you as mine own.
Stand not so much then whether the matter be hard to compass or no, seeing I
have promised you liberty, neither dispute you too and fro of the matter by
your carnal reason, for ye Chaldeans have no right at all to ke^pe possession,
neither can they be able to hinder your passage. To conclude, even as in the
place before alleged he cleared himself from the imputation of an unthrift,
who is compelled to make sale of, or to pawn his children for debt, so in this
place he shows that they were taken from him, and were let go of him gratis,
for no other cause, but in regard they had provoked him thereunto by their
iniquities, Chap. 50.1. Therefore there is no more difficulty to redeem them,
then there was in parting from them.

Some expound this more subtillie, that we are redeemed freely by Christ. The
doctrine no doubt is true: but it agrees not with the Prophets intention (in
this place) for his meaning is to correct the diffidence of the Jews, that he
might assure them of their freedom. Let it suffice then that when God is
purposed to redeem his Church, he will not stand much about beating the price
with the Chaldeans, whom he will easily chase from their unjust possession, and
that whether they will or no.

Verse. 4. For thus says the Lord God, My people went down before time into
Egypt to soiourne there, and Ashur oppressed them without cause.
THe expositors soar aloft here, An argument taken from the less to the
greater, in this, and in the next verse.
and in the mean while c^^e nothing near the matter. The Jews forge three
captiuities here. The Christians differ from them, in supposing that it is
spoken here of the third captivity under Antichrist, from which Christ shall
deliver them. But in my judgment the Prophet has a far other meaning, for
he argues from the less to the greater, and alleges the captivity under
Pharaoh, from which the people in old time were delivered by the wonderful
power of the Lord. His argument stands thus then: If the Lord punished the
Egyptians because they dealt so barbarously with his people, much more will he
be revenged on the Chaldeans, who no less cruelly tyrannized over them. For
Pharaoh had much more show of reason to domineere over the Jews then the
Chaldeans had. For Jacob going down into Egypt with his family, subjected
himself thereby under Pharaohs power, who in thankfulness for the good service
which Joseph had done him and the kingdom, assigned out to his father and
brethren a very large country, fit to nourish their cattle in for their
abode. The successors of Pharaoh proving unthankful, and forgetting the
benefits received by Joseph's means, they afflicted all Jacobs posterity
diverse ways. Neither was the Lord behind hand with them in recompensing this
unkindness and ingratitude with a swift and severe vengeance. But the wickedness
of the Chaldeans was far worse, and more insupportable, in that they cast the
Jews out of their country, unto which they had a just title, to lead them
away captive. If the Lord then could not endure the ingratitude, nor the unjust
taxes which the Egyptians laid upon the Israelites, though they might claim a
just possession, how much less would he suffer this violence and cruelty of
the Chaldeans, who had no right at all to retain his people, See Chap.
49.24.25.
but oppressed them by force and tyranny?

By Ashur, he means the Chaldeans, who were joined under one Monarchy with
the Assyrians: but he names the Assyrian especially, because he was the first
who greatly afflicted Iudeah, and made away to this captivity.

Verse. 5. Now therefore what have I here, says the Lord, that my people is
taken away for naught, and they that rule over them make them to howl, says
the Lord? and my name all the day continually is blasphemed?
HE prosecutes, and confirms that which I have said, namely, that he has no
reason to suffer his people to lie any longer under this servitude: in these
words therefore he does as it were blame his own delay. As if he should say,
Shall I not manifest my power? Shall I not defend my people? If Pharaoh who was
so lawful a possessor, could not resist me; shall these thieves and robbers
be stronger then he?

In the next place he recites the causes that should move him to call back
their captivity. But we must here supply a close opposition in the word
taken: for the Egyptians led not Jacob captive forcibly: he went down thither
willingly when famine pressed him; and yet his posterity was set free. How much
more shall they be violently plucked out of their hands, who forced them out
of their own Country, to subdue them as slaves against their will?

Afterward, to augment the indignity of the fact, he says his people were
constrained to howl, or cry, without ceasing. Some expound it otherwise: but I
think it is said to augment the fault, in regard he expresses what violence
and oppression the Chaldeans exercised over the Jews: for they contented not
themselves to usurp an unjust dominion over them, but they handled their
prisoners cruelly. Moreover, to cry or howl, argues a deeper misery then when
we sigh or weep. Doubtless there is appearance that the sorrow is violent,
when the same extorts yellings and pitiful cries. It is indeed a similitude
taken from wild beasts, which shows an extreme despair.

And that my name should be exposed all the day long to blasphemies.] This is
the third and principal reason why the Lord will deliver his people; namely,
that his name may not always be made a scorn, nor laid open to the outrages
of the wicked; for he respects his own honor, and therefore conserues his
Church, and the worship of his name: but when the Church is scattered, then the
wicked by and by take occasion to belch forth their blasphemies, and offer
proud contempt even against the highest Majesty. It is rightly said then, that
in delivering his people, he will defend his own cause. I will neither stand to
recite nor confute the diversities of expositions upon this place, because I
think it sufficient that I have briefly touched the native sense of the
Prophets words.

Verse. 6. Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in
that day, that I am he that does speak: behold Or, I will be present.
it is I.
THe Prophet concludes that from this verse, The conclusion.
which he touched in the two former verses; namely, that the people should in
the end be delivered by the Lord, who will not be found contrary unto
himself. For if he has redeemed their fathers: and if he has always
assisted his Church (in former times) he will never suffer their successors to
be overwhelmed, whom he has adopted. We are diligently to observe the verb
Shall know: for the knowledge of the name of God, consists

But we must remember what we have said heretofore touching that experimental
knowledge, Experimental knowledge.
which subscribes to the authority of the word. Moreover, Gods speaking is to
be referred to his promises, and his presence to his actual power. As if he
should say; Albeit you hear nothing now but the sound of words, in which I
promise you things almost incredibe, yet hereafter you shall see the
performance thereof: for I purpose really to act that which I have promised.
Hence we may gather a general doctrine; namely, The promises and the execu^ion
thereof, inseparably knit together.
that the promises and the execution thereof, are knit together with an
inseparable bond. As often as Satan then solicites us to distrust, as if God had
quite and clean rejected us; let us remember this point, and let us trust
boldly in the name of our God, who never promises ought in vain: and if it
falls out that he performs not the same forthwith, yet he will do it in
convenient time.

Verse. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
declares and publishes peace! that declares good tidings, and publishes
salvation, saying unto Zion; Thy God reigns.
THe Prophet confirms the faithful again in the certainty of Gods word:
Another confirmation.
First, to give them certain assurance of being adornes the word of God wi^h
excellent titles. (As if he should say) Can you be so unthankful, as not to
content your selves with this inestimable treasure of God word, which brings so
many commodities with it? Will you let loose the raines to your^ unbridled
affections? Will ye indeed complain of God? For his meaning is to call back
the people from their diffidence, who were ouercarried through diverse
allurements, and would not rest securely upon the truth of Gods word. For this
cause he extolles the excellency of his doctrine, and shows, that the Lord
will give much more by it, then we can ask or think.

Besides, it is plain that he speaks not here of every kind of doctrine,
but of that only which is fit to yield consolation. He shows then that the
seete of such as bring glad tidings from Gods mouth, are pleasant and
desirable. Why so? Because this consolation serves not only to assuage our
sorrows, but brings with it inestimable joy: for he speaks here of the
doctrine of salvation; and therefore he says, that by it, peace, good tidings,
and salvation is published. By the word peace, he understands an happy and
prosperous estate: but we have heretofore entreated at large touching the
signification of this word.

Saying to Zion, etc.] Hence we gather what the beginning of this doctrine is,
which Isaiah publishes, and what it is we ought principally to desire;
namely, that the kingdom of God may be established amongst us: for if he
reign not, all things must needs fall to ruin, and so by consequence, our
estate must be miserable. As on the contrary, the only way to salvation is,
when God vouchsafes to take the care of us: and it is also the means whereby
we obtain peace, how confused or desperate soever things otherwise are.

Let us also remember that this message appertains to Zion; that is to say, to
the church. For what have the profane and ignorant sort to do with it? The
Apostle Saint Paul alleges this place, Romans 10.15. to prove that the
preaching of the Gospel is of God, and not of men; and that it is he who
sends the Ministers, which bring the glad tidings of Whosoever shall call on
the name of the Lord, shall be Faith gives prayer entrance.
For what gives prayer entrance but faith, by which, having embraced God for
our father, we may familiarly discharge all our cares into his bosom? But
whereupon is this faith grounded? Upon the doctrine of the unless he be sent
of God. But it seems as if Saint Paul wrested these words of the Prophet, sent
of God. But from whom comes this salvation? Comes it from men? No such matter:
for a benefit so excellent, can come to us from none but God himself. He
rightly concludes then, that this salvation proceeds from God, and not from man.

Verse. 8. The voice of thy watchmen shall be heard: they shall lift up their
voice, and shout together: for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall
bring again Zion.
A continuation of the former confirmation.
HE continues on his speech, showing, that the restoration of the people shall
be such, as the messenger shall boldly publish it.

By the lifting up of the voice, he signifies the same that he spoke of before
touching these words, upon the mountains: for the thing shall not be done in a
corner, but it shall be so manifest and apparent, that all shall be smitten
with astonishment. Those who speak of things doubtful, mutter them out
between the teeth, and dare not lift up their voice: but this shall be no
perplexed or doubtful matter. The Prophet borrowed this similitude from
watchmen, whom they were wont to place in Cities: though all the Prophets
indeed are called by this name, Hab. 2.1. Chap. 21.11.
because they are placed in the watchtower to watch for the peoples safety.

When he says, they should lift up their voice, it is to show, that during
the captivity, there should be silence; because the tongues of the Prophets
should then cleave to the roof of their mouths: Ezekiel. 3.16.
for albeit they admonished every one privately, yet they should not have
liberty to preach publicly. In which respect also, Jeremiah faith; I will put
my mouth in the dust: Lam. 3.29. But when the Lord shall cause the captivity
of his people to return, then the watchmen which were dumb before, should
have their mouths opened to publish their freedom: for they should not speak
in hugger mugger, neither should they content themselves to give some privy
token of this consolation; but should boldly proclaim this salvation upon the
mountains: verse. 7. Which also appears by that in Chap. 40.1, 2, 3. where we
have handled this matter more fully.

Eye to eye.] That is to say, plainly and openly. These things are indeed to
be extended to our spiritual conversion. I grant we are to tie our selves to
the literal sense; yet so, that we are to comprehend under the same, that
favor which God showed to this ancient people: for these things were
accomplished when he set the Jews free; and for this end he used the
ministry of Zerobabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah. But yet we must stretch the same
even to Christ's coming, at which time the Church was gathered from all the
parts of the world: yea, more then that, even to Christ's last coming, in which
all things shall be set into their perfect estate.

Verse. 9. O ye desolate places of Jerusalem, be glad and rejoice together:
for the Lord has comforted his people: he has redeemed Jerusalem.
HE exhorts the faithful to thanksgiving. An exhortation to rejoice.
But his special drift is to confirm their hearts in the expectation and
assurance of this salvation, as if the inioying of the thing called them
presently to thankfulness. For the truth is, we are too little affected when the
Lord protests that he will assist us: yea, we think he does but mock us,
unless he effect that which he has promised. Why the Prophets insisted so
long in pressing the promises.
The Prophets therefore are wont to insist very much upon this point, namely,
in confirming the peoples hearts, and in setting their deliverance as it were
before their eyes. Now howsoever it seems auke and absurd to call to songs of
joy in the time of heaviness, as in Psalm. 137.4. yet we have formerly showed,
that this manner of speech is very fit to awaken such as groan under the burden
of care, fear, or sorrow. He mentions the deserts, or desolate places of
Jerusalem, to the end they should hope for the re-edifying thereof,
notwithstanding she now lay in the dust: for this title agrees better for the
removing away of fear, then if he had called her an happy or flourishing
city. From the time then that she fell into this most miserable estate, they
would have thought these promises had concerned them nothing at all, unless
the miseries against which they were to encounter had bin manifested unto them.
It also taught them to wait for this restoration ^n assured hope, though they
now saw nothing but horrible ruins, and desolations.

For the Lord has comforted.] The Lord turned the peoples mourning into joy,
and of captives,

He has redeemed his people.] Here we see that the deliverance of the Church
is the proper work of God. And if this ought to be affirmed in regard of that
deliverance out of Babylon, which was but a figure or shadow, what shall we say
of our spiritual deliverance it self? Can that be attributed to men, without
offering great wrong unto God? Let us conclude then, that as it appertains to
God only to deliver his Church, so none but he can preserve her free estate.

Verse. 10. The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the sight of all the
Gentiles, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God.
God discouers his arm two ways.
Has made bare.] This is a similitude taken from men of arms, who turned up
their sleeves when they prepared themselves to the combat. Though to make bare
here signifies not so much the making of the arm naked, as the manifesting of
it, and stretching it forth. For when we sit still, our arms are lightly
folded one in another, or we cover them: so in regard of our senselesnes, we
imagine that God sits idle, as men are wont to do, until he manifest his power.

He calls it the arm of his holiness, in regard that he should display his
power for the salvation of the people: for there is here a mutual
correspondencie between God and his Church, which is consecrated unto him. I
grant that his arm is made bare in the government of the whole world: but it is
never called the arm of his holiness (as in this place) but when he gives some
special relief unto his Church. The power of God must be considered

In the sight of all the Gentiles.] His meaning is, that this deliverance shall
be worthy of so great admiration, that even the blind themselves shall see it.
Whereas this noble spectacle is manifested to the ends of the earth, we therein
perceive that ye Prophet speaks not only of the bringing again of Zion, as in
verse. 8. which should happen some few years after, but of the general
restoration of ye whole Church both of Jews and Gentiles. The Rabbis
therefore do malitiouslie restrain this to the deliverance out of captivity
from Babylon. And the Christians on the other side unaptly to our spiritual
deliverance, which we obtain by Christ: for we must begin at the deliverance
under Cyrus, and go on still even till our own times. Thus then the Lord
began arm among the Medes and Persians, but afterward he made it appear all
nations.

Verse. 11. Depart ye, depart ye: go out from hence, and touch no unclean
thing: go out of the midst of her: be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the
Lord.
HE now exhorts the people to be always ready to depart, An exhortation,
encouraging the Jews to depart out of Babylon.
and yet in the mean while patiently to endure their misery: for as the
ouer-great haste of the people to be loosed deserved to be repressed, so their
drousines was to be quickened, in respect that before their deliverance every
ones desire was wonderfully kindled to return; but when the time was expired,
their long expectation had abated their heat, and had deprived them not only
of all hope, but of all will or desire to return, so as the number of those
that came back again into Judea was very small. They were mingled amongst the
Babylonians, who had so entised and corrupted them, that they made little or no
reckning at all of their country. It was very needful therefore that they
should be awakened and quickened up to be of good courage in this their long
attendance, and that they should not suffer themselves to be stained with the
filthinesses of the Babylonians.

The second member wherein he forbids them to touch any unclean thing, does
better confirm that I was about to say. For he commands them to keep
themselves pure and clean from the pollutions in which the Chaldeans plunged
themselves, because there was danger that they might be corrupted with
heathenish superstitions, to which vice we are by nature too much inclined,
and are therefore easily misled by evil examples. He exhorts them then
notwithstanding their captivity, not to yield to any thing whereby nor consent
to false religion, To what temptations captives are subject, that are oppressed
under Tyrants.
for this is that accursed pollution which the Lord exhorts them here to
avoid. Such temptations as these aforenamed, are incident to poor prisoners
that are oppressed under Tyrants, which sometimes so faint, that they give
themselves leave to do many wicked and unlawful things, under pretense that
they would thereby assuage the fury of Tyrants. But in this place we see how
frivolous their excuses be. For the Prophet not only requires this purity of
the Jews when they shall be set free, but also during the time of their
slavery and bondage, yea, though it were with the loss of their lives in the
very place.

Doubtless these aduertisements also belong unto us, who by S. Paul are
exhorted to purge our selves from all impuritie both of body and mind, 2. Cor.
7.1. Moreover, Isaiah directs this exhortation particularly to the Priests and
Levites, who were to show themselves most constant, in regard they were the
standard-bearers: not that it was lawful for others to defile themselves, but
he speaks principally to them, that they might give good example to those
over whom God had placed them as Captains and Leaders. We are also to remember
what we have seen heretofore, which Isaiah also will repeat again in the end
of his book, namely, that there should be a new Priesthode planted over the
redeemed people. And yet I willingly consent, that the Levites and Ministers
of the Temple are here mentioned by way of excellency, for all the people.
Thus this doctrine then appertains at this day not only to the Ministers of
the word, but to all Christians in general, who are also called a royal
Priesthood, 1. Pet. 2.9. and are not only appointed to ^^are the vessels of the
temple, but are also themselves the temples of God, 1. Cor. 3.6. For this cause
Ezechiel has foretold, that in the restoration of the Church, the Levites
should be high Priests, and all the people should be put in the place of
Levites. Seeing then that the Lord has advanced all unto so high a degree and
dignity, it necessarily follows, that this purity is required of all
without exception, and therefore S. Paul applies this place to the whole Church,
2. Cor. 6.17.

Verse. 12. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor depart by fleeing away: but
the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will gather you together.
An amplification.
THe Prophet again amplifies this benefit of their redemption, for they were
all so swallowed up with despair, that they thought it a matter incredible. He
especially speaks to them that were to go into captivity, that they should
not faint in being brought to such a woeful condition. But he promises them
that this deliverance shall not be by flight, as that out of Egypt was. For
there is here a close comparison between their deliverance out of Egypt, and
this out of Babylon. For they fled by night out of Egypt, faining as if they
had only meant to have gone three days journey to offer sacrifice unto God,
Exodus 3.5. and 8.27. Afterward, they went forth hastily and with tumult, as it
was enioined them, Exodus 12, 31. and then Pharaoh pursued them, thinking
utterly to have destroyed them, Exodus 13.5.6.7.8.9.

But here it is said, Ils s'en iron^ a en seigne desployee.
it shall be far otherwise with the Jews (at this time) for they shall go
forth like Conquerors, so as none shall dare to stop their passage. In a word,
they should depart thence (as we are wont to say) with banner displayed. This
deliverance then shall be much more excellent and admirable, then that of Egypt.

The Lord shall go before you.] That is to say, he shall lead you, and be
your Captain in the way. But will some say, conduct the ancient people, when
he brought them out of Egypt? It is true indeed: shall gather: for they should
not be scattered one from another, as it falls out in some sudden
astonishment; neither should they wander to and fro, but should march in
troops in good array, as under their colors. It is as much then as if he had
said, God will conduct you like an army assembled by himself, one shall not
follow another as it were by stealth, but being knit all together, you shall
march boldly without fear, none shall hinder you, for you shall be gathered
under the leading of God, to return home into your country.

Verse. 13. Behold, my servant shall prosper: he shall be exalted and extolled,
and be very high.
ISaiah having spoken of the restoration of the Church, comes now to Christ,
The restoration of the Church consists wholly in Christ.
in whom all things in heaven and in earth are gathered together, as says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.10. Some expound the verb Iascil, Shall behave himself
prudentlie: but because it is by and by added, that he shall be exalted the
scope of the text requires it (as I think) that we should rather translate, He
shall prosper, seeing the infinitive, Sacal, signifies so much. He speaks
then touching the prosperous estate of the Church. But because there was no
such thing to be seen in outward appearance, he brings us to the sovereign
King, who should set all things in their perfect estate, and bids them to wait
for him. Now the oppositions which the Prophet here uses are diligently to
be highness of this exalt, to ye poor and miserable condition of this people,
who were almost brought into despair. And he promises that this King shall be
the head of the people, who shall flourish under so worthy a leader, though now
they be afflicted and brought to the gates of destruction. Why so? Because all
things shall prosper that their King takes in hand.

He calls Christ a servant, in respect of the office which God had imposed
upon him. For Christ is not to be considered of here, as bearing the person
of a private man; but with that office which the Father had committed unto him,
namely, that he might be this leader and conducter of the Church, and might
restore all things. And let us for our part know, that the things here spoken
of Christ, do also belong unto us. Chap. 9.6.
Christ is given us of God, and therefore have we interest in his office. For
the Prophet might have said in a word, that he should be exalted and be very
high: but in attributing to him the name of a servant, it is as much as if he
had said; He is thus exalted for your sakes.

Verse. 14. As many were astonished at thee, his visage was so deformed of men,
and his Or, beauty.
form of the sons of men.
A prevention in this and the next verse.
He uses this prevention, in regard this majesty and dignity of Christ
appeared not at the first blush: for which cause they might take occasion to
reject him. Therefore the Prophet shows, that Christ must first be humbled and
made low. And thus he preuents the doubts which might have caused them to
stagger, in beholding his abject and deformed estate. As if he should say; You
must not despise this his baseness and deformity, for it brings with it
forthwith eternal felicity.

By men, I understand not this by way of comparison, as many expound it, to
wit, More then men: or, Above that which falls out among men. But I willingly
accept of the plainest sense; namely, that Christ was deformed amongst men: or,
that his beauty was defaced, in regard of the perverse judgments of men.

All were astonished.] Some take this astonishment for that admiration which
men were in, when they saw the miracles which Christ did: and yet being brought
to the Cross, they straightway rejected him. But they come nothing near the
Prophets meaning: for he says, that Christ shall be so deformed, that all
shall be astonished at him: his baseness of birth was such, as all despised him;
his glory was hid under the infirmity of flesh. And howsoever a majesty
worthy of the only begotten Son of God, shined in him; yet men discerned it
not: but they rather gazed upon that his abasement, which eclipsed and darkened
his glory. See here the true cause of this astonishment then, namely, because
he conuersed among men, Luke 9.58.
without any outward pomp. For the Jews expected not a Messiah of so mean an
estate. Now at his crucifying this astonishment was augmented much more.

Saint Paul speaks of this abasement of Christ, and then of his exaltation,
when he says; He being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God: ^hil. 2.6. and ^he verses ^ollowing.
but he humbled (or emptied himself) by taking upon him the form of a
servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He
humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even unto the death of the
Cross. Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.
Christ humbled before he was exalted.
It was needful the^ that Christ should first be humbled and shamefully
entreated, and that this glory into which he was exalted, should not appear
at the first. But after his humiliation upon the Cross, came a glorious
resurrection, with a sovereign degree of honor.

Verse. 15. So shall he sprinkle many nations: the Kings shall shut their
mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see, and that
which they had not heard, shall they understand.
OThers expound; He shall distill: so, under a figure, taking it To speak. But
seeing the verb Nasa signifies to sprinkle; and being so taken in the holy
Scriptures, I had rather follow this interpretation. His meaning is, that the
Lord shall spread his word among many nations. In the next place he adds the
effect of this doctrine, in saying, that Kings shall shut their mouths in
sign of astonishment: but yet diverse from that which he mentioned before: for
men shut their mouths and stand astonished, when the matter is of such
consequence, that they are unable to express it, because they can find no
words wherewith to utter the same.

They shall see that which was not told them.] The Prophet shows that this
astonishment shall not proceed from the bare sight of Christ's person, but
rather from the preaching of the Gospel: for though he rose again, yet all
esteemed him dead, if the glory of his resurrection had not been published. The
preaching of the gospel therefore manifested those things which neither the eye
had seen, nor the ear heard of before: 1. Cor. 2.9.
as also in regard the publishing of this doctrine came to Kings and nations
far off, even to the ends of the world.

Saint Paul alleges this text, and shows that it was fulfilled in his
ministry, reioicing that he had preached the Gospel to those who had never
heard of it: Romans 15.21. For this is the office of an Apostle, The Apostles
office.
and not of every Minister now. Thus then our Prophet shows, that the kingdom
of Christ shall not be shut up in so narrow bounds, as within the ^and of
Iudeah; but should spread it self furlther off. The Jews understood somewhat
by the Law and the Prophets; but the Gentiles knew nothing at all. This
therefore by consequence belongs unto them. Faith consists in certainty of
knowledge.


Shall understand.] By this he shows that faith consists in certentie and in
assured knowledge: for where this wants, No faith without certainty of
knowledge.
there faith questionless is not. Whence we may discern how ridiculous the
opinion of the Papists is, touching their implicit faith, in believing as the
Church believes: which indeed is nothing else but an absurd ignorance, or to
say better, a mere circle and blind imagination.

THE LIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Who will believe our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed?
An holy complaint in the person of all the Ministers of the-Gospell.
We will not stand to speak of the division, or rather dismembring of this
Chapter: for it should rather have begun at the 13. verse of the former
Chapter. And this ought to be joined to that which was said a little before:
for the Prophet stays here as it were in the middle of his speech. For having
said before, that the name of Christ should be published far and near, even
amongst strange nations; and yet that he shall be so contemptible, that these
things shall in a sort be esteemed no better then fables, he now suddenly stops
in the mid way as it were, and cries, that none would believe him. And
therewithal he also expresses his grief, to think that men should be so
incredulous, as to reject their own salvation. This is an holy complaint then:
for his will is, that all should know Christ, and yet he sees but a few which
believe the Gospel: which makes him to utter this lamentable cry; Who has
believed our report?

Isaiah shows then, that the number of those shall be very small, that shall
submit themselves to the Gospel of Christ: for when he cries; Who will
believe our preaching? it is as much as if he had said; That of an hundred that
hear the Gospel, scarcely one of them will prove a believer.

Neither speaks he of himself only here, but as one representing the
person of all the faithful Ministers, Although God send many of his servants
then, If they that have preaching continue bl^nd, how miserable blind must they
be that have no preaching at all.
yet there are but a few that believe: What shall become of them that enjoy no
preaching at all? shall we need to wonder much at their extreme blindness? If
the earth that is well husbanded, brings forth but little fruit; what is to be
expected from that that is utterly barren, and unhusbanded? But the Gospel
loses no whit of his excellency, though it get but few followers: neither
does the small numbers of believers diminish the authority thereof, nor yet
obscure the infinite glory of it: but rather so great is the mystery of it, that
it can hardly find any welcome in the world: for it is esteemed folly, 1. Cor.
1.23. because it is far above the reach of their carnal reason.

In the second member Isaiah more clearly sets down the reason why there are
so few believers. What is that? The reason why so few believe.
None can come unto God, without the especial illumination of his holy Spirit.
But those are deceived in my judgment, who think that arm here signifies
Jesus Christ. For it is a rendering of the cause, why the Gospel gets mo nore
attendants; namely, they cannot comprehend the mysteries thereof by the
dexterity of their turall wit. This is a very worthy sentence therefore, and
it is alleged both by Saint John and Saint Paul to this very purpose: John
says; that albeit Christ had done so many miracles, yet they believed not:
that the word which Isaiah had spoken might be fulfilled; Lord, who has
believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? John 12.37
And Saint Paul says; But all have not obeyed the Gospel: for Isaiah says;
Lord, who has believed our preaching? Romans 10.16.

Both of them show, how we are not to wonder if that which was so long since
foretold, does still come to pass, that so they might remove that scandal
which otherwise would remain, in regard of this peoples revolt, who in stead
of acknowledging and receiving Christ when he came, did obstinately resist him.
And yet Isaiah meant not to tax his own Countrymen alone with this sin, This
incredulity common both to Jews and Gentiles.
but comprehends all those that shall succeed them to the end of the world: for
as long as Christ shall have any kingdom on earth, this prophecy must be daily
accomplished. And therefore the faithful ought to be confirmed with this
testimony, against such an offense. Moreover, this refutes their ignorance,
who imagine that faith is in every man's power, because the word preached is
common to all. For though all be called to salvation by the ministry thereof,
Many called, but few chosen.
yet the Prophet expressly affirms, that the outward voice which calls,
profits nothing, unless the particular grace of the holy Ghost concur
therewith. But whence is this difference? Only from Gods secret election, who
reserues the cause thereof hid in his own counsel.

Verse. 2. But he shall grow up before him as a branch, and as a root out of a
dry ground: he has neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there
shall be no form that we should desire him.
This sentence has reference to verse. 14. where it was said, We must not
judge of Christ's glory by outward appearances, but according as the
Scriptures describes him unto us.
that at the first appearing of Christ, he should have no form nor beauty in
men's eyes; but before God, he should be highly exalted into a sovereign degree
of honor, and greatly esteemed. By which we are taught, not to judge of
Christ's glory according to outward appearance, but by faith; so to apprehend
him, as the holy Scriptures have described him. And therefore this particle
Before him, is opposed to humane reason, which cannot comprehend this his
admirable greatness.

He uses almost ye very same similitude with that in Chap. 11.1. where he
said, that a rod should come forth of the stock of Ishai: for the house of
David was then like a withered stock of a tree, which had no sap nor any
appearance of beauty left. And therefore in that place he names not the house
royal, but of Ishai, whose name was then little renowned. Only the Prophet
adds here, a dry ground: thereby signifying, that Christ should take no force
from the moisture of the earth, to cause him to grow as trees do: but should
increase after a supernatural manner. Those who allegorize here, and think
that the Virgin Mary is called a dry ground in this place, because she
conceived by the holy Ghost, and not by the seed of man, do miss their mark:
for the question is not here touching Christ his birth, but of his whole
kingdom.

Now the Prophet says that he shall be like a branch issuing out of a dry
ground, which in appearance will never grow to any stature. Isaiah foretold.
What were his Apostles, that they subdued so many Kings and Nations by the
sword of the spirit? May they not well be compared to little sprigs? Thus the
Prophet shows then by what means Christ's kingdom should be erected and
established, that we should not judge thereof as of a worldly kingdom. Ioh.
18.36.
The deformity whereof he speaks in the next place, is not only to be
referred to Christ's person, This deformity is not only to be referred to
Christ's person, but to his whole kingdom.
which being contemptible and despised of the world, was at last adjudged to a
shameful and cursed death: but also to his whole kingdom, which has no
form, beauty, nor glory at all in the eyes of men: in a word, no appearance
at all to procure any great admiration in the eyes of worldlings. For albeit
Christ rose again, yet the Jews always esteemed him a man crucified, and
full of reproach, so as they proudly disdained him.

Verse. 3. He is despised and rejected of men: he is a man full of sorrows, and
has experience of infirmities: we hid as it were our faces from him: he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.
The doctrine of this verse is all one with the former.
THis present verse tends to the same purpose with the former; namely, that men
should reject Christ, because nothing was to be seen in him but sorrows and
infirmities. The Jews needed to have this often repeated unto them, that they
might not conceive a false opinion of Christ, nor of his kingdom: for he that
will rightly see his glory, He that wi l take a right view of Christ's glory,
must pass from his death to his resurrection.
must pass from his death, to his resurrection. Many are offended at his
death, as if he had been overcome and overwhelmed of it. But they must pass
forwards to that divine power and majesty which shined in his resurrection:
Romans 1.4. Yet if any shall begin at his resurrection, he shall not follow the
order here prescribed by the Prophet; neither shall he comprehend the mighty
power of the Lord.

We almost hid our faces from him.] It is not without cause that he uses
this word we: for thereby he shows, that thus all men shall judge of him.
Neither shall any man be able ever to conceive otherwise, unless the Lord
correct and reform his judgment by the holy Ghost. And howsoever he seems
here to tax the Jews principally, who should disdainfully reject the Son
of God promised and offered; yea and puts himself in the number, as being a
member of that body: yet let us learn from this place notwithstanding, that
the whole world is here taxed and condemned of ingratitude, for contemning of
Christ; because they judge him unworthy the looking upon; nay they turn their
eyes from him, as from an abominable thing.

Verse. 3. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrewes: yet
we did judge him as plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled.
THe particle Surely, is not only an affirmative, but also serves for an
exposition; Now the Prophet sets down the cause why Christ was thus far
humbled.
to wit, when any thing is brought to light that seems strange and unwonted.
For is it not wonderful, nay monstrous, that he to whom God has given
sovereign power over all creatures; should be thus abased and humbled? So
then, if the cause were not rendered here, all would esteem this no better
then a fable. Why was Christ thus covered over with dolours and infirmities?
Surely because he bare our sorrows. Saint Matthew alleges this prophecy,
after he has told how Christ healed diseases of diverse kinds: Chap. 8.17. And
yet it is most certain, that he was appointed rather a Physician of men's
souls, then of their bodies. Add also that the Prophet speaks of spiritual
sorrows. But in the miracles showed in the healing of men's bodies, Christ
manifested a plain proof of that power he had to heal the sicknesses of
their souls. This healing then whereof S. Matthew speaks, extended further
then to their bodies: for he was ordained a Physician of souls: Matthew. 9.11,
12. And this is the cause why Matthew attributes that to the sign, which
agrees to the thing signified.

In the second member the Prophet shows the greatness of this peoples
ingratitude and peruersitie, in that they did not see the cause why Christ was
thus far humbled and afflicted, but did rather judge that he was smitten of
God for his own sins: and yet they knew well enough that he was an
innocent; yea the Judge himself testified it: Matthew. 27.24. Luke 23.4.14.22.
John 18.38. Since then they saw well that he being not guilty, bare the
punishment of sins which he never committed, wherefore did they not conceive
some rare excellency to be in him? But in regard they saw him smitten and
despised, they never stood to examine the cause, but judged only by the events,
as the foolish are wont to do. And for this cause Isaiah complains of the
frowardness of men's judgments: which considered not of the reason why Christ
was so greatly afflicted. And especially he bewailes the senslesnesse of the
Jews, in esteeming God the sworn enemy of Christ, without thinking of their
own iniquities, which by this means were done away.

Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, Or, in his wounds is
our medicin.
and with his stripes we Or, in his wounds is our medicin.
are healed.
HE once again repeats the cause of these so great afflictions of Christ, A
repetition of the cause, lest any should be offended at Christ's abasement.
to prevent the scandal that might arise: for ye spectacle of the Cross
drives many far from Christ. That is to say; whilst they only consi^^r of
that which is present before their eyes, not looking whereunto the same tends.
But all offense is removed, when they see that by his death, he has not only
done away our iniquities, but has also ^btained salvation for us.

Some think that chastisement, is here called the chastisement of peace;
because men were grown senseless, and hardened in their sins: and therefore
it was needful Christ should suffer. Others refer this peace to the
conscience; namely, that Christ has suffered, to give our consciences rest. To
which purpose Saint Paul says; Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God: Romans 5.1. But I take this word simply for reconciliation; because Christ
bare the chastisement which was due unto us. And thus the wrath of God justly
inflamed against us, is appeased, and the peace made between God and us, by
means of this mediator, so as we are now reconciled.

Hence we gather a general doctrine; to wit, A general doctrine.
that we are freely reconciled unto God, because Christ has paid the ransom
of our peace. The Papists will confess thus much I grant: but by and by they
restrain this doctrine to original sin: as if after baptism, free
reconciliation had no more place; but that we are to satisfy for the rest by
our works and merits. But our Prophet deals not here with one kind of
remission only, but extends this benefit to all the parts of our lives: so as
it cannot be lessened nor restrained to one certain time, without committing
horrible sacrilege. A frivolous distinction of Sophisters, touching the fault
and punishment answered.
And by this also it is easy to overthrow the frivolous distinction of the
Sophisters, touching the remission of the punishment and the fault: for they
will not have the punishment remitted, unless it be abolished by
satisfactions. But the Prophet plainly shows, that the punishment due to us
for our sins, is laid upon Christ. What do our Papists then but make
themselves joint redeemers with Christ, attributing unto themselves the same
power with him?

And with his stripes we are healed.] He brings us again unto Christ, that
we may have recourse to his vvounds, if ever we mean to recover life: for
the Prophet here opposes him to us, in respect that there is nothing to be
found in us, but death and damnation; and in Christ only life and salvation.
It is he alone that has procured us a plaster; yea, by his sickness has he
given us health, and by his death, life: for he alone it is, who has pacified
and reconciled the Father with us. I confess here is ample occasion afforded
me to speak of many things touching the fruits that come to us by the passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ: but my purpose is now rather to expound, then to
preach. Let us therefore content our selves now with this short and plain
exposition. And I wish every one by himself to gather consolation from hence,
and to apply the fruit of this doctrine to his particular use: for these
matters do as well concern all in general, as every one in particular.

Verse. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to
his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all.
THat he might the better imprint the benefit of Christ's death in our hearts,
The necessity of this healing described.
he shows how necessary this healing is, which he mentioned in the latter
end of the former verse. For if we acknowledge not our misery and poverty,
we shall never know how desirable the remedy is, which Christ has brought
us; neither shall we ever hunger or thirst after the same, with such a longing
affection as we ought; but being acquainted with our own forlorn estate, then
feeling our wants, we will run with greediness to receive the remedy, which
otherwise we shall lightly esteem. That Christ then may be received as he
deserves, let every one consider and examine himself, and acknowledge that he
is lost, Luke 19.10.
until Christ seek him out.

We see here that none are excepted, seeing the Prophet comprehends all: None
excepted out of this lost condition.
for all mankind had been utterly lost, if Christ had not wrought our
salvation. No, he excepts not the Jews, who yet were puffed up with a false
opinion of their dignity; but he even wraps them up in the same condemnation.
Now he compares them to sheep, not to lessen their fault, as if themselves for
their parts were harmless: but the more plainly to show that the proper office
of Christ, consists in gathering from among the dispersed, those who resembled
brute beasts.

In adding afterward every one: he descends from the general in which he
comprehended all, The Prophet descends from the general, to every one in
particular.
to the particular: to teach every one apart, whether it be not so indeed: for
a sentence generally propounded, moves us not so much, as when every man
considers that it belongs to him in special. Let every one then awaken up his
own conscience, and let him present himself before the judgment seat of
God, confessing his misery.

In the next place the Prophet shows wherein this staying consists, namely,
that every one has followed his own way: that is to say, has lived after
his own pleasure. And thus he shows that there is but one way to walk in;
out of which, if any one turns, he can do nothing but wander and lose
himself. Neither speaks he of works only, but of our very nature, which
causes us all to go astray. For if we could recover the right way again, and
deliver our selves from error, either by the instinct of nature, or by our own
wit, Christ had died in vain. We are all lost then till Christ has delivered
us: and the more we shall rely upon our own wisdom or industry, the more
shall we draw perdition down upon our own heads.

Thus then the Prophet shows in what estate wear, till we be regenerated by
Christ: for all are wrapped up in the same condemnation: there is none
righteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks God. They have all gone out of the way, they are all become
unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one: Psalm. 14.3. and 53.4.
As S. Paul also manifests it more fully, Romans 3.10, 11, 12.

And the Lord has laid upon him.] Here is a scattered, in Christ we are
gathered: by nature err, and run headlong into destruction; way by which we
are press us down to hell; Christ discharges us of them, to lay them upon
his own back: whilst we were lost then, and so estranged from God, that we
run post haste to hell, Christ took upon himself all our filthinesses and
iniquities, that he might deliver us from eternal death. But we must refer
this only to his condemnation and punishment: for he was no way guilty,
otherwise then by imputing of our sins unto him. Let every one of us then
make a diligent examination of his own iniquities, that so he may bring
himself to a true taste of this grace, and may feel the fruit of the death of
Christ.

Verse. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted; yet did he not open his
mouth: he is brought as a Or, lamb.
sheep to the slaughter; and as a sheep before her sheerer is dumb, so
opened he not his mouth.
Christ's obedience commended.
HE here praises Christ's obedience which he showed, when he was to suffer
death. for had he not done it willingly, he might have seemed not to have
satisfied for our disobedience. As by the disobedience of one then, all were
made guilty, (as Paul says) Romans 5.19. so by the obedience of one, many were
made righteous. And in another place; He was obedient to the death, even to
the death of the Cross: Phil. 2.8. This is the cause why he held his peace
before Pilats judgment seat, Mat. 27.12.14. though he might have pleaded his
just defense. But in regard he had bound himself to suffer for us, he
willingly submitted himself to an unjust judgment, without muttering one
word; that we with full mouth might rejoice, in being freely justified by
faith, and so acquitted from the righteous sentence of our condemnation.

And here also by the way we are exhorted to patience and meeknes, Christ's
patient sufferings, our example.
that by Christ's example we may be ready to endure reproaches, injuries,
wounds, and torments for his sake. In which sense, Saint Peter alleges this
place, 1. Pet. 2.22, 23. showing that we ought to be conformed to our head
Christ, that so we may follow him in patience and modesty.

In the word lamb, there may be an allusion to the sacrifices under the Law:
For the further explication of this and the verse following, read his Comment
upon Act. 8.32, 33.
in which sense he is called the Lamb of God: John 1.29.

Verse. 8. He was taken out of prison, and from judgment: and who shall
declare his age? For he was cut out of the land of the living: for the
transgression of my people was he plagued.
THis place is diversely expounded. Some think the Prophet prosecutes the
argument which he began to handle, Having spoken of christ's death, he passes
to his resurrection.
verse. 6. namely, that Christ was smitten with Gods hand, and afflicted for our
sins. The Greeks translate; And in his abasing, his judgment appeared.
Others, He was lifted up without delay. Others expound; That he was lifted up
upon the Cross: that is to say, Christ was led to the place of execution,
immediately after his apprehension. For mine own part, I rather agree with
those who think that the Prophet passes now to the glory of his resurrection,
having before spoken of his death: and by this means, meant to meet with men's
perplexed thoughts, which might trouble and grieve the hearts of many.

For when we see nothing but stripes and shame, we remain astonished: men's
natures abhor such spectacles. The Prophet then teaches, that Christ was
lifted up: that is to say, delivered from prison, and from judgment or
condemnation; and afterward was exalted into a sovereign degree of honor,
lest any should judge that he was overcome, or swallowed up by this horrible
and shameful kind of death. Truly he triumphed over his enemies in the midst
of death it self: yea, he was so condemned of it, that now himself is
ordained the sovereign Judge of all, as it well appeared in his resurrection.
Isaiah then keeps the same method that Paul does, who having in Philip. 2.
spoken of Christ's humiliation even to the death of the Cross: Paul's method
agrees with Ha^^hs in this place.
adds, that for this cause, he was advanced to an high exaltation; having now
obtained a name, unto which every creature in heaven, earth, and under the
earth, must bow their knees, and yield their obedience.

As touching the exclamation following, it has been racked and rent by diverse
expositions. The ancient Fathers abused this place to confute the Arians,
A^ians. Heretics must be convinced not with shows, but with plain euidenc s
of truth.
who denied the eternal generation of Christ. But they should have contented
themselves with plain and manifest proofs of the holy Scriptures, that so
they might not have made themselves a scorn to heretics, who by this means
oftentimes take occasion to grow the more impudent: for they might have
replied, that the Prophet had no such meaning. Chrysostom referres it to
Christ's humanity, because he was miraculously conceived in the virgins womb,
without the use of man's help: but he roues far off from the Prophets
meaning. Chrysostom.
Some others think that the Prophet cries out upon them that crucified Christ.
And some again refer it to the posterity which should succeed; to wit, that
Christ's lineage or offspring should greatly increase, though himself died. But
seeing the word Dor, signifies Age, or lasting; I doubt not but he speaks of
Christ's age, namely, that notwithstanding the sorrows wherewith he was
ouerpressed, he shall not only be freed from them, but shall also have a
flourishing age, Psalm. 102.24.27.
yea such a one as should endure for ever. For he shall not resemble those
that are delivered from death, and yet must die nevertheless afterward,
because he rose again to live eternally. For as S. Paul says, Romans 6.9. He
can die no more, Christ can die no more.
death can have no more dominion over him. And yet we must remember that the
Prophet not only speaks of Christ's person, but comprehends under it, the
whole body of the church, which must never be separated from her head. A note
touching the perpe uitie of the Church.
We have here then a notable testimony touching the perpetuity of the church:
for as Christ lives for ever, so will he not suffer his kingdom ever to
perish: John 14.19. In the next place we are to appropriate this immortality
to every member in particular.

For he was cut off.] It may seem strange at the first blush, that the death
of Christ should be the cause and vvel-spring of life. But in regard he
endured the punishment due to our offenses, all the ignominy which appeared in
the Cross, ought to be laid and charged upon us. And yet in the mean while
we may see a wonderful goodness of God shining in Christ, who has so
manifestly discovered his glory to us, that we ought to be carried into a
wonderful admiration of it.

For this cause he once again repeates, that he was plagued for our
transgressions: that we might diligently consider how he suffered for us, and
not for himself: for he bare the torments which we had deserved; and should
for ever have borne them, had, not this ransom and satisfaction come between.
Let us acknowledge then that the fault is ours, whereof he bare the punishment
and condemnation, by offering himself to his heavenly Father in our name,
that in his condemnation we might receive our absolution.

Verse. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death, though he had done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth.
SAint Ierom translates; And has given the wicked for burial; Saint Ierom.
as if the Prophet spoke of the punishment, whereby the Lord will avenge
himself of those which crucified Christ. But he rather speaks of Christ's
death, Christ seemed to be buried as it were in the hands of the wicked.
and of the fruits of it, and touches not this vengeance. Others think that
the particle Et, signifies As: and they translate, He has made his grave as
that of the wicked. Some again translate With: and by the rich, understand
Joseph of Aremathea, in whose sepulcher Christ was buried: but this exposition
is constrained. Where he adds, and to the rich: I think the singular number
is put for the plural, according to the custom of the Hebrews. I see no
reason why Oecolampadius has translated; Oecolampadius.
He has exposed his high places to the rich. By the rich, understanding
tyrants and proud men; for they are wont to wax insolent and intemperate, in
regard of their riches, which they abuse to play the Tarmogants.

Thus I think that by the wicked and rich, he understands one and the same
thing. Isaiahs meaning is then, that Christ was subject to the contumelies,
insolences, and lusts of the wicked. Scribes and Pharisees.
For the Scribes and Pharisees on the one side rushed upon him with a desperate
fury: and on the other side, the factious people cried no hing but crucify
him, The factious people. Pilat.
crucify him: Matthew. 26.66. Pilat contrary to all equity and law, gave an
unjust sentence of death upon him, though he were informed of his innocence:
The Roman soldiers.
Mark 15.14. And the Roman soldiers greedy of any pray, put the cruel and
wicked sentence cruelly and wickedly in execution: John 19.16. Who would not
have thought now, but that Chrst had been utterly overwhelmed, an^ buried
amongst the bloody hands of these cruels murderers? For I take the grave here
by a metaphor, in regard the wicked and their executioners had almost
ouercharged him.

Though he had done none iniquity.] The Prophet sets Christ's innocence here
before us, not so much to defend him against the slanders of the wicked, as to
recommend unto us the fruit of his death, lest we should imagine that he
suffered at adventure. He was innocent and suffered by Gods decree, not for his
iniquities, but for ours: for he bare the punishment due to us. Now in two
words he expresses Christ's perfect innocence; to wit, that he sinned neither
in word nor deed. Surely every one will confess that this cannot be affirmed
of any mortal man: it follows then, that it appertains to Christ only.

Verse. 10. Yet the Lord would break him, and make him subject to infirmities:
when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed,
and shall prolong his days; and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand.
BY this we may the better discern of that which I have briefly touched; The
fruit of Christ's death expressed.
to wit, that the Prophet propounding Christ's innocence, had a further drift
then to defend him against the contumelies and reproaches of the wicked. The
mark he aims at then, is to make us look unto the very cause, that so we
might feel the effect thereof in our souls: for God neither ordaines, nor
executes ought at randon. Whence it follows, that the cause of Christ's death
was lawfully undertaken. The exposition also is still to be remembered of us,
would the Lord then have him suffer?

The word Asham, signifies sin, and oblation for sin; and so oftentimes it
is found in the latter signification in the Scriptures: Exodus 29.14. Ezech.
45.22. For the beast sacrificed, was so offered, as that bearing the punishment
and curse of the sin, it also blotted it out. And the Priests signified so
much by the imposition of hands; even as if they had laid upon the beast the
sins of the whole people: Leuit. 4.4. And if any private man had offered, he
also put his hands upon the head of the beast; as if he had thereby translated
his sin from himself, unto it: Leuit. 4.27.29. And therefore Saint Paul
calls Christ the curse, or execration, saying; Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the law being made a curse for us: Galat. 3.13. And in another
place; He made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him: 2. Cor. 5.21. Also in Romans 8.3. For that
which was impossible to the law, in that it was weak by reason of the flesh,
that has God done by sending his own Son in the similitude of flesh,
subject to sin; and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. The Prophet then by this
word Asham, signifies the same, which Paul calls curse, and sin, in the
places formerly alleged.

Now here the fruit of Christ's death is expressed, in regard that by his
sacrifice, sins are done away, and God is pacified toward man: for the
virtue of this word sacrifice, must be referred heereunto. Hence it follows,
that the abolishing of sin, and satisfaction for sin, is no where to be
found, but in Christ. Now that we may the better remember these things: first,
we must note that we all guilty before God; so as we are accursed and
loathsome in his presence. Will we then be brought again into his favor?
Sin must be taken away. But this cannot be done with purgations devised by
man. How then? We must resort to Christ's death, because satisfaction to God, In
a word, No satisfaction can be made to God for our sins, but by christ's death.
Isaiah teaches that sins cannot be pardoned, unless we flee to this
death. If this language seems harsh, and not seemly for the person of Christ,
let such a one enter into his own heart, and consider in good earnest, how
fearful and terrible Gods justice is, when nothing is able to appease it but
the sacrifice of Christ. And so the inestimable grace, which shines in the
curse of Christ, will easily remove all offense.

He shall see his posterity.] The Prophets meaning is, that it shall be so
far off, that Christ's posterity shall be diminshed by his death, that
contrariwise, it shall be the means to raise up seed unto him. For in
quickening the dead, he begets a people which he afterward will cause to
multiply exceedingly. Neither is there any absurdity at all in it, to call the
faithful the posterity of Christ (though they be his brethren) for they be
his offspring.

Where he adds; He shall prolong his days, some supply the relative Asher,
Which: saying, that the posterity shall endure long. But I expound it more
simply; that the death which Christ shall suffer, shall not cut off the length
of his days: that is to say, from living eternally.

Some departing out of this life, do leave children which shall survive them;
yet upon condition that their fathers be first dead. But Christ shall have his
children with him: for he dies not as men do, but obtaines eternal life both
for himself and his. And thus the Prophet shows, that both the head and the
members shall live eternally.

The will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.] This word hand, is often
taken for ministry: as where it is said, that the Lord gave the Law by the
hand of Moses: Numb. 36.13. Also the Lord did this by the hand of David: 2.
Sam* 3.18. meaning, that he used his service. In this sort also shall the will
of the Lord prosper in the hand of Christ: that is to say; the Lord will cause
Christ's ministry to bring forth his fruit, that it may not seem he was
exposed to so many cruel torments in vain. Under these four or five words,
is comprehended a very large and ample doctrine, which every one may collect by
himself: for we will content our selves now with expounding the text only.

The will of the Lord, is taken in the same sense here, as it was in the
former member: for he uses the word Kephets, which signifies a frank and
liberal affection, full of mercy. This text then sets two benefits of God
before us: First, that he spared not his own Son, Two benefits se before us
in this verse.
but delivered him up for our sakes, to redeem us from death: Romans 8.32.
Secondly, that he suffers not this his death to be fruitless, and
unprofitable; but causes it to fructify very largely: for what benefit
should we reap thereby, unless we felt the power and efficacy thereof in
our selves.

Verse. 11. He shall see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear
their iniquities.
The former argument further prosecuted.
ISaiah prosecutes the same argument. For he shows that after Christ has
suffered death, he shall reap the fruit thereof, from the salvation of men. To
the words shall see therefore, must be supplied the fruit and efficacy. Surely
these things contain wonderful consolation in them: for Isaiah could no way
better express Christ's infinite love to us, then in showing that he takes a
singular pleasure in the work of our salvation: and does herein as it were
refresh himself, as with the fruits of his own labors. Even as one that
reioiceth to see that which above all things he desired to inioy^, as if
nothing but that could content him.

In the next place he shows the means by which we may feel the virtue and
power of Christ's death; to wit, by his knowledge. This word knowledge, or
doctrine, may be read in a double sense; to wit, in the active, or passive: but
in whether of them you read it, we shall easily see the Prophets meaning.
Neither shall the Jews be able to cavil so impudently, but we will force
them to confess that which is here said; to wit, that Christ is the only
Doctor and author of righteousness: for the Prophet manifests so much by the
effect, saying, that he shall justify many. Thus then men shall not only
learn in the school of Christ, to define what this righteousness is, but
themselves also shall be made just, Note.
really and effectually thereby.

The difference between the righteousness of the law, and that of faith.
And here behold the difference between the righteousness of the law, and that
of faith. For albeit the law shows what it it to be just; yet Saint Paul
shows it is impossible to obtain righteousness by it. Which he proves by
experience, in regard the law is but a looking glass, serving to manifest unto
us our own unrighteousness: Romans 3.9, 10. But the doctrine to obtain the
righteousness which Christ sets before us, is nothing else but a knowledge of
him; to wit, faith: that is, when we accept the benefit of his death, and do
wholly rest our selves therein.

Philosophers.
The Philosophers give many goodly precepts, wherein they think all justice is
comprehended: but they were never able yet to make any man righteous by them.
For where is he that had ever yet the power to live according to their rules?
It is a small matter to know wherein true justice consists, unless
therewithal we taste the benefit of it. But to let the Philosophers pass, The
Law conferres righteousness to none.
we see the law it self, which contains a perfect rule of a godly life, is
not able to confer righteousness (as we have said:) Not because there is any
want in it, for Moses testified and protested that he did set before them in
it, good and evil, life and death: Deuteronomy. 30.19. But the law is unable to
confer righteousness to us, Why the law is unable to confer grace.
in regard of the corruption of our nature: as S. Paul well affirms, that this
impossibility proceeds from our flesh, and not from me law: Romans 8.3. For our
nature is enmity unto it, and our lusts ouercarry us violently, as wild
beasts, to rush against the commandment of God. And thus, the law ingenders
wrath, rather then righteousness: Romans 4.15. The law then condemns all men,
and having discovered their sin, makes them without excuse. We must therefore
seek out another mean whereby to obtain righteousness; namely, Christ our
righteousness: Ier. 23.6. and 33.16.
in Christ himself, whom the very law points us unto, as to the end of it:
Romans 10.4. But what is that righteousness of the law? Do these things, and thou
shall live: Leuit. 18.5. Gal. 3.12. But none can do them. Then you must seek
another righteousness, which S. Paul collects out of a place of Moses; The word
is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart. This is the word of faith
which we preach: Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8. By this doctrine we are justified:
not as it is nakedly and barely propounded, but as it offers unto us Christ and
all his benefits, by which our sins are done away, and we set at peace with
God: for if we embrace this benefit by faith, we are reputed just before him.

And our Prophet also expounds his own meaning, in showing wherein this
knowledge consists; for these two members must be joined together. By his
doctrine, or by the knowledge of himself, he shall justify many; because he
shall bear their iniquities. For as he has once offered himself for the
purgation of all our iniquities: so now he daily allures us to receive the
fruit of his death, by the preaching of the Gospel. The publishing of which
his death and passion, is the substance and foundation thereof, that by bearing
of it, we might be justified. Saint Paul also accords very well with this
sentence of the Prophet. For having showed that Christ was offered for the
remission of our sins, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him; he adds, we are ambassadors for Christ, and do beseech you that you will
be reconciled unto God: 2. Cor. 5.20.

My righteous servant.] The Prophet teaches that Christ iustifies us, not
only as he is God, but also as he is man; Christ iustifies as he is both God
and man.
in regard he has obtained righteousness for us in his flesh. For he calls
him not My son, but My servant: that whilst we consider him as God, we may
also apprehend his humane nature, in which he yielded that obedience which
absolues us before God. The foundation of our salvation.
This is the foundation of our salvation then, namely, that he offered up
himself in sacrifice: as he testifies in the Gospel. And for their sakes
sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth: John
17.19.

Verse. 12. Therefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong, because he powered out his soul unto death,
and he was counted with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and
prayed for the trespassers.
The victory that Christ obtained by his death.
ISaiah shows further, what issu^ Christ's death shall have: for it was
necessary he should add this doctrine touching the victory which he obtained
by his passion; because the knowledge of our reconciliation with the Father by
his death, would not otherwise have sufficiently confirmed our hearts. Now he
borrowes a similitude here from those who used triumphs. For having obtained
the victory, they were gloriously apparrelled, and received with stately
shows: so Christ, as a valiant and noble General, triumphed after the
conquest over his enemies.

He shall divide the spoil with the strong.] It is the same with the former
member, and a repetition much used among the Hebrews: for those which before
he called great, now he calls mighty and strong. Those who translate; I will
give him a portion with many; pervert the meaning of the Prophet, as I think.
All the difference in the two members is, that gave to Christ: and he inioies
it not for himself, but for us: for the fruit of this victory is made ours.
Christ conquered Satan, sin, and death, not so much for himself, as for us.
How so? Christ has subdued death, the world, and the devil, for us. In a
word, the Prophet here extolles this victory which Christ achieved by his
sufferings, who though he died concerning to the infirmity of the flesh, yet
he was raised again by the wonderful power of the holy Ghost: 2. Cor. 13.4.
and triumphed over all his and our enemies.

Heereunto appertains the similitude of spoi les, which the Prophet uses. For
he ascended into heaven, led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men: Psalm.
68. Ephesians. 4.8. And afterward he ads, that the abasing of Christ, was the
beginning of his imperial dignity. As also S. Paul says, that after Christ
had taken away the hand writing which was against us, he triumphed upon the
cross, Col. 2.14. So far was it off then, that the reproachful death which he
suffered, did any thing diminish his glory; that it was rather a means by
which God his Father advanced him into an high degree of honor.

Isaiah also expresses the kind of death: as S. Paul also, who having set
forth Christ's obedience, and showing that he humbled himself unto the death,
adds by and by, that it was no common death, but the death of the Cross: that
is to say, a shameful and an accursed death: Phil. 2.8.

Now the Prophet minding yet to amplify this contumely to the full, says,
that Christ was counted among the wicked. But the greater the contempt was
before men, so much the greater was the glory of his resurrection. Saint Mark
alleges this place, when he tells us how Christ was hanged between two
thieves: Mark. 15.28. for then was this prophecy truly accomplished indeed.

But the Prophet spoke generally, to show that Christ died not a common death.
For that they might make him the more odious, they hanged these two thieves
with Christ, and himself in the midst, as the Captain. And thus Saint Mark
alleges this text to very good purpose, and according to the circumstance of
this place.

He bare the sin of many.] This is added by way of correction, lest in
hearing tell of the ignominy of this death, we should conceive somewhat that
might redound to Christ's indignity. With which conceit our minds being
possessed, we might happily be deprived of the victory which he has purchased
for us; to wit, the fruit of his death. The Prophet then shows, that all this
was done to the end he might receive the burden of our sins Note.
Because in him we have a memorable testimony of Gods love, in that he was
thus humbled, scorned, and misused, with all the indignities that might be,
that we who were appointed unto eternal destruction, might with him enjoy
immortal glory and happiness.

I have followed the common translation in these words; he has borne the sin
of many: although by the Hebrew word Rabbim, we may understand the Great and
Noble: and so the opposition would be the more manifest; namely, that Christ
being accounted among the wicked, is appointed and offered as a pledge of the
most noble and excellent, and bare the shame which those that are in highest
degree in the world had deserved. But I leave it to the judgment of the
readers to choose whether of both readings they like best. In the mean while I
approve the common translation; that he alone has borne the s^nne of many: in
respect the condemnation of the whole world was laid upon him. And the word
many, is sometimes taken for All: The word Many sometimes taken for All.
as it appears by many testimonies, especially in Romans 5.19. For as by one
man's disobedience, many were made sinners, etc.

And prayed for the trespassers.] Because the purgation wherewith we are
cleansed, that is, Christ suffers and prays for trespessers.
the death of Christ, was ratified and approved in regard of his intercession
toward the Father, it was necessary this should be added. For as in the old
Testament, the high Priest, who never entered without blood, made prayers also
forthwith for the people, Exodus 30.10. Heb. 5.7. so that which was there
prefigured, was accomplished in Christ. First, he offered his body in
sacrifice, and shed his blood for the ransom of our sins: and then, that the
purgation might be available, he performed the office of an advocate and
intercessor for all those that embrace this his sacrifice by faith: as it
appears in that famous prayer which himself has left upon record in John
17.20. Father, I pray not only for these, (that is, for my Disciples) but also
for all those that shall believe in me through their word. If we then be of
that number, let us know for certain, that Christ has suffered for us, that
now we might enjoy the fruit of his death. He makes express mention of the
trespassers, to advertise us that it is our duties to run with boldness to
the cross of Christ, when the dread and horror of sin affrights us. For, for
such is he an advocate and intercessor: without which, our transgressions would
hinder us from approaching ne^re to the majesty of God.

THE LIVE. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Rejoice, O barren, that did not bear: break forth into joy, and
rejoice thou that did not travel with child: for the Or, widow.
desolate has mo children then the married wife.
Having handled the doctrine of Christ's passion, From the doctrine of Christ's
passion and death, the Prophet turns his speech to the Church, that she might
se^k the fruit and efficacy thereof.
he now fitly turns his speech to the Church; to the end we might feel in
our selves the efficacy of his death. For we cannot perceive it in Christ, if
we consider him by himself: and therefore we must come presently unto his
Church, which is his body, because he suffered for it, not for himself. This
order we know is observed in the articles of our Creed. For having confessed
that we believe in Jesus Christ, vv^o suffered and was crucified for us, we
add, J believe the Church; which has issued as it were out of his side: Genesis
2.1, 22, 23. And therefore after Isaiah has delivered the doctrine of Christ's
sufferings, of his resurrection, and triumph he descends now in due season to
mention the Church, which can never be separated from her head: to teach all
the faithful from their o^ne experience, that Christ has not suffered in
vain. If he had omitted this doctrine, the faithfu^l could not so well have
confirmed their hearts in the hope of the restoration of the Church.

Now this exhortation to reioicing, plainly shows, that after Chirst by his
death shall have got the conquest over death, sin, and hell, that he shall
not live so much for himself, but that he therewithal will inspire life into
the members of his body. He calls his Church barren, Barren.
because she seemed to have none issue, whilst this woeful servitude lasted.
And indeed, if a man had only looked upon her outward estate, he would surely
have judged her near to destruction. Moreover, besides the misery that
appeared externally, there was nothing sound within, all were corrupted and
defiled with superstitions. They had also profaned themselves with the
idolatries of the heathen.

Neither contents he himself to call her barren, A widow.
but he also terms her a vvidow: although one of them had been sufficient
enough to have taken from her all hope of posterity. But when both are joined
together, what was to be expected but an horrible desolation? Notwithstanding
he exhorts the people to be of good courage, in the midst of so many miseries:
for she that is desolate, Desolate.
shall have more children then the married wife, This place may be expounded
two ways; either that the Church is compared to the Gentiles, which flourished
like a woman that had an husband: or to the estate she was in before her
captivity: both senses will agree well. But I had rather follow one less
constrained: for I do not think the Prophet makes a comparison here between
two estates. But it is rather a form of speech usual with him, to signify
the extraordinary fruitfulness of the Church, that so we should not judge of
her, according to the order of nature. Why so? Because God will work in his
behalf wonderfully and miraculously. And yet I confess that she was then in
widowhood; for long time before, God had put her away by his Prophets, and sued
out a divorce between him and his people, which was then effected, when he
banished them out of their country. But the Prophet pronounces that this
iudegemnt shall be temporary, as we shall more fully perceive hereafter.

Verse. 2. Enlarge the place of thy tents, and let them spread out the curtains
of thine inhabitation: spare not, stretch out thy cords, and make fast thy
stakes.

3. For thou shall increase on the right hand, and on the left: and thy seed
shall possess the Gentiles, and dwell in the desolate Cities.


He prosecutes his argument under other figures, A prosecution of the former
doctrine under other figures.
and promises that the Lord will not only restore his Church, but will also
dignifie her with a more excellent estate. Those who think that there is a
comparison here between the Church and the Synagogue, are deceived, as I
think. Neither do they ought else hereby, then confirm the Jews in their
obstinacy, who perceive well enough that violence is offered to the sense of
this text, by such an exposition. For mine own part, I do indeed confess
that these things appertain to the kingdom of Christ, and that they were then
only fulfilled, from the publishing of the Gospel. But it does not therefore
follow, that the Prophet should not also respect that time which went before
Christ's coming: for the accomplishment of this prophecy began under Cy^us,
who gave the Gospel leave to return: then it extended it self to the coming
of Christ, in whom it received the full accomplishment. The Church then
conceived, when the people returned home: for at that time the body of the
people was gathered, of whom Christ should be borne; that so the pure worship
of God, and his true religion might again be planted amongst them. I grant
this fruitfulnes did not then appear; for the conception was hid as it were
within the mothers womb, which outwardly could not be any whit discerned. But
after the people multiplied; and The infancy of the Church.
Which time indeed, was the true infancy of the Church. Afterward, she grew
to woman's estate, and shall so continue even till Christ's last coming, The
perfect estate of the Church.
when all things shall be set in their perfect estate. We must therefore
comprehend all these things together, if we will attain to the true meaning of
the Prophets words. And in this sense it is that Zachary, Malachi, and Haggai
do encourage the people touching the hope of their estate to come, whilst
they thought they lost so much time in reedifying the Temple: Zach. 2.5. Hag.
2.7. Mal. 4.2. For they promised that the glory of the second Temple should be
more glorious then the first: but yet this was not perceived. And therefore
they extended these promises to Christ: for it was needful they should be
sustained with the expectation of him, and with the assurance of his coming,
in the building of the Temple. This consolation then was common both to the
Jews that lived under the Law, and to us, who now see this restoration of the
Church in Christ more evidently.

Of thy tents.] This is a similitude taken from Tabernacles which were commonly
used in that country. The Church then is compared to pauilions, Why the Church
is compared to a tent.
because she has no settled habitation in this world: for she seems to be
fleeting, and a pilgrim, in regard she is subject to be often transported
hetner and thither, by reason of her diverse changes. And yet I doubt not but he
aims at that first deliverance, (according to the custom of the Prophets) at
which time, the Israelites dwelt under tents the space of forty years: for
which cause, they every year celebrated a solemn feast of Tabernacles by the
commandment of God: Leuit. 23. from 33. verse, to 43.

The Church compared to a tent, rather in respect of her outward, then of her
inward estate.
I answer, that this similitude of Tabernacles is rather to be referred to the
outward estate of the Church, then to her spiritual or inward estate: for the
true building of the Church, is the very kingdom of God, which is not
unstable, nor like unto pauilions. And yet the Church cease not for all that,
to be transported hither and thither, in regard she can find no sure resting
place in this world. But she is more firm then a rock touching her inward
estate: for in respect she is vpheld by the impregnable power and strength of
God, she boldly contemnes as dangers. She resembles tents also, because she
is not built upon riches nor earthly forces.

In the next place the Prophet adds the reason why he commands her to spread
abroad the cords, to enlarge her pauilions; namely, because a little place
would not contain that great multitude of people which God would gather
together in one, from all parts. Now in as much as Iudeah was wasted with
ruins and desolations which had befallen it: therefore he says, that the
desolate Cities shall be inhabited.

Verse. 4. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed; neither shall thou be
confounded: for thou shall not be put to shame; yea, thou shall forget the
shame of thy youth, and shall not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any
more.
HE here confirms (as before) the hearts of the faithful, A confirmation.
and speaks to the whole Church: for the calamity was universal, and her
estate was almost utterly ruinated. Now he bids her be of good cheer, and
adds the reason; namely, that her deliverance should be so famous, that she
should not be confounded. As if he should have said; Though now for a while
thy case be desperate, yet thy matters shall succeed prosperously: for those
that trust in the Lord, shall not be confounded: as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
25.2. Chap. 49.23.

He repeates it twice, be not ashamed: that is to say, Hope still, and trust
confidently. For such blush for shame, who being frustrated of their hopes, are
forced to hang down the head. Then he adds the like reason to the former,
in the word Ci, for I take it here as before, for a particle rendering the
cause: so as it is one and the same sentence repeated in diverse words; unless
you will, that the first member be referred to the inward affection, and the
other to an outward cause. But the plainest sense will be, that there is in
both a promise touching an happy and joyful issue. As if he should say; Thy
calamity shall have an end.

But thou shall forget thy shame.] This is a confirmation of the former member,
by which he understands the calamities that should befall the Church, when she
should begin to grow: for the felicity she should afterward enjoy, would
utterly deface the memory of them. We told you ere while, Verse. 1.
that she is called a widow* in respect that at this time God had forsaken
and put her away from him: Chap. 50.1.

Verse. 5. For he that made thee is thine husband (whose name is the Lord of
hosts) and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel shall be called the God of
Or, all.
the world.
Here he renders a reason why she shall forget all the sorrows and
afflictions which she sustained before; namely, Reasons by which he confirms
the former consolations.
because God would accept her into his favor again: for the captivity was a
kind of divorce; as we have showed in Chap. 50.1. Now he says, he that made
thee, shall be thine husband: for so the words should be so construed. He
calls himself the maker or creator of his Church, not only because he has
created her with the rest of the world, Creation taken for regeneration.
but in regard he has vouchsafed to adopt her for his spouse: which
prerogative is as a new creation. Now albeit the Jews were fallen from their
excellency, (in regard men are apt by and by to decline out of the right way,
if they be not regenerated by the power of the holy Ghost) yet their spiritual
creation was not wholly defaced, for the memory of the covenant remained
still, by means whereof, God also created them anew.

Where he calls himself the Lord of hoster, it is to be referred to his
power, in which we have cause to rejoice, if we be his children: for the
greater his power is, and the more renowned his name is, the greater is our
glory, as long as he accounts of us as of his children; and that we boast not
of such a title in vain. Now the Prophet amplifies this benefit, when he
shows that God does us the favor, to admit us into the place of his wife;
for so we may indeed lay claim to this his almighty power.

Thy redeemer.] He attributes this name to himself, that he might the better
confirm the people in good hope; and also to assure them, that notwithstanding
the first deliverance out of Egypt seemed to be abolished when they were now
carried away captive; yet they shall be so restored, that they shall well
perceive Gods grace shall not be fruitless. The verb, Shall be called, may be
either referred to the redeemer, or, to the Holy one: or to them both. For mine
own part, I willingly refer it to both; to wit, The holy one of Israel shall
be called thy redeemer, and the God of the whole earth. He mentions all the
earth, (that is to say; the whole world:) for before, the name of God was only
known in Jury, Psalm. 76.1. but after the publishing of the Gospel, the
Gentiles were also called to one hope of salvation with them. God is now the
God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews: Romans 3.29. With whom he has
assembled under his dominion the Gentiles also, who before were far off.

Verse. 6. For the Lord has called thee, being as a woman forsaken and
afflicted in spirit, and as a young wife when thou wast refused, says thy God.
HE meets with a doubt which might have troubled the minds of the faithful,
A prevention of an objection.
under this grievous servitude: for they seemed to be so rejected of the Lord,
as if they were to expect nothing but utter ruin. The Prophet therefore
admonishes them betimes, not to quail, though they were forsaken, because God
according to his wonted favor, is inclined to be reconciled with them again:
yea, and to recover them out of their graves.

He calls her a young married vv^fe, or wife of youth; that by this similitude
he might the better confirm the peoples hope: for the new married couples are
easilier reconciled, then those that have dwelt long together. Young years, and
tender love, Simile.
allures young folks to keep amity. And thus he shows that God will be
easily pacified. As if he should say; I grant thou art now divorced from me,
but the divorce shall not long hold, but the Lord will be at one with thee:
yea, of his own accord he will allure thee to be reconciled.

Verse. 7. For a little while have I forsaken thee: but with great compassion
will I gather thee.

8. For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season: but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy
redeemer.


THe Prophet now expounds the former sentence at large, An exposition of the
prevention.
and shows the manner of this divorce; to wit, that the Church shall be shortly
restored to her first estate. Now he sets forth this mercy of God very
excellently, and thereby asswageth the dolor which might press down the
hearts of the faithful: for it was not enough to put them in hope of some
kind of restoration, unless they were therewithal assured that God would
also be quickly appeased. We are out of heart by and by, and quail, if so be
the Lord be not near presently to reach forth his hand unto us. And therefore
after Isaiah has mentioned the Churches restoration, he forthwith adds,
that her reiection shall not long endure, but that God will have compassion
with everlasting mercy.

When he says, he forsook his people: it is as much as if he had confessed it
to be so: for God has in such wise adopted us, that men's disloialtie cannot
frustrate the same. Why so? Because he is faithful, and will never therefore
finally reject or forsake his elect. God never forsakes his people: See 1. Sam.
12.22. Lam. 3.31.32.
This reiection then, must be referred to our apprehension, and to our seeming
in outward appearance: for we think God has cast us off, when we neither
feel his presence, nor protection. And yet it is necessary we should taste the
bitterness of Gods wrath, (as the wife whom her husband has put away, laments
her estate) that we may know he has just cause to deal so severely with us.
But on the other side, it is as needful that we forthwith should drink a
deep draught of his mercy, which being infinite and everlasting, will make all
our afflictions seem light; yea, and of short continuance, in respect of that.
As often then as calamities do press us down, let us have our recourse to
this consolation.

We may also note that this was said, and that truly, of the whole body of this
people, who had made this divorce by their iniquities: Chap. 50.1. And
howsoever God did not indifferently receive them all to grace, but that remnant
which he had chosen; yet there is no absurdity nor inconvenience at all in it,
that he directs his speech unto all. He repeates the same thing again in the
next verse, that it might take the deeper impression in the hearts of the
faithful: as also, that no adversity might too much dismay them. And had he
just cause to do so? Yea doubtless: for in this horrible darkness, the poor
captives could not easily behold the loving countenance of the Lord. And
howsoever that which is here said, for a moment in mine indignation, is
properly to be understood, that God in fit season brought his banished home
again into Iudeah: yet thence we may gather a general doctrine, namely, that
the afflictions, of the Church are but for a short space, when we lift up the
eyes of our minds to the eternal and blessed life. For we must remember the
admonition of Saint Paul, to wit, that all the afflictions of the faithful,
are light to bear, and ought to be esteemed very short, if we look to that
eternal weight of glory which is laid up for us in heaven: 2. Cor. 4.17. Romans
8.18. And if this comparison come not between; days will seem unto us as
long as years. If we set not the eternal weight of glory against our
momentany afflictions, days will seem to us as long as years.
Neither were there any reason to compare seventy years captivity to a
moment, if the continual progress of Gods favor were not opposed unto it.

Verse. 9. For this is unto me as the waters of Noah: for as I have sworn that
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I
will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee.
As God satisfied himself with one deluge, so he will satisfy himself with
this last waste of the Church.
THis may be read two ways: first as we have translated, This is to me as the
days of Noah: but the matter is not great. The principal therefore is to have
an eye to the Prophets meaning: for the expositors have but roued a far off
at it, as I think. They expound in general terms; that the Lord by oath
promised Noah, there should never be any deluge again, and that this oath
should remain for ever: for without this, the good man might have trembled and
feared death at the next shower of rain that had fallen, but that the Lord had
sworn to him is should never come to pass. And thus, when afflictions are at
hand, we may justly fear to be overwhelmed by them, unless the Lord had
promised that his Church should be preserved in safety. But as I think, this
should be restrained to the captivity of Babylon: for he compares this
captivity to the deluge, which then deformed the face of the whole earth; so
as the Church seemed to be utterly wasted, the people were all in a manner
carried away, and transformed into a strange nation, the kingdom and
government were overthrown, their bondage was extreme, and no man would have
imagined but that their memory and name had been wholly blotted out. And
questionless that which our Prophet said in the first Chapter, came to pass,
namely, that if the Lord had not left a small remnant, they should have been
like to Sodom and Gomorah.

It is not without cause then, that he compares this captivity to the waters
of Noah: that is to say, to the deluge. For which cause, I am of their opinion
who read; For this is to me as the waters; because this reading seems more
solid, as I think: and all the Rabbines have followed it. These words, This
shall be to me, ought to be well weighed also, as I take it; which the
expositors notwithstanding have lightly passed over. For his meaning is, that
this calamity shall be unto him as the deluge: that is, as he contented
himself with one deluge, so as he will never send a second: so will he also
satisfy himself with this only waste of the Church, and he will never suffer
it to be any more thus ruinated again. Thus then I suppose this text ought to
be expounded and applied to the similitude, namely, that the overthrow of the
Church shall be the same now unto God, as the deluge was, which happened in
the days of Noah: for even as he then swear, never to punish the sins of
men more with this so heavy a chastisement, so will he never consume the
Church any more, as he has done under the captivity of Babylon. And truly
whatsoever waste there happened after, yet the Church always stood, and
continued in some form, till Christ his appearing: for then the seed of the
Gospel was sown abroad every where, that it might bring forth children to the
Lord, out of all the nations under heaven. To conclude, the Lord promises
hereafter to mitigate his wrath, and never to punish his people so severely
again.

But some will object, Antiochus Antiochu^^
and others made terrible wastes, after which followed those reuolts which
Saint Paul foretold, 2. These. 2.3. 1. Tim. 4.1. And that all the world in a
manner was defiled with infinite superstitions, so as Christianity was almost
raced out: yet there evermore remained some form of a Church, though much
disfigured. Neither was the building so defaced, but some relikes thereof
remained unwasted above the deluges, that so this oath of God might stand fast.

So have I sworn.] This must not be barely understood as it is in it self,
but by way of comparison, for he opposes this member to the former, promising
never to correct his people so severely again, but that he will both
mittigate and moderate his stripes. Although tyrants then play the wild beasts
in running upon us with a desperate fury; and that Satan on the other side
leaves no plot unattempted to bring the Church to destruction; and that God for
our unthankfulness lets loose the raines unto them, yet will he never suffer it
to be utterly swallowed up of the^.

Verse. 10. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but
my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace
fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.
HE confirms the former sentence, A confirmation of the former sentence.
and shows, that heaven and earth shall pass and come to naught, before his
mercy shall fail. Some are so fond to demand here how mountains can remove,
or, how hills shall fall down? But they deserve none answer, for it is a
comparison taken from things that seem to be fast and firmly rooted, thereby
signifying, that the Church is much more stable and immovable. The mountains
are very firm and strong; neither do earthquakes happen so often there as in
plain and champian countries. The Lord then pronou^ceth, that though these
great and huge mountains should remove, or that heaven and earth should meet,
Psalm. 46.2. yet his covenant shall stand immovable, and his mercy shall be
perpetual toward his Church.

And to this purpose it is said in Psalm. 93.1. That the Lord shall reign, and
that the world shall be stablished that it can not be moved. And in Psalm.
102.26.28. The heavens shall perish, but the Church of God shall remain for
ever. In the word mercy we are to note what the foundation of this covenant
is: for we can have no acquaintance with God, unless he freely receive us by
pardoning our sins.

The covenant, is by him called the covenant of peace, because the Lord therein
offers us all that which belongs to our chief good: for under this word peace,
the Hebrews understand all happiness and prosperity. Peace, taken for all
prosperity.
Seeing this covenant then conteines a firm and stable blessedness, it must
needs follow that all those are miserable which are excluded out of it. In that
he says, it is he who has compassion, he again confirms that which we have
said, namely, that he has no other reason to show mercy, but because he is
pitiful, and ready to forgive, Chap 55.7.

Verse. 11. O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, that have no comfort:
behold, I will lay thy stones with the Carbuncles, and lay thy foundation with
Saphirs.
The glory of the second Temple greater then the first, in this and the next
verse.
HE prosecutes the same argument, and promises, that the Lord will put the
Church into her first glory; yea, that he will cause her to shine exceeding
clearly, in that she shall be more gloriously beautified then before, even as
if she were wholly built with pretions stones. Haggai in Chap. 2.10. shows
the same in a word, when he said that the glory of the second temple should
exceed the first.

We need not stand to decipher out the qualities of these precious stones,
which Isaiah here mentions, seeing the Hebrew expositors themselves agree not
together in this behalf. It is enough that we have the sense of the place.
Now this manner of speech has great weight in it to assuage the sorrows of the
faithful: for it is as much in effect, as if he had set the little bark of
the Church clear off the sands, when it was now in danger of drowning. As often
therefore as we see her ride in boisterous waves, and pressed with infinite
calamities, yea, and deprived of all consolation, let us remember that these
miseries are means to provoke God to give her succor.

Verse. 12. And I will make thy windows of Emerandes, and thy gates shining
brass, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
BY these similitudes he shows, that the estate of the Church shall be more
excel^^^t then it was wont to be, as we have noted before. The Church is here
compared to a building, a similitude which we often mere withal in the holy
scriptures, and therefore the Prophet lays down a platform of a stately and
sumptuous building. But we are to note, that God is here made the master
vvorkeman of this building, for the whole work must be attributed unto him.

Some may ask what the Prophet means by Carbuncles, Saphires, verse. 11.
Pearls, precious stones: for S. Paul has noted out the doctrine of the
Gospel by a like similitude: I have laid (says he) the foundation as an
expert master builder: and if any build upon this foundation, gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, or stubble, every man's work shall be made
manifest, 1. Cor. 3.10.12.13. I answer,

Verse. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace
shall be to thy children.
HEnce we may easily collect, that Isaiah spoke not in the former verses of
doctrine but of men, The former things spoken not of doctrine, but of men.
whereof the spiritual building of the Church is compact. I grant, the Church
is builded by doctrine, but that is done in gathering men in, and by fitting
them to be lively stones in this building, 1. Pet. 2.5. See the difference now
between Paul and Isaiah. Paul referres precious stones to doctrine, and Isaiah
to the gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewith men are enriched and endued, that of
them a Church may be reared up. But the diversity of gifts wherewith the Lord
adornes his servants are to be observed. For all are not Saphires or
Carbuncles: the Lord distributes to every one his measure according to his own
will, 1. Cor. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.7.11. Whence we also are to remember, that
whatsoever serves for the adorning of the Church, proceeds only from the mere
grace of God. For if we be Carbuncles and Saphires because we are taught of
God, then it follows that we get not this honor by nature.

Now the Lord teaches us two ways, namely, by the external ministry of man,
and by the secret revelation of the holy Ghost. Jesus Christ shows in Ioh.
6.45. which of these teachings the Prophet here speaks of: for he alleges
this text, and therefore we need not seek for a better expositor. Christ the
best expositor of this place.
It is written in the Prophets (says he) And they shall be all taught of God.
Whosoever then has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. If this
place then should be understood of the external preaching, that which Jesus
Christ concludes hence would not be firm enough. For this is no good
consequence, come to Christ, because they are taught of God. Hence let us
conclude then, that the Prophet speaks in this place of them, and of none
other.

The manner how we become pre^ious stones, fit to serve Gods spiritual building.
By this we may see, how and by what means we are made living and precious
stones to serve in the building of the Lords spiritual temple, to wit, when
the Lord has squared and polished us by his holy spirit: and to the outward
preaching of his word, ioines the inward power and efficacy of the same
spirit. And thus we are also taught how great the peruersitie of man's
understanding is, in that it can not be bowed nor reformed, unless the Lord
work upon the same mightily by the powerful operation of his blessed spirit.

Our Prophet has conioined these two manners of teaching together, to wit, both
the inward, and the outward. For he calls those the children of the Church,
who are taught of the Lord: if they be children, then have they bin conceived
in her womb, and nurced up in her lap, first with milk, afterward with strong
meat, 1. Cor. 3.2. Hebr. 5.12.13.14. until they grow up, and become perfect
men in Christ Jesus, as Paul speaks Ephesians. 4.13. The outward ministry of the
word then is required if we will be his disciples.

Whence it appears, how absurd and blockish the rauing of those fantastical
spirits is, who pervert this testimony, to overthrow the preaching of the
word, and the ministry of the Church. For children of the Church can they not
be, Anabaptisticall revelations taxed.
unless they will be nourished up in her lap. Let them go then with their
secret revelations; for the holy Ghost teaches none but such as submit
themselves under the Churches ministry. Well may such be the disciples and
children of Satan, but not of God, seeing they contemn the order which he
has established. For these two points, to wit, the children of the Church, and
the scholars of God, are so lincked together, that those who refuse to be
taught of the Church shall never be Gods disciples. Whosoever refuses to be
taught of the Church, shall never be Gods disciple.
I grant they must be aptly distinguished, even as Isaiah also does, lest that
be attributed to men which only belongs to the power of the holy Ghost. And yet
they must be so lincked one to the other, that we must know that in this work
God will serve his turn by man.

Moreover by this verse we are taught, that Gods calling works with efficacy
in his elect. S. Augustine S. Augustine.
has prudentlie pondered this place, and very fitly applies it against the
Pellagians, Pellagians, here^iques.
who extolled man's free will against the free grace of God. These Heretics I
grant seemed to attribute somewhat unto Gods grace, but in such sort, that they
left it to the free will of man either to choose or refuse: which our Papists do
at this day, The Papists become Pellagians.
who affirm that every one may reject or receive this grace. But all, says S.
Augustine, shall be taught of God. His disciples therefore are taught with
efficacy, and follow his calling, Ioh. 10.27. He also alleges that sixth of
John by us cited before, whence it manifestly appears that it proceeds not
from any free election that man has in himself, to be able to bow his will
which way him lists.

We are also to note hence what account the Lord makes of his doctrine, whereby
he fits us for this building, to the end we may be Pearls, Saphires and
Carbuncles. For those that go about to erect a Church without the preaching of
the word, shall rather build a Stie for Hogs, then a Church for God. Those that
will build a Church without the preaching of the word, shall rather build a
Stie for Hogs, then a Church for God.
By this also we may learn what to judge of that infolded faith whereof ye
Papists tattle so much: for thus they would make men to differ in nothing from
brute beasts, that so they might play the Merchants with them openly, without
control. But I trow, if we be taught of God, it is no reason we should
resemble unreasonable beasts.

It may be demanded, were taught of God under the law or no? so evidently,
that he openly manifested himself to be the teacher of his Church, and after
he gathered to himself a great number of disciples. Moreover, this place
accords with that of Jeremiah, Chap. 31.34. And they shall teach no more every
one his neighbor, nor every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me from the least of them to the greatest, says the Lord. Wherefore
if it were of necessity that all the children of God in old time were the
disciples of ye holy Ghost, much more ought we to be so in these times, seeing
this prophecy properly belongs to the kingdom of Christ.

And there shall be abundance of peace.] By the word peace, he means
felicity, Peace, taken for felicity.
that is, all good things. Hence we are to gather wherein man's chief happiness
consists, namely, Man's chief felicity.
in having our minds illuminated of God, to comprehend that salvation which is
manifested to us in Christ. For as long as we be strangers to this knowledge
we are the unhappiest people under heaven; for so the very blessings of God
are turned into cursings, Mala. 2.2. till they be sanctified unto us by faith.

Verse. 14. In righteousness shall thou be established, and be far from
oppression, for thou shall not fear it: and from fear, for it shall not come
near thee.
As God is the teacher of his Church, so will he be her protector.
HIs meaning is, that God shall be the workman and Master builder of his
Church. I am not ignorant that others expound it otherwise, and take
righteousness for good works: which exposition has some show of reason in
it, because the Prophet has before spoken of the doctrine of faith: and we
are taught, to the end we should live holily and righteously. But the Prophet
has another scope, namely, that the Church shall be restored under the
conduct of God, who would be her protector and defender. For here he
opposes righteousness to that violence and oppression, whereby the Church was
ruinated: or rather, by this word he notes out the firmnes and stabilitie of
it. As if he should say; This shall be no building of stones nor timber, which
may have some fair gloss set upon it for a time, because God will faithfully
maintain the work of his own hands: and in regard he is just, he will cause
her, being restored to her perfect estate, to stand for ever. Let men conspire
what they will then to work the ruin of the Church, their practices shall all
come to naught; because God will preserve her by his righteousness. We have
seen the like speech heertofore. This plain interpretation therefore contents
me, Read the exposition of the verse following, for the better understanding
of this.
though the other may seem more plausible to many.

Verse. 15. Behold, the enemy shall gather himself, but without me: whosoever
shall gather himself in thee, against thee, shall fall.
The Church must not promise to her self any seem resting place in this world.
THe sum is, that albeit many rise up to overthrow the Church, yet shall all
their plots and assaults be defeated, and vanish into smoke. Yea, it seems
that God not only promises help against the open enemies, but also against
them within: for many creep into the bosom of the Church, as if they meant to
be her children: but afterward, they fall like vipers to eat out the belly of
their mother. Some translate; In assembling, he shall assemble against thee:
understanding this of all the enemies of the Church in general. This is the
most received interpretation: neither do I reject it, provided that we
therewithal comprehend the wiles, ambushes, and treasons wherewith the Church
is assailed. And no doubt but that is here expressed, which is contained in
the second Psalm; to wit, the tumults and conspiracies against Christ and his
Church: for not one, but many nations rise up against her, and yet it is very
likely that the Prophet here expressly ioines the domestike enemies, and those
from without, who crept in to assail her in her own bosom as it were. For it
is said, in thee, against thee: that is to say, they shall set upon thee from
within, yea even in the midst of thee.

To be short, his meaning is, that the Church shall never enjoy such abundance
of peace, but she must look for many adversaries that will assail her. far
from oppression, and from fear, for it should not come nigh her? And now he
shows she shall have intestine conspiracies. the Lord will protect her in the
mi^st of all dangers.

Without God, signifies as much, as in vain, or without any good success. The
plots of the wicked shall be all brought to naught: and why?
For his meaning is, that the plotting of the wicked shall come to naught,
though they busy all their wits, and do the worst they can. They shall cast
themselves headlong into an headless rage, but the only hand of the Lord
shall give his people an happy evasion and issue. Now he alludes to that which
was said before, namely, that the Chaldeans should come under the conduct of
God, to destroy the land of Iudeah. The people were then destroyed because God
was their enemy: but now the enemies coming to assail the Church without
God, that is to say, without his favor, they shall flee and be confounded.

Which he better expresses by and by after, saying; He that shall gather
himself in thee, against thee, shall fall. That is, whatsoever he has
imagined against thee, shall fall upon his own head: yea, though the whole
world should rise up against thee, yet should it crush and ouerwhelme it self
by the own burden.

The particle in thee, is to be noted: for when the Lord drives our enemies
far off from us, then we grow confident: but if they approach and draw near,
then we are out of heart. Therefore he says, though they pierce even to thine
inward parts, yet will the Lord destroy them, and deliver thee.

Verse. 16. Behold, I have created the smith that blows the coals in the
fire, and him that brings forth an instrument for his work, and have created
the destroier to destroy.
THe Lord shows how easy it is for him to deliver his Church from the wicked
enterprises of his enemies: God knows how to work well by evil instruments.
for they can accomplish no more then that which he permits them to do; yea
he uses them as his instruments to chastise his children withal. Now this may
as fitly be referred to the Chaldeans, as to the rest of their enemies, which
afterward molested the chosen people of God. If we receive the first sense,
God plainly shows, that in a moment he can chase them away, whom he has
brought together; and bring them down, whom he has exalted. And if we
refer it to Antiochus, and his like, the sense will not be much different; to
wit, that even those shall not hurt as they would; for they shall not so much
as remove their least finger without Gods leave.

without the Lord: and here he shows that they fight as it were under his
colors, and that under his conduct and authority, they waste and destroy the
Church? I answer, Without his commandment.

Some expound, that the Smith is created for his work: that is to say, to
practice his own death: and the destroier to destroy himself. But I think
the first sense is more simple, where the Lord says, that he creates the
destroier; it is not only referred to their nature, as they are borne men, but
to the act of destroying: and yet we must not lay the blame upon God, as if he
were the author of the unjust cruelty which remains in men: for God consents
not with their wicked will, but disposes of their endeavors by his secret
providence, and uses them as the instruments of his wrath. But we have handled
this matter in another place.

Verse. 17. But all the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper:
and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall
condemn. This is the heritage of the Lords servants, and their righteousness
is of me, says the Lord.
HE again repeates that which was noted before; namely, that the wicked shall
lose their labors, let them plot as much as they will: for their violent
determinations are conducted and held short by the secret counsel of God. Now
he uses the particle All signifying that the wicked should have means of all
sorts, and in great number, to work the Churches overthrow: but all should
vanish like smoke, because the Lord would repress them. God indeed permits
them to work their wills for the trial of the faithful: but after patience
has had her perfect work in them, he strippeth the wicked of all the force
and power in which they trusted. Now having spoken in general of the weapons
and instruments of war, wherewith the ungodly invade the Church; The tongue a
pestilent enemy.
he names the tongue expressly, which is the most pestilent and deadly weapon
of all: James 3.8. For the wicked content not themselves to rent and tear the
servants of God by outrages and slanders, but they also labor as much as in
them is, to extinguish the truth of God, and to alienate men's minds from the
love of it: and this ought more to pierce and wound our hearts, then if we were
to lose our lives an hundred times. Add also that good men are more deeply
wounded with false imputations, then with the deepest gash that can be given
them with a sharp sword? and therefore we must not ouerpasse this mortal and
deadly weapon of the tongue.

Afterward when he adds, that these tongues rise up in judgment: it is to
show that the wicked shall be so bold and insolent, that they shall maliciously
provoke and molest the children of God; yea they shall do it in judgment: for
they cover themselves under goodly pretenses, that they may make the world
believe their cause is exceeding good. As when the Papists call us dogs,
heretics, and schismatikes; they plead against us in judgment (as you would
say) and will be esteemed the defenders of the Catholic faith, though they
only be the vpholders of idolatry and lies. And yet their accusations are
painted over with such colors, that so they may make us the more odious among
them, who are ignorant of our just cause. But admit they assail us with open
violence by the smitings of the tongue, Ier. 18.18. or with any other weapon,
yet let us not doubt but we shall be more then conquerours, as this prophecy
witnesses: for the victory is here promised us. Seeing therefore we may be
bold to rely upon the truth of it, let us buckle our selves to the combat,
with a stout and invincible courage.

This is the heritage.] He shows that the Lord has given this to his
servants as it were by the right of their inheritance, whereof they shall not
be defrauded: for as there is no title so sure as that of an inheritance, so he
also shows, that the servants of the Lord ought to assure themselves of this
privilege above any thing in the world besides, namely, of his protection and
perpetual safeguard, by which he defends and keeps all his, from all dangers
whatsoever.

Righteousness is here taken for that which we commonly call, Their right. To
conclude, his meaning is, Leur droit.
that the Lord will show himself the protector of his Church, that he may
maintain their innocence. As often then as men offer us any violence, let us
learn to run straightway to God: for in regard we seek to other helps, it
comes to pass that we are destituted of his defense and protection.

THE LV. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have
no silver, come, buy, and eat: come I say, buy wine and milk without silver,
and without money.
A general summons.
THE Prophet here greatly magnifies and extols Gods goodness, which should be
spread abroad largely, and in greater abundance then was wont upon the Church,
under the kingdom of Christ, unto whose custody all the treasures of Gods
graces are committed, for in him God gives himself wholly unto us. So as the
saying of S. John is truly accomplished, namely, that of his fulness we all
have received grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. I grant the fathers under the law
felt this goodness and spiritual liberality of God, which is here mentioned:
Oh how great says David is the goodness which thou have laid up for them that
fear the el Psalm. 31.19. notwithstanding this goodness was much more fully and
liberally shed abroad under Christ. Behold here then a singular commendation
of Gods grace, which is set before us in Christ's kingdom. The Prophet then
not only teaches that which should be once done, but that also which is daily
effected when the Lord summons us by his doctrine to the inioying of all these
benefits.

Some refer the word waters to the doctrine of ye Gospel, others to the
holy Ghost: but both (as I think) are deceived. For those that understand it
of the doctrine of the Gospel which they oppose to the Law (whereof the Jews
suppose the Prophet speaks in this place) do only comprehend one part of that
which Isaiah meant to say. For the others, who refer it to the holy Ghost,
they have a little more color, and they allege that place of S. John: If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it were that says unto thee, Give me drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee waters of life,
John 4.10. And a little after, it seems that Christ expounds this text of the
Prophet, when he says, Whosoever shall drink of this water shall thirst
again; but, he that drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never be
more athirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life, verse. 13.14. Yet I doubt not but
Isaiah under these words waters, milk, wine, and bread, here comprehends
whatsoever is necessary to the spiritual life: for they are similitudes taken
from that ordinary food wherewith we are daily sustained. Look then how we
are nourished with bread, wine, milk, and water, so also let us know that our
souls are fed and sustained with the doctrine of the Gospel, with the holy
Ghost, and with the other gifts of Christ.

Now the Prophet makes a loud exclamation, and cries Ho, Why the Prophet is
feign to make this exclamation.
for men are rocked so fast asleep, that they can hardly be wakened: they
feel not their poverty though they be affamished, neither do they desire that
meat whereof they have great need. This drouzines of men therefore ought to
be rouzed with great and continual cries. The carelesnes then of such as are
deaf at this exhortation, is so much the more hateful and detestable, and the
slothfulnes of such as flatter themselves in their sloth, albeit they have bin
spurred to the quick.

Moreover this is a general summons. For who is he that stands not in need of
these waters, or, to whom Christ can not bring much profit? for this cause he
calls every one, without exception of persons. But men are so wretched, that
notwithstanding they feel well enough what need they have of Christ, yet they
seek out means which way to deprive themselves of such a benefit: and do
rather give credit to Satan, who furnishes them with sundry impediments, then
to give care to this so gracious and gentle a call.

We are to know then wherein the true preparation consists to receive this
grace, which he expresses in saying, he that thirsts: for such as are
swollen up with a vain confidence, and are full gorged: or, who being
bewitched with earthly delights, feel not the poverty of their souls;
neither will they give place unto Christ. Why so? Because they feel no relish
in the sweetness of this spiritual grace. They may well be compared to sick
folks that have need of good nourishment, but because they are filled with
wind, with disdain they reject their meat; or, being carried with some fond
imagination, they feed upon their own dreams, as though they stood in need
of nothing at all. And in this sort, such as are swollen with pride, or with a
false persuasion of their own righteousness; or, possessed with the allurements
of the flesh, do either despise, or reject this grace of God. It is then
required that we be athirst, that is to say, to have an ardent desire, that we
may be fitted to be partakers of so great benefits.

Buy without silver.] The Prophet means not that there are any which have
silver in abundance: but it must be thus resolved; Notwithstanding you be
extremely poor and needy, yet the way is open for you to come unto Christ,
through whom these gifts are freely given. buy, without paying ought? I
answer, buying. The verb to buy here then, is taken for to get, or obtain.
And the price, for the labor or industry; or, any other way whereby men
obtain any thing. He shows then that we are utterly poor and beggarly,
having nothing in the world to get this grace of God, but are here gently
allured to receive all things of his hand freely, without any recompense on our
part.

Verse. 2. Wherefore do ye lay out silver, and not for bread? And your labor
without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is
good: and let your soul delight in fatness.
A general complaint.
He complains of men's folly and ingratitude, who either reject or disdain
Gods bounty, in offering them all things liberally: and yet in the mean
while, weary themselves much in following after sundry toies, which can bring
them no profit at all. For the devil has so bewitched them, that they had
rather err in their forlorn bypath, yea and to kill themselves for nothing,
then to rest upon that grace which God presents before them. The experience of
the time in which we live shows sufficiently, that the Prophet took not up
this complaint only against them of his own nation, but against all men, of
what time or age soever. For all the successors of Adam are carried away with
this rage, namely, that whilst they pretend to seek the way to eternal life,
they wholly err and go astray, and rather follow their vain opinions then
the voice of God. The Prophet then complains not only of their slothfulness,
who having utterly forgotten both God and themselves have no care at all of the
spiritual life of their soul, (the numbers of which kind of persons are very
many) but of those who seem to desire life, and yet neither keep nor observe
the way or means to attain unto it, but wander in their own crooked paths.

Here then are condemned all such means to obtain salvation by, as men have
forged unto themselves, without Gods word; and are therefore called
unprofitable costs. For by silver, he understands all industry, study, and
pains of men: not that God esteems a rush of all that which we offer him in
vain to serve him; but in regard the sense of the flesh esteems those labors
very precious, which we have foolishly taken up.

By the word bread, he understands that which he said before touching waters:
and by labor, that which he called silver. As if he should say; Men weary
themselves much for nothing. For when they follow their inventions, they must
look for no reward, though they vex and martyr themselves never so much.
Therefore the Prophet says, that those who labor inconsiderately, shall never
be satisfied. For if they forsake God, to seek out new means of salvation,
they shall never be filled; because, as Hosea says, they are fed with wind:
Chap. 12.1. They may well seem to be full, whilst a vain conceit blinfolds
them; but they shall be like those, who being swollen with vvind, feel not
their hunger. And yet it were much better for them to be so pinched with
hunger and thirst, that they might thereby be provoked to cry earnestly unto
the Lord to be filled: according to that in Psalm 63.2. My soul thirsts for
thee, like the dry ground. But bread or water alone, would not suffice to fill
us, neither can our life be sustained with one of them. That is the reason
then why the Prophet has used diverse words, to show that God furnishes us
with all things abundantly, that are necessary to preserve life, lest we should
use any unlawful shifts to succor our selves elsewhere.

But because every one rusheth himself into error by his own counsels; and
all having forsaken God, do vanish away in their own perverse imaginations,
the Prophet here adds a remedy, namely, that we wholly depend upon the mouth
of God. For whosoever submits himself unto his word, needs never fear that
he has misspent his time. And here we see a wonderful goodness of God, in
that he offers his grace, though men be unthankful and unworthy of it.

Yet notwithstanding he adds a condition; for the entrance into life, cannot
be made, unless we give ear unto him. And as the cause of our ruin is,
that we stop our ears against Gods word: so the way to heaven is open unto us,
if we hearken unto him diligently. He repeates the same admonition again, the
better to move our affections: and redoubles the word, Hear, in hearkening.
And that he might the better win us with sweet allurements, he protests the
fault to be our own, if we be not fully satisfied with all sorts of good
things.

Verse. 3. Incline your ears and come to me: hear, and your soul shall live:
and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David.
BY this heap of words we may the better conceive of that which I have said
before, namely, The ground of Gods covenant.
that God omits no means to awaken and correct our dullness: and yet here is
a reprehension. For it must needs be granted that such are too drowzie headed,
who being so lovingly called, do not forthwith yield their obedience. An
excellent place: which shows that our happiness consists in that odedience
which we ought to yield unto the word. Now when he speaks thus, his meaning
is, to bring us to salvation: and therefore the fault rests wholly in our
selves; for we contemn this saving and quickening word. Moreover, if God
should only command us to do that he has inioined us, he should therein
show us the way indeed how to obtain life, but yet without any profit to us.
For the law, as it comes forth of Gods mouth, is the minister of death, 2. Cor.
3 7. but when he calls us to himself, and adopts us for his children, when he
promises remission of sins and sanctification; this causes them which
hear, to receive life of him. We are the^ to consider what kind of doctrine
it is that has life in it, that we may therein seek our salvation.

From this place also we gather, that there is no hope of salvation, unless we
be obedient to God and his word: and by this all men are convinced, so as they
can pretend no cause of ignorance; for he that vouchsafes not to hear, shall
never be able to allege one sound reason for his own defense. But, as I have
said, these repetitions set forth the patience of God in calling us. For he
summons us not for once only; but if he perceive that we be slow, he
admonishes us the second, yea, the third time, that he might overcome our
stubbornnes. He reiects not those then at the first which disdain him; but
after he has many times allured them.

Furthermore here is expressed the nature of faith, The nature of faith.
when he commands us to come unto for we must so hear the Lord, that the
incline our ear before we come. When mention shall be made of faith then, Gods
word the ground of faith.
let us remember that it must be joined to the word, in which it has her
foundation.

Where he adds, and I will make a covenant: some demand, Isaiah then has
fitted this phrase of speech as you see to the capacity of the people, that
they might know how the covenant of God made with their fathers was firm,
stable, and eternal, and neither mutable nor temporary.

He signifies the same thing by the mercies of David: but by this clause he
shows that the covenant is free, because it has its foundation laid in
nothing but in the mere goodness of God. As often then as we mere with this
word Covenant in the Scriptures, Covenant, and mercy, must always be matched
together.
we must therewithal call to mind the word mercy, or grace.

Now he pronounces he will be faithful therein: and forthwith he signifies,
that he will be found true and constant, so that none shall be able to charge
him with double dealing, as if he had broken his covenant. Nay, the Jews
themselves rather were become treacherous and disloyal, in regard they had
revolted from him: for, he for his part can not repent himself touching the
promise or covenant, which he had made.

He calls them mercies of David, because this covenant which was now so
solemnly confirmed, was made in David's hand. True it Abraham, Genesis 15.5. and
17.7. and afterward Moses, Exodus 3.15. and lastly he established and ratified
it in the hand of David, 2. Sam. 7.12. that it might continue for ever. When
the Jews then thought of the redeemer, that is to say, of their salvation,
they were to remember David as the mediator, representing the person of Christ.
For David David, a figure of Christ.
must not be considered here as a private man, but with that title and person
above mentioned.

The time also is to be noted, for the dignity of the kingdom being extinct
under this captivity of Babylon, and the royal title obscured and profaned,
it might seem that the truth of God was abolished in the ruin of this
family. See Psalm. 89.38. etc.
He therefore commands them by faith to look unto that royal seat of David,
which for a time was thrown down.

Verse. 4. Behold I gave him for a witness to the people, for Or, a Leader.
a Prince and a master unto the people.
NOw the Prophet explanes that yet better which he briefly mentioned before
touching David, to wit, An explanation of the former verse in this, and the
verse following.
because the promise of the redeemer was made to him; and that this speech
therefore was fitly applied to his person, in regard he was the pledge of the
covenant: for he was not placed in that office to perform his own affairs,
but was set there as the mediator between God and the people. Notwithstanding,
it is certain that Isaiah brings us directly unto Christ, to whom we may
easily descend from David: We must descend from David, to Christ.
as if he should say, this successor of David shall come, by whose hand perfect
salvation and felicity is promised. And in calling him a witness, A witness.
he signifies that the covenant by him contracted shall be ratified and
established in Christ. There is great weight in this word witness then: for the
Prophet shows, that this covenant shall be approved in Christ, through whom
Gods truth shall be manifested, because he shall testify that God is true.

But this testimony consists in doctrine, for without it we should receive but
little profit by Christ's coming, in which sense it is said in Psalm. 2.7. I
will preach the decree. And in the same sense Isaiah in Chap. 49.2. says,
that Christ's mouth should be like a sword, or, an arrow. For this cause also he
calls him a Leader, A Leader.
and a Master, A Master.
that to him and to his doctrine audience might be given: for if we hear him
not speak, nor with certain affiance embrace that which he says unto us
touching the good will of his Father, his power is abolished, For after this
sort the name of Christ makes a great sound among the Papists: but seeing they
will not receive him for their Doctor and Master, but only acknowledge him in
name, their brags which they make thereof, are but vain and ridiculous.

These words, to the peoples, are added by way of amplification: for the Church
could neither be established in her first dignity, nor get increases, but by
the vocation of the Gentiles. It was therefore necessary that the voice of
Christ should sound through all the quarters of the world, because he is
ordained to be the witness, conductor, and teacher of all mankind.

Verse. 5. Behold, thou shall call a nation that thou know not; and a nation
that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and the
holy one of Israel: for he has glorified thee.
ISaiah expounds that now at large, which he touched before but in a word: for
he shows that Christ shall be the conducter, not of one people only, but of
all. To call here, notes out the possession: so as there is a correspondencie
between the word To call, and, to answer. Christ then being called by
authority, as he which is furnished with a sovereign power, he calls the
nations to bring them in order touching their duties, and to subject them to
the word. Now he says they shall be ready to obey, though they were not
known of him: not that the Son of God who created them, knew them not what
they were, Psalm. 94.9. but it is spoken in regard they were rejected and
despised, until they began to have a place in the Church: for God had
particularly called the Jews; and the Gentiles seemed to be utterly excluded,
as if they had nothing at all appertained unto them. But now, speaking to
Christ, he promises that he shall constrain them to obey, though before they
were wholly estranged from under his dominion.

Afterward, he declares this more plainly in the progress of the text, where
indeed he uses the plural number, that he might the better show that the
Church shall be gathered out of diverse nations: so as those who were separated
and scattered, should now be assembled into one body: for the word, shall
run, is to be referred to the consenting of faith.

Moreover, he says here, that the Gentiles have not known: but it is to be
taken otherwise then that which he said before, namely, that Christ knew not
them: for ignorance is properly attributed to the profane and unbelievers, in
regard they are deprived of the heavenly doctrine, without which we shall never
know God. And howsoever this knowledge is naturally engraven in the hearts of
all; yet it is so obscure and confused, and wrapped in so many errors, that if
the light of the word be not added thereunto, whilst they know God, they
shall be ignorant of him, and not know him at all, but shall miserably err in
darkness.

We have here an excellent testimony then touching the vocation of the
Gentiles: A testimony touching the vocation of the Gentiles.
for whom Christ is ordained a redeemer, as well as for the Jews. Whence also
we gather, that God has now care of us, if we will submit our selves under
his government: so as he will not only watch over us, as he does over the
rest of his creatures, but as a father that is vigilant over his children. The
word shall run, does better express the efficacy of this vocation: for the
end thereof is, that we may obey God, in yielding our selves teachable with a
ready and glad heart in his presence, and willingly to receive from his mouth,
the least of his commandments. For as S. Paul says, Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
Obedience is the end of our vocation. But because the Gentiles were far
estranged from God, it was necessary they should valiantly enforce themselves
to break through all impediments, to draw near unto him.

Because of the Lord.] Isaiah shows from what fountain this willingness and
cheerful alacrity shall spring, namely, the Gentiles shall know they have to
do with God. For if we consider Christ as man only, his doctrine will not
much move us: but if we apprehend God in him, we shall be inflamed with a
wonderful affection. Now he is here described unto us as a Minister, ordained
of God to perfect his work. For in taking upon him our nature, he therewithal
took upon him the form of a servant: and in this behalf it is no
disparagement to him to see him subjected unto the Father, as one of us.

Moreover, we are to remember that which we have often touched before, touching
the conjunction of the head with the members. For that which is said of Christ,
appertains to his whole body: and therefore glorifycation is common to the
whole Church. I grant that Christ always holds the sovereign degree: for
being highly exalted, he rules over the whole world, to the end all nations may
run unto him. To conclude, the Prophet shows that men yield obedience to
Christ, and submit themselves to his doctrine, because God has exalted him,
and would that his excellency should be acknowledged of all men: for
otherwise, the preaching of the Gospel would profit very little, unless God
gave efficacy to the doctrine, by the power of his holy Spirit.

Verse. 6. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found: call ye upon him whilst he
is near.
Having spoken of the fruit of the Gospel among the Gentiles, The Gentiles set
before the Jews, to provoke them to follow them.
who were before estranged from Gods kingdom, he now pricks forward the Jews,
that they may be ashamed to sleep whilst others ran: for seeing they were
first called, it were a shame for them to come lag. This exhortation therefore
properly belongs to the Jews, before whom Isaiah sets the example of the
Gentiles, that he might provoke them to follow them: which the Lord also had
foretold, namely, that he would provoke the Jews to jealousy by a foolish
nation: Deuteronomy. 32.21.

The time To find, is not taken altogether in the same sense here, as it is in
the 32. Psalm: but for that time wherein God offers himself; as in other
places he has set down a certain limited day, within the compass whereof his
favor and salvation shall be found. And yet I grant that Isaiah also notes
the time wherein necessity presses us to ask help of God: but we must
principally remember that God is sought in a fit time, when himself comes
forth to meet us; for it shall be in vain for the drowzie and sleepie to
bewail the loss of that grace, which themselves have wittingly rejected. The
Lord bears with our slothfulnes for a time, and patiently waits for us; but if
he gets nothing by it, he will leave us, and bestow his grace upon others.
Christ therefore admonishes us to walk whilst it is day, because the night
will come, in which we can walk no more forward: John 12.37.

Hence we are to gather a singular consolation, namely, that we are here
assured not to lose our time in seeking God: Seek, says Christ, and you shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened; ask, and you shall receive: Matthew. 7.7.

The word call, may be taken here generally: but I think he notes out a
particular seeking of God, such an one as is principal above others: as if he
commanded us to have recourse unto him by prayers and supplications. Now he
then shows himself to be near, when he summons us familiarly unto him, in
opening the gate, or presents himself before us, to the end we should not
wander hither and thither to seek him.

VVhil^st he is neere] Saint Paul's distinction is to be noted, who says, the
preaching of the Gospel is signified by these words: Romans 10.10. The Lord is
near, How God is said to be near unto us.
and offers himself unto us, when the voice of the Gospel sounds in our ears.
Neither ought we to seek him a far off, nor to fetch many circuits, as the
unbelievers do: for he presents himself unto us in his word, to the end we
for our parts may draw near unto him.

Verse. 7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and
to our God, for he is abundant in pardon.
very ready to forgive.
A confirmation of the former sentence.
HE confirms the former sentence: for having called men to receive Gods grace,
he at large describes the way how to recover the same. We know how the
hypocrites yell and cry with open mouth after God, when they would be
succored in their miseries, and in the mean while they harden their hearts
through a wicked obstinacy. That the Jews then might not disguise themselves
in seeking of God, Isaiah exhorts them to true piety. Whence we gather, that
the doctrine of repentance ought perpetually to be joined with the promise of
salvation: The doctrine of repentance must always be joined with the promises
of salvation.
for men can never taste Gods goodness, unless first of all they be
displeased in themselves for their sins, and have both renounced the world,
and themselves also. For no man will ever in good earnest desire to be
reconciled unto God, nor to obtain remission of his sins, unless he be
touched with a true and sound repentance.

The Prophet describes the nature of repentance three ways, The nature of
repentance described.
or by three phrases of speech; Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous his imaginations; and then, let him return unto the Lord. Under
the word way, he comprehends the whole course of our lives: and thus he
requires that they bring forth fruits of righteousness, to show their newness
of life. In adding thoughts; he signifies that it is not enough to correct the
outward actions, but that we must begin at the heart. For though according to
men's judgments, we have as it seems, changed our life from worse to better,
yet we have indeed made but a weak beginning, if the heart be not first
changed. Repentance therefore co^taines in it the change of the whole man.
Wherein we have first to consider the imagination, then the deliberations, and
lastly, the outward actions. Men see the actions: but the root from whence
they proceed, is hidden within the heart: it behooves therefore that it be
first renewed, that afterward from thence there may flow forth fruitful works.
First, the understanding must be cleansed from all the filthiness that is in
it: and then must we cast off the wicked affections and lusts; that from
thence, outward testimonies may afterward manifest themselves. If any one boast
that he is changed, Note.
and yet lives a disordered life; his reioicing is vain: for these two things
must be required together, to wit, the conversion of the heart, The conversion
of the heart, and the change of the life must go together.
and the change of the life.

Besides, God calls us not to turn to him, till the former revolt be amended.
For hypocrites would be well enough contented that that which they do should
be praised, so they might still be suffered to rot in their filthiness: but
we can have no acquaintance with God, unless we come forth of our selves,
especially when we have estranged our selves from him, by a wicked backsliding:
The renouncing of our selves, goes before our reconciliatio^ with God.
wherefore the renouncing of our selves, goes before our reconciliation with
God.

And he will have mercy.] This knitting togerher of the text ought to be
diligently noted. For it shows that men can never be brought to repentance,
Remission of sins must not be separated from the doctrine of repentance.
but by setting before them the assurance of the remission of sins. Whosoever
preaches the doctrine of repentance then, without mentioning Gods mercy, and
the free reconciliation, he loses his labor. For we see how our Popish
Doctors think they have well discharged their duties, when they have long
insisted upon the former point: and yet in the mean while, they do but babble
and lie in preaching this doctrine. Yea, though they should teach the true way
to repentance, yet would it be to small purpose, seeing they omit the
foundation of free remission of sins which only appeaseth consciences. Truly
the guilty sinner will always flee the presence of God (as we have said in
another place) as long as he shall be haled before his Judgment seat to yield
an account, neither will he ever be humbled to obey, nor fear, till his
conscience be at rest. Now because it is a difficult matter to quiet terrified
consciences, Isaiah draws an argument from the nature of God, saying, Gods
nature described.
that he will be merciful, and abundant in pardoning. The holy Ghost insists
long upon this point of doctrine, Why the ho^y Ghost insists so long upon this
doctrine.
because we always doubt whether God will pardon us or no. For howsoever we
have some opinion of his mercy, yet dare we not persuade our selves so
assuredly that it belongs unto us as we ought. You see it is not without cause
that the Prophet adds this member, because he thereby labors to dispossess
our minds of that trembling which is incident unto us, as often as we stand in
doubt of his infinite mercy toward us.

Verse. 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, says the Lord.

9. For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then
your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.


Gods affection distinguished from ours.
FOr my thoughts.] This place is diversely expounded. Some think that men's
conversation is here condemned in general, to the end they should not please
themselves therein, nor flatter themselves in their vices, because there is no
access unto God, unless we be emptied of this vain opinion of our own
righteousness. For none will seek after the Physician, but such as feel
themselves vehemently sick, and that desire both the remedy and their health.
And therefore they compare this place with that in Luke 16.15. That which is
highly esteemed before men, is an abomination in the sight of God. But I think
the Prophet has another meaning. Those therefore who think that Gods
affection is here distinguished from humane affections, expound it best (as I
think.) For men are wont to measure God by their own ell (as they say) and
because themselves are irreconciliable, and can not be pacified but with much
ado: they in like manner think that God can never be appeased, after they have
once offended him. But the Lord shows that he resembles them nothing at all.
As if he should say, I am not a mortal man that I should be so severe, and an
enemy to you for ever: no, my thoughts are far unlike yours, for though it
be impossible for you to be pacified, and that it be an hard matter to bring
you to be reconciled with those which have offended you, yet it is not so with
me, I will not show my self so inhumane toward you. To this agrees very well
that place of David, Psalm. 103. where describing Gods mercy, he says, that
it is higher then the heavens are above the earth: and though the application
be to another purpose there, We must impute it to our own unbelief, if we
obtain not pardon at Gods hand.
yet the sense is all one with this. In a word, there is none so gracious, or
so inclined to mercy as the Lord is, and therefore we must impute it to our
own diffidence, if we obtain not pardon of him.

Now there is nothing which troubles our consciences more, then when we think
God resembles us, for this makes us afraid to draw near unto him: nay, we
rather flee from him as our enemy, and can never be in any rest. So those who
measure God according to that which they conceive of him, do indeed conceive a
flat Idol directly contrary to the nature of God, neither can they do him a
greater dishonor then this. Are not men who are corrupt, and stuffed full with
inordinate lusts ashamed to compare the most pure nature of God with theirs?
and to imprison him that is infinite within so narrow bounds, wherein they
feel themselves miserably enthralled? For in what more noisome dungeon can
any of us be enclosed, then within our own infidelity? I take it that this is
the Prophets true and natural meaning; and yet I deny not but he had some
respect to men's manners, namely such as he has described them in the former
verse.

To be short, his meaning is, that men must forget themselves when they mean
to turn to God, because there is no impediment so dangerous as when we think
him to be irreconciliable. Let us remove this false imagination then out of our
minds.

Besides, by this place it appears how far they are out of the way, which
abuse Gods mercy to take the greater liberty to sin. For see how the
Prophet argues; Repent; Verse. 7. Verse. 8.
forsake your wicked ways, because Gods mercy is infinite. When men doubt
or despair whether they shall obtain pardon or no, this makes them more
wicked and stubborn; but the feeling of mercy draws and conuerts them. It
follows then that such as neither forsake their leaud life, nor change their
minds, have no part in this mercy.

Verse. 10. Surely as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread unto him that eats.
Having spoken of the tender affection and incredible love which God bears us,
To the commendation of Gods merciful nature, he adds a promise that our faith
might be the more surely settled.
he again places promises in the middle, that so being grounded upon them, we
might be assured to pass safe and sound through all dangers. For it would
serve to little purpose that one should describe unto (...) the nature of God;
or inform us of his secret counsel, if therewithal we were not brought to
the word, wherein the same is manifested: but God speaks plainly and
familiarly unto us, so as we have no need to enquire further. We must
therefore come to the word, which plainly opens his will unto us, if so be we
will contain all our senses within the bounds of it, for otherwise we shall
always remain^ in suspense, and doubt what shall become of us, though the Lord
should tell us an hundred times that he resembles men nothing at all. And yet
men (if they would confess the truth) do desire to be certain of their
salvation, and to know what should befall them afterward. We are therefore to
observe this order well which the Prophet here keeps. And thus Moses brought
the people to the knowledge of the word, saying, Ask not who shall ascend up
into heaven, or who shall descend into the deep, for the word is near thee in
thy mouth and in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 30.12. and this is the word of faith (says
Paul) Romans 10.10. which we preach.

Now the Prophet borrowes a similitude here from a thing ordinary amongst us,
and it is exceeding fit for his purpose: for if we see so great efficacy in
the rain which waters and fattens the earth, much more will the Lord manifest
his power in his word: for the rain vanishes, and is subject to corrupiton,
but the word is immortal, immutable, and incorruptible, and cannot consume
away as the rain does.

But that we may the better understand the Prophets words, we are to search
out his drift. Men doubt whether God will accomplish that which he has
promised in his word; for we think his word hangs in the air without any
effect: but by the very order of nature he shows, how detestable this opinion
is. For it is too absurd a thing to attribute less to the word, then to an
insensible creature: and therefore he teaches, that the word is never
without his effect. Some understand it, as if the preaching of the Gospel
were never in vain, but that it always brings forth some fruit. Which I grant
to be a truth, for the Lord works by his Spirit, and gives increase, 1. Cor.
3.7. that the labor of his Ministers may not be in vain. But the Prophet
meant another matter, namely, that God casts not the seed of his word upon the
ground, without effect, neither scatters he his promises in the air, but we
shall gather the fruit thereof, if so be we resist him not by our own
incredulity. Now he mentions two effects of the rain, which makes the earth
fruitful by falling food to sustain them: secondly, seed to sow: the benefit
whereof, is to be reaped the year following. If then Gods power be so great
in things transitory, how much more effectual may we think his word is?

Verse. 11. So shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth: it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.
God speaks to us by men.
THe word goes so out of Gods mouth, that it also goes forth of the mouths of
men: for God speaks not from heaven, but uses men as his instruments to
declare his will by their ministry. But the authority of the promises is
better confirmed unto us, when we^ hear that they proceed out of the sacred
mouth of God. Although then that he use witnesses on earth, yet he testifies,
that whatsoever they shall promise in his name, shall be ratified and
confirmed afterward, before him. And that he might the better ingraue in men's
minds, the power and efficacy of preaching, he aduertiseth us that he
scatters not this precious seed at randon, but has ordained it to a
certain end; in regard whereof, no man is to doubt of the effect. For there is
nothing whereunto men are more inclined, then to judge of God according to
their own fantasies, that so they may reject his word. It was needful
therefore tha^ this doctrine should be often repeated and beaten into our
heads, that we might know how God will surely perform that which he has once
said. As often then as we hear of Gods promises, let us consider what his
meaning is in them: as when he promises free remission of sins, We must
have an eye to Gods intention in his promises.
let us assure our selves of reconciliation through Christ. But as the word of
God is powerful to save the faithful, so has it also his efficacy to
condemn the wicked: which Jesus Christ himself affirms,

Verse. 12. Therefore shall ye go out with joy, and be led forth with peace:
the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into joy, and all
the trees of the field shall clappe their hands.
NOw the Prophet concludes the argument of this Chapter: The conclusion in this
and the verse following.
for that which he has spoken touching Gods mercy, tended to assure the Jews,
that God would deliver them. Now he applies his discourse touching Gods
infinite goodness to his purpose, and shows, that his thoughts are nothing
like to the thoughts of men. Take a pattern here then of a right order of
teaching, namely, A right form of teaching.
when we apply general doctrines, to the present use.

Lastly, Isaiah speaks of the peoples restitution, which depended upon the
free mercy of God.

By mountains and hills, he signifies, that all stumbling blocks which should
lie in the way, should notwithstanding serve to aid those that should return
unto Jerusalem. These are similitudes then whereby he shows that all
creatures are at Gods beck, and are ready to employ themselves to set forward
his work: yea and rejoice to do it.

He alludes to the deliverance out of Egypt, All creatures at Gods beck.
according to the custom of the Prophets: for so it is written in Psalm. 114.
The mountains leaped like Rams, and the hills as lambs: What ailed thee O
sea, that thou fleddest back? O Jordan, why wast thou turned back? For in
regard that the restoration of the church is as it were a renewing of the whole
world, it is said, that heaven and earth are changed, as if they had quite
altered their ordinary course. All this depended upon the former prophecies,
by which they had a promise touching their return.

Verse. 13. For thorns, there shall grow fur trees: for nettles, shall grow
the mirrhe tree; and it shall be to the Lord for a name, and for an
everlasting sign that shall not be taken away.
Again he extolles Gods power, which should appear in the peoples
deliverance: for he teaches that there shall be such a change, that the way
shall be made very easy for their return. Some expound this allegorically;
and by thorns, understand that such as endeavor to hurt and hinder others,
should now become fur trees: that is to say, bearing fruit, and bringing
profit to their neighbors: but this exposition is too curious. I deny not
but these things indeed appertain to Christ's kingdom, and therefore ought to
be spiritually understood. For the Isaiah speaks of the peoples return into
Judea. For, that they might the better pass, the Lord promises to remove all
impediments out of the way, and would furnish them with all things necessary,
that so they might be free from all annoiances.

And so, when Christ promises the benefit of our redemption, he therewithal
takes away whatsoever thing might hurt or hinder the same: nay, he turns it
wholly the contrary way, that out of every evil we might draw some good: All
things f^llout for the best to them that love Go^
for all things turn to the best (as Paul says) to them that love God: Romans
8.27. And thus God uses the most hurtful and dangerous evils, as remedies to
purge the faithful, that they may not give over themselves to the love of the
world, but may be made the more lively, and ready to perform the will of
their Master.

When he adds that this shall be for a name to t^^ Lord; it is to show the end
of the Churches restitution; namely, that Gods name might be the more praised
among men, and that the memory thereof might flourish, and be conserved. And
therefore he adds, for a sign: that is to say, for a testimony, or for a
perpetual memorial. Although the Church floate then* and be diversely tossed
among these waves and tempests, yet seeing the Lord is purposed that the
memory of his name shall last for ever, he will both defend and maintain her.

THE LVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Thus says the Lord; Keep judgment and justice: for my salvation is
at hand to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.
In the former-verses God has manifested the signs of his favor toward us:
now he shows what duties we owe to him,
THIS is a notable place. For the Prophet shows what God requires of us, as
soon as he manifests the signs of his favor, or promises to be reconciled
unto us, to the end our peace may be assured. The thing he requires of us, is
such a conversion as changes both our judgments and affections: so as having
forsaken the world, we forthwith aspire unto heaven: and therewithal he
requires the fruits of repentance.

Under the words judgment and justice, he comprehends all the duties of
charity, which consists not only in abstaining from evil, but in doing good
to our neighbors, according to our abilities. And this is the sum of the
second table: The sum of the second Table.
in the observation whereof, we give testimony of our piety, if there be any
at all in us. The Prophets always bring us thither: God often tries our love
to him, by our justice toward men.
for by this means it will quickly appear what we are within: and the true
integrity of the heart is thus discerned, from those outward ceremonies
wherein hypocrites please themselves; as we have showed heretofore. Now he
renders a reason, and forthwith shows the beginning from whence all must frame
themselves to newness of life; namely, that in as much as Gods justice is at
hand to be revealed to us, we in like manner ought to present him with ours.

The Lord calls himself just, and says that justice is his; not that he
holds it shut up in himself; but because he sheds it abroad upon men. He also
calls that his salvation, by which he delivers men from destruction.

Besides, howsoever these words be directed to the Jews, that with a sincere
affection of heart, and with an unfeigned desire of godliness, they might show
themselves thankful to their redeemer; yet it also belongs to us all in
general: for the whole world is lost in it self, unless it recover salvation
in God. Let us also note this exhortation; for thereby we are taught to be so
much the more moved to the true fear of God, as we are near unto him: and
therefore Saint Paul admonishes the faithful, to cast off the works of
darkness, and to put on the armor of light; because our salvation is nearer
us then we be aware of: Romans 13.12.

Verse. 2. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man which lays
hold on it: he that keeps the Sabbath, and Or, violates it not.
polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any evil.
To the d^ties of the second Table verse 1. he now add^s those of the first.
IN calling them blessed, who having embraced this doctrine, do submit
themselves unto God, walking in vprightnes, he closely insinuates, that there
are many deaf, or unteachable. But to the end their peruersitie or sluggishnes
might not discourage the faithful, he recommends his exhortation to them by
the fruit which comes thereof. That the faithful then should not recoile
back, but casting off all impediments, they might readily prepare themselves to
walk uprightly, he cries out that such only are blessed, to whom grace is
given to be thus wise-hearted.

Justice and Judgment. But here he mentions the Sabbath, which appertains to
the first Table. The duties of both Tables must go together.
he now mentions the first, because they must be joined both together. In a
word, Isaiah meant to say, that he shall be an happy man who submits himself
unto God in the observation of the whole law, for to such an one the
righteousness and salvation of God belongs, verse. 1.

But because men wander and err in their imaginations, and seek diverse means
how to draw near unto God, the Prophet shows that there is but one way,
namely, when we study how to order and rule our lives according to the
Decalogue. Besides, here is an excellent place, for it teaches us, that
nothing is pleasing unto God, but the observation of his commandments.
righteousness and salvation by works;

Now because the Sabbath (as it appears by Moses and Ezechiel, Exodus 31.13.17.
Ezech. 21.13.) was the principal sign of Gods service, therefore by the
figure Synecdoche it contains in it self all the exercises of piety, a part
being taken for the whole. We must understand the Sabbath then, with all his
circumstances. For God rests not himself contented with the outward ceremony,
neither delights he in our idleness, but he requires that we freely renounce our
selves, that with heart and hand we may yield him absolute obedience. The
Prophet also adds another Synecdoche in the end of the verse, That keeps his
hand etc.
to note out charity. The sum is, That God is not served aright, unless
true piety and innocence of life go together: as also under these two parts
he has distinguished the manner of well living. In a word, here is an
exposition of that true righteousness which is contained in the law of the Lord,
that in it we may rest, for in vain shall any man seek a way of perfection
out of it. This then overthrows all devised worships, and all superstitions.

Verse. 3. And let not the son of the stranger which is joined to the Lord
speak^ and say, The Lord has surely separate me from his people: neither let
the Eunuch say, behold, I am a dry tree.
THe Prophet shows that this grace of God shall be such, A prevention of an
objection.
that those who were far off from him before, and against whom the gate was
shut, should now obtain a new estate, or should be placed again in their
right. And thus he meets with their complaints, that they should not say they
were rejected, unworthy, aliants, or shut out for any infamous note; because
the Lord would take away all lets and impediments. Now this may be as well
referred to the Jews, whose temporary strangers, Hosea, J will call them my
people which were not my people. Hose. 1.10.

Moreover when he says, that they shall be joined to the Lord, it is to
admonish them that this consolation only appertained to such as followed the
voice of Gods call. For there were many Eunuchs to whom the Lord showed no
mercy, and many strangers, which were not joined to the Lord. This promise
therefore is restrained to those, who being called, should obey. Under
strangers and Eunuchs, he notes out all such as seemed unworthy to be reputed
among the number of Gods people, who once had chosen them for his peculiar
inheritance, and afterward banished them out of his land. Other nations were
shut out of his kingdom, as it appears in every place of the holy Scripture.
Saint Paul says in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. 2.12.13. that the
Gentiles had nothing to do in the Common wealth of Israel, but were strangers
from the covenants of promise, without hope, and without God in the world; but
now in Christ Jesus (says he) you which were once far off, are made near by
the blood of Christ.

Thus then the Gentiles might in the beginning sign unto them of their
reiection. The Prophet therefore wills them to remove all such doubts as these
out of their heads.

Under the word Eunuch, by the figure Synecdoche, he comprehends all those
that bare any note of infamy upon them, which might be an occasion to separate
them from Gods people. For it seemed that ye Eunuchs, and such as had no
children, were rejected of God, and excluded out of the promise: wherein he had
said to Abraham, that his posterity should be as the stars in the heavens,
and as the sand of the sea: Genesis 15.5. and 22.17. In a word, he withdrawes all
men from the consideration of themselves, that they may wholly fix their minds
upon the calling of God, that thus they might imitate the faith of Abraham, who
considered not his body now dead; neither the deadness of Sarahs womb; so as
to enter into any dispute with himself through his own incredulity touching
the power of God: but above hope, believed under hope: Romans 4.18, 19, 20. The
Prophet then speaks to the vile and contemptible, lest they should be
discouraged; because, as Saint Peter says, God is no accepter of persons; Acts
10.34.35.
but in every nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him.

Verse. 4. For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and
choose the thing that pleases me, and take hold of my covenant.
A confirmation.
NOw follows the confirmation. For the faithful servants of God which kept the
Sabbath, and cleaued to the righteousness of the Law, should have place in the
Church, although they were Eunuchs, or had any other impediment. And thus it
seems the Prophet abolisheth all the external marks and visible ceremonies,
wherein the Jews only gloried. The dignity of the new Church is not
external, but spiritual.
For the dignity of the new Church is not outward, but spiritual: and albeit
the faithful have no appearance of glory before the eyes of worldlings; nay,
they are rather despised and wronged by them, yet are they of precious esteem
in the sight and presence of God.

When he ioines obedience to the observation of the Sabbath: thence we may
easily gather, that in speaking of the day of rest, he had not so much
respect to the bare cetemonie, as to a perfection of holiness. Where again he
imposes bands upon the faithful, that they should not start the least step
from the duties of the whole Law: for it is not permitted them to choose any
thing that likes them, but that which God has revealed to be pleasing and
acceptable to him. Hypocrisy and inconsiderate zeal therefore are here
condemned, Hypocrisy and inconsiderate zeal condemned.
in that God opposes his commandments to men's inventions, and inioines them
to take sure hold of his covenant.

Verse. 5. Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within my walls, a
place, and a name better then of the sons and of the daughters: I will give
them an everlasting name that shall not be put out.
Here we may evidently see, that the door is set open for all persons to
enter into Gods kingdom (how unworthy soever they be.) The Prophet alludes to
Jerusalem, and to the Temple, wherein the Lord had put the memorial of his
name. Now none but the Jews had any place there: for they would have thought
the Temple profaned, if any Gentiles had come within it. And this, as you
know, was the cause that so great a multitude arose against Saint Paul, who had
brought some uncircumcised ones into it: Act. 21.28. But here the Lord
receives all those without exception, whom before he had rejected: and has
abolished that difference, by bringing us, who were strangers, into the Temple;
that is, into the Church. For it is not now shut up within the bounds of Judea,
as once it was; but it extends it self far and near, thorowout the whole
world: as in Mark 16.15.

The word lad, is taken here, as in many other texts, for place. It may also
be taken for power or authority, in regard they are advanced to such dignity,
as to be held for the children of God. Where he adds, a better name; it may
be demanded whether the Lord compares the Jews which were then in the Church,
with the faithful which afterward he will call into their room: or the
estate of the people to come, with that it was then. For it is certain that
the name of the Gentiles is more honorable now, then the name of Jews, who
for their infidelity were cut off: and we have succeeded them, who being wild
Olives, were grafted into the natural stock: as S. Paul speaks, Romans 11.24.
We may expound it then, that the Eunuchs and strangers shall have a better
name then the children, and those of the household; who were unto God as his
heritage. But I had rather take it in another sense, namely, that the dignity
of the faithful shall be greater under Christ, then it was under the law. The
Patriarks had an excellent name, in respect that they called upon God as their
Father, and were knit unto him by (a perpetual) covenant: but at Christ's
coming, Gods grace was more abundantly sh^d abroad; and therefore we at this
day have obtained a better, and much more excellent name then they.

He calls it an everlasting name, because it is written in the heavens, where
it shall not wither, but shall flourish for ever. The wicked will have their
names to be remembered in this world, and use all the means they can that their
renown may continue perpetually; but it is perishable, and therefore lasts not
long. But this is another kind of name; for we are so made heirs of the
heavenly kingdom, that we are accounted for Gods children in the presence of
his Angels. The word Mibbanim, may also be interpreted, for the name which a
man gets by means of his children: for men make their names aft^r a sort
perpetual by their offspring. Now the Prophet promises that this name shall
be much more excellent. But I had rather follow the first exposition.

Verse. 6. Also the strangers that cleave unto the Lord, to serve him, and love
the name of the Lord, and to be his servants: every one that keeps the
Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and imbraceth my covenant.
A repetition. Verse. 5.
He repeates that he said before, namely, that God will so open the gates of
his Temple to all without exception, that there shall be no more distinction
between Jew and Gentile: but such as the Lord shall call by his word, Act.
2.39. which is the band of our adoption, shall be joined unto him. And
therefore these are those espousals, in compassion, and faithfulness; whereof
Hosea speaks, Chap. 2.19, 20. Now he not only allots them an outward court to
worship the Lord in, as the people in old time did, Luke 1.10. but he
attributes unto them a more honorable order, to wit, that God will auow them
for Priests and Levites, which were profane before.

But the end of their vocation which immediately follows, is to be noted,
namely, that the Prophet says, they shall be Ministers of the Lord, on
condition that they love the name of the Lord. Hypocrites rejected.
And thus al hypocrites are here rejected, because the express tenor of our
vocation runs thus; that we serve the Lord with a free and ready affection of
the heart: for we cannot serve him, unless we yield him a frank and
voluntary obedience. That therefore* which is said of almes-giuing, oght to be
applied to all the parts of our life; namely, God loves a cheerful giver: 2.
Cor. 9.7. that thus unto our Lord and Master, we may render such a service as
proceeds from love.

In adding, whosoever shall keep: he again mentions the Sabbath; under
which (as we have said before) the whole worship of God is comprehended. But
the people neglected that which they should principally have observed upon this
day: for in contenting themselves with the outward ceremony, they omitted the
truth; that is to say, amendment of life. The Lord on the other side meant
they should so rest, that yet in the mean while they should keep their hands,
verse. 2. and their souls pure from all uncleanness and iniquity.

Under the particle, and shall embrace: he expresses the zeal and constancy
of such as subject themselves unto God, and cleave fast unto his word. If
therefore we be joined to the Lord by covenant, we must keep it steadfastly,
and be fast glued as it were to the pure doctrine, that nothing whatsoever may
turn us back, or divide us from him.

Verse. 7. Them will I bring also to mine holy mountain, and make them joyful
in mine house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine Altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for
all people.
BY these phrases of speech he expresses that which he said before, to wit,
The difference between the circumcised and uncircumcised taken away.
that the strangers which were shut out of GODS Church, are called now unto it:
so as the difference between the circumcised and the uncircumcised, shall be
abolished for ever. For these words cannot be referred to the proselytes; that
is, the strangers converted to the Jewish religion, who were taken into the
body of Gods people by circumcision: for then the Prophet had spoken of no new
or unwonted thing. But he testifies that Gods grace shall be spread over the
whole world; which could not be done, but the Gentiles must needs be united
with the Jews, to make one body with the^: which came to pass, when the
difference touching uncircumcision and circumcision was taken away. There is
nothing now therefore that can hinder the Gentiles from serving of God, seeing
they are called into the Temple: that is to say, into the society of the
faithful. Yea, Verse. 6.
as a little before we noted, the priesthood was translated from the Tribe of
Leui; not only to the whole body of the Jews, but even to very strangers
also. It is well enough known, in how great detestation the Jews have this
sentence. For albeit they read these words of the Prophet, yet they hold it
for a thing extremely prodigious, that God should call the Gentiles to the
participation of this so excellent a benefit, which was peculiarly allotted unto
them. And yet that which the Prophet says is so manifest, that none can
without gross impudency, call the truth thereof into question.

He extols this grace by the fruit that should flow from it; for the true and
solid felicity stands in our being united with God as his children. I grant
that the wicked ouerflow in iollitie; but all their joy shall be turned into
wailing and gnashing of teeth, because it is accursed of God. In the mean
while, he filles the hearts of the faithful with unspeakable joy, as well in
showing himself pacified toward them, as in causing them to feel his favor
and good will, by giving an happy success to their affairs. Yet the chief
and principal joy consists in the peace of conscience; which Saint Paul
attributes to the kingdom of God: Romans 14.17. which we then enjoy, when we
are reconciled unto God by Jesus Christ: Romans 5.1.

He also promises to accept of their sacrifices: for we are all called of God,
to the end we should offer up our bodies, and all that we have, as sacrifices
unto him. By the word sacrifices, he means Gods spiritual worship, such as
the Gospel describes unto us: for the Prophet spoke according to the customs
of his own time, wherein the worship of God was wrapped with diverse
ceremonies. But now, in stead of sacrifices, we have praises, good works,
etc. And lastly, we Romans 12.1. When acceptable: let us not think the same
proceeds from their merit or excellency, but from the free bounty of God: See
Exodus 28* 36.37.38.
for he might justly reject them, if he only looked upon them as they are in
themselves. And yet by this goade are we quickened up with a prompt desire to
serve God, seeing he assures us that our works (which are nothing) are yet no
less pleasing in his sight, then if they were pure and spotless sacrifices.

He adds, upon mine altar: for the sacrifices were not allowed of God, unless
they took their holiness from the altar upon which they were offered. And thus,
whatsoever we offer, shall be unclean, Christ our Altar.
unless it be sanctified by Christ, who is our altar. See Chap 60 7.

For mine house shall be called, etc.] The Temple was only destinated to the
Jews, by whom the Lord would especially be called upon. And therefore when
Paul would show that the Jews were above the Gentiles in dignity, he says,
that to them belonged the service of God: Romans 9.4. Thus then the Temple was
built amongst them by a special privilege, seeing no other nation in the
world was permitted to have the like. But now that difference is taken away,
and every person, of what place or Country soever, may enter into the Temple:
that is to say, into Gods house, The difference between the Law and the
Gospel.
because all nations are called to worship God. Here then we see the manifest
difference between the Law and the Gospel: for under the Law, there was but
one people which might serve God purelie; for which cause the Temple was
particularly built: but now all may freely enter into Gods Temple, there purely
to worship him: that is to say, every where.

But we must note the phrases of speech which are usual and familiar among the
Prophets: for they use such figures as fitted their own times (as we have
already showed:) for by the Temple and sacrifices they mean Gods pure worship
and service. Mal. 1.11.
The Prophet here therefore sets forth or describes the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, under which it is lawful to call upon God, and to lift up pure hands
in every place, 1. Tim. 2.8. And neither in this place nor at Jerusalem, says
Christ, shall men worship the Father any more: but the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth, verse. 23. With our eyes therefore do we
behold the accomplishment of this prophecy, namely, that Gods house is made
the house of prayer to all nations, that so in all languages he may be called
upon, Abba Father. The Jews therefore can no longer boast that they only are
Gods peculiars. Thus you see then how necessary it was that the Prophets
should suit their manners of speech to the times and customs then in use, that
so all might understand them: for the time of the full and open revelation of
things was not yet come, but Gods service was clothed with diverse figures.

And yet no question but this Temple thus consecrated for the service of God,
was truly and really his house: for he had told by Moses, that he would be
present in every place where he should put the remembrance of his name, Exodus
20.24. And Solomon in dedicating the Temple said, When they shall come and pray
in this house, then will thou hear in heaven thy dwelling place, 1. King.
8.33. which is the cause why Christ reprocheth the Jews for making his Fathers
house a den of thieves, Math. 21.13. and thereunto adds this our text to
that in Iere. 7.11. Now Christ called the Temple the house of prayer, as having
respect to those times in which the Gospel was not yet published. For albeit
he was come, yet he was not then known, neither were the ceremonies of the law
abolished. But when the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, Mat. 27 51. and
remission of sins preached in his name, Luke 24.46.47. Act. 13.38. then these
high praises touching the Temple and other ceremonies took their end, for then
God began to be called upon of all nations.

And yet herewithall let us mark that we are called into the Church upon
condition that we call upon the name of God. We are called into the Church,
upon condition to call upon God.
For those do but glory in vain who hold a place therein, and yet make little
or none account of prayers, nor of true invocation. In what place soever we be
then, let us beware we despise not this exercise of faith, seeing it
sufficiently appears by the words of our Prophet, that prayer is the greatest
and the most excellent service that God requires of us: as also it is said in
Psalm. 50.15. that the holiness of the Temple consisted in the prayers which then
had their force there.

Verse. 8. The Lord says which gathers the scattered of Israel, yet will I
gather Or, upon him.
to them those that are to be gathered to them.
HE again confirms that which he said before touching the reestablishing of
the people, A confirmation of the former doctrine.
for he has heretofore wonderfully extolled that grace of God whereby he
should deliver his chosen: but the estate of the Church was such, that these
promises seemed ridiculous. These are no needles repetitions therefore, but
were of necessity to be added for the sustentation of the weak, that that
which otherwise was incredible, might be assuredly confirmed unto them.

Who gathers etc.] Isaiah gives God this title in regard of the circumstance of
the matter in hand, because it is his office to gather in the Church when it is
scattered abroad, which is confirmed in the same sense out of the words of the
147. Psalm. verse. 2. The Lord builds up Jerusalem, and gathers together the
dispersed of Israel. For this cause then he promises to assemble them again,
yea, and to join diverse nations unto them, that so the Church might grow and
multiply into a great number. As often then as we doubt of the restoration of
the Church by being astonished at the sight of so many storms and tempests
wherewith it is tossed, let us lay hold upon this buckler, and cover our selves
therewith, namely, that it is the Lords office to gather together the dispersed
of Israel; yea, though they were divided and scattered to the utmost part under
heaven, yet, that even thence will the Lord easily gather us, and restore us
to our perfect estate: Deuteronomy. 30.4.

Yet will I gather upon him.] I willingly retain the propriety of the
Prophets words: Gnal, that is, to, or upon: for (as I think) he has an eye
unto that which he said in the former verse, namely, that the Temple should be
set open to all people: and here signifies, that God shall add to the Jews
which should be gathered a great number of others, which is now indeed
accomplished. For he not only gathered together those which were dispersed in
Babylon, but also gathers together other scattered sheep, which often, and
almost every day came to pass, John 10.16. so as he never ceased gathering
till he had added a great heap to those which were first gathered.

Verse. 9. All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, even all ye beasts of
the forest.
Having comforted the faithful, he now turns himself to the hypocrites.
IT seems this prophecy agrees not with the former, because whatsoever the
Prophet has hitherunto spoken was full of sweet consolation, and now he
denounces terrible threatenings, and an horrible destruction. Truly one would
take these things as contradictorie one to another. But having comforted the
faithful, we must not think it strange if he now advertise them
notwithstanding touching the calamity which should ensue, This Chapter has a
twofold use.
yet they should content themselves with this only remedy. Secondly, that the
hypocrites might be astonished with fear and trembling, that they should not
insult in their ouerweenings, nor bless themselves, under pretense of these
promises.

God therefore calls not men, but cruel beasts to devour the people. He
commands the faithful then not to be troubled, nor to suffer themselves to be
transported in their beasts should

By the beasts of the field, he means all sorts of beasts, and so comprehends
not only the Chaldeans, and Assyrians, but also Antiochus, Antiochus.
the Romans, and other nations, who afflicted this people with diverse wars.
But he especially respects that discomfiture of ye people by the Chaldeans,
who afterward led them captives into miserable thraldom.

Verse. 10. Their watchmen are all blind: they have no knowledge: they are all
dumb dogs: they can not bark: they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping.
NOw he adds the cause why the people were destinated to this destruction, The
cause of the peoples destruction.
namely, in regard they were governed by wicked Princes and Pastors. Not that
the fault rested wholly in them, and that the people were innocent; but
because their sin was the beginning of this mischief. For if we follow blind
guides, that shall not excuse us; but we rather worthily bear the punishment
of our own iniquities, in regard the Lord takes away good Governors from such
as he means to chastise for their unthankfulness.

By the word watchmen, he not only understands the Prophets which had the gift
or Judges, Governors, Magistracy and Ministry, as the two eyes in man's body,
to govern the Church by.
namely, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, whom the Lord had established as the
two eyes in the body for the well ordering of ye Church. If they be wicked or
faithless, there can not a more dangerous plague happen to the Commonwealth.

In the first place then the Prophet reprocheth them for their ignorance. 1.
Ignorance.
For as the principal virtue of a good Pastor is to know what belongs to his
charge, that he may be able to discern and judge what is profitable or
hurtful for his flock, and then to watch over them carefully, and to stand as
it were upon his vvatch-tower, that by all means he may procure the salvation
of his sheep: so is there nothing in the world that does worse beseem him
then ignorance and blindness. No man then shall be fit for this office, Nothing
more unseemly then ignorance in a Minister.
unless he be acquainted with the right manner of governing the people. Hence
it appears what account is to be made of the Idols of our time, Idol
Ministers.
who proudly vaunt with intolerable insolency of the title of Pastors, though
in the mean while they be unlearned, and grossly ignorant.

Secondly, in calling them dumb dogs, 2. Idleness.
he taxes them of idleness, and carelesnes. For seeing it is required of a good
Pastor that he be diligent and industrious: Destruction not far off when
learned and painful Pastors are removed, and ignorant idle-bellies placed in
their rooms.
in calling them slow-bellies, he shows there was naught in them worthy the
title of Pastors. When we then are deprived of good Pastors, and that either
sots, or cruel wolves succeed them, let us see and acknowledge Gods wrath
therein; and let us assure our selves that destruction is not far off. For
from thence, the Prophet gathers his threatenings, and denounces desolation to
the people, when their Pastors are dumb: Prou. 29.18. It follows then, that
Pastors are ordained of God to perform the office of dogs: that is to say,
to vvatch, to scare away thieves and robbers, and not to suffer them to enter
into the sheepfold. If dogs then stand so carefully upon their watch, and in
such wise regard their Masters profit, as to be always watching for his
safety, and will never cease barking at those, who it may be are able to kill
them: ought not the sleepie and idle Pastors blush to be ouermatched by a
brute beast?

Verse. 11. And these greedy dogs can never have enough: and these
sheepheards cannot understand; for they all look to their own way, every one
for his advantage, and for his own purpose.
3. Covetousness.
THe third vice he reproues in these wicked Pastors, is their insatiable
covetousness. Though they be idle in governing, says he, yet they are valiant
and hardy enough in supping up the broth. Some extend these words of the
Prophet further, namely, that such rule with cruelty: and this vice is
expressly reproved by ^zechiel, 34.4. For false Prophets are ordinarily fierce,
and behave themselves uncivilly and barbarously over the poor people. But he
that shall advise himself well touching these words, he shall see that the
Prophet taxes their unmeasurable avarice, which he also in the next words
paints out at large.

Every one looks to his own way.] That is to say, they are diligent in their
affairs. Every one seeks his advantage. In a word, his meaning is, that there
was none, but preferred himself first: as if every one had bin borne for
himself only.

The word Mikkatsehu, is diversely expounded; for some translate; To his end:
that is to say, to his affairs: but this agrees not with the Prophets meaning.
Others; After the limits of his covetousness. But the most natural sense (as
I think) is right: which phrase of speech, is also common among us. Every one
then being given unto covetousness, they drew and appropriated all things unto
themselves, seeking their own commodity, without regarding the good of others.

He which is given to inordinate lusts, can never serve God.
Hence we gather; that he which is given to inordinate lusts, can never serve
God: and whosoever he be that busies his brains to heap up riches, will
never apply his mind to build up the Church of the Lord. I know not a more
dangerous blindness then covetousness. A true Pastor therefore ought above
all other vices to flee that, if he will serve God faithfully. Do we see then
that the Prophet complained thus of the wicked Pastors of his time? Let us not
be troubled if the like befall us now:

Verse. 12. Come, I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink: and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.
Having reproved the covetousness and idleness of the Pastors: now he sets
forth their malice and desperate obstinacy: 4. Despera^^ obstinacy.
for he brings them in speaking, and describes their wicked talk: whereby we
may discern, they could not be reduced into the right way, neither by any
admonitions nor threatenings; but audaciously contemned whatsoever was said unto
the^. In Chap. 22.13. and 28.15. the Prophet has recited the flouts of
scorners, who invited one another to play the epicures and drunkards, whilst
by the servants of God they were exhorted to fast in sackcloth and ashes. Let
us eat and drink, say they, for too morrow we shall die: as if they should
have said; What mean these Prophets to importune us so much? We shall look
but with lean cheeks, if we follow their counsel. These and the like
blasphemies they were not afraid to utter: as we have seen in Chap. 22. and
28. And Isaiah repeates the same complaint here, to wit, that the Pastors
hardened their hearts, and obstinately contemned the judgments of God.

Now he reproues them not for drinking wine and strong drink, which in it
self is no unlawful thing: but he taxes their braine-sicknesse and
brutishness, which makes men proudly and presumptuously to despise the word of
the Lord. The abuse of wine is condemned in other places. Chap. 5.
But the Prophet in this place inueighs against this frantike malapartnesse,
whereby they loftily combined themselves against God, and trampled under feet
all threatenings, admonitions, reprehensions; and in a word, all religion. And
yet no doubt but he taxes this horrible and hateful vice, in that they
ouercharged themselves with wine and meats, when they had no need; that
neither shame, fear, nor reverence of God or man, might disquiet their
meriments. For it is the custom of the wicked, to glut themselves with all the
belly-cheere they can devise; that so they may with the greater boldness and
intemperancie, plunge themselves in their filthiness. But is it not an
horrible and fearful example to see such a contempt of God; not in strangers,
not among the common people; but in the heads and governors, who by their
godly conversation, (in this holy and sacred order, which was the figure of
Christ) should have bin guides unto others? For the Kings and Priests bare in
them his image, and were types of him. We may easily judge how insupportable
this pride is, whereby men thus furiously oppose themselves against Gods word.
For when we come once to reject this sovereign and last medicine, our case is
desperate; we are past cure; because we will not suffer the Lord to bring us
again into the right way. For this cause, in Chap. 22.14. the Lord vows, that
this iniquity shall never be pardoned.

Thus then the Prophet notes out an extreme impiety: and let us observe his
words diligently; To morrow shall be as this day: that is to say; Have we bin
merry to day? we will be yet more merry to morrow: let us not pine our selves
away before the time.

He amplifies their fault, because in deriding Gods patience and long
suffering, they promised to themselves impunitie: as if God slept, or sat idle
in heaven, as often as he deferres his judgments. Men at this day endeavor to
benumme and bewitch their own consciences with such diabolical proverbs as
these, mentioned in this text, Devilish prouerb^.
that they may the more freely wallow themselves in all sorts of
voluptuousness, and take liberty to commit wicked and execrable impieties.
That we then may escape this horrible judgment of God* let every one search
and try his own ways, and a far off let us epsy the wrath of God; lest being
overtaken at unawares, we be suddenly overwhelmed therewith.

THE LVII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man considers in heart: and
merciful men are taken away; and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.
The Prophet continues on his a^gument still.
ISaiah prosecutes his argument still. For having showed how securely hypocrites
repose themselves in their pleasures, and with what impudency they despise
Gods word; he further complains, that they consider not the works of the
Lord: for we are placed in this world, as upon a spacious Theater, to behold
the acts of our God. Neither is there any of his works, how mean soever they
appear in our eyes, that we should lightly esteem; but ought rather
diligently and attentively to observe and consider them. Now among other
testimonies of his providence, the Lord sets before us the death of the
faithful, and of approved men whom he takes out of this world, when he is
purposed severely to chastise and correct his people. But no man lays it to
heart, neither imagines that such matters should be forerunners of imminent
destruction, namely, that the good are gathered to God, and laid up in safety,
that they may not be wrapped up with others, in so many common miseries. The
sum is, that the wicked greatly deceive themselves, in thinking that the
prolonging of their lives, should be the only happiness that can befall
them: and that for this cause they should take themselves to be in better case
then the faithful, who die sooner then they. For as they are glued to the
world, so under this pretense, do they harden their own hearts, that (as they
suppose) God favors them exceedingly, in suffering them to be safe and sound,
whilst others die.

If by men of mercy you understand the charitable and pitiful, then this
epithete must be diligently noted; for thereby the Prophet shows what the true
righteousness of Gods children is, whereas hypocrites place their
righteousness in things of no value. Now there is no virtue more pleasing unto
God, then liberality, whereby we manifest our righteousness, and discover
unto all an heart void of guile. But merciful men may as well be taken in the
passive signification, namely, for such to whom the Lord shows mercy: for
this manner of speech is common enough among the Hebrews. Neither is it from
the purpose to say, that the grace of God should be privily opposed to the
perverse and sinister judgments of men, who are wont to condemn such as die
(...) the flower of their youth. And yet seeing the Prophet in many places
adornes the children of God with this title, of being merciful and liberal, I
see no inconvenience, if (as I have said) we make it a true definition of
righteousness.

By this it appears that then the Lord gathered a great number of good men out
of the world unto himself, whose death prognosticated some horrible calamity;
and yet that the Jews regarded not such forewarnings. Nay, which is worst of
all, they took occasion thereby to ouerflow with the greater freedom in all
licentiousness, thinking all should go well with them, when they suruiued the
best men.

Now this doctrine is very fitting for all ages and times. For, for the most
part, it comes to pass that God takes the good out of this world, when he is
purposed sharply to punish the sins of the wicked. Why so? Surely as he has
a tender care over those that be his, so he pulls them often times as brands out
of the fire, having compassion on them, to the end that such as shall survive
them, may therein perceive a token of Gods wrath. And yet this is not a
perpetual law, seeing the elect are often wrapped up in the temporal
judgments with the wicked. Notwithstanding the taking of them away first, is a
thing so ordinary, that it seldom falls out otherwise: whereof in our time we
have a famous example in the death of Martin Luther, Martin Luthers death.
who was taken out of this world a little before Germany was pitifully wasted
with that furious war, which many years before he had foretold, whilst he
thundered against the contempt of the Gospel: against the villainies and foul
enormities which then ouerflowed in every place. Often he entreated the Lord to
take him out of this life before he should see those horrible judgments which
he had threatened: the apprehension whereof made him to quake for fear: and
this request he obtained of the Lord. Soon after his death a sudden and
unexpected war began to invade, and miserably to afflict Germany: even then
when they suspected nothing less. And examples hereof also we have daily. And
doubtless, if men did well consider of them, they would not flatter themselves
so much in their iniquities as they do. But I have thought it good to recite
this in particular, not only because it has happened within these few years:
but also that it might be the more apparent, in regard it fell out according to
that which so excellent a Preacher of the Gospel, and a Prophet of God had
foretold. We therefore ought diligently to observe the work of the Lord as
well in ye lives, as in the death of the just: but most of all in their death.
Whereby the Lord calls them to the enjoying of a better life: that so they may
be delivered from those miseries, into which the wicked must at length be
plunged.

Verse. 2. Peace shall come: they shall rest in their beds, every one that
walks before him.
The state of the faithful after their death.
THe Prophet here describes what the state of the faithful is after death. For
the wicked who think there is no life after this, do judge that good men are
perished, because they can apprehend nothing in death but ruin and perdition.
Jsaiah therefore says; that such a peace shall come, as is more desirable
then a thousand lives that are replenished with troubles. As if he compared
the good to crased soldiers, who are permitted quietly to take their ease.

Simile.
He adds the similitude of sleep, to show, that they shall be set free, and
delivered from all disquietnesse and care, as if they safely and sweetly slept
in their beds. Whereas he adds, every one that walks: I refer not whosoever
to the word peace, as some expound it. Namely, that peace shall go before the
faithful, as if it led them the way. But I think he therein notes out the
faithful. As if he should say, Whosoever walks before God, he shall have
peace. And therefore when the righteous do die, they (after the enduring of
many troubles) are called to peace and rest, as having finished their course.

Now they rest in their beds, in regard they do not yet enjoy full and perfect
glory and blessedness: but wait for the last day which shall be the time of
their resurrection, wherein all things shall be fully restored. And me thinks
Isaiah meant to say so. But, may some say, peace. They are in peace and rest
then, because they live in Christ.

Verse. 3. But you witches children, come hither, the seed of the adulterer, and
of the whore.
Having spoken of the happy and peaceable death of the faithful; The cursed
life and death of the wicked, opposed to the blessed life and end of the godly.
he inueighs with exceeding vehemency against the wicked, who for all this,
ceased not to lead a leaud and lascivious life without taking the death of the
righteous to heart. For as he has affirmed that the faithful are in peace: so
contrariwise he denounces an irreconcilable war against the other. Nay,
which more is, he has showed that death to Gods servants is an hiding place
which defends them from the whirlewinds, hail, and other tempests: that
afterward the obstinate contemners may be laid open to all sorts of
calamities. For we must note here the opposition between the faithful which
walk before God: and the wicked who cease not obstinately to resist him. The
former after death, shall have peace: the latter shall be vexed whilst they
live, and after death shall feel horrible torments.

He summons them before Gods judgment seat: because they thought to escape by
their sophistications. But he shows that they shall gain nothing thereby,
because they shall be drawn before the same whether they will or no. For, as
they had made their hearts over hard, so was it needful that they should be
pricked with the sharper launcers: doubtless the Prophet could not use too
much severity, as well to awaken their drowsinesse, as to beat down their
pride. Who knows not with how great ouerweening the Jews insult in regard of
their race? The Prophets therefore are usually wont to crush this their
arrogancy and hie mindednes; by affirming that they were none of Abraham's
children, in respect they behaved themselves as bastards, and such as were
degenerate.

This is the cause why our Prophet terms them, the seed of the adulterer, and
of the whore. With which also Ezechiel reprocheth them in Chap. 16.3. saying,
Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. And the like phrases of
speech are used in many other places: Hosea. 1.2. Thus then he brings their
intolerable pride down to the ground, and in despite of their teeth draws
them forth into the light, that they should not think they could escape the
tribunal seat of God.

Verse. 4. On whom have ye iested? upon whom have ye gaped and thrust out your
tongues? Are not ye rebellious children, and a false seed.
Hypocrites unmasked in this, and the verses following.
THe Prophet shows that the Jews have no occasion at all to glory so much
under pretense of their lineage or stock, seeing they derided the Prophets of
God. Now they thought it was but with men, with whom they had to deal when
they rejected the word. And so at this day we see how impudently the wicked
despise the doctrine of their salvation, and scorn the Ministers of it; and
yet in the mean while, cover themselves under a vain show of religion. This
is the reason then wherefore the Prophet presses them so near, and reprooues
them so sharply. As if he should say, When you thrust out your tongues on this
manner against God, and scorn his word, do ye think you have to deal with a
mortal man? For these words, on whom, signifies that they sought out euasions
and pretenses to cloak their impiety withal. For the ungodly will not
acknowledge that they rebel against God: no, they think foul scorn any man
should so judge of them: but yet they must be brought out into the light, and
convinced of their wickedness. And seeing there is a God, they must be told
that they make open war upon him, in resisting or in rejecting his word, and
in esteeming no better thereof, then of a fable.

To open the mouth, and to thrust out the tongue, is here taken in one
signification: unless that under these two phrases the Prophet meant the
better to discover their impudency, namely, in that they thought it not enough
only to reject the Lord, but they must also deride him. For the inward contempt
of the heart caused them to utter forth such manifest scoffs and blasphemies,
so as they were not touched at all with any fear of dishonoring themselves.

Lastly he concludes, that they are rebellious children, a lying seed, and
therefore has just cause to esteem them the sons of an where, for such a
contempt could not be found in the children of Ahraham. By this we learn how
the wicked ought to be handled, and with what severity they are to be
reproved, that they may have no cause left them whereby to flatter themselves:
and, the more they despise whatsoever is propounded unto them in the name of
God, the more ought we to discover and to manifest in all men's sight their
impieties so full of sacrilege.

Verse. 5. Inflamed with Idols under every green tree? and sacrificing the
children in the valleys under the tops of the rocks.
OThers translate, Who take pleasure in consolation. But our Prophet takes a
similitude used in many places of the Scriptures, and very fitting to the
circumstance of this place. For the Lord is wont to compare lust, wherewith
poor and miserable Idolaters are furiously transported and inflamed, to the
love of brothels, for they keep no measure at all, neither will they suffer
any to restrain them from their folly. Now Idolatry in Gods sight is a most
hateful kind of whoredom.

As touching the Hebrew word Elim, some translate it Gods, others oaks; we may
take it in whether sense we will, for there will be no great difference: and
all the expositors agree that the Prophet condemns Idolatry. I contend not
then about the words, though it be very likely that one thing is repented
twice, according to the custom of the Hebrews: and yet it may be under an
ambiguous word he alludes to their gods.

Sacrificing children.] Here he presses the Jews nearer, and shows that
they are none of Abraham's true children. Why so? Because they polluted
themselves with all manner of superstitions: and in regard they pleased
themselves in such forgeries, therefore he discouers their villainies. As if he
should say, You pretend religion, but I protest that you play the whoremongers
with Idols. For thus must we manifest and point out (as it were with the
finger) the impiety which subtle and politic heads endeavor to varnish over
with sundry delightful colors. The Prophet therefore discharges his duty
most faithfully, in adiuring them thus before Gods tribunal, and in proving
to their faces that they were guilty, though they meant to play the cauillers
to the full.

Now he shows that they were rebellious, and had revolted from Gods law
through detestable Sacrificing of children. How greatly the spirit of error
preuailes in such as are revolted from God.
Whence it is evident, how greatly the spirit of error preuailes over men after
they have once turned away from God. For Satan so possesses their
understandings, that he makes them become stark bedlems. For we must needs
conclude that such are frantique and out of their wits who spare not their
own children, but will cut their throats, and think they have then performed
an acceptable sacrifice. And yet these cruel murderers wanted not their
pretenses wherewith to cover their execrable villainies, to wit, the example of
Abraham, who spared not his only son. For the ancient Hebrews are of opinion
that these customs proceeded from an inconsiderate zeal: as if they should
have said, Abraham's example in offering up his son inconsiderately and
peruersly followed of the Jews.
Seeing we are descended from Abraham, we ought no more to spare our children
then he did. But this good Patriarch did it in obedience to God, Genesis
22.2.12.16. and these on the contrary had no commandment, but did it on their
own heads.

Abraham's example was extraordinary, in which the Lord meant to prove and to
manifest to all the faith of his servant. Again, Isack was not offered, in
respect that the Lord satisfied himself with Abraham's prompt and ready
willingness: but these sacrificed their children, and therefore this imitation
was perverse and damnable, seeing they trod nothing at all in the steps of
their father. This must be well observed: for the most of our superstitious
obserua^ces have sprung from this fountain of inco^siderate zeal, Whence
superstitions have sprung
because men have greedily snatched at any occasion, and without judgment have
followed whatsoever their fathers have done.

Verse. 6. Thy portion is in the smooth stones of the river: they, they are thy
lot: even to them have thou powered a drinke-offering: thou have offered a
sacrifice. Should I delight in these?
He prosecutes the same argument, and sundry ways taxes the superstitions
which reigned in Judea; for there was no place exempt from idolatry: there was
neither rocks, rivers, valleys, nor any corner free, wherein they had not left
some memorial of their superstitions. They had their woods and mountains,
where they sacrificed according to the customs of the heathen.

Whether we read it polished stones here, or Parts of the river, the sense
will be always one. For the Prophets meaning is that the Jews chose a service
of God after their own fantasy, and turned themselves away from that rule
which he had prescribed them in his law. Also, that by means hereof all the
sacrifices by them devised were wicked and abominable, in regard God only ought
to be heard, when there is any question touching his religion and worship. If
you will turn it polished stones, then Isaiah taxes them for the contempt of
the law, wherein God had forbidden them to cut or polish any stones with
hammers for the framing of his Altar. Exodus 20.25. Deuteronomy. 27.5.6. because he
would have them sacrifice no where else but upon one only Altar. But in respect
that it was the fashion of the Heathen to erect Temples near unto fountains
and rivers, the other sense agrees well also.

These words they, they, have great weight: and it is to be understood as if
the Lord gave the Jews leave to cleave to their inventions, seeing they had
forsaken him, and rather turned after Idols, and forged inventions. As also the
Lord by Ezechiel says to the people, Go, and sacrifice every one of you to
his Idol, seeing you will not obey me: Ezech. 20.39. And as I think this
exposition agrees best. As if he should say; I even leave you to your own
inventions; and it contents me that you are wholly addicted thereunto. And yet
no doubt but the Prophet alludes to that place of Moses, by whose mouth God had
promised to be the lot and portion of his people, that they might content
themselves with him alone. According to which also David says, The Lord is my
portion and my inheritance: Psalm. 16.5. For as much as the Jews then were
revolted from God, and followed Idols, the Lord had just cause to say they
might cleave unto them, thereby showing that they should have no more to do
with him.

To them have thou powered drinke-offrings.] He continues to put them still in
mind of their superstitions, and proves that they had renounced and forsaken
God, because they had attributed unto them whatsoever he would should be
wholly reserved as his proper right unto himself. But the Jews might have
replied to every one of the Prophets words, and have said; that in all these
things they had none other purpose the^ to serve God. And yet you see the
Prophet fears not to charge them with idolatry, for all their vain and idle
pretenses: for Gods wrath is provoked by superstitions; and the longer they be
continued and maintained, the more hotter does it wax. Hence let us learn what
sobriety we ought to keep in erecting Gods worship, that we may depend upon
his only will and word. For he that shall swerve but the least jot from that,
shall not only lose his time, but shall also inkindle Gods displeasure against
him, whose Majesty, as much as in him is, he labors to violate and diminish.

Should I delight?] We may also turn it; Shall I repent? And this is the most
received interpretation, because he means to show the cause wherefore he
chastises the people. As if he should say; When I shall revenge these
enormities, can I repent? Notwithstanding the exposition which I have followed,
seems to suit best: Should I take delight or comfort in these sacrifices which
you offer me? For idolaters are wont to please and flatter themselves in their
inventions; and therefore presume that God also reioiceth and takes delight and
comfort in all things, upon which they dote with burning lust. Such an
interrogation is not superfluous then, Interrogation.
when men think that God resembles them, and that he likes and approoues of
all that they think well of: but he on the contrary shows, that nothing
pleases him, nor is approved of him, but that which accords with his word.

Verse. 7. Thou have made thy bed upon every high mountain: thou wentest up
thither, even thither wentest thou to offer a sacrifice.
He repeates the same similitude again which we have touched before. A
repetition of the former similitude, verse. 4.
For ye superstitious sort commit whordome with their Idols, in regard that
having forsaken the purity of the word, they break that holy marriage knot
which God had contracted with them, and sell themselves over unto Satan. But
Isaiah meant here to express somewhat more: for in telling them that they had
made their bed in an high place, it is as much as if he had said; They were
become shameless, for they cared not who saw their villainy, no more then an
impudent harlot shunnes the presence of men, but is careless of her
reputation: so these committed whordome in the sight of the Sun, and being
past shame, ascended up to every high and imminent place, to do it in.

He compares Chapels and Altars to beds, upon which this cursed filthiness is
committed, and men which sacrifice there to bold and brazen faced strumpets.

In the end of the verse he shows without any figure, what this harlotry is
which he condemns, namely, that they sacrificed to Idols. I grant they thought
in so doing to serve God; but he reiects whatsoever it is that men forge,
according to their own lusts, and detests such a lascivious course.

Verse. 8. Behind the doors also and posts, have thou set up thy remembrance:
for thou have discovered thy self to another then me, and wentest up, and
did enlarge thy bed, and make a covenant between thee and them, and
louedst their bed in every place where thou saw it.
An amplific^^ion of the faul^.
HE amplifies the crime whereof he spoke before, that the people should not
flatter themselves in their inventions. Now it is very likely that Isaiah
alludes to Moses words, wherein the Lord commanded that they should always
have the Law before them: that they should fix it upon the door posts of the
house, and write it in roles, to wrap it about their arms, and about the
fringes of their garments, that they might be continually admonished of their
duties: Deuteronomy. 6.9 and 11.20. Numb. 15.38.39.40. But contrariwise, the Jews
ceased not to pollute the doors and the posts of their houses with marks and
signs of idolatry; and left no corner nor nooke free from such defilings. Thus
God and his Law were rejected in all places, and in stead thereof, they had set
up prouocations and inticements unto whoredom.

Thou have enlarged thy bed.] Yet once more he repeates that which he had said
before, and comes to this clause again, to wit, that the Jews committed
gross adultery with their Idols; and yet thought they served Gods: but this
came to pass, because they neglected to follow the rules of the word. Simile.
For it is all one, as if a woman having forsaken her husband, should go and
prostitute her self to the stews, and make her self common indifferently to
all comers: as if the bed were now become an open field, which might contain
a great troop of men.

For this cause he says, that she discovered herself without him: because
having shaken off the shamefastness of marriage, she suffered others to abuse
her. For God holds the place of an husband, to which she ought to have been
subject: but she sought out new companions, and brake the faith of marriage.
He amplifies this crime, in regard the Jews did voluntarily present
themselves before the idols: as if a disloyal wife should run after another
man, to have his company.

Moreover, under another figure, he taxes their inordinate lust, in respect
that one only glance of the eye served the turn, to carry them suddenly and
dotingly away into every place. Therewithal also he conuinceth men of
rashness: who think themselves very sharp witted in things belonging to Gods
service; and make choice of their places where themselves list. But this is a
devilish wit; for the Lord will have our eyes fixed in such wise upon him and
his word, that they rest closed and shut up against all other things.

Verse. 9. Thou wentest to the Kings with oil, and did increase thine
ointments, and send thy messengers far off, and did humble thy self unto
hell.
HEre the Prophet reprooues another vice almost like the former: It is just
that such as will not rest contented with God, should wander up and down
restleslie without relief.
for impiety begets many errors, and forces light heads that are void of Gods
fear into very sore and perplexed molestations. And is it not good reason that
such as will not rest in God should be restless, or rather tossed up and
down with whirlewinds? He reprocheth the Jews then that they vexed themselves
so much, and so long a time in hunting after the help of strangers, namely,
when they endeavored to oppose the aid of the Egyptians against the Assyrians:
and then being defrauded of their hopes, they began to trot to the Chaldeans.
See 2. Sam. 28.5.6.7.
For when men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty, then they seek help
in others, and not only weary themselves, but are a great cost and travel
to atchieue the same. And whilst the Lord gives quiet sleep to his beloved
ones, that they may quietly finish that they have to do, the wicked vex
themselves for nothing. They rise early, and go late to bed, and eat the
bread of carfulness: as it is in Psalm. 127.2. And yet in the mean while
they cannot enrich themselves the value of a nail: because they do nothing
under Gods authority or government. Now the Lord punishes them thus, to the
end they may wander up and down, as men at their wits end, being ever in doubt
and perplexity, without ever enjoying the benefit of a quiet and contented
mind.

Verse. 10. Thou weariest thy self in thy manifold iournies, yet said thou
not, There is no hope: thou have found life by thine hand, therefore thou wast
not grieved.
HIs meaning is, Men labou^ in vain when they follow not God.
that men labor in vain when they follow not God. For they vex themselves
without profit, as we have said before: because whatsoever it be that is taken
in hand contrary to the will of God, can never have good success. And here
he does wittily deride the perverse endeavors of such, as in taking much
pains, had rather waste and consume the strength of body and mind, then
with quietness to go whither the Lord called them.

It is labor lost.] That is to say; Albeit thou see thy iournies serve thee
to no purpose, yet do thou obstinately go on in pursuing thy enterprises.
And yet very Idiots are wont to repent, when their counsels prosper not well.
Such then must be called perverse and desperate, Who they be that deserve to be
called perverse and obstinate.
who having experience of Gods cursing and crossing their affairs, are not
moved sometimes to enter into their own hearts, and to say, What do thou?
Jeremiah in his 18. chap. and 12. verse touches this obstinacy; but in other
words: for he shows that the Jews were grown so stubborn, that they
desperately said, It is done: that is to say, We will walk after our own
imaginations: we have concluded it shall be so, and we purpose neither to alter
nor change our determinations. But Isaiah in this place reprooues that
senselessness wherewith they were so besotted, that they could not be brought
to acknowledge their own folly, nor repent so, as to turn into the right way
again.

Thou have found life.] Some take life here for food. As if the Prophet had
said; This thy labor has been as acceptable to thee, as if thou had gotten
thy living, in laboring with thine hands. Others take life of the hands for
delight or great voluptuousness: and these two expositions come to one
reckoning. But there is yet a little more difficulty, namely, whether he
speaks here in good earnest, or by way of scorn. For if there be no figure
used here, then the sense will be thus: Thou were not sorrow, because fortune
seemed for a time to favor thee. Whilst the affairs of unbelievers succeed
well, the^ they flatter themselves more and more in their infidelity. As the
common proverb is, Prosperity blinds men. But this falls out then
especially, when having forsaken God, they follow their own ways and
deliberations. For then they despise the Lord. It may also be read by way of
scorn, as if he should say, Whence is it, I pray thee, that thou breakest not
off thy course, nor repentest? why do thou not acknowledge thy folly? Is it
because thou have life in thine hands, and because all things fall out
according to thy desire? This reading pleases me best: though I reject not the
other. Truly it appears sufficiently by the histories that this people had
small cause to glory in their good successes. For the league which they first
made with the Egyptians, next with the Assyrians, and lastly with the
Babylonians was pernicious and deadly unto them. So as they felt by experience
how unadvised they were to call such companions into their rescue. The Prophet
then had good reason to object against them that they had found life by their
hand. He sets out the sottishness of the Jews therefore, in regard they
wittinglie plunged themselves into ruin, and obstinately pursued their own
perdition; whereas at least they ought (even by the example of fools) to have
become wise after they had tasted the whip.

Verse. 11. And whom did thou reverence or fear, seeing thou have lied unto
me, and have not remembered me, neither set thy mind thereon? Is it not
because I held my peace, and that of a long time? Therefore thou fear not
me.
HE inueighs here more sharply against the Jews, There can be no true fear
of God, but where he is worshipped purelie.
in that they were destitute of all fear of God; howsoever they bragged of
their holiness, and pretended a vain title of religion. For hypocrites not
only flatter themselves in their superstitions, but the common people take
them for petty gods: and for this cause they insolentlie advance themselves
both against God and men, and set forth themselves with an impudent
malepertnesse. But our Prophet pronounces that there can be no true fear of
God, where he is not purely worshipped, nor according to the precise rules of
his holy word. For let men esteem the best they can of all their goodly
superstitious devotions; yet all is but mere folly and impiety. Thus then
he protests that they have no fear of God, nor no religion at all in them,
though they gloried never so much of their painted sheathe. Nay, which was
worse; by their ceremonies they made it manifest as by infallible testimonies,
that they had no reverence nor awe of God in them. For the Lord testifies by
Moses, that he would prove whether they loved him from the heart; in suffering
false Prophets to bring in superstitions and idolatries: Deuteronomy. 13.3. All such
then as run after such trumperie do evidently show that their hearts are
void of Gods true fear: for if they considered, that one day they must yield
an account thereof before his judgment seat, they would not so presumptuously
tread his commandments under their feet.

Where he complains, that they had forgotten him; it is to show that they had
not sinned against him through ignorance, but of an obstinate maliciousness.
For having a contain rule of a godly life set down before them, they
wittingly revolted from God, and brake their faith which they had promised him.
We are heedefully to observe how terrible this thunderclap is which is shot
from heaven, as it were against all hypocrites, who scorn all threatenings, and
cover themselves under vain pretenses: when he thus testifies, no spark of
the fear of in them: that they have forgotten him: full of lies.

It is not because, etc] I have thought it fit to insert the particle of
rendering the cause here, which must be supplied, to the end the Prophets
meaning may be the more manifest. For those that supply it not, vex themselves
much to draw out an exposition. But we know how usual this manner of speech is
among the Hebrews. The Prophet blames the Jews for thus abusing the patience
and long suffering of God: which notwithstanding should have mollified their
hearts: Romans 2.4. But such is man's malice, that he thereby imboldens himself
in sinning: and thinks he has good leave to do whatsoever him lists as long
as he is suffered to escape unpunished: Psalm 50.21. And therefore I expound
this member thus: Thou fear not me, because I have held my peace: whereas on
the contrary, my lenity should have broken thine hard heart. Hence we gather,
that the Jews had no cause to complain that God dealt too severely with them,
seeing that though he patiently forbear them a long time, yet they became the
worse; and that by means of this impunitie. The Lord was urged therefore of
necessity to take another course with them: and to punish their iniquities
with the greater rigor.

Verse. 12. I will declare thy righteousness and thy works; and they shall not
profit thee.
Though God suffer long, (yet his patience being abused) he will be avenged at
length.
THe Prophet shows that God will suffer no more so long as he has done in
times past, but that hereafter he shall be constrained to take another course
with them. He mentions their righteousness, by way of derision: for under
this word, he understands all the impieties and errors wherewith they were
stained and defiled. As if he should say; I will have your righteousness to
be seen of all. For whilst God holds his peace, those that are most unjust,
and filled with all corruptions, seem to be petty Saints: but when God gets
up into his judgment seat, then men are forced to come out of their dens,
and their villainies are manifested to every one: Psalm. 50.21. The Prophet
therefore meant to say, that the world esteems horrible impieties to be
virtues, as long as God is silent: but this shall vanish at the last, when he
shall sit to judge of them. For after men shall have flattered themselves much,
and for a long time together, yet in the end they shall feel him to be their
Judge.

And they shall not profit thee] This appertains to the effect; by which men
are wont to judge of things for the most part. For they care not whether the
matter be just or unjust, but imagine, that whatsoever is profitable, ought to
be approved of: and therefore denounces, that all the works from whence they
expected any benefit should turn to their detriment and ruin.

Verse. 13. When thou criest, let them that thou have gathered together, deliver
thee: but the wind shall take them all away; vanity shall pull them away: but
he that trusts in me, shall inherit the land, and shall possess mine holy
mountain.
The former verse amplified.
He shows now more at large, that which he touched but briefly in the former
verse, namely, that when the matter shall come to the vp-shot, they shall be
confounded: for the clause, let them deliver thee, signifies as much as if he
had said; they shall not be able to do it. In this verse then he alludes to
that which he said before, in verse. 9. to wit, Thou wentest to Kings with thy
presents. And for this cause he calls all the means whereby the Jews
thought to secure themselves, gathered: for in resting thereupon, they
prostituted themselves to all kinds of villainies, as if they had had been
liable to no punishment at all, in regard they were fortified with ramparts on
every side. But the Lord shows how vain all their preparations are, that are
thus gathered together without him.

The cry here signifies that calamity wherewith they should be afflicted. For
being settled upon leagues and succors of their confederates, they thought
themselves in such safety, as if before they had never been annoied by such
associates. But he protests, that all the aid which they have gathered
together, shall serve them to no use: for the hopes which we conceive in the
things of this world, and in the help of man, joined with the forsaking of
God, is accursed and abominable: Ier. 17.7.

He reproched the Jews in Chap. 8.6. for not contenting themselves with the
still waters of Silo, but searched out swelling and roaring rivers, which would
ouerwhelme them in the end: which indeed came so to pass. For the Assyrians,
Egyptians, and in the end the Chaldeans, not only were unprofitable to the
Jews, with whom they were confederate, but at last were also their destruction.

Afterward there follows an opposition, wherein he recalles them to trust in
God; which was the only remedy that ought to be opposed to all calamities:
as on the contrary, all our miseries flow from our own infidelity and
distrust. All our miseries flow from our own infidelity.
And whereas he promises an heritage to those that hope in the Lord, it is as
if he should have said; What is it that you seek, but that you may live in
safety, and that your inheritance may remain wholly unto you? And I am sure
my self can give it you. For (tell me) who brought you into this land? Who
gave you possession in it? And yet you trot down into Egypt, and seek aid
from men which cannot help you, and you set mine assistance at naught. The
word heritage out of all doubt is meant of Judea, wherein the Jews desired to
remain securely. For afterward, he mentions the mountain of his holiness,
whereupon the Temple was built. Thus then the Jews sought to turn God out of
his office as it were, seeing they rather ran for succor to the Egyptians
and Assyrians, then to him.

Hence let us gather a general doctrine, holy mountain, to which the Jews
were to be brought again, he means, that neither life, nor none of the
commodities thereof, are to be desired, but upon condition that we may
therewithal enjoy the true worship of God: for the end of man's life is, The
end of man's life.
that God may have a people to call upon his name purely. Let our eyes then be
always fixed upon the honor and service of our God, if we either desire
deliverance from troubles, or to enjoy life with the commodities thereof.

Verse. 14. And he shall say, Cast up, cast up: prepare the way: take up the
stumbling blocks out of the way of my people.
See verse. 13.
BEcause this promise (to wit, that those who trusted in the Lord should
possess the land) might seem ridiculous, seeing soon after they should be
banished out of their country: A prevention.
therefore this second promise is added for the little remnants sake which yet
remained. In which he promises that they shall be brought home again into the
land of Canaan, though for a time they were cast out and driven into a far
country. He meets with a doubt which might arise, that so the faithful might
not be discouraged during this long and tedious exile, nor esteem Gods
promises to be vain.

Some expound, That the Lord would send true and faithful Prophets which
should remove and purge out those offenses of the Church, wherewith it was
corrupted by false prophets, and wicked governors. For they, as he showed in
Chap. 56.10.11. were the cause of the ruin of it, and therefore they judge
that here is a better and more desirable estate promised. But this exposition
suits very ill, and therefore I had rather follow the first, namely, that
albeit the Jews for a time were to be deprived of this land, yet the Lord
would establish them therein again, who will to that end command the rough
ways to be made smooth, for their return. This place therefore agrees with
that which we have seen in Chap. 40.1.2.3.4. where the Lord comforted: For
being yet in Babylon as in a sepulcher, and the distance of place very great,
and the passage tedious, they were hardly drawn to hope that they should ever
return again into their country.

Isaiah therefore was not lightly to pass over this matter, that so he might
take from them all fear of being hindered in their journey, either in regard of
the mountains or the sea. He speaks to Cyrus Cyrus.
and Darius Darius.
then, into whose minds God would inspire a will to give the Jews both
passage, and all necessaries fit for the same. As if he should say, The Lord
will send the Jews such servants of his as they little think of now, by whose
ministry he will prepare the way, and bring back his people. The manner of
speech whereby he commands, has greater vehemency in it, then if he had
spoken in the third person.

In that he bids them to take away the stumbling blocks: he signifies, that
they ought not to be dismayed for the lets and impediments that lay in their
way, for the Lord would easily remove them in his good time. Out of the way of
my people. The hope of the return is included in this, namely, that after God
had brought back his people, he would again place them in the land of Canaan.
And therefore howsoever for ought they could see, there was no way nor passage
left for them, yet would he provide one, and would break all bars and
obstacles. Why so? Because they had the Lords promise here for their return:
and in deed it was he that brought them home in safety.

Verse. 15. For thus says he that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth the
eternity, whose name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place: with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart.
HE confirms the former sentence touching the restoring of the people after ye
captivity. A confirmation of the former sentence.
But this verse may be two ways expounded; either, that the Prophet preuents a
doubt which might fall into ye minds of the faithful, and so he mentions
things in heaven, but in the mean while there is a great distance between him
and us: and that he little regards us; or else lets things go at six and seven
in the world: or that he cares little or nothing for our matters. Now to
correct this imagination, the Prophet grants it is true that God dwells on high,
but yet does not therefore cease to behold and to govern this world by his
providence: for he is careful of men's saluations, and dwells also with the
afflicted, and with those that are of a contrite and broken heart. For though
the Lord be high, yet he beholds the lowly, as it is in Psalm. 113.3.4. and
148.6. and in other places.

The other sense is, that God resembles us nothing at all. For we tremble in
adversity, because we measure him according to our own capacity: and thus we
mutter, How can the Lord help us, seeing we are overwhelmed with troubles?
Moreover, the afflicted are for the most part despised and neglected. And thus
we think that God is careless of us, because we conceive of him according to
the reach of our carnal reason. But it is our parts to judge far otherwise
of him, and therefore the Prophet says, that he dwel^ in the heavens, to
signify, that he is not subject to humane affections: for he is always like
himself, and never changes his counsel. As he therefore has once promised
to restore the people to their former liberty, so will he assuredly perform
it.

This exposition I approve of, and yet rather accept of the first, which is
more ample and copious, and also agrees with other testimonies of the holy
Scriptures, where these two things are often conioined, namely, That God dwells
in heaven, and yet has respect to things below: but especially of his
children, as I said erewhile.

Dwelling in eternity.] embraced:

I dwell in the high and holy place.] The holy place is often taken for the
Temple; but here it is taken for heaven it self. Why God cal^^^ himse^fe the
holy one, dwelling on high.
We see wherefore the Lord calls himself holy, and dwelling in an high and
holy place, even that he might cause us to know what difference there is
bet^e^ne him and us, and between his nature and ours. Besides, we may hence
collect a special consolation, A consolation.
namely, that the Lord will assist the poor, yea, and dwell in the midst of
them, if so be they acknowledge their miseries. For the wicked shall be pressed
with diverse calamities; but in the mean while they cease not to remain
haughty and untamed. Let such never look to have God dwell with them: With
whom God will dwell.
for those that will expect any comfort from him, must be rightly humbled, and
brought low in their own sight. But he stoopes even to the dead, that by
inspiring new life into them, he may create them anew. Afterward, he makes
express mention of the humble spirit, and contrite heart, to let us
understand, that these promises appertain to none that are rebellious and
stiff-necked in their afflictions, but to such as having at last subdued all
loftiness of spirit, shall show themselves humble and meek.

Verse. 16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth:
for the spirit should fail before me, and I have made the breath.
He prosecutes the same matter still.
HE prosecutes the same doctrine. For this was an hard matter to persuade them
of, in regard that in this tedious banishment, they felt God as it were their
enemy. It was no easy matter then for them to conceive such a taste of this
grace, as might cause them to take heart unto them, and to be of good cheer.
The Prophet therefore meets with this doubt, and shows that the evils which
they were to endure, should last but for a time, and that God would not
always be wroth. No doubt but he has just cause given him to be angry: but
he rather parts with his right, and pardons that which he might justly exact.
And thus he ioines with Gods wrath, that moderation whereby he comforts the
faithful, In wrath God still remembers mercy.
lest the spirit should fail. For albeit he reasons from the nature of God,
yet this promise is particularly directed to the Church. Let us for ever then
keep this point in our remembrance in our extremest anguishes; that so we may
not think that God will stand to contend or to plead the case with us.

When he says that God is wroth: it is by way of yielding so much unto us, in
respect of the weakness of our flesh: for in adversity we can conceive no
otherwise of God, but as of an angry Judge: and no question it is profitable
for us to be touched with this feeling, which ought to bring us to repentance.
This phrase of speech then must wholly be referred to our weakness, and not
unto God.

For the Spirit shall be clothed again.] Here he renders a reason wherefore
the Lord will not contend for ever: but this place is diversely expounded. Among
other expositions, this seems to agree best; that the Spirit is clothed with
the body, as with a garment. In which regard, the body also is called the
Tabernacle or dwelling place of the Spirit. If we receive this exposition,
there will be a double sense: for some refer this place to the last
resurrection, and say, that the soul shall be clothed: that is to say, after
it shall depart from the body, she shall return the second time into it, as
into her house. And thus it should be an argument from the greater to the
less, thus; I will raise the dead bodies: wherefore then should not I put you
into a better estate, though you seem as good as dead? The other sense which
some others follow, will be better, and less constrained: for this
interpretation touching the last resurrection, seems far remote from the scope
of the text.

I have compassed the Spirit in with the body.] As if he should say; It is I
that have created men; you must think that I will have a care of them then.
But I should think that the Prophet mounts higher: for he teaches that the
Lord handles us thus mildly and graciously, because he knows and is well
acquainted with our frailty and infirmities. This doctrine is confirmed unto
us by many other places of the Scriptures; but amongst the rest, out of Psalm.
103.13, 14, 15. Even as a father pitieth his own children, so is the Lord
compassionate over such as fear him. He knows whereof we be made, he
remembers we are but dust. Man is like to grass, he florisheth as a flower of
the field. In Psalm. 78.38, 39. it is said in the same sense; But he being
merciful, forgave their iniquities, and destroyed them not. He often called
back his anger, and suffered not his whole displeasure to arise: for he
remembered they were but flesh, and a vvinde that passes away, and returns
not again. And me thinks the Prophet meant thus much in this place, as if the
Lord should have said; What should I do trying my force against a little
vvinde, or breath; or against a leaf, or grass, which vanishes in a moment,
and withers away as soon as it has felt the heat of the Sun?

Some expound the verb Iaatok, Shall fail: and this agrees well enough to
this place; for our Spirit must needs fail, as soon as the Lord does begin
to manifest his power against us: Psalm. 104.29. But not to stand upon the
signification of the words, we see, I hope, what the Prophets meaning is: for
he shows that God spares us, and uses great lenity toward us, in correcting
our vices, because he respects our infirmity, and means to support and relieve
it.

Verse. 17. For his wicked covetousness, I am angry with him, and have smitten
him: I hid me and was angry, yet he went away, and turned after the way of his
own heart.
A complaint.
HEre he complains of the desperate obstinacy of the people, and shows that
the Lord had exceeding just cause to punish them thus: so as they could not
complain of his over great severity.

For his lusts.] Others turn it, For his avarice. And in this sense if you
understand it of avarice, it is by a figure called Synecdoche, taken as a part
for the whole. For covetousness is the root from whence other vices spring.
But we may take it generally for all lusts. For the Lord was wroth against so
many wickednesses, wherewith the Jews were stained: and punished them severely
for them. But he speaks expressly of lust, to show that they were chastised,
not so much for their manifest and open sins, as for that they were guilty
before God. For this suffices to all men's condemnation, that God is the Judge
of thoughts. So as he will not only punish notorious iniquities, but also the
secret inordinate and wicked lusts and affections of the heart. Besides, he
aduertiseth them that they are justly smitten: that by feeling their
guiltiness, they might humbly sue for pardon.

I have smitten him, and hid my self.] The meaning of these words is, that his
grace stood a far off and was hidden from them for a time. But he speaks
according to our opinions. For we apprehend God as an enemy and angry with
us, when he punishes our offenses, as we have said before. And doubtless it
is needful we should thus conceive of him and apprehend him, that thereby we
may be brought to acknowledge our sins: which we will never do in good
earnest, neither will we be effectually touched with the horror of them,
unless we consider and be assuredly persuaded in our minds and consciences
that we have thereby provoked the wrath of God against us. Now as it is
expedient that we be brought to repentance by this means, Beware of being
overwhelmed by desperate, sorrow.
yet let us beware that we be not overwhelmed with sorrow, in imagining either
that God is irreconciliable, or that he will have no more to do with us. Thus
then the Prophet mitigates these excessive fears, and forbids us to measure
God according to our own ell. For albeit he chasten us, yet cease he not to
bear a gracious love and fatherly affection toward them whom he has adopted.

But he went his way.] This is the rebellion which the Prophet taxes and
reproues, namely, that the people amended not by their stripes, but obstinately
perseuered in their wickedness: and therefore he shows they were grown past
cure, in regard the violent remedies which God used could not bring them back
into the right way.

Verse. 18. I have seen his ways and will heal him: I will lead him also and
restore comfort unto him, and to those that lament him.
THe Lord here on the contrary magnifies his mercy, Our maladies incurable,
if the Lord should not prevent us by his grace.
in regard that he is favorable to this so obstinate and rebellious a people,
and in preventing them of his mere bounty and compassion. As if he should
say, I have endeavored to bring them to repentance by my rods and chastisements,
even whilst they pursued their lusts: but they have showed themselves
obstinate and incorrigible, so as I have spent all my labor in vain. I might
therefore (if I would) justly destroy them, yet had I rather heal and save
them. But this can not be effected unless I manifest my great and infinite
mercy. Well, I will therefore withdraw my corrections. You see then that our
Prophet by degrees amplifies and sets forth Gods mercy, whom he brings in as a
careful Physician, be thinking himself of the aptest and fittest medicines to
cure this peoples maladies. But they are incurable, unless the Lord prevent us
for his own mercy and truths sake. Let his rods be never so sharp and biting,
yet can they not draw us to repentance, unless the Lord work it in us by his
holy Spirit. Alas! without it we are in danger to grow the more obstinate and
hard hearted. Read Exodus 7.8.9.10.11. and 12. Chapters.
In this people therefore we may behold the image of man's corrupted nature,
therein the better to take knowledge of our own obstinacy and rebellion
against God; as also what remedies are the meetest to heal our spiritual
sicknesses: so as being sick, nay half dead, yet we may recover health, and
be brought into the right way, and therein remain.

Our Prophet shows herewithall, Perseverance the only work of God.
that perseverance in a good course is the only work of God, whereupon
follows a great consolation, which yet we can not have, nor faith neither, if
repentance be wanting: for such as are not at odds with themselves in regard
of their sins, can never conceive ought but Gods wrath, terrors, and
despair. We are carefully to observe the order then which Isaiah keeps
here; for he does not rashly add a consolation to the healing, because such
as recover their health, do therewithal recover joy of heart, whereof they
were before deprived.

When he adds, and to those that lament him; he seems especially to note out
the faithful who were few in number, as it appears by the Prophets
complaints, who make sharp and bitter inuectiues against the drouzines
wherewith this people was wholly possessed. He speaks to those then who being
guilty of common offenses, were constrained to weep in regard of the grief
which pressed them near: and lamented not only the calamities of the people,
but also in pitiful sort mourned under the sense of Gods wrath, whilst others
plunged themselves in their voluptuousnes.

Verse. 19. I create the fruit of the lips to be peace: peace to them that are
far of, and to them that are near, says the Lord; for I will heal him.
An exp^sition of the former sentence.
THis is the explication of the former sentence, namely, by what means the Lord
would comfort this people, to wit, by promising and offering them peace: for by
the fruit of the lips, he signifies, that they shall hear such good news of
peace, as shall revive and rejoice their hearts. And, as I take it, he speaks
of the publishing of that peace, which was committed first to the Prophets,
then to the Apostles, and other Ministers of the Gospel: as Saint Paul
teaches, 2. Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for Christ (says he) and do
beseech men to be reconciled unto God.

The repetition of the word peace, serves not only for the greater
confirmation, but it also signifies a continual progress of it. As if he
should say; You hear nothing now but terrible threatenings: the doctrine of
grace and salvation is as good as buried: for you are incapable of it; your
obstinacy is such, that you must be thundered against with terrors and
menaces: but one day I will restore unto you the doctrine of peace, and I will
open the lips of my Prophets, which shall puplish the same in your ears.

To those that are far off.] This was added in regard the people, who were
carried away captive, thought that these things appertained not unto the^,
because they were far off, but such as were left in the Country, might
happily enjoy this fruit; for their exile was unto them as a kind of reiection.
But the Prophet protests, that even they shall taste of this grace, though they
be far remote. Lastly, the effect is added, namely, that God would heal the
people: that is to say, would keep them safe and sound. Hence we gather that
which I touched but erewhile, to wit, that whatsoever appertains to the true
and perfect felicity of the Church, is the free gift of God.

It seems Saint Paul had an eye to this place, in Ephesians. 2.17. where he says,
that Christ has brought peace to those which were near, and to those a far
off. Now he speaks of Jews and Gentiles: for the Jews were near, because
God had made a covenant with them; and the Gentiles were far off, in regard
they had no part in this covenant. Paul had just cause to put them both in one
rank, and therefore makes them paires: and thus applied that to the Gentiles
which our Prophet had said touching the Jews: as in like manner he applies the
place of Hosea, Chap. 1.10. to the Gentiles: Romans 9.26.

Verse. 20. But the wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt.
Having spoken of that peace which the faithful should enjoy, A denunciation
against the wicked.
he on the contrary denounces against the wicked continual war and
perpetual troubles, and garboiles of conscience, wherewith they should be
vexed. And the rather, that the faithful for their parts might the better
prize this excellent benefit of peace: as also, that the wicked might know,
that this peace is so promised to Gods children, that their condition shall no
whit be bettered by it. But in regard these do often vainly and falsely pretend
the name of God, and glory in it as a cloak to cover their wickedness withal;
therefore the Prophet shows, that they shall have no cause to rejoice herein,
or to attribute any thing to themselves in regard of this promise; because they
can have no part in this peace. It should be little to their good then, though
God showed mercy to his people, received them into favor; or that he gave men
authority to publish peace unto them.

This similitude of the sea, is elegant and very fit to express the
disquietnes of the wicked. For the sea troubles it self, and is tossed with
hideous tempests, though the winds be calm: the waves iustle one against
another with great violence, and break with a very terrible noise: and so the
wicked are vexed with a secret worm, which cleaves fast to their consciences;
for they are in continual terrors, by reason of the gnawing and stings
thereof, which is a torment that surmounts all the rest, and the most cruel
hangman that is to be found in the whole world. The furies of hell harrie and
pursue the wicked, not with burning Torches, as the Poets feign; but through
anguishes of conscience, and y^ torment of their wilful rebellion: for every
one of the^ is affrighted, and extremely tortured by his own iniquity: their
wicked cogitations amaze them, and cause them to rage, and the guilt and
scruples of their consciences astonish them. He has very aptly then compared
the wicked to the raging sea. He that would escape and avoid these tempests and
horrible boiling of spirit: let him beware how he reiects this peace which the
Lord offers him. There is no mean between these two: for unless we abandon
all our lusts, to entertain

Verse. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
THe Prophet confirms the former sentence, namely, A confirmation of the
former denunciation.
that the wicked shall gain nothing in seeking this peace; for they shall have
alarums rung in their ears on every side; and in regard that God makes war
upon them, therefore they shall but lose their labor to hope for peace. I
grant the wicked would with all their hearts enjoy peace, yea they much desire
it. For what seek they else in this world, but to be secured, and to rock
their consciences asleep, that they may take their fill of pleasures, and give
themselves over without check, unto all lasciviousness. They endeavor to
banish from them al thoughts of Gods judgments, What course the wicked take to
attain peace.
and would feign become senseless: and these they take to be the true means
whereby to obtain peace: but they shall never this way enjoy it; for till they
be reconciled unto God in Christ, their consciences will ever be galling them,
and they shall not cease to be molested with the accusations thereof. And thus
he brings in God the only author of peace, who by this terrible sentence,
takes from the Jews their peace, and calls him his God: opposing it against
their vain glory, who falsely covered themselves under such titles. For they
could not be said to have any knowledge of God, whilst they rejected both his
Prophet and doctrine: and therefore Isaiah is bold by Gods express
commandment, to proclaim open war against them.

THE LVIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Cry aloud, spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my
people their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins.
This Chapter depends upon the former.
THis present Chapter was ill divided, in regard this is knit unto the former:
so as if we will understand the Prophets meaning, we must read this as if
there were no breking off. Isaiah has testified that the people should be so
chastised, that yet some hope of peace remained fot them. Now he confirms
this doctrine, and teaches that the Lord has charged him to cry out of the
throat, A plain gosier.
or as we commonly say in our speech, with open throat. To what end? Forsooth,
to show the people their sins. Neither speaks he only of the lifting up of
the voice, but of that vehemency and severity of speech (whereof hypocrites
stand especially in need) as if God thundered upon them from heaven. For they
flatter themselves in their vices, if they be not rounly dealt withal, and be
forced to come into the light: nay, no good is to be done upon them, unless
they be laid upon with maine blows.

Where he adds, spare not: it is a form of speech much used among the
Hebrews; I speak, and will not hold my peace: as we also commonly say; Cry
without ceasing. We have told you that the Prophet speaks not here simply of
the sound of the voice, Cry sans espargner.
but signifies a sharp and biting kind of reprehension, wherewith hypocrites
must be galled to the quick: as for example, if the Prophets should only
propound the Law of the Lord, and show wherein the rule of a well ordered life
consists, should fall into the praise of Gods worship, and without any
vehemency reprove iniquities; what would hypocrites have been the better for
such a cold manner of preaching? For their consciences are so drowsy, that
they cannot be awakened, but with loud and shrill cries. A cold manner of
preaching then would do them no good, unless they were sharply pressed and
thundered upon with terrible threats.

Saint Paul (imitating the Prophets) having proved all mankind guilty and
worthy of death, he rises up with great vehemency, against such as had some
appearance of holiness, and yet abused Gods patience. Behold, says he, thou
art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and gloriest in God, thou know his
will, and approuest the things that are excellent, being instructed in the Law.
Thou take upon thee to be a leader of the blind, a light to such as are in
darkness, an instructor of the ignorant, and an instructor of them that lack
discretion, having a form of knowledge and of ye truth in the Law. But thou
which teach others, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest another
should not steal, yet do thou steal? etc. Romans 2. Against such, in
conclusion, he denounces judgment, and the horrible vengeance of God;
because they abused Gods goodness, and gloried in his name in vain. Likewise
in this place the Prophet taxes the Jews in particular, who gloried in the
name of the Lord, and in the mean while rose up in arms against him.

This is the course then that must be taken with hypocrites, who content
themselves with an outward mask of holiness, if we mean to discharge our
duties profitably, and as we ought. And even as the Lord has exercised his
Prophets in this combat, so mus^ we also at this day be in like manner
exercised; that we may not fear the faces of hypocrites, nor content our
selves to have reproved them lightly, in two or three words, but to cry aloud
with might and maine against them.

But, may some say, If the Lord command such to be reproved for their sins,
Isaiah then gives hope of a peace near hand, he had respect little flock:
when he proclaimed the multitude, who were revolted from God, and contemned all
admonitions. For the state of the people was such that nothing was sound nor
pure among them, as we have seen in chap. 1.21.

He mentions the house of Jacob, in regard the most of the people were
corrupted. Now this distinction in the Prophets Sermons is diligently to be
noted of us, in that they now speak to the whole body of the people: and by
and by restrain their speech to a small number of the faithful. But it is not
without a very sharp and biting reproach that he calls those his people, and
the children of Jacob, which were degenerate from their original, and had
shamefully revolted from the faith of the Patriarks. This therefore is a
yielding of so much to them: but with a plain mock. As if he should say,
There are no deserts at all of theirs which shall privilege them from hearing
their own.

Verse. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and will know my ways, even as a nation
that did righteouslie, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God: they
ask of me the ordinances of justice: they will draw near unto God, saying.
A prevention to an objection.
HE meant here to take from hypocrites all occasions of replies, for they had
their exceptions ready, We fear, serve, love, and seek God with our whole
hearts. Wherefore blamest thou us as if we were infidels? For we would thou
should well know we order our lives according to the ordinances of the law.
But to meet with this objection, he denies that they do any thing purely or
sincerely: but that all is hypocritical, and from the teeth outvvard; and
therefore God who chiefly requires a perfect heart, Genesis 17.1.
reiects such a fained service.

And we are to observe the order which the Prophet here follows. For having
proclaimed open war against the wicked and hypocrites, he now severely
reprooues them, and stripes them quite of their fained pretense, under which
they shadowed themselves. For thus they were to be handled and to be ferreted
out of their lurking holes: otherwise doctrine would profit them but little or
nothing. Which order as all the faithful are to observe in regard of others; so
ought every one to apply this doctrine to his several use, that he may not
please nor flatter himself in his vices, lest he deceive his own heart, or
suffer himself to be seduced by the illusions of the devil. Let every one
bring with him a pure and an upright heart, if he mean to profit in the pure
doctrine; and to be acceptable to his God.

Moreover, although Jsaiah attributes to these dissemblers and disloyal some
kind of holiness: How he ought to come to be fitted that means to profit by
the word.
yet he again taxes them with a very bitter flout, as if he should say,
Your impudent boasting is accompanied with too manifest an obstinacy. And thus
it is not only a plain mock, but there is a complaint mingled therewith, for
presuming to serve God in hypocrisy. Whereas if their shows were rightly
examined, and that the whole course of their lives were sufficiently sifted, it
would be found that their hearts were far remote from God.

They ask of me.] Those who think that hypocrites do here complain of God,
and rise up against him as it were to plead the matter with him, have not
rightly conceived of the Prophets meaning. I confess we shall see this
hereafter: but before that he plucks off from them that mask of fained
holiness. Having said then that they sought God daily, as if nothing had bin
deerer to them then religion, he prosecutes the same sentence, and says, that
they asked of him ordinances of justice, to the end they might honor God, and
follow an upright course of life; to wit, when they made show to burn with
zeal.

And no question but the Prophet here recites the chiefest exercises of the
faithful, which sometimes hypocrites in appearance seem to imitate. Now the
maine point of true godliness consists in seeking to Gods revealed will, that
our conversation may be squared according to the rules which he gives, and to
depend upon his sacred mouth. But the hypocrites do counterfeit this in such
wise, that for the most part they seem to practice that which appertains to
Gods worship in an higher measure then the faithful.

Verse. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? We have punished
our selves, and thou regardest it not. Behold, in the day of your fast you will
seek your will, and require all your debts.
He passes on further in the same argument, and says, He still prosecutes
the same argument in this and in the next verse.
that besides this hypocrisy which thus blindes those that serve God to the
halues, pride does so superabound in them, that they dare in plain terms make
opposition against God himself: and when he presses them near, they burst
forth into complaints, as if he offered them great wrong. As if they should have
said; Have thou any reason to reject our services, fasts, and prayers?
Wherefore should thou not accept of them? Can thou in equity suffer us to
punish our selves thus for nothing? He has already granted to the hypocrites
some show of holiness, whereby they deceived the world: but now he shows that
rhey were besotted, and ready to burst with pride inwardly, under pretense of
their painted works, with which they thought to satisfy God, and in regard
thereof, outfaced the Prophets, and flattered themselves in their wickednesses,
namely, in their infidelity, rebellion, and obstinacy against God; distrust,
cruelty, deceit, and oppression. These were light matters with them, and they
thought they might easily purge themselves of them, by fastings and such
bodily exercises: for these were their goodly merits in which they imagined the
whole worship of God consisted, and by which they hoped to be absolved from all
their sins. And thus they strained at a gnat, and made no bones to swallow a
Camel: Mat. 23.24.

But if the Jews had only been such, and that the world were now grown
better, then should we be enforced to seek out examples here of far hence:
but seeing we have experience every day of the like dealing, we need not spend
much time in the exposition of this text.

Besides, this complaint may as well be referred to the word as to the power of
God. For the Lord judges hypocrites both ways. fasts, are here rebuked for
opposing these exercises against the Prophets admonitions. As if forsooth they
had been the true servants of God, and that they were wrongfully reproved.

Neither am I of their mind who think that the people complain of God for
using them so severely in this their banishment. But I rather think they
complain of the Prophets of God, who as they thought, rebuked them too
sharply. For the Jews would needs be held for zealous and devout men, and
could not endure that any should condemn them of impiety or iniquity. And
for this cause the Prophet discouers their affections; and tells them that they
strove against God: that so they might know they had not to do with a mortal
man.

In the second part of the verse (in the person of God) he refutes the virtues
which the hypocrites proclaimed with sound of trumpet. The reason is, because
they never made any reckoning, touching ye putting off of their froward and
carnal affections, nor began not at the denial of themselves. For he
condemns them especially for being given to their lusts: and then mentions
certain particular vices: Whence we may gather, that they were touched with
no care of repentance.

Verse. 4. Behold, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do to day, to make your voice to be
heard above.
The reason Why God regarded not the I^wes fasts.
THis verse must be joined to the former. For in regard the Lord brought in the
hypocrites complaining of ye Prophets vehemency and sharpness in the first
member: now in this second he yields a reason wherefore the Lord regarded not
their fasts and other works: namely, because none of these things proceeded
from a pure affection of the heart. Now he shows what their hearts were by the
fruits: for he brings them to the commandments of the second table, whereby
it is easy to discern what we are within.

The purity of the heart manifests it self in an upright conuersing with our
neighbors, and in absteining from all fraud and violence. These are ye lively
representations of a pure affection: without which God reiects, yea abhorres
all external services. For where deceit, extortions and robberies have the
full scope, it is most certain that there the fear of God has no place at
all. He reprocheth the hypocrites then that under color of their fastings,
they took the greater liberty to oppress their brethren, and to follow their
lusts the more freely. We have experience of this every day: for many fast,
not only to obtain pardon for their frauds, and thefts, and liberty to play
the thieves the more freely; but also that during the time of their fasts, they
may have the better leisure to cast over their reckonings, to read their bills
and obligations, to count what gains are come in by their usury, Lent.
and to the set fasting days; and such as are the most notorious hypocrites,
will hear many Masses every day, that under pretext of religion, they may
plot their cosenages and treacheries with more freedom, that so no man may
come to interrupt them. Last of all, the Prophet reiects their fasts,
notwithstanding the high account which they made of them; because by means
hereof, Gods wrath was the more provoked.

And by and by after he also reiects their prayers: God approues no service,
but that which proceeds from the sincere affection of the heart.
whence it appears (as we have more largely showed upon the first Chapter)
that God approues no services at all, unless they proceed from the sincere
affection of the heart. Truly there is no sacrifice more excellent then prayer,
and yet we see notwithstanding that the impuritie of the heart pollutes and
defiles all our prayers. Moreover, in regard that fasts are usually joined
with prayer, the Prophet takes it for granted, Fasting, a dependence of Prayer.
for indeed, it is a dependence of prayer. He forbids such kind of men then to
make solemn prayers with fasts, because they shall gain nothing thereby,
unless peradventure that the Lord will punish them the more severely for it.
And hence we gather (as we have said before) that ye Lord reiects all external
works, if the true fear of his Majesty goes not before.

The fast which was in use among the Jews is not here in it self condemned,
The Jews fast not condemned in it self.
as if it had bin a superstitious ceremony, but the abuse of it, and vain
confidence in it. Which we are well to observe: for we must go another way to
work with the Papists, if we should stand to reprove their fasts, which are
merely superstitious, in regard they are tied to certain days and times, as
if the rest of the year it were lawful to cram their bellies. Fast of Papists
merely superstitions.
They also hold flesh to be unclean, and in the mean while stuff themselves
up to the throats with iunckets, and delicate meats. In a word, if so be they
eat and drink their fills only once in the day when they keep their fast,
they think then they have done a work of supererogation. Seeing then that
there is nothing in all that which they do that may be approved of, we may
simply condemn them. But Isaiahs dispute was in another kind: for the fast
which the Jews observed was laudable in it self, because God had instituted,
it, Leuit 23.27. and 16.29.30. But the false opinion only was condemned. As for
the Papists, we must condemn not only their false opinion, but the
institution of their fasts also, in regard it is wicked. The Papists join
together with the Jews in this, namely, that they think God beholding to them
for it, and in that they think to merit by it. Fasting alone is no service of
God.
But a fast alone is no service of God, neither is it required in it self as
other works commanded in the law: but it is an outward action, as an handmaid
unto prayer; and is profitable either to tame the flesh, or to testify our
humiliation. As when we feel our selves guilty, we desire God in the day of
our adversity that he would turn his wrath away from us. But he that would
be further instructed touching this point, Institutions of Calvin.
let him resort to our Institutions, Lib 4. Chap. 12. Sect. 14. 15. 16. 17. and
there he shall find a more ample discourse both concerning the use and end of
it.

Verse. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his
soul for a day, and to hang down his head like a bulrush; and to lie down in
sackcloth and ashes? will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day unto
the Lord?
A confirmation of the confirmation.
HE confirms the former sentence, and shows that God neither approues nor
condemns fasting in it self further then when it is applied to the right end.
Now his meaning was not utterly to abolish it, but the wicked abuse of it, to
wit, when men put holiness in it, and either in despising or neglecting true
godliness, they think that the bodily exercise alone suffices. For hypocrites
are ever wont to make the most they can of their external ceremonies, and that
no less, then if they were satisfactions to appease God withal. Now in regard
that men accor^ing to their headines dare of themselves define what Gods
service is, he therefore brings us back expreslie to his own difinition of it,
to the end our reason may not give sentence that a thing is right, unless we
be first assured that he approues of it: for howsoever men please themselves,
and be highly conceited of their own understandings, and malepertlie vaunt
thereof, yet the Lord reiects and abhorres such pride; for he reserues it in
his own power to make choice of that which he likes best, neither does it
belong to any other.

To choose, is as much as to like or allow of: but he protests that this is not
acceptable unto him to see one continue a day without meat, and to go
sorrowfully with his head hanging down. Simile.
The Prophet has used a very fit similitude: for as the bulrush bows it self
easily, notwithstanding it stands bolt upright, so hypocrites have skill to bow
and hang down the head, as if they were brought low with faintnes, or to
signify some vain appearance of humility. His meaning was therefore to tax
these superstitious gestures wherein hypocrites are wont to place a kind of
holiness.

Sackcloth and ashes were added to fasting then chiefly, When sackcloth and
ashes were chiefly in use.
when they made solemn profession of their repentance: for they covered
themselves with sackcloth, and laid ashes upon their heads. God approved this
as an holy and laudable exercise. And we also see that the Prophets summoning
the people to repentance, have called them to sackcloth and ashes, Joel. 1.13.
But as we have formerly said that fasting is not here condemned in it self, no
more does Isaiah condemn these external rites; only he rebukes hypocrites for
separating the truth from the signs.

If any shall ask,

An acceptable fast.] From hence we observe that fasts were celebrated when
solemn prayers were made; and that all the Church was assembled together. For
fasting is but the handmaid of prayer, Fasting the handmaid of prayer.
as we have showed before; and we also see that Christ adds it thereunto,
Matthew. 17.21. It is not instituted then in regard of it self, but tends to
another end.

Verse. 6. Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke?
THe Prophet shows wherein the true offices of piety which are principally
commanded of God consist, namely, What duties God allows of in fasting.
in comforting the poor and oppressed. fasting, when in stead thereof he
recites those works which are much more acceptable unto God. I answer, Fasting
approved when charity is joined with it.
that fasting is then approved, when charity is joined with it. The Prophet
brings us to this principle, to wit, that our consciences may be pure and
sound, and that we exercise our selves in showing brotherly kindness one to
another. For if this order be duly observed, then fasting being added thereto,
will be pleasing and acceptable to the Lord. But, may some say, here is not a
word uttered touching the purity of the heart. Paul makes express mention of
love among the fruits of the Spirit: Gal. 5.22. When the observation of the Law
is mentioned then, we understand not only the outward actions, but the
affections of the heart must also come into account.

To loose the bands of wickedness.] Some expound it; The wicked thoughts,
wherewith men are bound and entangled. But it seems Isaiah meant otherwise, to
wit, that hypocrites are very merciless toward the poor, and lay very heavy
yokes upon them. He calls that knots or bands, which we commonly term
oppressions. To which agrees that which is added, to take off the heavy
burdens, under the weight whereof, the poor and needy groan, and are in a
manner overwhelmed therewith. The Prophet then sets not down the definition of
a fast, but shows what the Lord chiefly and principally requires in the

Verse. 7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that wander unto thine house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh?
He still goes on in describing the duties of love.
He goes on in describing the duties of love, which he touched in the former
verse. For having said in the first place, that Two parts of equity.
For there are two parts of equity and justice. First, that

In commanding them to break their bread to the hungry, he meant to take away
all excuses from the covetous and niggardly, who are wont to reply, that their
goods are their own: like Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.11. It is mine own, say they, and
therefore I may keep it to my self. Why should I make that common, which God
has given me for my particular use? The Prophet answers, that it does indeed
appertain unto thee, but upon condition that thou dealest out part thereof to
the hungry and thirsty: and not that thou should eat all thy self alone.
Truly common reason teaches us, that the hungry are defrauded of their right,
unless their wants be supplied: yea, such a woeful spectacle often moves the
most barbarous and cruel to compassion.

Afterward he reckons up some particulars, which are usually wont to mollify
the stoniest heart, and move them to show mercy. The reason is, that their
inhumanitie which are not touched with the sense of the poverty, and need of
their brethren, might be the less excusable.

Lastly, he concludes, and hide not thy face from thine own flesh: where we
are to note this word flesh; for thereby he means all men in general; not
one, whereof we can behold, but therein of necessity we must view our own
nature, as in a glass. It is great inhumanitie then to disdain and despise
those in whom we are forced to acknowledge our own image.

Verse. 8. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of
the Lord shall embrace thee.
THe Prophet shows that God is not over rigorous, A prevention of an objection.
neither requires he of us more then is need, though hypocrites complain
causlesly never so much, in accusing him of too great severity: for when their
works are condemned, then they gnash the teeth, and answer, that God can never
be content; and therefore they know not what they should do more, nor what way
to take. He answers them again, that God requires no more but a pure and
upright heart: that is to say, a good conscience. If they have that, he will
show them mercy, and in gathering them together again, will give testimony of
their holiness, and will bless them every manner of way, whom he has justly
chastised for their disloyalties. In a word, that they shall have no occasion
at all to murmr, as if he were too sharp toward them; because they should
taste of his bounty and liberality, if in rejecting all hypocrisy, they
would dispose themselves to worship him in sincerity.

We must note the particle then. For on the contrary, it signifies that
hypocrites are very far off from this pure worship of God, though they would
be taken for the holiest men in the world. But the Prophet holds them more then
convinced, when by their own works he shows that they neither fear nor
reverence the Lord.

By the word light, he means a prosperous estate: as on the contrary;
darkness signifies a life full of misery and calamities. And this we know is
a phrase of speech much used in the Scriptures. Mich. 7.8. Chap 42.16.
Health, notes out an happy and quiet life, as we shall see anon in another
place. For the plagues which were inflicted upon this people by the hand of God
in regard of their sins, had almost consumed them: so as they pined away as a
sick man that is brought low by a languishing disease. For there is no
sickness so sharp, as to be pressed with the just vengeance of God, or to be
washed under his curse.

The word righteousness may be taken two ways: either for a testimony of
uprightness: or for an estate well ordered: because God would heal the
confusions, and place all things in their first estate. The first sense then
will be; after God shall be reconciled with thee, the testimony of thy
righteousness shall appear before him and before men; as if an Herald of
arms went before thee. There are other expositors, which had rather take
righteousness, for a well ordered commonwealth, which is a gift of God, and no
small token of his fatherly love. And in other places also we have seen that
it is taken in this sense amongst the Hebrews. But the last member which
follows, the glory of the Lord; causes me rather to follow the first
exposition, Thy righteousness shall go forth, that is to say, All shall know
that thou art just and holy; whereas before thou wast guilty and convicted.
And thus the glory of the Lord shall be put upon thee: whereas before thou
were overwhelmed with ignominy and reproaches. For we are exposed to shame and
contempt, when we bear the punishment of our transgressions.

Verse. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am: if thou take away from the midst of thee the
yoke, the putting forth of the singer, and wicked speaking.
ISaiah prosecutes that which he has already begun to entreat of, namely,
that the Jews should prosper in all things, The same argument further
prosecuted.
if they live in such equity, and so abstain from all wrong, that thence men
may take notice of their piety and religion. For he pronounces that which is
said by Hosea, and is repeated by Christ: That mercy ought to be preferred
before sacrifice: Hos. 6.7. Matthew. 12 7. Having spoken then of the duties of
charity, and likewise having protested that such as perform them shall be
happy; now he ads, Then thou shall call, and the Lord shall hear thee. For
herein consists the chiefest part of our happiness: namely, if God vouchsafe
to hear us: contrariwise, there cannot befall us a more woeful condition, then
when he is our enemy.

Now for the exercise of our faith, he attributes that to our prayers which he
is minded to bestow voluntarily, Wherein our principal happiness consists.
and of his mere liberality. For if he should still supply us with his
benefits while we slept, as it were; the affection of prayer would grow cold in
us, yea would be utterly frozen up; and so his liberality should nourish our
sloth and negligence. Albeit then that he prevent us by his free grace; yet
will he have our prayers to come between: and therefore he adds, Thou shall
cry, and he shall say, Here J am. For this promise contains also an
exhortation, to the end we should not remain idle. When he says, Here am I:
this appertains not to our outward senses; but by the effects he shows that
he is near unto us, and afuours us.

And in the end of the verse he repeates again, that God will be pacified
toward the Jews, if so be they did repent. By the yoke, he comprehends all
the molestations wherewith the poor were vexed. As if he should say, If thou
ceasest to molest thy brethren, and abstainest from deceit and violence: the
Lord will bless thee every kind of way.

The lifting up of the finger also, contains under it all manner of injuries.
For we are wont to say, Lift up thy finger, when we mean to deal cruelly
with our neighbors, or to offer them any outrage. The word of vanity, is the
third kind of wrong, by which we hurt our neighbor in deceiving them with
sweet and sugared words. For all iniquity is composed either of secret fraud
and malice: or of open violence.

Verse. 10. If thou power out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled
soul: then shall thy light spring out of darkness, and thy darkness shall
be as the noone day.
Power out thy soul.] He continues to recommend unto them the duties of
charity. For the whole sum of his exhortation is to show that men worship
God in vain, if they only offer unto him some cold and naked ceremonies,
seeing Gods true and pure worship consists not in such childish things: but
rather commands and charge us to live in innocence and uprightness with our
neighbors: doing them good to our powers, and being ready to help them when
need is, readily and cheerfully.

The two parts of this duty are to be marked, which Isaiah also has expressly
distinguished. For in the first place he commends unto us the affection of
pity and compassion: in the next place he exhorts us to manifest the same by
the effects. For it is not sufficient to do good to men, unless it proceed
from a frank and willing mind. If I distribute all my goods to the poor,
says S. Paul, and have not love; I am nothing: 1. Cor. 13.3. Thus then to
power out the soul, signifies nothing else but to pity our brethrens
miseries, and to be as much affected with their wants, as if we our selves were
afflicted with them: Heb. 13.3. As contrariwise all such as are strait laced
being given to their private commodities, shutting up their bowels, and are
void of affection, 1. John 3.17. are called men of an hard heart.

Whereas others translate, If thou presentest thy soul: it a agrees not. The
same promise with that in verse 8. follows, and under the same similitude or
figure. For by darkness he understands a woeful estate: and by light, an
happy and prosperous condition. As if he should say, The Lord will cause all
thy miseries which now ouerwhelme thee to cease: and a sudden felicity shall
succeed the same. He shows therefore that they had no cause to complain of
God when afflictions pressed them so the quick; because they should forthwith
escape, and enjoy an happy estate, if they served and obeyed God.

Verse. 11. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden and
like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.
THe Lord shall guide thee.] Now he more clearly expresses that which he
touched before in brief, and under borrowed speeches. Namely, that God will be
their leader: so as nothing shall hinder them from enjoying all things in
abundance. It is said that God guides us, when we feel by experience that he
goes before us, as if we saw him with our eyes. Next he adds, that this
shall not be for a time; because God never leaves those that be his in the mid
way; but with an unchangeable course continues his benefits always unto them.
For this cause the Prophet also promises fulness and sacietie in their
extremest penury. For God has abundance of blessings always in his hand
wherewith to relieve the wants of his children. And surely his only blessing
is more worth then the sweetest dewes that can fall in an whole year. And yet
he does not promise to the faithful, that they shall have always a goodly and
plentiful increase of fruits, and good seasons to end their harvest and
vintage well; but that God will nourish them, albeit the earth should bring
forth no food at all. And thus he commands them to depend upon Gods help,
and to content themselves therewith, notwithstanding that the barrenness of
the earth should put them to their shifts.

In this sense it is said afterward, He will make fat thy bones. He says
not yt they shall be full fed and fat; but so lean, that their bones shall
pierce the very skin. He calls them bones then, who are pinched with penury
and famine. In a word, such as in whom there is nothing left but skin and
bones utterly shrunk up and withered. And thus he signifies that the Jews
should have to wrestle against famine and leannes, until God should be pleased
to restore them.

Heereunto appertains that which he adds touching a watered garden, and of
the spring of waters. For Isaiah cannot satisfy himself in expressing the
largeness which God would power out upon his servants, that so men might seek
the causes of dearth no where but in themselves. The sum is, that this
fountain of Gods bountifulness shall never fail nor be drawn dry, if so
be we stop not up the same by our frowardness.

Verse. 12. And they shall be of thee, that shall Or, restore the old deserts.
build the old waste places: and thou shall raise up the foundations for many
generations; and thou shall be called the repairer of the breach, and the
restorer of the paths to dwell in.
BY deserts, the Prophet means an horrible waste which befell the Jews at
that time, An objection prevented.
when they were led captives: for the Land became like a desert, the cities
were ruinated, the Temple was razed, the people made bondslaues, and scattered
into all quarters. He calls them deserts, and old, because they could not be
so soon reedified; neither was there any hope left that the people should be
restored to their first estate. If any City be wasted or laid on heaps, yet
as long as the inhabitants remain there, it may in short time be restored: but
if the inhabitants which dwelt therein be dead, or have bin carried away into a
far Country, and shall be long absent, what hope is left that such a City
should be new built again? Will it not seem strange if a long while after the
ruin thereof, one should say; The people which seemed forlorn, shall build
and repair it again? Seeing this promise then was incredible, the Prophet
meant to meet with this doubt. For they might object; If the Lord meant to
raise us to our former estate, why suffers he us to languish so long a time? He
answers, that the length of time shall not let God to raise up the things
again that were fallen to the earth for many years together. Now this must
not be restrained to the building of the Temple begun by Zerobabel, and
continued by Nehemias, Ezra. 3.8. but it comprehend^ the restoration of the
Church, which was effected some ages after.

Of thee] signifies that out of this people almost dead; should come forth
such as should repair these woeful ruins. And thus they should be the
Carpenters and Masons to reedifie Jerusalem. A little after he seems to
attribute to all the people that which he now restraines to some particulars,
but the sense notwithstanding remains always the same. For if it be asked,
Who reedifed Jerusalem? Truly it was this people. But out of this infinite
multitude God culled out an handful, and cut off all the rest. Some think
that the Cities should not be big enough to contain so many people, for which
cause they should be forced to build those again which were thrown down
before. But this seems too far fetched.

By the foundations from generation to generation, whereof he speaks in the
second member, some think that the Prophet only repeates that which he said
before, and so expound foundations of generations, because they had a long time
bin overthrown, in regard these buildings were forthwith to be reedified and
set up: but many impediments should come between that should cause the work
to cease: notwithstanding this may be referred to the time to come thus; Thou
shall rear up the buildings which shall remain for a long space, for he
seems to promise unto the Church such an estate as shall continue a long while:
as if he should say, other buildings stand not long, but this shall endure for
many generations. If any had rather refer it to the time past, I gainsay him
not.

And thou shall be called.] The Prophet here comprehends two points. First,
that the people repairers and directors of the paths, in regard the Lord shall
use their service to that end. We have here then an excellent promise,
namely, that the ruins of the Church shall be gathered again together, and
repaired. Now seeing the Lord will use our selves in this work, let nothing
hinder us from employing our whole services this way. And albeit the world
resist and scorn us as witless people, yet let us be of good courage, and
overcome all these impediments. For we must be valiant and bold when we know it
is the Lords work, who has enioined us thus to do.

Verse. 13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will
on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath Or, delites.
a delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor speaking Or, thy words.
a vain word.
SOme think the Prophet has respect to the outward observation of the
Sabbath, because it was not lawful to travail on that day. Now howsoever I
reject not this, yet I take it that the sense has a larger extent; for under
the figure Synecdoche, he signifies the whole course of man's life, it being a
thing well known to all, that by vvalking, our whole conversation is
understood. He says then, If thou ceasest to follow thine own swinge: if thou
shut up all passage against thy self: walk not vvhither thy fantasy leads
thee, etc. For they are said to turn their feet from the Sabbath who impose
not this law upon themselves, namely, not to wander whither their unbridled
lusts would carry them.

Now as before under the fast he comprehended all ceremonies, and showed that
these disguisings in which they placed their holiness, were nothing but vain and
unprofitable things, so in this place he shows wherein the true observation of
the Sabbath consists, to the end they should not think it to be in the outward
rest from bodily labor, but in the true renouncing of our selves, that is, in
abstaining from all wickedness, violence, voluptuousnes, and evil thoughts.

First, by the word foot he means their works: for the Jews durst not
travail nor dress any flesh upon the Sabbath day, and yet they made no
scruple at all to vex their poor neighbors, and to scorn the afflicted,
notwithstanding, he comes forthwith to speak of the will, and words, that he
might comprehend all the parts of that obedience which is due unto God.

The word delights ought to be referred unto God, and not to men. For there is
nothing which pleases him better, or is more acceptable unto him then the
observation of the Sabbath, and his pure worship. He carefully repeates that
men do much ouershute themselves if they contemn the commandments of God, to
set up their unprofitable works in the stead thereof, and also admonishes us
to suffer our selves to be governed by his only will.

Moreover, he mentions some particulars, whereby he shows that the true
observation of the Sabbath consists in the renouncing of over selves, and in
the conversion of the whole man: and therefore he lays the will for the
foundation, that from thence may flow words, and deeds, for we lightly utter
the conceptions of our understandings, and by our words we manifest our will,
then follow For a more particular explication and application of this 13.
verse, see Widley upon the Sabbath, Lib. 2. Chap. 4. Sect. 2.
they should testify their sincere obedience. For in truth, that man can never
be said to meditate aright of the heavenly life, that is not dead both to the
world and to himself. Now howsoever this ceremony be abolished, yet the
substance remains. For Christ is dead and risen again, to the end we might
keep a perpetual Sabbath; that we cease from our own works, to suffer the
Spirit of grace to work powerfully in us.

Verse. 14. Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iaakob
thy father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
THen shall thou delight.] It seems he alludes to the word delights, in the
former verse. For the word Tithannagh, which the Prophet uses, comes of the
word Onegh, which he used in verse. 12. in saying, that the Lord took great
delights in the true observation of the Sabbath. In a word, his meaning is,
that the people received no delight from God, because they provoked him to
anger, and would not obey his will. For if we square our lives according to
the rules of Gods Law, we shall be his delights, and he shall be our joy and
contentment. He testifies then that the Jews are the cause themselves that God
takes no more pleasure in them: also that their own lives are so comfortless.
By this then he privily reprocheth the Jews, namely, that through their own
folly, they have drawn down so many calamities upon them.

Afterward he adds, that they shall mount upon the high places of the earth:
thereby promising unto them their return, and a safe abode in their Country:
for we know that Iudeah was situated on high, above the regions round about:
and that Babylon was seated lower, so as the people was hid there, as within a
cave. And yet he shows more plainly, what he meant by this word to mount: for
he promises to them the possession of that heritage which was promised and
given to the Fathers, which they also should then enjoy, after that for a time
they had been deprived of it.

He adds, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; that they might know for
certain, that all these things should take effect. But this must not only be
understood touching these promises; but must also be referred to the former
part of this Chapter. For therein he has sharply censured the hypocrites, who
thought to have made their party good against God; showing also that they were
(notwithstanding their plea) justly punished for their iniquities: yea, that it
was in vain for them to quarrel with God, by opposing their vain and
unprofitable works to his justice. And therefore he brings them back to the
true observation of the Sabbath day, and shows that all shall go well with
them, if they worship the Lord purely: and in the end concludes, that in all
these things they had not to do with a mortal man, but with the eternal
God, who is the Judge that testifies these things.

THE LIX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: neither
is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.

2. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.


The Prophet maintains Gods equal dealing, against the slanders of the wicked.
THis Sermon is in a manner like to the former. For after he has unmasked the
hypocrites, who falsely vaunted themselves, and showed that their punishment is
just; now he answers to the rest of their objections. The custom of such
kind of persons is to accuse God either of impotencie, or of over great
severity: and therefore he shows, that neither power nor will is wanting in
God, to save those that be his: but that it is their own peruersitie that
hinders him from causing them to feel his liberality: and consequently, that
they did wickedly to complain of him, in uttering such slanders against him,
seeing that themselves rather deserved to be accused.

The word Behold, has great weight in it: for it is as much as if the Prophet
in speaking of a thing present, should have pointed it out with his finger for
the greater certentie, that so he might at once cut off all the cauils and
replies of hypocrites. Now we must supply oppositions in the words shortened
and heavy: as if he should say; The hand of the Lord was once strong enough
to save his children: and once his ears were open to hear their prayers: and
now he is no changeling, as if his hand were maimed, or as if his ears were
heavy, that he should not be quicked enough of hearing. The sum is; that men
are not to charge God with mutabilitie, as if he had altered his nature; but
that the whole blame rested in themselves, in regard that by their sins they
had as it were shut up the passage against his bounty, and would not admit of
his succor. So that if themselves had not laid impediments in the way, he
would have caused them to have felt his power and mercy, as well as their
fathers in times past had done. And thus he draws his argument from the
perpetual and equal constancy of God, whose grace they reieced by their
sins, and would none of his help.



prevented by men's deserts: and therefore it must needs be that he do good
to the unworthy. divorce; by which they repulsed and turned back the ordinary
course of Gods graces.

Verse. 3. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
iniquity: your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue has murmured
iniquity.
He descends from the general to particulars.
NOw he brings their works to light, to stop their contendings: and that they
should not call into question what these sins were, which had made this
division. He takes away from the^ all excuse then, in discovering unto them
these particular vices; as if their wicked life had been blazed in an open
theater. Now he speaks in the second person, in regard that he maintains and
prosecutes the cause of God, whose advocate he is: and therefore he separates
himself out of the wickeds society, to whom now he will not join himself,
although he were not utterly exempt from sin. But he feared and honored
God notwithstanding: and therefore had his conscience clear. He is unfit to
control othe^s that is g^iltie himself of the same crimes.
For he which shall be tainted with the same offenses, cannot freely condemn
others: neither shall he be fit to debate the matter, because he bereaues
himself of his authority by his scandalous and wicked life.

Now it is not to be held as a matter superfluous, that he lays forth the
ungracious life of this people thus, by piece meal. For men are wont to seek
out many starting holes; neither can they be brought into any good order,
unless they be first brought to acknowledge their offenses.

In mentioning of blood; his meaning is not that they committed open murders;
but thereby he notes out the inhumanitie, rapines, violence and outrages which
the hypocritical sort exercised over the poor, and such as were not able to
resist. We must not think he had to deal with notorious murderers or
thieves; but with the King and Statesmen; who were honored and respected, in
regard of their great places. These are they whom he calls men of blood; in
that they cruelly vexed poor innocents: and in that by force and violence
they wrung unto themselves other men's goods.

For this cause in the next place, he puts iniquity in stead of blood. And
howsoever he seems to extend his speech further off; yet it is but a
repetition or redoubling of the words; which the Hebrews often use for
amplifications sake. For he expresses more by the fingers then by the hands.
As if he should have said, There is not the least part of your bodies which is
not stained with extortion.

Next, he touches another kind of wickedness: to wit, when one of them
circumuented another by subtilties, periuries, and treacheries. For iniquity
by which we wrong our neighbors, is fortified with cruelty Iniquity
fortified by cruelty.
or lies and deceit, as with the court guard. Now the Prophet in this place
insists upon matters belonging to the second table, and by the sins which
they had committed against the commandments therein contained, he shows that
they were wicked persons, and utterly void of the true fear of God. For that
barbaritie and disloyalty which violates humane society, merely proceeds
from the contempt of God. Violating of humane society proceeds from the
contempt of God.
See here the reason then, why from the hands; that is to say, from extortions
and outrages, he descends to lying, wicked practices, periuries, and other
devilish subtilties, whereby we circumuent our neighbors.

Verse. 4. No man Or, cries.
calls for justice: no man contendeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and
speak vain things: they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.
THe Prophet meant to say, It is not enough that we abstain from offering
violence, unless we hinder it in others.
that there was no regard of equity or vprightnes among the^: That no man
opposed himself against the injuries, which the great ones practiced against
the weak. And, that all licentiousness grevv and increased, because all
looked through their fingers thereat, and no man did set his heart to maintain
justice. Now it is not enough that we only abstain from violence our selves,
unless as much as possibly we can, we therewithal endeavor to hinder men
from doing the same to others. Truly, who ever he be that permits that which
he may hinder; the same may be said in a sort to command it. For silence is a
kind of consent. And to this appartaines the second member.

Some take the verb N^shpat in the passive signification, and think the
Prophets meaning is, That none is judged justly. For the whole State is full of
corruptions, and yet no man opposes himself against them. But the active
signification agrees better, in respect of the answering of these two points
one to another, No man calls for justice: No man contends for truth. For
whereas some translate, No man judges himself in truth: it is a little too
nice. Besides, in as much as this verb, To cry, is taken, to contend; the
scope of the text seems here to run better, No man sets himself to
maintain the right, with a loud voice freely to maintain and defend justice.
In a word, to contend against the wicked. Unless we had rather refer this
crying for justice, to the miserable, who were unjustly oppressed. As if he
should say, These poor wretches held their peace, because they gained nothing
by their cries. But this sense would be somewhat too harsh. Well, if such as
are careless in defending of man's right; and such as relieve not the afflicted
are thus rigorously condemned by the Lord: what shall become of us, Note.
if our zeal in maintaining the glory of God, prouokes us not to cry without
ceasing against iniquities? if we wink at the scoffs wherewith the wicked
deride the doctrine of salvation, and profane the name of our God: or if we
set light by the plots wherewith they go about to overthrow the Church, shall
not our silence deserve to be condemned of disloyalty Jsaiahs meaning is, that
all good order falls to ruin by our fault, if we resist not the wicked

When he says, that they trust in vain things; it is to signify that they
heaped up multitudes of perverse counsels, by means whereof they became
utterly obstinate. Will you see the height of iniquity The height of iniquity.
then? Surely we may then be said to be come unto it, when in seeking out
sweet allurements here and there, we accustom our selves with a settled
malice to contemn God; for by such means Satan inueigles the reprobates, till
he has wholly bewitched them. So as having first of all shaken off all fear
of God, they come by degrees to reject all wholesome admonitions, and at last,
with an insupportable pride and sauciness to deride and scorn them. Because
arrogancy then transports us, when we oppose our vain hopes against Gods
judgment; it is not without cause that our Prophet brands this trust under
which scorners hide themselves, with a note of despair. For a man may see well
enough that the malady is grown incurable, when the wicked make no bones to
flatter themselves in all men's sight; and when being built as it were upon
their own frowardness, they think they have license to do whatsoever they
list.

He adds, that one might discern a far off, what their thoughts and manners
were in their speech, according to the common proverb; Proverb.
The tongue is the messenger of the heart. And yet this particle may be
expounded two ways; either that they uttered nothing that was good, but that
their tongues were framed to deceive without ceasing: or that their wickedness
brake forth into manifest swaggering. And this second exposition pleases me
better then the first.

They shall conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.] These similitudes
are elegant. Simile.
For by them he compares the wicked to women, who nourish their fruit in their
womb, and afterward bring it forth. Likewise, he says that the wicked are
like great bellied women, whilst they are plotting their treacheries in their
breasts, even till the full time approach, in which they must be delivered;
namely, as soon as they have found fit opportunities. Now he says, that they
conceive hurtful counsels, to the end they may afterward oppress the innocent
without cause. As if he should say; They plot their mischiefs long before
hand, and are always ready to execute some outrage: for they cease not here
and there to search out close conueiances to trouble such as only desire to
be at peace.

Verse. 5. They hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weaue the spiders web: he that
eats of their eggs, dies, and that which is trodden upon, breaks forth
into a Serpent.
THe Prophet passes on further, comparing the Jews not only to women, A
comparison taken from venomous beasts.
but also to venomous beasts; the better to signify, that whatsoever proceeded
from them, was dangerous and deadly. First then he says that they hatched
Cockatrice eggs. Simile.
As a Viper then cannot but hatch a venomous egg; so were they so defiled and
stuffed with iniquity, that they brought forth nothing but poison.

By the Spiders vvebbe, he means that they were so fruitless and empty of
goodness, that by the only appearance of goodness, they beguiled every one.
And thus he paints out the wicked with two colors as it were: First, that all
their works manifested the corruption of their nature. Secondly, that they were
profitable for nothing, neither were they ready to show themselves loving,
amiable, charitable, and faithful to those with whom they conuersed. I am not
ignorant that this place is otherwise expounded by some, namely, that whilst
the wicked are weauing the web of other men's destruction, they overthrow
themselves; and thinking themselves very wise, do notwithstanding plot their
devices in vain. And thus are caught in their own nets, and fall into the pit
which they dug for others: Psalm. 7. and 9. But me thinks the Prophet meant
to express that which I have touched, to wit, that the wicked always, every
where, and in all things, are mischievous, and never profitable to any.
Whosoever shall have to do with them, shall taste their venom, and that they
sting to death. Heereunto belongs that which he says, namely, that deadly
poison is in their eggs, and that if one do but tread upon them, a Serpent by
and by issues forth.

Verse. 6. Their webbes shall be no garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their labors: for their works are works of iniquity; and
the work of cruelty is in their hands.
A repetition and confirmation of the former similitude.
He both repeates and confirms one and the same thing, namely, that they
evermore are hurtful to mankind, whatsoever they enterprise or execute:
because of set purpose they have all duties of charity in abomination. Here
then is a sign of a nature wonderfully corrupted, namely, to be so wholly
given up to commit evil, that no hope is left of reaping any fruit from their
life, who desire to be utterly void and stripped of all justice. Others
expound; that they strive to get riches, and to be advanced to honors: but all
to no purpose. Yet I had rather plainly expound it thus; that none of them
should cover himself with his works, because his vvebbe is altogether
composed of rotten and unserviceable stuff.

Now he repeates one and the same thing in diverse phrases of speech, to show
that theit works should be utterly fruitless. We are borne to do our
neighbors good, according to our power, and to be doing of somewhat that may
serve for the common good. These are wild beasts then, and not worthy the names
of men; seeing they are so industrious to hurt, and so provident, as to do
nothing that is of any worth. Last of all, without any figure, he adds, that
they are given and as it were, dedicated unto iniquity.

Verse. 7. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
blood: their thoghts are wicked thoughts: desolation and destruction is in
their paths.
HE here diverse ways describes unto us an image of an hateful impiety.
Namely, when men are so far past grace, and destitute of all fear of God,
that they rush into all kind of wickedness, as the horse into the battle: and
ouerflow in cruelties, roberies, and outrages. They r^nne (says he) because
they are strong and ouerbold to commit wickedness. Now having spoken before of
the hands and tongue, now he also adds the feet, to show that they are their
crafts Masters in all sorts of mischief. So as no member of their bodies was
exempt from acting some iniquity. For some use violence, but they can
restrain their tongues. Others again who resemble a certain ravenous bird
called an Harpie, A bird called an Ha^pie.
content themselves with the first pray they meet withal. The Prophet then
confesses that those of his nation were light of foot, to spoil and rob.

By the word desolation, he signifies that wheresoever these cormorants came
they fared like savage and wild beasts, who rauin and devour all they meet
withal, and leave nothing remaining. So as by their terrible course, they
scatter and cause all beasts to flee; which dare not come near them. Pliny
Pliny.
takes up the like similitude touching Domitian, Domitian.
who tyranized like a cruel beast. And the same may we see to be in all these
blood thirsty ones, whom all the world flees as from furious and untamed wild
beasts. And thus their ways become desolate, and solitary, when they will
suffer none to have any fellowship with them.

Verse. 8. The way of peace they know not, and there is none equity in their
goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goes therein, shall not
know peace.
SOme take this word peace, too nicely, for peace of conscience, in respect
that the wicked are evermore vexed. But the Prophet so brings them to Gods
judgment, that yet in the mean while by transgressing the second table, he
shows that there was neither faith nor charity in them. In a word, that they
were void of affection. The way of peace (says he) they know not. Why so?
Because their wooluish minds had bereaved them of this Justice and equity;
which two virtues uphold humane society, and cause men to dwell quietly and
friendly one with another. For justice and integrity nourishes peace.
Justice and integrity nourishe peace.
But if every one with fury rusheth violently upon his neighbor, in offering
them open wrong: there, open war is proclaimed. For we can by no means
maintain peace in the midst of us, unless every one in particular squares al
his doings by the rules of equity.

He expresses this more fully by the word judgment. As if he should say,
Peace cannot be maintained without equity.
wheresoever they came, they were a terror to all; because they had cast off
all uprightness. The last member may be taken two ways, either that whosoever
walks in them, shall also be far off from peace: Or, He which falls into
the hands of the wicked shall feel their cruelty and murtherous minds. Both
expositions may agree well, and (as I think) we need not much contend about
it. And therefore after the Prophet has spoken generally before, and showed,
that the fault was not in God, that the Jews prospered no better in their
enterprises; now he descends to the particulars, wherein he more fully declares
how they had revolted from God, and so made themselves unworthy of his favor.

But here arises a difficulty, Paul alleges this place in the Epistle to
the Romans 3.17. to condemn all flesh as vicious, corrupt, and utterly void of
any thing that is good. But contrariwise it seems the Prophet applies it in
particular to the men of his time. But the answer Romans 2.26. I answer, Paul
therefore has alleged, this sentence to very good purpose when he minded to
show what men are, being forsaken of God, and are led by the light of their
own nature. I grant that the peruersitie of men breaks not always forth
into open sins. Well, our Prophets meaning is to reprove the corruptions of
those times wherein iniquities were grown to such an height, that one might
well discern as in a glass how (loathsome a sink and) bottomless gulf of
all abominations man's nature is. In the mean while there is no doubt but this
Sermon stung the Jews to the very quick, in regard they were puffed up with a
vain conceit of their race forsooth; but in as much as the spirit of God
spared not them, the rest of the nations who were no less corrupted by nature,
had no reason at all to wallow themselves in their pleasures.

Verse. 9. Therefore is judgment far from us; neither does justice come near
unto us: we wait for light, but lo, it is darkness: for brightness, but we walk
in darkness.
Why is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.39.
Having showed how much the estate of this people was perverted and corrupted,
he therewithal teaches that they are justly corrected thus severely, to the
end they should take up no complaints, as if they were more hardly dealt
withal then there was cause. He has by peecemeale then deciphered out their
open and known corruptions, that they might acknowledge how many ways they
were guilty before God: and now he puts them in mind that it was no wonder if
God carried a strait hand over such obstinate spirits, in handling them
according to their deserts. Now he says, that judgment was far off, in
respect that they were the only miserable people in the world, and had not God
their protector, as at other times. He takes judgment and justice for Gods
particular care and safeguard over us, namely, when he expresses so much by the
effects. By Justice, he means Gods protection, by Judgment, the vengeance
which he executes upon such as offer any violence against us. But here he
affirms, that God has no more care over his people, and that he has
withheld his aid and succor from them, because they were unworthy thereof. We
are also to note this particle therefore, for thence it follows, that they
were not to murmr against God, as if he kept no measure in his corrections,
seeing they had so often abused his Majesty.

Hereunto appertains that which he adds, namely, that a perpetual darkness
environed them, who vvaited for light. This metaphor ^^ewes, that they were
almost consumed in their miseries, and were then frustrated of their hopes,
whilst they promised unto themselves some release. By light, is meant a
prosperous estate, as on the contrary, by darkness, a state unhappy, as is
well enough known in diverse places before. His meaning is then, that it was in
vain for them to expect better fortunes, because he would have this people
learn to impute these calamities to their own deserts, and not to imagine
either that they came by chance, or that the Lord handled them too sharply, for
his whole scope and drift is to bring them to the doctrine of repentance.

Verse. 10. We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without
eyes: we stumble at the noone day as in the twilight: we are in solitary
places, as dead men.
BY variety of phrases he expresses one and the same thing. One and the same
thing expressed, under diverse manners of speech.
For in regard many complaints would be heard to pass from this people, he
would omit nothing that might serve to lay forth their woeful calamities. It
may be he vtters these things as if he consented with them, that they were so
indeed; as if he meant to say, Our matters are brought into wonderful straits:
but we are above all things to consider the cause thereof, seeing we have
deserved to be handled with much more severity. And yet the sense will not
suit amiss if we say, That the drouzie are here awaked, to bethink them of
their miseries: for howsoever they were but too forward in making their
complaints, yet Satan benumbed their senses, lest the signs of Gods wrath
should solicit them to repentance.

Now he alludes to that similitude which he mentioned in the former verse,
where he said, that the people were in darkness and obscurity, without any hope
of getting out. Here he signifies that they were destitute of counsel, and so
pressed with anguish, that no refuge nor remedy at all appeared unto the^.
When some light affliction befalles us we look this way and that way, and have
hope of some issue: but in great extremities we are able to discern nothing,
in regard of despair which has surprised us: for this cause the Prophet
says, that being entangled in a maze of perplexities, they groped.

We stumble.] This phrase of speech tends to the same end, and has also
greater weight in it, namely, that if they set but one foot forward, so many
impediments presented themselves on all sides, that they could find no more
release, then if the day had bin converted into the night. By solitary places,
I understand deep gulphes, or desert and barren lands. For in this place I
allow S. Ieroms S. Jerome.
reading, who deriues these words solitary places, from the verb Asham, which
signifies as much as to be horribly destroyed and desolated.

The Rabbis Rabbis.
who will needs draw it from Shamen, which signifies, to be fat, argue
childishly, as I think, neither do they allege any thing that makes to the
purpose. For by solitary places they think men are understood, because
Shemmen signifies anointment, and thus judge, that the Gentiles are noted out
in these words. But the Prophets true meaning is, that the Jews were brought
into solitary places, that being banished from the society of men, they might
resemble the dead, and might be left without any hope of deliverance.

Verse. 11. We roar all like bears, and mourn like doves; we look for Or,
judgment.
equity, but there is none; for Or, salvation.
health, but it is far from us.
He notes two sorts of men that cannot bear their miseries with patience, but
they must discover them by outward testimonies. bears; and the mourn like
doves. He used this latter similitude in Chap. 38.14. where he described the
sighings of Hezekias. And this happens at such times as we would feign
repress our sorrows, and yet we cannot so restrain them, but whether we
will or no some signs thereof will breake-forth outwardly. The sum is, that
one while the weight of their miseries extorted from them loud cries; another
while they were overcome with groans, and broken sighings: but neither their
roarings nor mutterings, brought them any release, because their estate was not
changed for the better.

For this cause he repeates it once again, that they vvaited in vain for
judgment and salvation: whereby he means that the people were deprived of
that succor from God, which above all things they wished and longed for. And
he has used the word salvation, the better and the more fully to express what
he meant before in verse. 9. by justice; and here, No salvation without
conversion.
by judgment. Hence let us gather, that we are miserable through our own
fault, and that we wither and waste away in our miseries, till we be
converted to our God. We may well roar and mourn; but without repentance our
sorrows shall receive no relief. Our miseries then cannot cease, as long as
we provoke the Lord to anger, nor till we endeavor with our whole hearts to be
reconciled unto him.

Verse. 12. For our trespasses are Or, multiplied.
many before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our trespasses are
with us, and we know our iniquities.
A confirmation of the former sentence.
HE confirms his former speech, namely, that the people did ill in accusing God
of cruelty, and that they did not rather acknowledge that they received the
just recompense of their sins, the heaps whereof reached up to the heavens.
And in this sense it is that the Prophet says, they were multiplied. Also this
particle before thee, has great weight: for the Prophet descends into
himself, and acknowledges the just judgment of God, which was hidden from
men's eyes. His meaning is then to note out a close opposition, which is
between men's judgment and Gods, Men flatter themselves, and think not of
their sins; but God who is the Judge, leaves not to condemn them for all
that, neither cares he for all the vain and idle excuses, wherewith they
would feign daube them over. And therefore he contents not himself simply to
condemn this people; but he ads, that they had multiplied their iniquities:
that is to say, they were guilty before God many ways. He acknowledges
then that God is just, and executes the office of a good Judge, seeing among
men there is not to be found so much as a drop or grain of justice or
equity. And therefore it is he adds, Verse. 4.
that it was not needful to cite any vvitnesses, nor to bring them from the
Court of heaven, because the Jews were sufficiently convinced and condemned by
the testimony of their own consciences. This manner of speech therefore ought
to be well observed; for it shows that God has no great need of proofs,
seeing our sins hold us sufficiently convicted. We have no reason then to
contend with God, as if he punished us wrongfully, or as if he chastised us too
severely: for our own iniquities testify plainly enough against us, what
we are, neither has God need to seek out for any other vvitnesses.

With us.] Others translate, Upon us: but I had rather keep the propriety of
the word. Men make many turnings, and transform themselves into many shapes,
that they might be taken for just: but all in vain, because they bear their
iniquities about with them in their bosoms, from which they cannot flee. As
also when God condemned Cain, Cain.
he pronounced that his sin played the watchman at the door. So, he that
despises Gods just judgment, shall vex himself in vain, if he thinks to
escape by rebellion.

When he says, the Jews knew their sins; he means not that they were
truly touched with them in their hearts, for then repentance would have
followed: but he shows, that albeit they strove to flee the judgment of God,
yet the testimony of their own conscience kept them imprisoned, and confined
them in such wise, that they lost their labor to frame or forge excuses. Now
whereas he speaks in the first person, putting himself also in the rank, it
is a thing very rife in the Scriptures: and yet therewithal he shows, that
this evil had so spread it self through the whole body, that there was no
member sound nor free. Now howsoever he might for his own particular, protest
his uprightness in the presence of God, yet in respect that iniquity had
ouerflowed into all the parts of the body, he confesses himsefe to be (as it
were) one of those rotten members, and to be infected with the common
contagion. Neither does this any way gainsay our former assertion, namely, that
he has hitherunto exempted himself from the common revolt, that he might gall
them the more to the quick. Now to take away all exceptions, he vvrappes
himself also up in the number with them.

Verse. 13. In trespassing and lying against the Lord, and we have departed
away from our God, and have spoken of cruelty and rebellion, conceiving and
uttering out of the heart false matters.
In verse 12. the Jews are taxed generally, here particularly.
HE here reckons up some particular kinds of sins, that he might with the
greater vehemency provoke the people to acknowledge their sins. Now truly it
is monstrous that those which were chastised, and in a manner shattered to
pieces by the hand of God, should yet stand to set up the crest, and that their
neck should be of such an iron sinew, as that they could neither be bowed
nor humbled by the feeling of their misdoings. For the Lord labors to soften
our hard hearts by his rods and stripes. But when chastisements profit us
nothing, we may then be said to be grown past recovery. Jsaiah insists long
upon this point, namely, to show how woeful ye state of this people was, who
albeit they were almost ground to powder, yet did they still grudge against God,
and could not endure to be brought under subjection. He therefore often
repeates this admonition, and stands the more vehemently upon it, that he might
tame the rebellion of this people.

He also taxes their iniquities with many words, and singles them out one from
another, having showed before generally what sins reigned every where amongst
them. Neither does he reprove any petty offenses, or of a small handful of
people, but rather a general revolt. For by this verse he gives us to
understand that they were so corrupted, that there was not one dram of faith,
integrity fear, or conscience in them. For what is it to lie against God, but
wickedly to depart away from him, as if they played the flat rebels? He not
only reprocheth them then with the breach of one or two commandments of the
law, but says, that they renounced God, and revolted from him, lest they
should come at his call.

In the next place he says, that they were given to forge wicked matters, and
that they were wholly stained with falsehood. For it is much more detestable to
utter false matters out of the heart then to be suddenly overtaken with a lie,
yea or to deceive upon the instant. In the mean while these rebukes no doubt
cut the very hearts of the Jews, who were ready to brast with pride; taking
themselves to be exceeding holy men. But hypocrisy must be thus dealt
withal; because a plain admonition in such a case would have done little
good. By this example then al Pastors when they see the Church of God corrupt,
and men to please themselves in themselves, and to lie rotting in their dung;
thus must they oppose themselves, and ^rie sharply and shrillie against the
same.

Verse. 14. Therefore judgment is turned backward, and justice stands a far
off: for truth is fallen in the Or, place.
street, and equity cannot enter.
THose are deceived who think he returns to his first speech, in verse. 9, The
former discourse still p osecuted in this, and in verse 15.
as if he now spoke of the punishments which the people had felt from Gods
hand. For he still prosecutes his former discourse; and discouers the corrupt
diseases of the people: to testify unto all that they were justly punished.
But this verse we must thus distinguish from the ninth, where he said, That
judgment was gone far off. For in that place he pronounced that the Jews
were deprived of Gods help, in regard they had made themselves unworthy that
he should be any longer a defender of their cause. But here he says that
judgment was turned backward; because they had ouerturned all justice and
equity amongst themselves. They received then a recompense according to their
deserts, when Gods justice stood a far off, and appeared not for their help;
seeing they had banished judgment and justice far away from them. For we do
but lose our time, to expect that from God, which we have denied unto others,
and have cast behind our backs.

In the place.] That is to say, in the public assembly. For his meaning is to
speak of those places where they held their courts. And thus he signifies,
that corruptions had not only seized upon some private persons, but that the
whole estate of the people was so depraved, that there was nothing sound
amongst them. If any vices reign among the common people, there may some good
order be taken to remedy the same as long as justice has place: Where
judgment seats are corrupted, the^e the contagion of sin is universally
ouerspread.
but if the judgment seats themselves be ouerturned or corrupted, then it
must needs be that all things are infected with an universal contagion. He
also bewrayes their unbridled liberty, in that they were not ashamed to do
evil in public places, and that they neither fled from the light, nor from
the eyes of men.

Verse. 15. Yea truth fails, and he that refraineth himself from evil
makes himself a pray: and when the Lord saw it, it displeased him, that there
was no judgment.
BY this it sufficiently appears, A confirmation and amplification of the
former sentence.
that Jsaiah spoke not in the former verse of the punishments which the people
sustained: For he prosecutes the very same discourse with the former: and
shows that the people had no cause to complain of the rigor of their
chastisments, seeing they had so grosely offended and provoked the Lord. He
confirms his former speech then: namely, that truth was fallen, justice had no
more place: and here he amplifies the same further, in adding that he which
refrained himself from evil, made himself a pray. The most of the expositors
among the Hebrews read this part of the verse with a breath, thus; Truth is
fallen, and was made a pray, in refraining it self from evil. But I see no
reason why they have accepted of this sense. Saint Ieroms S. Ierom.
exposition (which I also have followed) is much better, and more agreeable.
This phrase of speech is very frequent in Scriptures, as we see in Job 1.1. of
whom it is said, that he was an upright and just man, fearing God, and
eschewing evil. Solomon also says, Prou. 14.16. That a fool rages; but the
wise man fears; and departs from evil. Well, the Prophets meaning is, that
all honest courses were so hated and abhorred, that the small remnant of the
faithful could not live in safety. As if he should say, Whosoever mean in
these times to have society with men, must of necessity be as wicked as they:
according to the old proverb; Proverb.
He must howl amongst wolves: but he that will refrain from evil, shall be
devoured of the wolves like a poor sheep. Truly he here expresses the
height of impiety: The height of iniquity.
for he shows that truth was so fal^en, that no honest man durst converse
amongst them. Why so? Because whosoever refrained himself from evil, did by
and by fall into the jaws of Lions.

And the Lord savv it.] This tends to the consolation A consolation.
of this people: for his meaning is, that notwithstanding this peoples
obstinacy which in a manner seemed irremissible, yet God would tender their
welfare. And howsoever for a time he had severely punished them, yet would he
at last think upon his covenant: so as in curing their evils, he would
restore unto them incredible comfort. He speaks here of the time to come, and
promises that a day will come after all these calamities, that God would send
some relief to the remnant of his inheritance: for the Jews had been left
destitute of all hope, if the Lord had not added this consolation.

Take a view here then after what sort men are wont to plunge themselves into
contrary vices. Are they reproved? then either they grow stubburne, or being
surprised with terrors, they fall into despair. We are therefore carefully to
observe our Prophets

If any had rather restrain this discontent and displeasure of God to his
judgment, in regard that he justly condemned and abhorred this wicked people;
I gainsay him not. As if he should have said; God saw nothing in this people
but matter of hatred: whence it follows, that he had no other motive to send
them relief, but only because he saw that things were brought to utter ruin.

Verse. 16. And when he saw that there was no man, he wondered that none would
offer himself. Therefore his arm did save it, and his righteousness it self
did sustain it.
THe Prophet prosecutes the same argument still: The same argument prosecuted.
but he lays that out more at large now, which he briefly touched before. For
that which he said in the former verse, might peradventure seem obscure,
namely, that it displeased the Lord, because there was no judgment. In this
place then he repeates, that the Lord saw there was no man that would succor
the Church, and he wondered at it. He uses a verb which signifies, that the
Lord took up an occasion of wonde^ment. As if he should say; He stood as one
amazed. Some translate the word Maphgia, Intercessor: but I think the sense
is, that no man presented himself to set the things in order, that were
confused; there was no Physician that would put to his hand to prescribe a
remedy for this sickness, and therefore the Lord wondered. But it is easy
to judge why he attributes this astonishment unto God: for by this reproach, he
meant to shame the Jews, that so (according to their custom) they might not
seek out pretenses to cover their sins withal.

Now in regard it was a thing incredible or rather monstrous, that amongst the
holy and elect people there was not a man to be found that would oppose
himself against injustice, he brings in God as one astonished at so rare a
matter, that by means hereof they might be brought at last to wonder and blush
at their own hypocrisy. For might they not worthily be taxed of detestable
obstinacy if they would not blush at that which d^aue the Lord into this
admiration, and that by reason of their stubbornnes? And therewithal he taxes
their hypocrisy, in that they made show of having piety and holiness in great
estimation, and yet when God came to make a diligent search, there was not a
just man to be found amongst them.

Moreover, by this text he magnifies and extols the greatness of Gods mercy, in
that he vouchsafes to pull out a people as out of the bottom of hell, that
were in such a pitiful plight. For no doubt but the Jews by these words were
admonished by what means they were to expect their deliverance, namely, even
because the Lord was willing by a miracle to save this forelorne people. Now
this word to vvonder, sets forth Gods fatherly care. Sure it is that there are
no such affections in God, namely, God is not subject to humane passions.
that he should be astonished at new and unwonted accidents, as if they were
strange to him. But herein he rather applies himself to our capacities, that
being touched to the quick with the sense of our miseries, we might be brought
to abhor our woeful condition.

When he says then that the Lord saw, it is to signify, that there is no
relief to be found in our industries: and when he wonders, it tells us that
we are more then blockkish and senseless; in regard that we neither know nor
regard the miseries we are in. And

So his arm brought salvation.] In these words he shows that we are not to
despair, albeit the help of man do fail us. We must not despair though
man's help fail us.
Nay, all aides whatsoever being abolished, the Prophet attributes the
beginning and end of his nations salvation, yea, of all mankind, to the free
goodness, and only power of God. Even as then in affirming that God is
powerful enough; yea, almighty to deliver the Jews, he therefore reaches
out his hand to

We must not only mark what the Prophets say; b^t also observe their scope
and drift.
This is the Prophets meaning: and I would have it well observed. For in reading
the books of the Apostles and Prophets, we must not only mark what they
say, but why and wherefore they have said this or that. In this place then we
are principally to consider whereat the Prophet aims, namely, to signify,
that God is of sufficient power in himself to accomplish the work of our
salvation, that our eyes might be kept from wandering here and there; because
our minds are too much tied to outward means. What then? but that we repose
the whole hope of our salvation in the arm of the Lord: and the true
restoration of the Church in his righteousness. Be it therefore known, that
such err grosely, who place it in any thing else, seeing God borrowes nothing
out of himself.

The use of this doctrine.
The use and profit of this (...), extends it self even unto us. For albeit all
helps do sometimes fail us, yet will the Lord find sufficient succor for us
in his arm and power. As often then as outward means do fail us, and that we
be overwhelmed with all sorts of miseries, perceiving nothing but present
death before our eyes: Note.
let us have our refuge to this doctrine: and let us be well assured that God
is strong enough to protect us: and seeing he stands not in need of any man's
help, let us learn to rest our selves boldly upon his assistance. But yet we
must herewithall retain the general doctrine. To wit, that the deliverance of
the Church is a work and benefit which only belongs to the wonderful power
of God: The Churches deliverance a benefit proceeding from Gods wonderful
power.
that so we may never attribute any thing either to the strength or industry
of man. We ought also to abhor their pride who wrest and wring part of this
praise unto themselves, which wholly belongs unto God: seeing in him alone
consists the cause and effect of our salvation.

Arm here signifies his power and might: Righteousness, that equity which he
uses in procuring the salvation of his chosen when he becomes their protector,
and delivers them from death. Whereas he says, that his own arm obtained
salvation: it must not be referred unto God, neither must we read it as if God
had saved himself: but it is to be referred to the salvation of the Church
which he delivered out of the hands of her enemies.

Verse. 17. For he put on righteousness, as an habergeon, and an helmet of
salvation on his head, and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing,
and was clad with zeal as with a cloak.
THe Prophet arms the Lord at all points; If God put himself in arms to
fight, he must needs ca^rie away the victory.
not only to confirm the faith of the godly, but also to strip all men of
all confidence in their own virtue. For the sum comes to this, that nothing
shall be wanting unto God, neither for discomfiting, nor for bearing away the
victory over his enemies. Why so? Because that of his righteousness, power,
grace, and exceeding affection toward his Church, he will make armor of
proof. And this we are to note with no less diligence, then the doctrine of
the former verse. For albeit we confess that God is almighty, yet does not
that satisfy us, but we will be seeking out of other helps. Our minds are
always given to infidelity, so as they are wonderfully hampered, and glued
fast to outward means. To correct this vice our Prophet sets before us this
lively description. As if he should say, know ye that God has all the
safegards of your salvation ready, so that nothing shall be wanting unto him
for your deliverance, and for your return home again: do your enemies what
they can. There is no need then why you should tremble at all. Besides, we
are very easily carried away to think, that we bring some of our own unto
God. And thus we attribute part of his praise to our selves, which should
wholly be reserved unto him.

Whereas he clothes the Lord with vengeance and indignation as a cloak; it
appertains unto the enemies against whom God rises up in wrath, for the zeal
he bears to his people. The more then that Satan endeavors, and with might and
maine plots our overthrow, the more will the zeal of the Lord of hosts be
inflamed, and will arise with his admirable and omnipotent power to relieve us.
Although this worrier of mankind then, and all the reprobates with him cease
not day nor night how to oppose all the impediments they can, to hinder our
salvation, yea, and that they break forth into open rage to root us out; yet
will our God scatter all their plots by his only power.

Verse. 18. As to make recompense, as to requite the fury of the adversaries,
with a recompense to his enemies: he will fully repay the Islands.
He confirms the conclusion of the former verse. A confirmation of the former
conclusion.
For here he shows, what that vengeance is, wherewith he clothed the Lord,
namely, that he is ready to render the like unto his enemies. But the reason
why the Prophet arms the Lord thus ready with indignation to execute his
vengeance, is to be noted, to wit, because the deliverance of his Church is
joined with the ruin of the wicked. It is needful therefore that God should
be armed to meet those enemies which would work our destruction.

requite the fury of our adversaries. So exceedingly does he love his little
flock, that he esteems it more then all the world besides. This is the cause
then wherefore he testifies that he will repay the Islands, that is to say, the
nations beyond the seas far remote from them: for, for the deliverance of his
people he overthrew such mighty Monarks as seemed invincible.

Verse. 19. So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the West, and his
glory from the rising of the Sun: for the enemy shall come as a flood, but
the spirit of the Lord shall chase him away.
God will make the Churches deliverance glorious in the sight of the whole
world.
NOw he testifies that this deliverance shall be so glorious and magnificent,
that all the world shall wonder thereat, and shall speak honorably of it: and
afterward, being smitten with astonishment, shall give glory unto God. But it
is uncertain whether he means this of the conversion of the Gentiles, or of
the terror by which the Lord would bring down his enemies. For mine own
part, I rather incline to the first exposition, namely, that to the utmost
parts of the earth, Gods name shall be glorious and fully renowned: so as the
Gentiles shall not only be amazed, but shall also worship and serve him in
true repentance.

The expositors agree not about the rendering of the cause which follows. But
the true sense, as I suppose, is, That the violence of the enemy shall be so
great, that as a flood spoils and carries all away before is with the force
thereof, so shall he seem to tear up, and bear away: But the Lord will
forthwith cause him to recoile and to vanish away. It is an amplification then
of Gods power, who in an instant breaks in sunder all the terrible power and
furious rage of his enemies, so as their violence being turned backward, it
falls to nothing.

glory was not manifested before to all the world, nor the enemy so put to
flight, that they gathered not their forces together again, until Christ came
and triumphed admirablie, having obtained conquest over Satan, sin, and death.

Verse. 20. And the redeemer shall come unto Zion, and unto them that turn from
iniquity in Iaakob, says the Lord.
HE again confirms that which he said before, namely, A second confirm^tion
touching the redemption of the Church.
that the people should be delivered, and that God would be the only author of
so great a benefit. For this cause then he bids the people to be of good
comfort in this exile, in regard it should not be perpetual: afterward he
places the hope of their deliverance in God only, to the end their thoughts
might not rest in any thing but upon the promises.

Under the word Zion, he means (as heretofore) the prisoners, and banished:
for albeit they were scattered far off from their country, yet was the
Temple still to remain planted as it were in their hearts. But lest the
bastard children of Abraham should indifferently apply this unto themselves
with the heirs of promise, he forthwith shows who they be to whom this
deliverance To whom this deliverance appertains.
shall come, namely, to such as shall be truly converted unto the Lord. And yet
it is very certain that many returned from Babylon into Iudeah, which were not
touched with any repentance at all; who nevertheless had their part in this
benefit: but the Prophet speaks of that full redemption, which is only proper
unto the elect. For howsoever the external fruit of the deliverance redounded
to the hypocrites; yet embraced they not this benefit of God to their
salvation. The Prophet meant to say then, that the punishment of their
banishment should have fruit; to the end that the Lord having purged his Church
from her filthiness and corruptions, he might again gather together her
dissipations. We must also ever bear in mind that which I have heretofore
touched, in respect of the diminution of this people. Thus then our Prophet
exhorts the elect to the fear of God, that so they might make benefit of the
stripes which they received.

Hence let us gather, that we can not be reconciled unto God by the blood of
Jesus Christ, No reconciliation without conversion.
unless we be first of all thoroughly displeased with our selves for displeasing
of him. Not that our salvation depends upon our repentance, seeing that is
grounded upon the remission of sins. Conversion deserves not remission of
sins.
But the hatred of evil, and the love of good, is so conioined therewith, that
they can not be separate. For those whom the Lord receives into favor, are in
such wise regenerated by the holy Ghost, that they abhor their vices, and
change their course of life.

The Papists utterly overthrow the whole doctrine of salvation, in mingling and
confounding repentance and remission of sins together: Papists confound
repentance and remission of sins together.
neither are they of the ignorant sort only that do this, but those also who
will be reputed the most ingenious amongst the^. They confess indeed that a
man is justified freely by Christ: but they add, it is because They must be
distinguished, not separated.
and so hold fast the foundation of our salvation.

S. Paul alleges this place, to show, that there yet remains some hope of
salvation for the Jews, howsoever by their untamed obstinacy we might
gather, that they were utterly rejected, and judged to eternal death: Romans
11.26. But in regard that God always remembers his covenant, and that his
gifts and calling are without repentance, Romans 11.29. Saint Paul aptly
concludes it to be impossible, that some remnant should not at last be
gathered unto Christ, to enjoy that salvation which he has purchased. The Jews
in the end must be gathered in with the Gentiles, that both peoples may make
one fold under Christ. redeemer of the world, that it should not appertain to
some of the Jews, out of whom he had elected their fathers, and made this
promise expressly in favor of them: Romans 11.1, 2. In the end of the verse, the
ratification of so excellent a sentence is added.

Verse. 21. And I will make this my covenant with them, says the Lord; My
Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord, from hence forth, even for
ever.
BEcause the doctrine before proposed by our Prophet hitherunto was hard to be
believed, he labors by diverse means to confirm the Jews that without
wavering they might assuredly rest upon this promise of salvation: and should
so far forth honor the Lord, as to stay upon his word. This word covenant
is diligently to be noted. For thereby the Prophet sets forth the greatness and
excellency of this promise. For the promises have a large extent, and may be
compared to stones in the building; whereof the covenant is the foundation,
that sustaines and bears up the whole burden. Thus then he has used this
word covenant, that they should not esteem hereof, as of some common matter.
And he adds this confirmation, to the end that howsoever this promise was not
by and by accomplished; yet they should hope for the same, even above hope. And
it may be, here is a close opposition, to cause the faithful with the greater
alacrity to aspire to the new covenant which should be established in the
hand of Christ.

words, and the Spirit.

Now in regard that God thus orders and dispenceth his grace, that he always
exercises the patience of the faithful, whilst they live here below; and
never wholly satisfies their desires: this is the cause why he brings them to
the word. As if he should say, Thou shall truly feel that I am liberal; and
that I will many ways procure thy good: but thou ought not to wish greater
happiness, then to feel my presence by my word. Whence we gather, that the
greatest treasure the Church has, The richest treasure the church has.
consists in this, that the Lord has chosen her for his dwelling place, that
in the hearts of the faithful he may make his abode by his Spirit, and may
conserve the doctrine of the Gospel among them.

Lastly, he foretells that God will never forsake his people, but will always
assist them by his word and spirit: which two are conioined together, Why the
Spirit is joined with the word.
because without the efficacy of the Spirit, the word would profit nothing,
but would remain fruitless. On the other side, we must not separate the one
from the other, as some fantastical spirits dream, who in rejecting the
word, pretend the name of the Spirit, and are ready to burst with a vain
confidence, which they have conceived in their fantastical imaginations: for
we must hold that for the spirit of Satan, which is separated from the word of
God; That is to be held for the spirit of Satan that is separated from the word.
to which, the holy Spirit is ever more annexed. Now when he quickens the
external word, writing it in our hearts by the finger of his Spirit; then is
our condition happy even in the midst of infinite miseries. Neither do I doubt
but it was the express purpose of the Lord to say, that albeit God meant to
deal graciously with his Church; yet she must know that her life and
salvation is hidden in him by faith. And thus the ancient people is discerned
from the new: for as the Kingdom of Christ is spiritual; so from his
resurrection from the dead, the souls of the faithful must ascend up on high
with him.

Now he promises that the Church shall never be deprived of this inestimable
benefit, namely, of being governed by the holy Ghost, and sustained by the
heavenly doctrine: for it were to little purpose that the Gospel should be
offered us, and the holy Ghost given withal, unless they should always dwell
and remain with us.

God speaks unto us but by the mouth of his servants.
When he says, in thy mouth, it is to show, that the Lord so speaks unto us,
that in the mean while he means to use the service and ministry of man. He
might indeed if it pleased him, speak unto us from heaven, or send his Angels
from thence: only herein he has respect to our weakness. Why so? Because
he would call and exhort us by our like; Why God rather speaks to us by man,
then by himself.
that by their voice he might draw us unto him the more familiarly. This order
therefore was by him established in the Church: so as they who reject his
Ministers, brag in vain of their obedience unto God. His meaning is then, that
we seek the doctrine and word of life, in the mouths of his Prophets, and in
the teachers who preach in his name, and by his commandment.

My words shall not depart.] Some translate in the imperative; Let not my
words depart: and so the future tence is often taken for this. But an
exhortation or a commandment in this place agrees not, in regard the Prophet
rather promises what God means to accomplish. I deny not but hence we may
draw an exhortation: but the promise must go before. Now the tenure of the
promise is, that the Lord will so assist his Church, and have such great care
of her, that he will never suffer her to be deprived of the doctrine of the
word. When afflictions press us then to the quick, and things succeed not as
we would wish; let us have an eye to this sentence: for it is the word and
Spirit, by which we must be r^ised up and sustained; of which the Lord here
promises never to destitute us.

THE LX. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Arise O Jerusalem; be bright: for thy light is come, and the glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee.
In Chap. 59.21. he spoke of the word, now he speaks of the efficacy of it.
IN this place the Prophet shows what the efficacy of this word is, whereof
he spoke in the former Chapter. For he comforts the church in her low and
afflicted estate, and restores her to her brightness. And in respect that he
represents the person of God, he here manifests his authority: and for that
cause, uses a commandment, that he might give his speech the greater weight:
as if by his absolute power, he placed the Church in that happy estate, which
he before promised her. The sum is, to assure the faithful that the Prophet
spoke not as in the air, but effectually.

Now he commands her to Arise, in regard that before he said, she sat upon the
ground: which two words are opposites. In the 47. Chapter of this book, he
said to Babylon; Come down, and sit in the dust. And in Chap. 32.18. he said
of the Jews themselves; My people shall sit in the dust: and yet on the
contrary, in Chap. 52.1, 2. he says; Arise, Arise. O Zion, put on the
garments of thy beauty: shake thy self from the dust. Now in this place
again he raises up the Church, as if he took her by the hand, to the end
she might again recover her seat of honor, who now sat in the dust, wholly
covered over with filth and dung.

Now that the poor Jews might not by reason of the darkness of their evils,
be utterly overwhelmed with despair, he tells them that the light which had
been smothered for a time, should immediately break forth again. Herein
alluding to the ordinary course of the day, succeeding the night. As if he
should say; Simile.
The Lord having compassion upon thee, will draw thee out of these obscure
dungeons, in which thou have so long bin held prisoner. I have satisfied my
self in correcting thee, it is time now therefore thou should begin to take
some ease. And therefore by the word To shine, under a figure he means a
recovery of health, and a flourishing estate: as heretofore by darkness, Chap.
58.10. and 59.9. he signified the calamity of the Church.

But heerewithall he admonishes her, that this light shall arise unto her from
none but from the brightness of Gods countenance, at such time as he shall be
pleased to manifest some tokens of his favor: for all things fall out to the
best, when the Lord lightens us with his brightness: but if he be against us,
we cannot possible meet with a greater misery nor infelicitie.

Verse. 2. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness
the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen
upon thee.
NOw he amplifies this grace which he mentioned before by way of comparison,
An amplification of the grace mentioned in verse. 1.
to the end we might consider of the infinite love which God bears to his
elect; yea and how great the privileges are, which are given and granted unto
them by him. The sum is, that whilst the world is pressed, and in a manner
overwhelmed with infinite miseries, God will have care over his people to
enrich them with sundry benefits. He shows then that the light of grace and
favor, mentioned in the former verse, shall not be common to all, but
particular to the people of God. We told you before that the word brightness,
notes out the flourishing estate of the church; but yet we must not judge
thereof by any outward appearance: for the Prophet flies an higher pitch.
Neither make I any doubt, but he here propounds unto us a spiritual brightness
and light. Otherwise the phrase of speech which he uses in verse. 3. (namely,
that the Gentiles should walk in this light) would not agree. And the
coherence of the text of this chapter with the former, shows it plainly. For
in verse 21. of chap. 59. he said, that the covenant was enclosed in the word
and spirit: from the opposition then, it is easily gathered, that the felicity
promised to the Church in the beginning of this Chapter consists in somewhat
else then in meat, and drink, idleness and carnal security. Nay, let us
rather consider of the matter aright, and we shall see, that since that time,
all the Gentiles were not covered with a cloud of miseries, whilst the Jews
in the mean while enjoyed their ease. Seeing then the condition of the Church
is separated from the state of the whole world; the benefit which Isaiah
possesses the Church of in this place, is spiritual. As also this brightness
which he promises, is spiritual. This therefore belongs to the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, whereby the light of the Gospel enlightened all parts of
the world. Yea, the strange nations were enlightened by it.

To this appertains that which follows, The Lord shall arise upon thee. For
albeit he showed that Gods favor should appear by manifest signs and
effects: yet he leaves not out that which was the principal: namely, that the
faithful should sensibly perceive that he was their father, to the end they
might wait for their salvation from him.

darkness, till such time as the Lord lightens us with the testimony of his
free adoption. I speak of all mankind: for Jsaiah teaches that this quickening
light proceeds from God only: thereby to signify that it is the especial gift
of his own hand. Secondly, Church only partakes of this brightness, yt is, the
elect of God. Whence it follows, that it is no common or natural gift: but
such a one as with which the Lord supplies the common defect of man's nature.
And hereby also we perceive that there was never any spark of true light, No
light out of the Church.
but in the Church. For all men besides are enwrapped with darkness, albeit
they think to be in the light, and that they have a great splendour: neither
can they be delivered out of this darkness, but by the light of the Gospel.
He adds the word glory. For after the Lord has once received us into his
favor, he so continues the same unto us, that his benefits do daily more and
more flow in upon us with greater increases.

Verse. 3. And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings at the brightness
of thy rising up.
A confirmation in this and the verse following.
THe Prophet now confirms that which we were saying, to wit, that men have no
light of their own, but that whereby the Lord enlightens them through his
word. All will confess so much; but they do not worthily esteem of this
grace as they ought: they only take it for some common thing which appertains
naturally to every man: but here it appears that it is supernatural. And
therefore it must be distinguished from nature; as the repetition of these
words, upon thee, sufficiently shows. First then let

Now this is done by Christ, who is called the sun of righteousness: Mal.
4.2. because we are enlightened by his beams. Moreover, the Prophet teaches,
that the grace which was communicated unto the Jews, shall be spread far and
wide. According as the words of the covenant often sound, In thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed: Genesis 22.18. For the light which was
proper only to a particular nation, would bring no benefit at all to others.
But for as much as the doctrine of the Gospel was to be spread into all parts
of the world, Judea bare this light; that from thence it might shine to the
Gentiles, who saw not one sparkle thereof before. For in that he makes this
light proper to one people, he shows that the world could not otherwise be
enlightened nor attain to the participation of this benefit, but in seeking
this light in that word which came forth of Judea, and was heard in Jerusalem;
where the lamp of the Lord was kindled; and from whence the Sun of
righteousness cast his beams, that thence he might afterward enlighten all
the habitable corners and quarters of the earth. As in chap. 2.3. we have
seen, That the law went forth of Sion. There is no light then, but in the
doctrine of the Prophets: so that whosoever they be that recoile back from
it, they falsely brag of vvalking in this light.

By the brightness of thy rising up, he alludes to the break of day. For as
the morning star begins the day, by striking through the heaven only, and
forthwith the sun shines over all the world: so the break of day began
first in Judea; whence the light arose, and spread it self throughout the
whole world. For there is no corner of it, which the Lord has not enlightened
with this light.

He mentions kings, This light belongs as well to Kings as to common persons.
that we should not imagine this light belonged to the common people only, but
to Princes and great Lords, who otherwise do much please themselves in their
dignities. Truly, the honor which he here attributes to the Church is
exceeding great, seeing her brightness shall be so glorious, that it shall
draw unto her, As the Moon draws her light from the sun, so the Church
borrowes her light from Christ.
kings and nations. He calls it the Churches light, not because she has any
light of her self; but in regard she borrowes it from Christ, as the Moon
takes her light from the Sun.

Verse. 4. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these are gathered
and come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be
nourished at thy side.
BY many words he confirms this promise touching the restoration of the
Church, which seemed a thing altogether incredible: and therefore was a matter
hard to be beaten into the heads of the Jews, in an estate wherein things
were so perplexed and confused. For then none but the kingdom of Judah stood:
which daily decayed, till at last it fell flat to the ground. Afterward, when
the people were carried away captive, all things grew so desperate in these
horrible scatterings and woeful ruins, that as it seemed the Church was
utterly abolished. It was needful therefore that this doctrine should be many
ways confirmed, that men's minds, which of themselves are too much inclined by
nature to distrust, Men inclined overmuch by nature to distrust.
might no longer remain entangled with doubtings. For this cause then he brings
the Jews as it were, to ye thing done, notwithstanding it were yet far off:
to the end they might assure themselves no less of ye accomplishment thereof,
then if the thing were already effected before their eyes.

Now he commands the faithful to lift up their eyes on high, that is to say,
above al humane thoughts: for whilst we remain fixed to outward appearances,
we cannot savor the fruit of these promises. He ads round about, that they
might certainly know the people should not come from one nation alone, but
from all parts, to be knit together into one body. Neither does he alone
promise an end, and a remedy to the scattering which was to come, as in Psalm.
147.2. and chap. 56.8. that God would gather in the scattered of Israel: but
this gathering should extend it self further off. For it signifies that there
should be a wonderful change in the world: so as those who before were
strangers and divided, should be gathered into one body. To conclude, A
testimony ^ouching the calling of the Gentiles.
the spreading of the Church to the utmost bounds of the earth is here noted
out unto us. We must also supply a close opposition here, which manifests that
miserable and woeful estate whereinto all mankind is plunged till we be
gathered in under the conduct of Christ.

Some, by sons allegorically understand those who were strong and steadfast in
faith: and by daughters, the weak. But I think the Prophet was not disposed
to speak so acutely. I therefore take it simply thus, That sons and
daughters shall in time to come, run unto the Church. That is to say, shall
not only be begotten within doors, but without also: yea, even in the
furthest parts of the world. For the womb of the Church shall no more be shut
up in a corner of the earth, but shall spread it self as far, and as wide,
as the whole world has any space.

Verse. 5. Thou shall see and shine: thine heart shall be astonished, and
enlarged, because the multitude of the sea shall be converted unto thee, and
the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.
THese things at the first blush seem to have some repugnancie in them; By
speaking in the present tence verse. 4. he showed the certainty of the promise
speaking; now in the future, he teaches them to be patient.
seeing in the former verse he spoke in the present tence; and now in the time
to come. But there he spoke of the eyes of faith, which apprehends that, that
men cannot comprehend by nature: here, he handles that which concerns the
event of the thing it self. Or, rather; by speaking in the present tence
before, he meant to signify the truth and steadfastness of the promise: and
now restraines the same sentence; to teach the faithful to limit themselves
within the bounds of patience. Besides, howsoever the promises of God be for a
time shadowed from men's sight: yet do the faithful clearly behold them by
faith; so as they wait for the undoubted accomplishment thereof, though others
will believe nothing at all of them.

And shine.] Because the verb Nahar, signifies to shine, and to flow forth, it
may be translated both ways. For we may refer it to that joy which carries
and causes the Church to ouerflow, when she grows and increases in this
world: or, to that decking of her, which makes her to shine. But it seems to
agree but untowardly with the text, that he couples astonishme^t, with
brightness or joy. Truly I doubt not but by this word he understands such an
amazedness as arises from an admiration and wonderment, with which the Church
shall be rapt up and carried away in seeing her self to rise to such an
unexpected honor, and to be exalted to so high a degree of glory. As if he
should say, The greatness of this work shall be such, that it shall far
surmount thy hope. It is no astonishment then that is conceived through some
fear of danger or calamity; but such as we see to happen in great wonders,
which surpass the reach of our understandings: when being astonished we are
for the time as in a dream: Psalm. 136.1. And this trembling suits very well
with joy.

Verse. 6. The multitude of Camels shall cover thee: and the Dromedaries of
Midian, and of Epha: all they of Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and
incense, and show forth the praises of the Lord.

7. All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee: the Rams of
Nebaioth shall serve thee: they shall come up to be accepted upon mine Altar:
and I will beautify the house of my glory.


Under borrowed speeches the Prophet describes the glory of the Church, and
applies his doctrine, both to the time and persons, with which he had to do.
For we must keep that in mind which we have often said, He that is truly
converted unto God, will dedicate all he has to his service.
namely; that the Prophets had respect to the people whom they taught. And for
that cause, mentioned the things best known, and the ceremonies most in use;
that under the figures thereof, they might note out Gods spiritual worship and
service. For it was good reason the Jews should be first instructed: and the
Gentiles (in the second place) to whom the truth of these things is come. As if
he should say; The people of far Countries shall come with their riches, in
the power of God.

And where he says, the Church shall be enriched, it is not to be referred to
the persons of men: but in regard of the union which the head has with the
members, that which appertains to God and Christ, is here attributed to the
Church. Absurd collections from this place of Jews and Papists.
The Jews deal absurdlie therefore, who under color of this prophecy, by
their insatiable covetousness devour all the riches of the earth: neither do
the Papists less fondly wrest these words to the maintaining of their riches,
and superfluous pomps.

Now he mentions Camels, incense, gold, and sheep, as having regard to that
wherewith every region abounded in, thereby signifying, that all should
consecrate unto God whatsoever they inioyed; and should offer themselves and
all their riches unto him in sacrifice. 1. Pet. 2.5. Romans 12.1.
which we can not possibly deny him, if our hearts be truly dedicated and
consecrated unto him. The wicked abuse the gifts of God to excess and
wantonness, and as much as in them is corrupt them by an execrable prophanenes,
but the faithful who use them with good conscience, consecrate them unto the
Lord. None can rightly say he is the Lords then, unless he therewithal
dedicates and consecrates unto the Lord himself and all that he has.

As touching the regions here mentioned by the Prophet, it is not needful for
us to discuss in what place every one of them is situated. Notwithstanding by
the way we note, that he speaks of such as lay Eastward, and chiefly Arabia,
and the places near adioining, which he signifies by Kedar, and Nebaioth.
Another absurd collection of the Papists.
The Papists have also abused this place, to prove that Kings came from the
East Kings of the East.
to offer gifts unto Christ: wherein they show themselves too ridiculous,
seeing the Prophet speaks of all sorts of people. But they snatch up without
judgment all such like places wherein mention is made of gold, or incense, as
if the Prophets meant to speak of the gifts which the wise men offered, Math.
2.11. There is nothing obscure in this place then: for the Prophets meaning is,
that God shall in time to come be called upon in every place, and all strangers
shall be gathered unto him to yield him obedience.

As touching the words, they shall come up; some translate, They shall come up
upon mine altar in good pleasure. And this seems to me not unapt; as if the
Prophet meant to say, that the offerings of the Gentiles should be acceptable
unto God. Others expound, They shall come up acceptable: which suits not with
the propriety of this tongue. For Ratson signifies good pleasure, good will,
or favor: and therefore I think it should be read as I have translated it,
namely, that the oblations should come up in good pleasure upon the altar; so
as the words may thus be resolved, They shall go up, to appease God: for the
altar was ordained, and the sacrifices offered, to the end God might be
merciful and favorable unto men, who according to his promise, Exodus 20.24.
accepts the sacrifice offered upon his altar: for then the Altar was the mean
to obtain Gods favor.

The Prophet then expresses three things here distinctly. For first when he
says, Three things noted in the sacrifices of the Jews.
that the sacrifices went up, he alludes to the ceremony which in old time
they used in the sacrifices, lifted up their offerings: Exodus 29.24. Leuit.
8.29. to signify, that they were to lift up their minds, that so they might
not be glued to the earth; or only, to fix their eyes upon that which was
offered. Secondly, acceptable unto God, that so they might be distinguished from
the sacrifices of the Gentiles, which were offered without faith. Thirdly, upon
the Altar, which Christ is Gods altar, Christ, Gods Altar.
as we have seen in Chap. 56.7. and upon him must we offer our sacrifices, if
we would have them vvell-pleasing unto God.

Besides, under the beauty of the Temple he signifies the restoration of the
people; in regard the principal part of their felicity consisted in having
the Temple wherein God was purely worshipped to stand in perfect beauty. And
there must we begin, namely, to have God reign amongst us, if we would be
truly happy, for which cause the Lord minding to show that his Church shall be
restored, mentions the Temple, upon which he will put his glory. As if he
should say, My house is now exposed to the mocks of the Gentiles, but in the
end I will put my glory again upon it, whereof it is now deprived. Now out
of Zachary, Haggai, and Malachi it appears, that this was not accomplished
presently after their return out of captivity: for we must not think that
there was that true dignity in this sumptuous building, whereby Herod Herod.
would cunningly have insinuated himself into the favor of the Jews. The
dignity or glory here mentioned therefore appeared not till God opened the
door of heaven to Jerusalem, and afterward manifested the hope of eternal
salvation to all the Jews.

Verse. 8. Who are these that flee like a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows?
BEcause the Prophet could not content himself with mentioning this benefit of
God, being rapt into an admiration, The Prophet amplifies this multiplication
of the Church by an admiration.
he cries out, Who are these? Which manner of speech has much more vehemency
in it, then if he had simply affirmed, that a great number did flee; yea,
though he had used the same similitudes. He meant then more fully to express
how glorious this multiplying should be, seeing he could find no fit words to
set forth the same withal. Psa. 110.3.


Which flee as a cloud.] Some think that by this the Apostles are meant, who
with an incredible swiftness, ran to the utmost parts of the world. I grant
this exposition has some color: but the Prophet speaks of the assembling of
the whole Church, namely, that the nations should run unto it from all parts,
with great nimblenesse and alacrity.

Simile.
The similitude of doves, which he uses, is very apt for this purpose. For
when these birds be in the fields, they seem to be of the number of other wild
birds; yet they belong to an house, and have their lovers, unto which they
retire, and in which they make their nests. So in like manner, the faithful
begin to know their gathering together, being illuminated by faith; that so
they may withdraw themselves out of that horrible scattering in which they are.
Whosoever shall consider the miserable and woeful state of those times, shall
easily perceive how necessary this advertisement was. For if the Prophets,
who without ceasing, had so many years instructed the Jews, reaped little or
no profit thereby; what was to be expected from the Gentiles, who were wholly
estranged from God? Yet the Prophet has not spoken excessiuely: but he so
admires the thing, that he also draws us therewithal into admiration with him.

Verse. 9. Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish as at
the beginning, that they may bring thy sons from far, and their silver and
gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, because he has glorified
thee.
That these things might have the more weight, God himse^fe is brought in
speaking.
Having magnified the excellent benefit of this restoration, with all the
praises he could possibly devise, he brings in God himself speaking, that his
speech might have the greater authority. Some take To vvait here, To desire:
as if he should say; Let this be done, because the strange nations are as men
affamished, longing after him, by feeling themselves destituted of life and
salvation. Others take it simply, To hope: but the word also sometimes
signifies, To observe. And in this sense David takes it, in Psalm. 56, saying,
The wicked waited for my soul: that is to say, they spread snares for my life.
And in this signification we may take it here. They shall wait: that is to
say, they shall observe my countenance, Psalm. 123.^.
as servants are wont to depend upon the will of their Masters: as if he should
say; Marvel not if so many nations run after the Church, for the Isles which
despise and resist me now, shall be so attentive to my voice, that they shall
do whatsoever I command them. And questionless it appears by the rest of
this verse, that such a kind of obedience is here mentioned.

The ships of Tarshish.] If any will, they may here supply the particle of
similitude thus; As the ships of Tarshish once sailed unto Judea, and brought
that which was necessary for the building of the Temple, and for men's use: so
it shall come to pass, that they shall sail thither again, and this
interrupted navigations shall recover the first course.

By Tarshish, that is, Cilicia, which was opposite to Judea; under the figure
Synecdoche, he understands all voyages and traffikes, which they made by sea
with strange nations. We may also take it without figure thus; The ships of
Tarshish which were wont malapartly to scorn my Church, shall subject
themselves to my authority, and thereunto shall bring children from a far
Country.

Their gold is with them.] He again repeates his former speech, to wit, that
the Gentiles shall so yield their obedience unto God, that they shall offer to
him both themselves and all theirs. The Popish Doctors do here again (as I
touched in verse. 6.) show their extreme impudency, Impudency of Popish
Doctors, in their absurd collections. Reu. 17.8. Persianlike pride noted in the
Pope and his Clergy.
when they abuse these and the like places, to uphold those tyrannous and
Persian-like pompes, whereby that Antichrist of Rome, and his supposts, glister
and will be wondered at. And albeit they ouerflow in costly raiment, being
covered from top to toe with gold and pearls: in a word, though they apparel
themselves like a strumpet; yet are they not ashamed to make the holy Ghost the
author of all these abominations. For when the Prophets do but mention gold or
silver, straightway they apply the same to their dissolutions. Truly in this
behalf they resemble the Jews, Jews and Papists iump together in their fond
collections.
who leap for joy as often as the Prophets mention gold or silver; hoping to
wallow themselves therein, when the Messiah shall come. So the Papists think
on nothing else but upon gold and silver, with which vain appearance, their
minds are so bewitched, that they cannot aspire to heaven: but this
blockishnesse has no need of any refutation. The sum is, that God will
exalt his Church unto an high and sovereign degree of honor, and deck her
with ornaments befitting her. But to the end the faithful might not doubt
that any impediments should hinder them to receive so glorious a promise: or
lest they should attribute ought to their merits, God himself promises to be
the author of this thing. Moreover, Isaiah now assigns the riches of the
Gentiles, whom heretofore he had abandoned from the Church, to be an holy
offering unto God, and as spoils and recompenses of her victory. And thus he
more clearly expresses that which I have said, namely, that we ought to
desire nothing so much, as to see the whole world subdued under Gods dominion.

Verse. 10. And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their
kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my mercy
I had compassion on thee.
HE prosecutes the same argument. The some argument p^osecuted, and in the next
verse expounded.
And as he said heretofore that strangers should submit themselves under Gods
authority to reedifie the Temple: so now he says, that the strangers shall
bestow their labor in building up the walls. The comparisons whereby he
promises the Churches restoration are diverse. For it is a thing usual in the
Scriptures, where the Church is spoken of, sometimes to set it forth under the
Temple, and then again, under Jerusalem. Now he promises that the strangers
shall help to set up this building, lest the Jews should faint being
astonished at their poverty, or small number. For in the captivity they might
be solicited to distrust, thinking that albeit they should return into their
country, yet there was no likelihood that ever they should perfect such a
work. But Cyrus Cyrus.
did this, who furnished them with great sums of gold and silver. And yet these
things were but figurative in him; for they had their full accomplishment in
Christ, to whose kingdom all that which is here spoken must be referred. For
first of all he used the service of a few weak men, to wit, the Apostles,
Apostles.
who were disfurnished of fit means for so long a business; afterward
therefore he raised up strangers out of whom he chose Pastors, Pastors.
and made their Princes to be nursing fathers to the Church.

Papists malepert in giving their Pope sovereignty over Kings.
The Papists too malepertly do overthrow and corrupt this place, when they wrest
it to establish the tyranny of their Pope; to who^ they give sovereign
dominion our Kings and Princes. Kings and Princ^s.
And herein they show themselves impudent liers (against the truth) in calling
him Christ's Vicar: Papists shameless liers in calling their Pope Christ's Vicar.
seeing the kingdom of Christ is not of this world: Ioh. 18.36. And yet this
companion on the contrary domineeres in pride and cruelty; and takes upon him
to change kingdoms. Now Kings so submit themselves unto Christ, that yet they
cease not to be kings still. Kings so submit themselves to the Church, that
they hold their kingly authority still.
Only they are to employ their power for the maintenance of Gods service; and
to govern their subjects with equity. Whence we see how far off they are
from Christ's kingdom, who would rent from Kings their power and authority, to
make themselves Lords over them.

Anabaptists would have no kings.
From this place we may also refute the Anabaptists, who so ouerturne politic
government, that Kings can no otherwise be Christians, then in renouncing (say
these, bedlems) their authority. But we see here that God will have himself
honored of the Kingly order.

Moreover that none might object, that it had been an easier matter to have
maintained the Church in her first estate, In my wrath I smot thee.
then now to pluck her out of hell: God preuents this also, and shows that
the Jews were justly thus afflicted, in regard they had too much provoked him
by their iniquities. But he gives them matter of good hope, because he will
And yet therewithal he informs them touching the cause of such a change: lest
they should judge thereof according to their sense. For when kingdoms are
changed, and sometimes on a sudden exalted; and forthwith fall back into
ruin: we think such things fall out by chance, and that it is but the course
of the world. The Jews might think the same, when after the ruin of the
Chaldean Monarchy, they were set at liberty. And therefore the Lord protests
that all these things were guided by his Providence; that they should not be
partners with infidels in their blindness; It is as much then as if he had
said; If thou ask wherefore thou have endured so many miseries: truly,
because J was angry with thee, Gods free mercy, and not our merits, the
cause of our redemption.
and took vengeance of thy offenses. But if thou would know the reason of
thy deliverance, it has proceeded from my mere good will; not for thy merits:
or a iumbling together of secondarie causes. Calamities then fall not out by
chance. Neither

Verse. 11. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually: neither day nor night
shall they be shut, that men may bring unto thee the riches of the Gentiles,
and Or, and their Kings led.
that their kings may be brought.
THis verse is ill expounded of the most Interpreters. For they think the
Prophet meant to say, that the Church shall be in safety under the fidelity
and protection of God. Why so? Because open doors, show that danger is fare
off. But me thinks the Prophet expounds himself: namely, that the gates shall
be open, that riches may be brought into the city from all parts. And in as
much as they are wont to bear their burdens by day: the day, says he, shall
not suffice in regard of the continual resort of such as shall bring precious
treasures thither. Wherefore carriages shall not cease, in so much that the
gates must be kept open day and night.

Where he says, yt the Church shall have the riches of the Gentiles, What is
meant by the riches of the Gentiles.
it is not to be referred to temporal commodities, but to the obedience which
all the world shall yield unto God in his Church: to which he gives that which
is offered unto him, in regard he has nothing which is not hers.

And their kings led.] I had rather retain the participle which the Prophet
uses, then to follow them who change it into a verb: for they overthrow his
meaning; in regard that he expressly adds this, because the pride of kings
is such, Kings naturally unwilling to submit their necks to Gods yoke.
that they will not willingly suffer themselves to be led. Nay, on the
contrary, standing too much upon their own power, they wax intemperate; and
in stead of being led whither they ought; they carry away with them al others
as with a violent flood. He shows then that notwithstanding their natural and
untamed rebellion, they shall submit themselves to God and his Church.

Verse. 12. For the nation and the kingdom that will not serve thee shall
perish: and those nations shall be utterly destroyed.
A confirmation of the former doctrine.
THe Prophet stands much upon the confirmation of the hearts of Gods children,
to assure them that they should behold the restoration of the Church one day,
as he has now described it out unto them. These thing were altogether
incredible: and howsoever we our selves are sufficiently confirmed by the
events of these things which are manifested in all men's sight; yet if we were
not governed by the spirit of Christ, hardly should we conceive them in our
minds. He shows then that there is no cause at all wherefore the Jews should
doubt of the restoration of the Temple; because the Gentiles should come to
aid them with all their power. But Isaiah regarded something more high in this
place, then the building of the visible Temple. For his meaning is to speak of
that obedience which Kings, Nobles, and the commons should yield unto the
Church, when they should advance as much as in them lay, the purity of
doctrine. Yea, he passes yet further in pronouncing that the kingdoms and
nations which will not serve the Church, shall perish. If such as help not
the Church, are condemned with this fearful and terrible sentence; If such as
serve not the Church shall perish, how shall they e^c^pe that persecute her?
what shall we say of those tyrants who set, themselves furiously against her,
and labor with might and maine to work her overthrow? If the slothful and
careless shall not escape unpunished, ought not the wicked to wait for some
horrible vengeance, seeing they strive to hinder and overthrow the work of the
Lord?

He repeates that now in the plural number, which he said before in the
singular; to show, that if the whole world were guilty, yet they should wholly
perish. For the multitude cannot free those from perishing, And those nations,
etc.
that estrange themselves from God: neither shall the wicked be excused, if
they hinder one another from coming to salvation; or if they encourage one
another to commit iniquity. Now it is said (as we have seen before) that
Kings and nations serve the Church, not in regard that she exercises any
dominion of her self, but because God has given and committed the scepter of
his word, by which he rules, unto her custody.

Verse. 13. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fur tree, the elm
and the box tree together to beautify the place of my sanctuary: for I will
glorify the place of my feet.
ISaiah uses yet another similitude, which he brought in when he compared
the Church to a building or City. For he recites such things as are necessary
to build withal, to wit, the fur tree, the pine tree, and the box tree; all
which grew in Lebanon, a forest that abounded with goodly and excellent trees.
His meaning is then, that whatsoever was fair and exquisite in this forest,
should be brought unto the Church. But we must refer the truth of these figures
to Gods spiritual worship; for he adornes his Church with the title of the
sanctuary, because himself dwells in the midst thereof: notwithstanding he
has always respect to the Temple, and to the customs of those times. He sets
before us then a pattern of the Temple that stood in Jerusalem; that under the
image thereof we might consider of the spiritual Temple, whereof we are the
matter and the living stones: Ephesians. 2.21. 1. Pet. 2.5.

By the place of his feet, he signifies that he so dwelles in the Temple,
that yet his Majesty is not enclosed therein, for he is not contained within
so narrow limits. There is nothing but his feet then, that is to say, his
lowest and meanest part: thereby teaching us, to aspire up unto heaven, and not
to rest fixed in these external signs, which instruct us according to our
slender capacity. According to which, it is said in Psalm. 99.5. Worship the
footstool of his feet, for he is holy. Also, We will enter into his
Tabernacle, and worship before his footstool: Psalm. 132.7. Not that Gods
essence is divided into pieces, Gods essence not parted into pieces.
part in heaven, and part in earth; but in regard that by such helps, he
raises up his servant as it were from his feet to his head.

Verse. 14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come and bow unto
thee; and all they that despised thee, shall fall down at the soles of thy
feet, and they shall call thee, The City of the Lord, Zion of the holy one of
Israel.
HE prosecutes the same argument still. For he shows how wonderful this work
of redemption shall be, The same argument still prosesecuted.
when those that persecuted or despised the Church, shall come to prostrate
themselves humbly before her feet, and with their whole hearts shall submit
themselves to her service. By the children of those that afflicted her, he
means the tyrants and persecuters which vexed her. Now this was partly
accomplished when the Jews returned into their country. But this return was
but an obscure shadow of that deliverance which we have obtained by Christ.
Thus these things then were truly accomplished under Christ's kingdom; yet so,
that we must wait for the perfect consummation thereof, till his second
coming: as in another place before we have noted.

But, will some say, bow, and fall down upon the ground, are such signs of
honor, which no mortal man ought to accept of. I answer, This honor not done
to the Church, but to the head Christ.
who is worshipped in the Church: and those who hated and persecuted him
before, come now to do him this reverence. Now we say that Christ is adored in
the Church, not according to the Popish opinion, who think they indeed worship
Christ whilst they kneel before that Roman Idol The Roman Idol.
to kiss his pantable. Those, in favor of whom this is affirmed, hate and
reject such a doctrine. They only honor Christ then who obey his voice; as also
the Prophet says, that the strangers which were out of the Church should
willingly submit themselves to yield obedience unto Christ, whose Majesty
shines in the doctrine which himself administers by the service of men.

And shall call thee, etc.] The Church was adorned with this title heretofore,
but it was in a manner defaced when the City was destroyed, the Temple raced,
and the people led away captive. Jerusalem was no more the same, neither was
there ought to be seen in her but an horrible wast, and yet he promises that
she shall be so, restored, that all shall acknowledge her for the City of the
Lord. Zion of the etc.
Afterward he speaks of the Temple, to signify unto us that this dignity is
attributed to Jerusalem in regard of the Temple: that is to say, for the
service of Gods sake which was there established.

Verse. 15. Whereas thou have bin forsaken and hated, so that no man went by
thee, I will make thee an eternal glory, and a joy from generation to
generation.
THe Prophet had an eye to yt middle time which already approached: for a
little after his death the people were driven out of their heritage, and led
away captive, so as all thought that the Jews had bin for ever rooted out.
That this thought then might not arise in the minds of the faithful, whereby
they were in danger to fall into despair and say, We are undone; there is no
way left how to remedy these so ex^reame miseries: neither are we ever to
expect a better condition; he on the contrary shows, that these sore
calamities can not let God to restore them again. For howsoever for a time
they were after a sort forsaken when the Lord thus corrected them, yet was it
no masterie for him to set them in a more happy and better estate then the
former.

If any object, glory shines forth from under the cross, Christ's glory
shines Under the cross.
so as Gods name rem^ nes, and a people also that calls upon his name by faith.



Verse. 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the
breasts of the Kings: and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy savior and
thy redeemer: the mighty one of Iaakob.
HE speaks of the spreading forth of the Church. But it was necessary that
one and the same thing should be often repeated, in regard it seemed incredible
that the Church of God being now brought to so low an ebb, should ever be
raised, or spread over the whole world: for her condition was lamentable, but
in the end she was rebuilt again, to the astonishment of all, and that by a
small remnant, as a brand recovered out of the fire; and the seed thereof was
scattered far and wide through all the quarters of the world. And therefore it
is as much as if he had said, Though thou be now enclosed within strait and
very narrow bounds, and have nothing in common with the Gentiles, yet so it is
that thou shall receive from them much fruits in abundance.

By milk, and breasts, he means nothing else but that service and obedience
which the Gentiles should render to the Church to nourish her offspring. For
having s^id before, that of an handful should proceed an infinite number of
children: now he prouides milk to suckle them with, until they be come of
sufficient age. And he expressly speaks of Kings, in regard it was the harder
to be believed. And thus Kings by the way are admonished of their duties, Kings
admonished of their duties.
who if they will discharge the same as they ought, then must they be servants
of the Church, otherwise the Lord will call them to account for it, and we know
what David pronounces in the second Psalm, verse 10.11.

But we must note after what manner the Church shall suck the milk and the
breasts of the Gentiles. For she is not permitted wholly to draw in unto her
self all the abilities and riches of the world, but only thereby to preserve
her own estate in safety. For can any thing in the world be more contrary to
the nature of the Church, then to be an insatiable gulf, No (...) mo e
^^^trarie to the nature of the true Church, then to become an insatiable gulf.
swallowing up into her belly whatsoever she may come by? These things
therefore must be referred to the spiritual estate of the Church, namely, that
by means hereof, God may be purely worshipped in her, that the ministry of
the word may flourish and be advanced there, and that she may thereby retain
some discipline Discipline.
which may serve as a bridle to curb every one. And yet herewithall, that the
faithful must remember, it is a more blessed thing to give then to take: Act.
20.35, that thus they may be instructed to bear poverty patiently, to the end
they may enrich others with their spiritual riches.

Lastly he adds, that that which for a time was hidden shall be discovered:
namely, the Jews should know, that they were not elected in vain, in regard
they should feel by experience that God was careful of their salvation. Faith
and experience distinguished.
Not that faith fails in afflictions: but because the feeling thereof is one
thing, and experience another. Whilst we seem forlorn, then faith soars up
aloft far above the present misery, and those thick mists with which we be
enwrapped. And if God be pleased to restore us to our perfect estate, then we
perceive the thing, not by the eyes of faith but by experience it self: lo
here that manifest knowledge whereof he speaks. As if he should say, after I
shall have dealt liberally with you, you shall then see by the effects that I am
your redeemer.

He does of set purpose use the title of the mighty one of Jacob: in regard he
had formerly often showed himself to be such an one toward them. And that not
only Jacob himself had many ways felt Gods power by experience, but that his
successors also had proved that it was in him in whom they were to seek
assured help. Thus then he calls him mighty; to the end they might
acknowledge that God would be the same for ever toward them, which in times
past he had been to their fathers.

Verse. 17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron will I bring silver, and
for wood brass, and for stones iron. I will also make thy government peace,
and thine exactors righteousness.
The excellency of Christ's spiritual Temple discribed.
THe Prophet alludes to the building of the old and ancient Temple, and compares
it with the spiritual and heavenly. As if he should say, When you shall be
carried away captive, then you will bewail the ruin of the Temple: but I will
so work, that you shall build it after a more excellent manner. In stead of
brass then, I will bring gold, and in stead of iron, silver; for wood, brass,
and for stones, iron. As if he had said, All shall be full of magnificence and
glory in that second Temple which shall succeed the first. Now we know that
this prophecy was never accomplished in the external restoration of this
people. Nay, it is certain that the beauty of the second Temple was far
inferior to the first: Ezra. 3.12.13. It follows then, that the Prophet who in
spirit, saw the true redemption, recites not only that which should fall out
presently after the return of the people; but publishes the excellency of
the spiritual Temple, which is the Church of Christ: we must therefore come by
a direct line, as it were unto Christ, if we will attain the true meaning of
this prophecy. In his kingdom these things were fully accomplished, and the
dignity of the first Temple was much surpassed: For the Lord shed abroad the
gifts of his holy spirit, which far excelled either gold, silver, or
precious stones. We may now then see the Temple built of precious stones, as
it was in Chapter 54.11.12.

As concerning the word superintendance, others tanslate tribute. Neither do I
doubt but the Prophet meant closely to compare ye miserable servitude, under
which the people should be held, with that excellent dignity, to which they
were afterward advanced. For to peace and justice, he opposes the exactors,
who unjustly tyrannised over them, whilst the Jews were vexed with the
covetousness and cruelty of the Babylonians. Now he shows that the exactors
being cut off, there shall be no other superintendancie then peace and justice.
This was more fully accomplished, when we were delivered from the tyranny of
the devil by Christ. For by his Gospel he erected a kingdom of
righteousness, which is not yet finished. But we are to wait for his last
coming to see the perfection thereof: and yet in the mean while to content
our selves with these first fruits.

Verse. 18. Violence shall no more be heard of in thy land, neither desolation,
nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shall call salvation thy walls,
and praise thy gates.
HE here more largely expresses that which we have said: namely, An
amplification of the former doctrine.
that in describing the happy estate of the Church, he privily opposes the
miseries and calamities wherewith she had been diversely afflicted, thereunto.
For which cause he promises that in time to come she should no more be vexed
by them I grant notwithstanding that many evils befell them after their
deliverance. What of that? Yet the people were never so utterly wasted, but
some form of a Church still remained; and by means hereof they enjoyed peace,
feeling by experience that God kept and defended them by his power. We must
not take it then as if the Prophet in these words promised them to be exempt
from all trouble and encumbrance. But this consolation was added by way of
comparison, in regard of the miseries to come: to wit, that the Lord will spare
his Church; which shall be in safety under his protection. And questionless
in the course of their deliverance, they evidently perceived some testimonies
of this peace which the Prophet does here so highly extol. To be short, we
must always remember that which we have so often repeated; namely, that we
feel all these things in part only; because the kingdom of Christ is not yet
accomplished.

And thy gates.] He alludes to the building of the Temple, or of the Church, as
we have said elsewhere: and shows that her safety shall not consist in
towers, walls, or other enclosures; and that howsoever humane helps should
fail her, yet should she have sufficient safety and quiet contentment in God
alone. But to the salvation of the Church he joins praise, or joy: for being
now in perfect safety she should rejoice: whereas before during her
oppression, she lay trodden under foot in an hopeless silence.

Verse. 19. Thou shall have no more Sun to shine by day, neither shall the
brightness of the Moon shine upon thee: for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory.

20. Thy Sun shall never go down, neither shall thy Moon be hid: for the
Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be
ended.


He teaches that the Churches felicity shall not be temporary, but
eternal. The Churches felicity not temporal, but eternal.
For he separates her from the common condition of men, among whom, nothing is
stable nor permanent. Why so? Because whatsoever is under the Sun, be it
never so well established, yet is it subject to diverse mutations and changes.
But the state of the Church must not be measured according to the dangers of
this present life, in regard she is preserved even in the midst of greatest
storms. As if he should say; Judge not of thy salvation by outward
appearances; but be thou sure that God holds that safely in his hand. The Lord
will be thy Sun; so as thou shall have no more need of the light, neither of
Sun nor Moon. Fear not any change then, or confusion of things; for thou
shall enjoy a perpetual and an immovable light. And yet we must not take it
as if the Prophet meant hereby to affirm that Gods children should be
deprived of the commodities of this present life. Though the felicity of Gods
chosen consists in eternal good things, yet are ^hey not therefore to be
deprived of the use of temporal things.
For seeing the Lord has bestowed them on all men indifferently, then has he
much more ordained them for his servants, for whose sakes, even all things were
created of God, in regard he has a special care over them. But the Prophet
meant yet to signify something more excellent, which the children of God only
do enjoy, namely, that heavenly light. This the wicked cannot apprehend, and
therefore they deadly hate it. For howsoever they have the light of the Sun,
and other like benefits; yet cannot their felicity be firm nor stable,
because they are without feeling, which hinders them from tasting the
principal good thing, to wit, that God is their Father. Our Prophet therefore
distinguishes the condition of the Church, and of the faithful therein, from
the common estate of men in the world: to teach us not to measure it according
to the changes gross darkness, God uses to let the light of his fatherly
countenance shine upon his children, to cause them to rejoice. Though all the
elements then should cease to do their office, or should threaten us with an
heavy look, let it suffice us notwithstanding that God favors us.

By the name of Sun and Moon, under a part he comprehends the state of the
whole world, which is often times changed.

Verse. 21. Thy Or, peoples.
people also shall be all righteous: they shall possess the land for ever: the
graffe of my planting shall be the work of mine hands, that I may be
glorified.
THe Prophet shows here, wherein the true establishment of the Church
consists: truly when she is separated from the godless, and that the
faithful only have place in her. The Church is then truly established, when
she is separate from the godless, and that the faithful alone have place in
her.
But we know that hypocrites are always mingled amongst the true children of
God in the Church. We have also told you that the kingdom of Christ is here
deciphered out; not such a one as it shall be in every particular moment of
time, but in its perfection. Christ at his first coming, began to accomplish
that which is here said, when he purged his Church: in which regard, he calls
his Gospel a fan; because by it the chafe is separated from the wheat: Mat.
3.12. And he continues still every day to purge it, and will hold on that course
even to the day of harvest. In the mean while, there must be much refuse
mingled amongst the good grain, which in that day shall at last be utterly
purged and cleansed out.

Moreover, here is a close opposition between that profane and wicked
troop, who by their filthiness do pollute the sanctuary of the Lord.
Further also he seems to mention the vocation of the Gentiles, when in the
plural number he says, that all peoples shall be righteous.

Where he adds, that they shall inherit the land for ever, I doubt not but he
had respect unto Judea, and closely opposed the time of the restoration, to
that of the captivity, which was at hand. As if he should say; Albeit I do
banish my people out of their inheritance, yet after seventy years, I will
bring them back again to possess it for ever. It is also to be noted, that
he restraines this promise which appertained to all the people of Zion, to the
righteous. For thus there is a kind of correction, whereby he shuts out all
hypocrites, who are wont vainly to vsurp and snatch unto them those titles,
which only belong to the true children of God. This sentence then agrees with
the beginning of the 73. Psalm: Yet God is good to Israel, even to the pure in
heart. For here the Prophet attributes the name of Jsrael, which all bragged
of, to the true servants of God only. And so in this place we may say as much
of the word peoples, to wit, that little remnant which shall be purged from
their uncleanness. This was not wholly accomplished among the Jews: they had
the beginnings of it indeed, when they were restored home unto their Country
again; that so afterward by their means, the possession of the whole world
might be given unto Gods children. And as he spoke heretofore of the
restoration of the Temple, which was not perfect in Jerusalem, but should be
extended through all the quarters of the world: so this possession of the land
must not be restrained to Judea alone, seeing it stretches it self further
off, in regard all men are called to have their part therein: that so by faith
they may be the children of Abraham, and consequently be made heirs.

These phrases of speech then which are much in use among the Prophets, ought
to be diligently observed, The phrases of speech used by the Prophets, ought
diligently to be observed.
that we may the better attain to their meaning, and not to curtall their
sentences, nor wrest them to a wrong sense. Their exposition then is too far
fetched, and far remote from the propriety of the Prophets language; who by
the land, understand heaven and the blessed life. For the land of Canaan was
given to the children of Israel, that being separated from the rest of the
world, as the peculiar flock of God, they might in that place serve him
purely. And therefore to possess the land by right of inheritance, signifies
nothing else, but to continue and remain in the Church of God.

Where God affirms that the graffe of his planting shall be the work of his
hands; it serves to confirm the hope of the faithful. For in man's judgment
it was a thing impossible that ever the Church should bud again; for all
esteemed her forlorn, chiefly in respect her root lay hidden. That she might
sprout a fresh then, the Prophet says, that God will play the husband man,
namely, in replanting that which was withered after it was plucked up by the
roots. In a word, he signifies that the deliverance of the Church out of this
miserable servitude, shall be an admirable work of the Lord, and not of men; in
regard she shall be raised up as it were from death. And truly that which
belongs to the heavenly life, is not given us by nature, nor obtained by our
industry; but flows unto us, and proceeds from Gods free bounty. Every one
of us also oght to apply unto himself in particular, that whcih is here said of
the whole Church in general: for we were planted of God before the foundations
of the world: Ephesians. 1.4. and afterward plantation. The wicked were never planted
of God: and therefore Christ pronounces that those whom his heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be plucked up: Mat. 15.13.

To conclude, the end wherefore we be planted, The end why we are planted.
is by and by added, namely, that we might set forth the praise of God, and
tell of his wonderful works: as we are taught very well by Paul, in Ephesians.
1.12. And by Peter in his first Epistle: Chap. 2.9.

Verse. 22 A little one shall become as a thousand, and a small one as a strong
nation: I the Lord will hasten it in due time.
HE confirms that which he has already said, A confirmation of that which
was said before.
namely, that albeit they were few in number, yet the Church of God should be
plentifully replenished with people. When the Prophet foretold these things,
there were great multitudes of people: but in short time after, they were so
diminished, that the remainders were very few; as we have seen in the first
and tenth Chapters, yet this small number, says he, shall so increase, that in
process of time, it shall become an infinite people of great power.

Let us know then, that whatsoever was said unto the Jews in this behalf,
planting of God: verse. 21. which we must not esteem of by outward appearances,
nor by the force or multitudes of men.

I the Lord.] Now the Prophet shows to what end all his former speeches have
tended, namely, that we should not resemble God unto men, whose counsels and
endeavors easily vanish and come to nothing. If they would take upon them to
alter the state of the world or of a kingdom; alas, they could do nothing:
but the Lord can change all these things in a moment. He speaks not then of an
ordinary government, but of a rare and admirable work, whereby the Lord will
deliver and multiply his Church.

In the end of the verse he promises to hasten the accomplishment of this
work: but he adds a particle that is worthy to be noted, touching the time
of the Church. For the relative is in the feminine gender; so as they who refer
it unto God, are deceived. And those who translate, In his time, are the cause
of this error, in regard this word His, is ambiguous. The Prophets meaning is,
that there is an appointed time set, in which the Church should be delivered.
And thus he exhorts the faithful unto patience, that they should not fall
away; but rather depend upon the unchangeable decree of God, who has skill
enough to dispose of the moments of times.

First of all the^ he notes the fit time wherein it shall be most for the
Churches profit to be delivered. We cannot judge of this: for we would have God
do that which he has promised out of hand: and if he foreslow the time, we
storm. But he defers for our good; and in respect that the fit time is not yet
come. Afterward he speaks of hastening, because we imagine that the Lord is
asleep, or takes his ease, when he deferres. And yet he hastens, to execute
all things according to that time and season which he alone knows to be
fittest.

THE LXI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord
anointed me: he has sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor, to bind up
the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the Captives, and to them that are
bound, the opening of the prison.
That which is here said appertains to Christ as the head, and all the
Prophets and Apostles as his servants.
FOr as much as Christ expounds this place of himself, Luke 4.18. therefore
the interpreters do without any difficulty restrain it unto him: holding it
for a principle, that Christ is here brought in speaking: as if these things
only appertained unto him. The Jews scoff at such, who inconsiderately have
attributed to Christ alone, the things which do also agree to the rest of the
Prophets. To speak then what I think, it seems to me, that this Chapter is
added as a seal unto the former, This Chapter is added as a seal unto the
things before going.
thereby to confirm yt which has been said hitherunto touching the
restoration of the Christian Church. And that to this end Christ protests,
that God has anointed him: which is the cause that he (and that very justly)
appropriates this prophecy unto himself: in regard he has exhibited that to
us clearly and manifestly which others have taught obscurely. Yet this hinders
not; but yt this sentence may in like manner agree to the rest of the Prophets
whom the Lord has also anointed. For they spoke not in their own names,
neither did they execute their offices from their private authority: but they
showed forth the authority and office of Christ; to whom it not only belongs
to publish these things; but also to fulfill them. This place then must be thus
understood, namely, that Christ who is the Prince of the Prophets, obtaines the
chief place among the^: and that it is he only who manifests all that which is
here mentioned: and also that Isaiah, with the rest of the Prophets, and the
Apostles, are his servants; every one of them employing themselves to the
utmost in preaching and publishing the benefits which we receive from him. So
as yt which Isaiah has said should be finished by Christ, we now see it
accomplished by the effects.

For this cause he has anointed me.] This second member was added in stead of
an exposition. For first it would have been obscure to us, If he had concealed
the cause, wherefore God had given him his Spirit: but now we may evidently
perceive his meaning, when he shows the use thereof: namely, that he
exercises a public office, that so he may not be taken as some private
person.

Now as often as the Scripture mentions the spirit of God, and says, that it
dvvels in us: We must not think of the spirit without his efficatie.
1. Cor. 3.16. let us consider of his efficacy and power; and not imagine it
to be some vain and idle thing in us without any effect. Wherefore after the
Prophet has spoken of the Spirit of the Lord: in the second place he adds the
anointing thereunto: thereby understanding the virtues which proceed from that
spirit. To which purpose Paul says, 1. Cor. 12.4. that there are diverse gifts:
but only one spirit from whence they flow. No man ought to take upon him the
office of a Teacher, unless he be able to manifest that he is called
thereunto of God.
This place is diligently to be observed of us, for no man ought to take unto
himself power or authority to teach in the Church of God, unless he be able
to show that he is called thereunto by the virtue of Gods spirit. And so
testifies S. Paul in 1. Cor. 12.3. namely, that no man can say, Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

But, may some say, we see that every one bragges of the spirit. For the Pope,
By the anointing. That is to say,

To preach.] The Prophet attributes not unto himself the authority of a
teacher, till he has made it manifest that he was sent of God. His authority
is founded upon his anointing: namely, in being fitted and furnished by the
Lord with sufficient gifts. It is our duties to give him audience then, not as
to a private person, but as unto a public Minister sent from heaven.

To the afflicted.) Others translate, To the meek: and the word Anauim,
signifies both the one and the other. But I had rather retain the first
signification, in respect the Prophet speaks of the prisoners, and of those
that are bound. And yet, as I take it, he comprehends both. For he speaks of
such, who being utterly forsaken and rejected, are also miserable in
themselves. Christ is only promised to such as are humbled and brought low by
the sense of their miseries, who having no conceit of their own worth, do
willingly contain themselves within the bounds of modesty and humility. Hence
we gather that our Prophet speaks properly of the Gospel. For the law was
given to bring down all lofty imaginations, and such as are swollen with
vain confidence: but the Gospel is ordained for the afflicted: that is to
say, for such as confess themselves empty of all good things, that by and
through it they may be raised up and comforted. For to what end are the
Prophets, Apostles, and other Ministers anointed, but to restore and comfort
the heavy hearts by the doctrine of grace?

To bind up.] The Prophet uses diverse phrases of speech that he might the
better express one and the same thing. In the word to bind up, he expresses
somewhat more then in the former member. For he shows, that the preaching of
the Gospel is no empty sound vanishing away in the air, but a medicine that
is operative, which works not upon those that are stubborn and strong, Upon
whom the Gospel works.
but upon such as have broken and contrite hearts. It is also the end of the
Gospel to set the captives at liberty. We are all prisoners and fettered,
until Christ have set us free by his grace, John 8.36. But let us beware that
we reject not the benefit which he offers us when he is about to smite off our
yrons. Generally we may note that the benefits here mentioned are distributed
unto us by the Gospel, but none are capable hereof, Who are capable of the
Gospel.
except those who feeling their poverty do ardentlie desire the help of
Christ, according as himself says, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that
travel and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

Verse. 2. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
of our God, to comfort all that mourn.
The time when this grace should be manifested.
HE here expresses the very time wherein this so excellent grace should be
spread abroad, yt so he might take away all scruples and doubts that might come
into their heads. For all of us are subject to sundry cares, and many
encumbrances arise up in our minds, which hold them entangled with infinite
discourses, whereof we taste by daily experience. Now the Prophet affirms that
he is the Herald of the grace which is to be revealed, the time whereof rests
wholly in the disposition of the Almighty: for as himself was to be the
redeemer of his Church by his mere favor, so was it in his own power (and
that by good right) to make choice of the time himself wherein to perform the
same. It may be the Prophet alluded to the year of Iubile, The year of Iubile.
Leuit. 25.10. Howsoever it be, he boldly pronounces that they were patiently
to wait with meek and quiet spirits, until it pleased God to stretch forth
his hands.

S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans 16.26. and to the Galath. 4.4. calls this
year the fulness of time. We have also seen heretofore that the Prophet in
Chap. 49.8. said, Behold the acceptable time, behold the day of salvation:
which sentence S. Paul in 2. Cor. 6.2. applies to his preaching of the Gospel.
For when the Lord summons us thereby, then is the gate of heaven set open unto
us, that we should forthwith enter into the possession of Gods graces. We
must not therefore put it off till to morrow; but we must make use of the
time, and take the occasion whilst so large mercies are offered unto us.

But here seems to be a repugnancie between these two, namely, Isaiah has
joined things so different together? Truly, work the deliverance of his
Church, but he must therewithal show himself a just Judge in revenging himself
upon ye wicked. The acceptable time then is to be referred unto the elect: and
the day of vengeance unto the wicked, who never cease persecuting of the
Church. It is needful therefore that in the deliverance thereof they should be
chastised. According to which Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. that it is a righteous
thing with God to render vengeance unto the enemies who unjustly afflict the
faithful, and to give rest to the afflicted. Neither could the Jews expect
any good issue out of so many mise^^es, unless it were by the confusion of
their adversaries.

In the mean while it is good to note the cause of this deliverance, which
must be wholly ascribed to the free grace of God, and not to our merits,
worthiness, or any industry that is in us. The Prophet seems indeed, as I have
said, to allude to the year of Iubile: but yet we must principally observe
this, namely, that our salvation consists altogether upon the free will of our
God.

To comfort.] We must remember what I have touched before, to wit, what the end
of the Gospel is: namely, That we being delivered out of all miseries, and
restored to our first liberty, our tears wiped from our eyes; we may enjoy
spiritual comfort and consolation. But if we be deprived of so great a
benefit, let us impute the same to our own incredulity and unthankfulness,
whereby we both reject and repulse God, who freely offers himself unto us.

Verse. 3. To Or, to establish.
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, and to give unto them Or, magnificence.
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the
spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting
of the Lord, that he might be glorified.
HE prosecutes the same argument, The same argument continued.
and declares, that the chastisement wherewith the people should be exercised,
should not be so sharp, but that there was hope notwithstanding left for them
touching remission of sins. Which that he might the better persuade the^ of,
he says, the Lord has given him charge to publish this deliverance, and that
not to himself alone, but also to all the Prophets, even til the coming of
that great Ambassador, to wit, Christ Jesus, who shall indeed publish and
accomplish that which God would now have diuulged for the time to come: yet
therewithal he signifies, that their sorrows shall not be able to let God
from giving them matter of joy, when it should seem good unto himself. For to
establish, is as much to say, as to appoint a time, that the long delay might
not discourage them. Again, by the verb, To give, he recommends unto them the
efficacy of his prophecy, to the end they might be undoubtedly persuaded
touching the event thereof. Well, he alludes herein to the ancient Ceremonies
of the Jews, who, when any affliction in those times pressed them, were wont
to cover their heads with ashes, and to clothe themselves with sackcloth. By
these things then he notes out that mourning, and deformity, which of
necessity was to ensue upon the peoples woeful condition, and opposes the
same to that joy and gladness which they should be filled withal, after they
had obtained their freedom and liberty.

But yet me thinks I can not let pass the answering of these words Peer, and
Epher, one to another, which signify magnificence, and ashes. For by the
transposition of the letters, they signify things clean contrary: by which
elegant turning of the words vpside down, he meant to note out the change of
their estate.

Trees of righteousness.] By these words he sets out the peoples
restoration. As if he should say; Whereas in times past you were rooted up,
and resembled a withered stock; now you shall be planted again and
established. He brings them then to the consideration of Gods power, to the end
that howsoever they should be overwhelmed and brought to deaths door, yet were
they notwithstanding to assure themselves to be so revived, that they should
take root, gather strength, and grow.

Hence we may gather a general doctrine, A general Doctrine.
namely, that we cannot be quickened, unless we be planted by the Lord. True
it is that we are called his plants, Chap. 60.21. because he has elected us
from the beginning: Ephesians. 1.4. But yet there is another kind of planting which
succeeds this first; Two kinds of planting.
to wit, our calling, which by faith grafts us into ye body of Christ. This the
Lord brings to pass by the labors of his servants, the Ministers of the
Gospel: but the whole must be ascribed unto him, because it is he only that
gives the increase: 1. Cor. 3.7. Yet we are always to keep in mind that
doctrine, which brings us from this first deliverance, unto the spiritual
kingdom of Christ.

He calls them trees of righteousness, in whom Gods justice shines, or, an
order rightly composed. Yet let us know that the Lord adopts us upon condition
that we be new creatures, and that righteousness may rule and reign in us.
And thence it follows that by nature we are all corrupt and perverse, and
cannot bring forth any good fruit, till the Lord have changed and planted us.
This also abolisheth that vain and proud conceit of the Papists, Popish
preparations.
who in forging unto themselves preparations, forsooth, or, some helps of free
will, vsurp upon that which belongs unto God. If we be planted of the Lord,
then it follows that by nature we are dry and unfruitful.

For my glory.] See here the end wherefore we be planted. But of this matter
we have spoken in Chap. 60.21.

Verse. 4. And they shall build the old waste places, and raise up the former
desolations: and they shall repair the Cities that were desolate and waste
through many generations.
THe Prophet amplifies this restoration of the Church, An amplification in
this and the verses following.
and insists principally thereabouts; that the Jews might conceive in their
minds a certain and an assured hope of their deliverance: for these promises
seemed altogether incredible. And this is the cause why he adornes the benefit
of this redemption with so many glorious and goodly titles. Those err, who
will have these words, Of the age, and from generation to generation, referred
to the time to come. As if the Prophet should have said; that the building
whereof he speaks, shall be firm and stable: whereas his meaning is far
otherwise. For he shows (as I noted in Chap. 58.12.) namely, that the old
ruins of the City should not hinder the Lord from rearing it up again. After
the inhabitants of any City have been long scattered here and there, what
hope is left that it should be built again? As for example; who is he that
thinks of the reedifiing of Athens? Athens.
So whilst the Jews were banished for a long time into a foreign country, and
that Jerusalem lay waste the space of seventy years; who durst expect that
ever the Citizens thereof should have reedified it? For this cause Isaiah
calls deserts of an age, the places formerly desolated; the Cities waste,
the solitary places from generation to generation: to show that none of these
should hinder the Lord in due season, as was noted in Chap. 60.22. to bring
back his elect to Jerusalem, and to cause them to dwell there.

Moreover, build up and to renew the things which for a long timc have been
ruinated and lien rotting in a perpetual consumption. But we have handled
this matter before in Chap. 58.

Verse. 5. And the strangers shall stand and feed your sheep: and the sons of
the strangers shall be your plowmen, and dressers of your vines.
HIs meaning is, that the strangers shall be ready to obey them. For in
respect they were at that time divided from other nations, no man would lend
them their hand. And therefore he says, that the strangers do stand: that is
to say, are ready pressed to meet and to succor them.

Where he adds, that they shall feed their sheep and shall be the plowmen
and vinedressers, these are borrowed kinds of speeches. For the Prophet speaks
of Christ's kingdom, which is spiritual; and sets forth the perfect felicity
thereof, under these figures; that we might the better conceive of those things
which are here proposed unto us by examples. Let us know therefore that we
shall be truly happy, when Christ shall reign over us: for by means
thereof many commodities whereof the posterity of Adam is worthily deprived,
Who shall be t^uly happy when Christ shall reign over us.
shall be restored unto us unawares.

Verse. 6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord; and men shall say
unto you, The Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles,
and shall be exalted with their glory.
THis verse gives us a little better light into the former: for in the second
part thereof Isaiah foretells, that the faithful shall eat the riches of the
Gentiles, and shall be exalted with their glory. The Jews lay hold of these
places with great earnestness, and greedily devour all the goods of other
nations, as if one day they should be masters of all: and glory, as if all the
pomp of the world should fall to their shares. But for our better
understanding Two points must be observed for the better understanding of the
Prophets.
borrow similitudes from things belonging to men. Secondly, in speaking of the
Church, they so conioyne the head with the members, that sometimes they rather
respect him then the members.

Neither must we reap this fruition of other men's goods, as if those which
should be converted unto Christ should gripe unto themselves riches, glory,
or the dignities of others; for this would not stand with the rules of
charity. But in respect that all things should be subjected under Christ's
dominion; that so he might obtain the sovereign rule and authority over
them. This is it which I have already said, to wit, that the Prophet has not
so much regard of the members, as of the head himself. But when riches are
brought under Christ's power, then they are called ours; because he has nothing
which belongs not to his spouse the Church. It is said in chap. 45.14. in the
same sense that the enemies of Christ shall fall down at his feet, and make
supplic^tion unto him: and yet this is done to the Church, in whom they
acknowledge Christ, and submit themselves unto his doctrine. See chap. 60.14.
Jsaiah then shows what the Father will give to the Son, who has lawful
power over all the world: to whom also all things ought to be subject.

In the mean while we must not omit that which I touched erewhile: namely,
that God feeds his elect liberally in this world, to the end thy might feel
that their estate is better then that of the infidels. For howsoever they may
want many things, yet a little contents them; for which they give God hearty
thanks: so as their wants to them are much better, then all the wealth of the
world is to the wicked.

By the word Priests he shows, that the condition of the common people shall
be much better then it was in times past. As if he should say, Hitherunto the
Lord has chosen you for his heritage only: but hereafther he will indue you
with more excellent gifts, for he will make you Priests. Now howsoever all
the people were a kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6. yet we know that the Tribe
of Leui only exercised this office, Deuteronomy. 33.10. But our Prophet here
testifies that afterward it shall be common to all. Yet this was not manifested
till Christ came. I grant that the restoration of the Church began at the
return of the people out of Babylon: but in the end at Christ's coming, the
faithful were adorned with this dignity.

Hereunto appertains that which is written in 1. Pet. 2.9. You are an holy
nation, a royal Priesthood. But withal we ought diligently to note what this
kind of Priesthood is: for we must no more offer unto God any brute beasts; but
reasonable men must now be offered and sacrificed to the obedience of Christ.
According to which S. Paul says, that he offered up the Gentiles by the sword
of the Gospel, that they might afterward yield their obedience unto God. Romans
15.19.

Hence we see how childishly ye Papists trifle in abusing this place to prove
their priesthood: Childishnes of Papists in proouing their Priesthood.
for the Pope and his chaplens ordain Priests to sacrifice to Jesus Christ;
and not to teach his people (both which Moses ioines together in Deuteronomy. 33.10.)
But Christ offered up himself by an eternal redemption, and he only once for
all has performed this Priestly office: Heb. 9.12. Minding that the fruit of
this sacrifice should now be offered unto us by the preaching of the Gospel.
They which vsurp this office are sacrilegious persons, namely, such as will
reiterate, that which Christ has by himself accomplished. Every one ought
rather to offer himself, with all that he has unto God: Romans 12.1. that he
may exercise this Priesthood as he ought to do. Secondly, the Ministers who
are especially called to teach, ought to use the sword of Gods word to offer
up, and to consecrate men unto God. Lastly, those are indeed faithful and
true Ministers, who enterprise nothing of their own heads, but boldly and
uprightly put those commandments in execution, which they have received from
God.

Verse. 7. For your shame, you shall receive double Or, honor.
, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: for in their land, they
shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.
HE confirms the former sentence, A confirmation of the former sentence.
where he had said that the faithful which mourned, being covered with
sackcloth and ashes, should be sprinkled with the oil of gladness: verse. 3.
Now this change of their sorrow into joy, is here again promised. Some
interpret double to be in regard that those whom God has redeemed, should be
happy before him, and before men. But I know not whether this exposition be
solid enough or no. I had rather take it more simply then, as if the Prophet
should have said; The prosperity of the Church shall be so great, that it
shall much exceed all the calamities and adversities wherewith it is now
oppressed. If she be now then discontented with her estate, she must cast her
eyes toward this day, in which she shall be most happy. And so Saint Paul
opposes a weight of glory to the momentany afflictions, which are suddenly
gone: 2. Cor. 4.17. The wicked scorn us without measure: for they seem lusty
and strong; they abuse their prosperity, and tread under their feet the poor
children of God: but the Lord promises in short space, to cause the faithful
(being delivered from under their tyranny) to rejoice in their portion. This
began to be accomplished when the people returned out of captivity: but in
Christ we have a more full testimony of it, which daily manifests it self,
and at his last coming shall be finished, who will perfectly renew all things;
and the wicked shall be consumed, to the end the possession of the world may be
ours.

To this appertains that which he says by way of yielding or granting;
namely, that the land is now indeed theirs. For then they vaunted themselves
as being Lords of the whole world: but in the end they should feel that it is
the proper and particular possession of Gods children. Everlasting joy may be
referred to the external estate of the Church; because God daily furnishes
them with ample matter of thanksgiving: but in regard they are constrained to
swallow many anguishes, and are environed about with all kinds of
encumbrances, this prophecy is not accomplished until the joy of the Spirit
has gotten strength in us, and obtained the full victory in our hearts; nor
till we feel that sweet peace which passes all understanding, to reign
there; as says Saint Paul in Phil. 4.7. Col. 3.15. which peace only the
Saints of God enjoy, when they feel lively testimonies within them of their
adoption. He calls it perpetual, to show how far it differs from the joy
of the wicked, (...) ^rence (...) ^ene (...) of the (...) and t^ ^^cked.
which is but of short continuance, and suddenly vanishes away: yea, and is
converted into gnashing of teeth.

Verse. 8. For I the Lord love judgment, and hate robbery for burnt offering:
and I will direct their work in truth, and will make an everlasting covenant
with them.
A^ ho^ta^^^ ^^led to (...) ^^^er (...) ^^natio^.
THe Prophet not only confirms that which he has promised in the name of God,
but also exhorts the Jews to repentance, and shows them from whence they were
to look for salvation, and with what a terrible Judge they had to deal. For
he reasons from the nature of God; and thence shows after what manner they
were to frame their lives, that so they might not reject this grace of God now
offered them by their own rebellion.

Under the word judgment, he comprehends all justice and equal dealing. For
he opposes this word to those idle inventions whereby the Jews thought to
satisfy God withal, which yet were but cloakes for their wickedness. But as we
have often seen heretofore, the Lord cares for none of these maskes and vain
pretenses, but only requires the true purity of the heart and hands, purged
from all iniquities. He then that will be approved of God, with all that he
performs in his service, must needs have a pure heart, and lead a blameless
life.

Hating robbery for burnt offerings.] Whose service it is that God approues of.
Under a part he comprehends all the fained services of God. And by burnt
offering, is understood all sacrifices. There is nothing then more hateful,
then that men should sacrifice their robberies and cosenages unto God: or, when
they mingle their lies, hypocrisies, and filthinesses of heart therewith; or,
in defrauding God maliciously of his right, do corrupt his pure worship.

But this is a vice not only practiced of that age, but in all times. For
every one will seem to serve God, and the wicked themselves will be ashamed to
be without the appearance of devotion, in regard the sense and feeling of the
divine nature is so engraven in the hearts of all men, that it cannot be raced
out. But in the mean while, the most part of men do but trifle and dally
with God, and labor to satisfy him with pretty gawdies and toies. Isaiah
therefore condemns and detests such an hypocrisy; and teaches that the Lord
rather requires mercy of us, then sacrifices: Hos. 6.7. Mat. 9.13. and 12.7.
For we cannot serve God, unless we observe the duties of the second table,
namely, in abstaining from all violence and fraudulent dealing: for he who
either deceiues, or offers violence to his neighbors, does also therewithal
offer violence unto God himself. To be short, the Prophets meaning is, to
teach us the true means to attain repentance: The means to attain true
repentance.
first, if in casting off all hypocrisy, and in rejecting all inventions of
men, the servants of God do give

I will establish their work.] Some expound, The reward of their work. But I
rather think hereby are understood all the enterprises of this life, unto
which the Lord promises an happy success. That which men purpose in
themselves to do, comes not to a good end, Why men's affairs hau^ commonly ill
success.
either in regard they neglect to ask counsel of God, or because they do not
things under his conduct and leading. And therefore they worthily bear the
punishment of their boldness: for they either trust in their own counsels, or
depend upon chances. Now in any of all thesc things there is not so much as a
dram of truth, but only a deceivable shadow of it. On the other side, it is
no marvel if all things prosper well in their hands, that are governed and
directed by the holy Ghost, and do wholly cast both themselves and their
affairs upon the providence of the almighty: for all prosperity does
absolutely flow from his only blessing.

Moreover, by the word truth is understood an equal course: for the
unbelievers are sometimes puffed up with a worldly joy, but it forthwith
vanishes into smoke. In the end of the verse he shows the cause of this
stabilitie; namely, God does not only guide them with his hand for once, and so
away: but directs them in their way continually. Lo here the solid stay and
upholding of our perseverance: to wit, in that he vouchsafes to make an
euerlast^ng covenant with us: wherein he binds himself voluntarily; and
freely bestows all things upon us, albeit in truth he owes us nothing at all.

Verse. 9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their buds
among the people. All that see them shall know them, that they are the seed
whom the Lord has blessed.
An amplification touching the enlargement of the Church.
THe Prophet discourses here more clearly touching the advancement and growth
of the Church which was then shut up within a narrow scantling, and in an out
corner of the world, and were afterward much diminished and lopped: as we
have seen in the first and tenth Chapters. Isaiah then speaks of the Church,
which after so many diminishings shall spread again over the whole world, and
that in such wise, as she shall be viewed of all nations. And yet this fell
not out, no not under the reign of Solomon whilst the Jews flourished in
greatest abundance of riches and glory: 1. King. 10.21.27. now this seemed
incredible. This is the cause also why the Prophets insist so much in
persuading the Jews, repeating it over again and again: to wit, that they
should not measure this restoration according to their carnal sense, nor to
outward appearances.

discerned in those times: therefore the perfect beauty of them shined in
Christ, under whose kingdom these things were wholly accomplished. For then
religion was as it were buried; Abraham's posterity began to sprout; in respect
that strangers were by faith ingrafted into the body of the elect people. And
thus the barbarous nations came to know, that the Jews were the blessed seed
of God: namely, when they united themselves unto them in the same confession of
faith. Neither was this only accomplished once, but is every day more and more
fulfilled. Whereas the Jews were first preferred, and obtained the chief
place in Gods covenant, it must be attributed unto Gods free mercy as S. Paul
teaches in Romans 3.2. For having there showed that they differ in nothing by
nature from the Gentiles, and that he has subjected them to the same
condemnation with them: he therewithal shows that they had this excellent
privilege to be the first unto whom the word and promises of God were given.
But that all these things proceeded meerelie from Gods free grace, and not from
their merits or deserts.

Verse. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in
my God: for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation; and covered me
with the robe of righteousness: he has decked me like a bridegroom, and as a
bride tireth her self with Jewels.
THe Prophet here brings in the Church giving of thanks unto God, the better
to persuade them of the truth of that which he has said heretofore. And it is
a lively description, as it were, wherein he paints out the thing done in a
table, and places it before their eyes, that he might remove all scruples.
For naturally we are inclined to distrust: and withal so inconstant, that we
will rather give credit unto men's dreams, then to the word of God. But
touching this kind of confirmation we have discoursed both in Chap. 12.1. and
26.1. as also in other places.

For he has clothed me.] To what men are naturally inclined.
Surely these things were yet very far off. But it was necessary they should
be seen and comprehended by faith. Yea, it is very needful that we lift up
our eyes to heaven, when the Prophet preaches to us the doctrine of
righteousness and salvation. There is nothing visible here, and much less can
we apprehend so great a felicity: seeing all things are still bending toward
a dissolution. But in regard that even at this day such a beauty, as this
appears not in the Church, which (for the most part) on the contrary is under
the horror of the cross, and therefore contemptible to all the world: it is
needful here that faith should come between, which comprehends celestial and
invisible things.

Justice is joined with salvation, in regard the one cannot be separated from
the other. These similitudes of garments and robes, are well enough known: and
it is as much as if the Church should have said, that justice and salvation
were given her together. Seeing it is the Lord then who distributes these
benefits, let us conclude in our selves, that it is only he, of whom we must
ask them, and none but he, from whom we must expect them. In these words, he
has decked me, there is a figurative kind of speech, which they think to be
taken from the Priests garments: for which cause some have descanted here upon
the priesthood of Christ. But as I think, the Prophet meant not to speak so
subtly, in using the similitudes of the bride and bridegroom. The Church was
in miserable plight before, and every one contemned her as a wise divorced
from her husband. But he having received her into favor again, she shines
with vvonderfull beauty. And the place in Hosea, 2.20. answers unto this.
Such an ornament was given at the coming of Christ, and we also receive it
daily, when the Lord clothes us with righteousness and salvation. But all
these things shall be fully accomplished at Christ's last coming, as we have
often said.

Verse. 11. For as the earth brings forth her bud, and as the garden causes
to grow that which is sown in it: so the Lord will cause righteousness to
grow, and praise before all the heathen.
THe Prophet confirms the former promises, by another goodly similitude: for
he brings the Jews to the ordinary power of God, which shines in his
creatures. We see that the earth brings forth her bud every year; the
gardens grow green after they have been sown with seeds: to be short, the
grass and plants which in winter seemed as good as dead, do revive again in
the spring time, and recover new strength. Now these are infallible testimonies
of Gods power, and of the good will which he bears us. Seeing these things
then come thus ordinarily to pass, should men doubt thereof? Has he given
this virtue and power unto the earth, and will he not much more manifest the
same for the deliverance of his people? Will not he cause the elect seed to
bud, and bring forth; which as he has promised, shall always remain in the
world?

Before all the Gentiles.] He shows again that the bounds of the Church
shall no more be so narrow as they were; because the Lord will cause her to
replenish the whole world. Afterward he mentions righteousness, which was
fully revealed at such time as the Lord redeemed his people: but Gods
righteousness did then especially appear, when Christ was manifested unto the
world. Not that he concealed it till that time, but in regard men attained not
to such a clear knowledge of it. It is as much then as if he had said; The
Lord will so deliver and restore his Church, that all shall know his
righteousness: for deliverance is an excellent testimony thereof.

He adds praise, in respect that such a benefit ought to be accompanied with
thanksgiuings: for the end of righteousness is Gods

THE LXII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my tongue, and for Ierusalems sake I
will not rest, until the righteousness thereof break forth as the light, and
the salvation thereof as a burning lamp.
The causes of these often repetitions.
IN regard that this sorrowful exile approached near, which should in a manner
utterly extinguish the name of this people, it was needful for the faithful
to be confirmed and hartened with many words, that in sure and steadfast
confidence, they might be supported with these promises, under the heavy
burden of the Cross. In this verse the Prophet discharging that office which
was committed unto him, plainly protests, that he will no in the performance
of his duty; will he cease to speak, till he has cheered up the hearts of
the faithful in the hope of their salvation to come, that they might know and
be persuaded that God would deliver his Church. For himself (good man) might
be discouraged in beholding the peoples incredulity, and might be driven to
forsake all, in regard he knew things would grow every day worse and worse.
Add also, that he well foresaw this horrible vengeance to be at hand. But as
one utterly neglecting all these encumbrances, he notwithstanding vows a
constant perseverance in his course: to signify unto all, that neither the
common calamity, nor yet the peoples diffidence, should be able to hinder God
from the performance of his promises, when the appointed time thereof was come.
Now it was needful that these things should be often repeated unto them,
because the peruersitie of our mind is such, that we presently forget Gods
promises.

In that he says, he will not hold his peace: he therewithal admonishes
others also of their duties, that they might be courageous; and with assurance
of faith to wait for their redemption, though it were deferred for a time: yea,
that their hope should not cease to answer Gods voice, which sounds continually
in their ears. We have daily experience of the necessity of this duty, when
Satan labors with might and maine to turn our feet out of the right way.
Thus then the Prophet not only shows what he himself would do, but by his
example teaches what end all faithful Ministers should propound unto
themselves; to wit, What ought to be our principal care.
wholly to employ their utmost endeavors for the benefit of the Church. For when
he says, for Zions sake, it is to show that our principal care ought to
extend it self about the procuring of the perpetual safety and prosperous
estate of the Church: as also that such deserve not the titles of good and
faithful Pastors, unless they have taken the care of her welfare so to heart,
that they refuse no pains whatsoever, for the bringing thereof to pass.

Some refer these words to prayers: but I

He takes righteousness for the Churches right, which during the time of her
affliction, seemed to be condemned. Her righteousness brake forth and appeared
then, when she was restored unto her perfection, and had recovered her first
estate: for this righteousness was hid as long as they were captives.

Salvation is coupled with righteousness: for whom God iustifies or maintains
their right, such recover their salvation by the same means. Hence we gather
that we are most miserable and succourlesse, whilst God withdrawes his grace,
in regard of our frowardness. The Prophet therefore in other places has
attributed that righteousness unto God, which he now says belongs unto the
church. We are undone then when we are deprived of Gods grace; that is to say,
whilst we lie snorting in our sins, and God manifests his just judgment in
punishing us for them.

Moreover, the verb to break forth signifies, that the righteousness of the
Church was hidden and buried as it were for a time. Truly she deserved to have
been consumed and brought to nothing before God. Nay, more then that, her great
iniquities were come to such an height, that there was nothing to be expected
but the just vengeance of God. Verily, it was so in respect of men, who gave
the Church thus afflicted, for lost; and by their pride and cruelty, dejected
her even almost to the bottom of hell. To be short, he compares her with the
world, in respect whereof she is righteous, when having been purged from her
filthiness, God begins to take her cause into his own hands. By this then
the Prophet aduertiseth us always to hope well touching the restoration of
the Church, though for a time she be plunged into an horrible darkness, yea even
into death it self. For howsoever for a moment she seems to be overwhelmed
and forlorn; yet has she God still for her defense in the heavens, who after
he has corrected her in measure, (as it is in Chap. 27.8.) will at last
manifest the care he has over her. For it must needs be that his
righteousness should break forth and be manifested; namely, in the salvation
of such as he has chosen for his people and heritage.

Verse. 2. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy
glory: and thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord
shall name.
NOw he shows more fully, The reason of the Prophets vehemency in verse 1.
why he protested before that he would not hold his tongue; even because the
faithful might be assured that salvation was not promised them in vain.
Glory is here taken for salvation. In this place we see with what argument
the Prophets must furnish themselves to preserve their constancy; to wit, that
the Lord is faithful, who will in the end accomplish that which he has
promised, albeit he defer for a time.

The word Kings, serves for amplification: as if he should say; Not only the
co^munaltie and meaner sort should see and admire the glory of God; but that
even Kings themselves, who were wont proudly to contemn that which in it self
is precious and honorable: for their own glory so blindes them, and their
greatness so bewitcheth all their senses, that they cannot willingly
ackonwledge any dignity but their own. Kings do not willingly acknowledge any
dignity but their own.


The new name is taken here for magnificence: for the people were in such wise
scattered and dispersed, that there was no certain body of them to be seen,
but seemed as utterly forlorn. I grant the multitude of them which were
carried into captivity was very great; yet in respect they were mingled here
and there among the Babylonians, they were rent one from another, as a body
divided into many pieces: so as they could not well be said to retain so much
as the name of a people any longer: which also they had been forewarned of.
But at their return home, they began to be knit into a body again: and
thus recovered that name, of which they had been deprived. Notwithstanding new
is taken for unaccustomed. As if the Prophet should have said, your glory
shall be singular, and such as was not heard of before. Which we know in
process of time came to pass. For this handful of people which inhabited the
country by way of entreatie, were not able to get unto themselves such a
magnificence by any greatness, or signs of honor: but at length after the
preaching of the Gospel, the name of the Jews was both known and renoumed.

Now Isaiah confirms that which was hard to be believed, by adding that God
should be the author of this glory. For it was not in the power of man thus to
raise up the poor Church, being then covered over with shame and dishonor: 1.
Sam. 2.8.
but God who raises the needy out of the dust, was able in a moment to adorn
and beautify his Church with new honor. For example, was there so much as any
face of a Church to be seen amongst us within these 40. years? The Lord had
indeed a small seed (scattered here and there) but it was so confused and
covered, that there could be no visible Church of God perceived. And yet he
gat his Church a name, when it pleased him to gather the same by the preaching
of the Gospel. This so admirable a work of God then, ought to confirm us in
this point, namely, that God will never utterly abandon his church. For albeit
the wicked do rent and tear us in pieces with cursed speakings, God will never
forsake his Church.
and that they slander and abhor us; endeavoring by all means possible to
make us an abomination in the eyes of the world: yet let us remember that they
cannot pluck Gods righteousness from him, but that he will make our glory to
shine here below, seeing he has been pleased to write our names in heaven:
Luke 10.20.

Others expound this more subtillie, namely, that in stead of being called
Israelites, they should be called Christians. But I rather suppose, that the
former sense suits best with the scope of the Prophets text: as also with that
language which he is wont to use. Moreover, we ought dilligently to observe and
mark these phrases of speech, which are peculiar unto the Prophets; that we
may acquaint our selves with their style. In sum, Jsaiah meant to say, that
the people, which seemed to be rooted out, shall be restored: and shall receive
a new name, not from men, but from God.

Verse. 3. Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a
royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
HE prosecutes the same argument; The same argument further prosecuted.
which we are not to wonder at. For, to judge thereof according to humane
reason, what man could ever have conceived in his mind, or by hope expected a
thing of so great consequence? Besides, his meaning was by these words to raise
up the hearts of the faithful to look toward the kingdom of Christ: which
it behooued him to beautify and adorn with these glorious titles, by how much
the more it was then obscure and far remote from them. For it was needful to
prevent a twofold danger, lest the Jews in seeing themselves so far recoiled

As touching the first member; these poor banished exiles, and bondmen could
apprehend God; that from him they might expect that glory which now was
hidden, in respect of man's reason. And in as much as they were assured that
they were dear and precious in his

He calls the Church the crown of God, in respect that he will have his
glory to shine in us. Wherein we have great cause with admiration to consider
of the inestimable goodness of God toward us: who though we are by nature
corrupt and unclean, and more vile then the filth in the channel; yet he
vouchsafes so to adorn us, God inestimable goodness singularly set forth.
as to make us the diadem of his kingdom. Let us be provoked then by this
goodness of God to hunger and thirst after holiness of life, that so his image
may daily be reformed in us more and more.

Verse. 4. It shall be no more said unto thee, forsaken; neither shall it be
said any more to thy land, desolate: but thou shall be called Hephzi-bath, and
thy land Beulah. For the Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall have an
husband.
HE now meets with a difficulty which might trouble the minds of the
faithful, The preuentiod of an objection.
whilst they saw themselves rejected and left destitute: and yet in the mean
while had these glorious titles given them, of a crown and a diadem. For might
not these titles seem ridiculous; seeing the Jews were hated and abhorred of
all nations, yea now and then their enemies trampled them under feet; and no
succor appeared: and yet notwithstanding that they should be exalted up to
heaven, and enclosed in the hand of God? Thus his meaning is to say, that
howsoever the people were for a time, as a woman left and forsaken of her
husband: yet they should be restored again in such wise, that their name and
condition should be changed. As if he should say, this shall be no perpetual
divorce, for God will at length marry thee again unto himself. Howsoever the
Church then seems to be contemptible, Though for a time the Church seem
contemptible, yet shall she not remain so always.
and in outward appearance be like a woman rejected and put away, yet will the
Lord one day put an end unto her misery and calamities.

But withal the Prophet teaches, that this proceeds only from Gods delight;
that is to say, from his free favor: lest any thing should be attributed to
the merits or dignity of men. To which purpose he says in Hosea; I will
marry thee unto me in mercy and compassion: Hos. 2.19. Thus then the Prophet
shows that their prosperity shall spring from none other fountain then this,
namely, because God will be pleased of his own infinite love, freely to be
reconciled with those whom he has rejected. Now howsoever this appertains
properly to the Church; yet generally are we hence to learn, that Cities and
Kingdoms also are restored to their first estate, by the favor and good will
of God: which whilst his wrath and indignation lay upon them, seemed as
utterly forlorn.

The Prophet then discouers unto the Jews, the original of all calamities, in
witnessing that their happiness rests only in Gods being well pleased with
them. For hence we may gather, that God was displeased with them before,
whilst they were afflicted. Moreover, the similitude of marriage, whereby he
notes out the peoples restoration, is very notable, and contains two points
in it. First, that the discord between God and his Church shall cease. Why so?
Because she that before was divorced, shall be received again into the place
of a wife, Gods anger being pacified: and secondly, that the multitudes of the
people shall abolish the shame of their widowhood. For the land is married with
her inhabitants, as the trees with the vines: on the other side, it is called a
widow, when it is destituted of those who were wont to inhabit there. Simile.


The good pleasure of the Lord is in thee.] Isaiah repeates and confirms that
which we said even now; to wit, that it is of Gods free favor, when the
Church is restored and settled in her first estate, and that the land receives
her inhabitants. For if he turns his loving countenance away from us, and
reiects us, there is nothing to be expected but desolation: neither can we then
expect any thing that shall do us good, either from the power or policies of
men.

Verse. 5. For as a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry
thee, and as a bridegroom is glad of the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over
thee.
THis verse only contains the exposition and confirmation of the former. An
exposition and confirmation of the former verse.
But there seems to be some repugnancie between them, because in the latter
member he makes God the sole husband of his Church; and in the first he
assigns her many. Yet the solution is easy: for when we speak of this
marriage of the Church, she has but one husband, that is, God; who always
attributes this title to himself. Now this is accomplished in Christ, to whom
the Pastors marry and couple the Church, as a chaste and pure virgin; as Saint
Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 11.2. Notwithstanding, this hinders not that this
similitude of the marriage should not be transferred to express the unity of
faith, which all the children of God have with their mother the Church: yea,
God is so her husband, that yet he marries her with all nations that are
gathered into her: for whilst she is lest destitute of children, she is after
a sort left as a desolate and solitary widow. This therefore is spoken in
regard of God, who by his wisdom, ratifying the holy union between the
members of his Church, extends the fruit of this marriage to all the body.

From this verse we nust gather, shall have many children when she shall be
married unto her husband; namely, unto God: for at him we must begin, that
he may reign over his Church, and that under his conduct we may be gathered
into her lap. Then indeed shall this marriage be holy: but if this be wanting,
it is not the multitude of people that makes the Church, but rather a filthy
brothell house. As in the Papacy, where Gods name roles up and down amongst
them, and yet his Majesty is no where more defaced with horrible sacrileges.

Verse. 6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day
and all the night continually shall not cease: ye that are mindful of the
Lord, keep not silence.
THe Prophet minding to describe the perfect felicity of Christ's kingdom, God
is the author not only of inward graces, but of outward defenses.
collects into a sum all things that belong to the prosperous and flourishing
estate of a City or Country. To the rest of the former benefits then he adds
garrisons and vvatch; because the abundance and sufficiency of all things would
serve to small purpose, unless we were well fortified against the rage of the
enemy. He therefore shows, that the Lord will not only furnish the Church
with all things necessary, but will also plant sufficient gardes about her, to
defend her from thieves and enemies: that thus it might appear how God is the
author both of the inward and outward blessed life.

Shall not cease.] To hold ones peace, is here taken to be quiet. As if he
should say; They shall evermore be upon their watch, to epsy a far off
imminent dangers.

But in the next place he shows what these watchmen are; to wit, those that
are mindful of the Lord: that is, such as have his name in an honorable
estimation. The Angels also may be put in the number of these watchmen, for
we know that is their office: Psalm. 91.11. But in regard they watch willingly
and cheerfully for the salvation of the Church, Heb. 1.14. and have no need
of being quickened up by exhortations, the Prophet directs his speech to other
watchmen.

The verb which he uses is somewhat ambiguous. For sometimes it signifies
Remember, and sometimes To call to mind: either of both expositions suit not
ill. But me thinks the Prophet meant simply to say; that these watchmen
should be Ministers of God, to celebrate his name. Some translate; Those which
publish or preach the Lord. But this is too constrained, and breaks off the
Prophets sentence: for such expositors keep not themselves to the similitude of
watchmen of a City, which the Prophet here uses. Albeit indeed his meaning
was to teach without any figure; that the Church shall be freed from all
dangers, in regard she has God for the protector of her salvation.

And yet respect must always be had to the nature of Christ's kingdom The
nature of Christ's kingdom.
here on earth. For it is not maintained, neither by weapons, nor force of men:
but as it is in it self spiritual; so is it vpheld by spiritual armor, and
defenses. The Lord then will have his Ministers, whose service he will use for
the preservation of his Church by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God. She shall be safely kept then, not by man's help; but by the secret and
spiritual power of God.

And the Prophet in saying, You that remember the Lord, expounds himself.
Now howsoever this sentence appertains to all the faithful, who are commanded
as much as in them is to extol the name of God in all places: yet he alludes
especially to the Priests, who being public officers were to lead the way
unto others, and to be given withal their affections to the setting forth of
Gods praises. Pastors must not only feed but also defend the Lords flock.
Besides, the Pastors are here admonished of their duties: for it is not enough
to feed the Lords flock, unless therewithal they defend the same against
the assaults of wolves and robbers. They must be vigilant then, and stand day
and night in their watchtower, if they mean to discharge their duties as they
ought. The Lord forbids them to be silent: for he would have them careful and
diligent in their places. In which he shows what great care he has over his
hurch. This text also witnesses that it is a singular favor of God, when he
sends faithful Pastors amongst us that are careful of our salvation. For we
lie open to infinite dangers, and are by and by environed with Satan's nets, if
the Lord preserve us not by his succors. We ought therefore evermore to beg
of him that he would furnish us with meet helps, which he knows to be
necessary for us.

Verse. 7. And give him no rest till he repair, and until he set up Ierualem,
the praise of the world.
To the duty preaching, he adds prayer.
HItherunto the Prophet has discoursed touching the office and duty of
teaching. But because this would not suffice without prayer were added, he
exhorts the Ministers thereto. For as I take it the particle him, must be
referred unto God. We ought therefore to be instant, and to importune ye Lord
continually, that he may be pleased to give good success unto our labors,
which otherwise would become unfruitful. So then whilst we shall diligently
employ our selves in preaching the word, and forciblie resist and withstand the
practices of Satan with all our might, let us learn therewithal forthwith,
to turn our hearts toward God, beseeching him by humble prayer, Prayer must
go with preaching.
that he would not suffer our labors to be in vain. Even as in the beginning
of the Chapter then, he referred silence unto doctrine, saying, That he
would not hold his tongue: so in this place he referres it unto prayers, by
which we obtain some fruit from the doctrine. Yea the very Angels whet on our
diligence by their example to this affection of prayer. For one of them, as we
read in Zach. 1.12. prays with great feruencie for the restoration of the
Church.

Till he repair.] Hence let us gather that these are two distinct benefits,
first, in enjoying faithful pastors which watch for the salvation of the
Church: secondly, that the Church is restored and vpheld in her estate by their
pains. But God who speaks here, does properly attribute ye bestowing of these
benefits to himself, as in many other places. How shall they preach, says S.
Paul, unless they be sent: Romans 10.15. It is Gods peculiar office then to
establish good pastors: for otherwise no man would ever be fit to exercise It
is Gods peculiar office to establish good Pastors in his Church.
for their endeavors would prove utterly vain and fruitless, if the Lord
gave them not good success. Here we see then, that men's external labors,
are joined to the efficacy of the holy Ghost. For albeit

Where he adds, until he set up Jerusalem, it is as much to say, As to cause
the Churches beauty to appear: so as matter of joy may proceed thence. For as
long as we only feel Gods severity, we become mute and confounded: but
when he frees us from trouble, therewithal he reuiues us and opens our mouths
in furnishing us with matter of praise and thanksgiving.

Verse. 8. The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by his strong arm, Or,
if I give.
surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and
surely the sons of the strangers shall not drink thy wine, for the which
thou have labored.
ISaiah prosecutes the similitudes which he used before. The same similitudes
prosecuted.
For in regard Christ's kingdom could not otherwise be described, by reason of
the shallowness of our capacities, it was requisite it should be represented
before us under such borrowed speeches. Even as heretofore then, he has
promised abundance of all good things: Verse. 3, 4. Verse. 6.
and secondly, a faithful guard, who should carefully watch for the good estate
of the elect: so in this place he promises peace and tranquillity, which the
faithful should quietly enjoy, and should never be disappointed thereof. As if
he should say; Whatsoever thou possessedst heretofore, was exposed to pillage
and to the spoil: but now all things shall be secured unto thee, and thou
shall be abundantly satisfied with thy wheat, and with thy wine. In a
word, thy felicity shall be full of tranquillity.

But in regard our peruersitie is such, that we cannot believe in God, though
he makes us never so large and liberal promises; therefore Isaiah brings in
the Lord binding himself with an oath: Why God binds his promises with an
oath.
for the Lord stoopes so low unto us, as to swear, the more to reprove our
distrust and obstinacy. Now he swears by himself, because he has no
greater to swear by; as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.16. Now he also mentions
the right hand of God: that is to say, his power; because it was fitting for
this purpose. As if he should say; If there be any power in me, then will I
manifest the same for your salvation: and lest your minds should wax drouzie
in so difficult a thing, J swear by my invincible hand, that conquers all
things, that you shall remain safe and sound by my means, whatsoever dangers
can befall you to the contrary. As often then as he promises us salvation, let
us forthwith bethink us of his virtue and power.

If I give, is a phrase of speech wherein more is understood then that which is
uttered: and it teaches us with what holiness and fear we ought to use an
oath. With what reverence we ought to use an oath.
The words themselves are as much in effect as if he had said; Let me not be
believed hereafter, if the event of these things do not manifest the truth of
these promises.

When he promises a peaceable inioying of wheat and wine, it is to show,
that when the Church is destituted of them, that it falls not out by chance, but
by the just judgment of God. For as often as the enemies spoil and rob us of
them, let us assure our selves that this falls out by Gods permission,
according as he threatens us in his Law: Deuteronomy. 28.33. As on the contrary, God
the author both of weal and woe.
it is by the special blessing of his hand, when every one sits in peace under
his own vine, and under his own fig tree: 1. King. 4.25.

Verse. 9. But they that have gathered it, shall eat it, and praise the Lord,
and the gatherers thereof shall drink it in the Courts of my sanctuary.
SEe here both the exposition and confirmation of the former sentence. An
exposition and confirmation of the former sentence.
For having protested that he would no more suffer the goods of the church to
be exposed for a pray, he now adds, that she shall enjoy them. In the mean
while he shows, that we may justly call wheat and wine ours, when we have
obtained them by our honest labor: for those who rob others of their bread, or
get it by unlawful means, hold it not by any right from the Lord; neither can
they attribute goods so gotten, to his blessing, as if they justly possessed
them. To which also, answers that in Psalm 228.2. Thou shall eat the labor of
thine hands: thou shall be blessed, and it shall go well with thee.

But seeing he assigns food to such as shall till the ground; wherefore says
he, shall give thanks to God? Wherefore should men praise the Lord when they
reap the corn, and gather in the grapes by their labor and industry? This
might seem to be but a fained thanksgiving, seeing it is attributed to men's
good husbandry, and that God should deserve no thanks for that which a man has
achieved by his honest pains.

When he adds, in my holy courts: he alludes to the solemnity of the
sacrifices. They might drink any where else: it was in every ones power to
eat at home. But he alludes to the custom which they held in sacrificing
their first fruits unto God, at what time they consecrated the revenues of the
whole year, as the Law inioined them: Leuit. 2.12. and 23.10. And this
sentence is very frequent in the books of Moses; Thou shall eat and rejoice
in the presence of thy God: Deuteronomy. 12.18.

Verse. 10. Go through, go through the gates: prepare you the way for the
people: cast up, cast up the way, and Or, paue it with.
gather out the stones, and set up the standard for my people.
FRom the former words he concludes, that they shall freely pass through the
gates of the City, which were either shut up, or broken before: shut up,
during the siege of the enemy: broken, when the City was destroyed and raced
even with the ground. Thus his meaning is then, that the City shall be so
restored, that the inhabitants thereof shall be gathered in great troops, and
that they shall often pass to and fro.

Some think that this speech is directed to the Pastors, namely, they should
enter into the gates, and pass through before others, as their leaders. But the
sentence is general and figurative; wherein he compares the Church to a City
well peopled, which notwithstanding had been laid waste for a time, and
desolate, as Jerusalem was. Others descant more wittily, and say; that the
gates of the Church shall be open, when remission of sins is there preached;
by means whereof, God calls men unto himself. But if we will have the Prophets
true meaning, then let us note that all this is spoken figuratively, as we
touched before.

Cleanse the way for the people.] See wherein the office of the Pastors
properly consists, but the Prophet has spoken generally, and addresseth his
speech to all such whose service God uses to prepare the way for his people.
Chap. 57.14.
Then, he spoke to the Medes and Persians, through whose means the Lord gave
the Jews passage to return home, but afterward he comprehends all others, by
whom God restored his Church. Now he commands all men with authority to cleanse
and make the way plain, that the Jews might know how every impediment should
easily be removed, and that their greatest enemies should forthwith yield
obedience to Gods commandment: and herewithall he also bids the faithful to
fit themselves in good earnest for their journey, as if many workmen were
already pressed to second them. And the weight which is in the repetition of the
words ought to be noted, for they serve for the further confirmation of the
matter.

Paue it with stones.] The verb Sakal, signifies as well to take away the
stones as to paue. And I had rather take it in this latter signification,
though the expositors for the most part be of the contrary opinion. Hereunto
appertains that which he says touching the setting up of the standard. For
his meaning is, that the nations shall as readily obey Gods commandment, as
the subjects do their Princes. For they assemble and run together when the
ensign is displaid, and employ their endeavors to bring back the people. He
speaks very magnificentlie then of Gods power, that the Jews might be well
assured to be restored to their first estate one day.

Verse. 11. Behold, the Lord has proclaimed to the ends of the world: tell the
daughter of Zion, Behold thy Savior comes: behold his wages is with him, and
his work is before him.
An objection prevented.
THe Prophet meant to say, that ye Lord in working miraculouslie beyond all hope
and conceit of flesh and blood will cause all nations to know, that this was
done by his commandment. For some might object, proclaim your return, in
such wise, that they shall understand how you must be restored by his
commandment.

But as touching that he adds, Tell the daughter of Zion, it properly
appertains to the Prophets and Ministers of the word, to whom the Lord gives
this charge, to promise salvation and deliverance unto his Church. Hence we
gather that these promises ought not to be restrained to one particular time,
Savior then appeared, when the grace of God was published by the Gospel. In a
word, he affirms that Gods voice shall one day sound from the East to the
West, and shall not be understood of one people only, but of all. Now this
voice is; Behold, thy Savior comes: which we know is the proper voice of the
Gospel. He therefore inioines the Teachers of the Church to raise up the
hearts of the faithful, with the coming of the Lord; though unto the people
it seemed a thing far remote.

But this promise belongs chiefly to Christ's kingdom, who fully and perfectly
did accomplish these things, for he indeed showed himself to be the savior of
the world, as we have seen heretofore in Chap. 40.10. And lest any scruple
might remain, he furnishes the Lord with power, when he shall appear, as it
is in that very place which we before alleged; for he uses the very same
words there which are here mentioned, as if he meant to show, that as soon as
it should please God to stretch forth his hand, the effect will in a moment
appear: for whilst he either cease or deferres, flesh and blood esteems
him idle. We also see that many fantastical spirits forge I know not what
divinity, as if they meant to paint out a dead image. The Prophet therefore
very aptly adds the work and reward before God, to show that he is the just
Judge of the world in the time of need.

Verse. 12. And they shall call them, the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord,
and thou shall be named a City sought out, and not forsaken.
HE sets forth the benefit of the Lords coming, The fruit of the Lords coming.
namely, that in showing how his elect are as dear unto him as his own
heritage, he will make it known to all the world that the covenant of Adoption
by him contracted with Abraham, is not in vain: for this cause he calls them
the holy people, in regard the Lord had separated and consecrated them unto
himself, for though he governed all the nations of the world, yet he
vouchsafed to choose the posterity of Abraham, to have a special care thereof.
And in this sense God meant to say, that his people shall be holy, when he shall
appear their savior and redeemer. And as the people are called profane when
they be plunged in their dregs, being afflicted and vexed by the scoffings of
the wicked: so on the contrary they are said to be holy, when the Lord shows
himself by effects to be the God of their salvation, which came to pass in
their wonderful deliverance, for then God showed indeed that he remembered his
holy covenant touching his heritage which he had (as man's reason deemed)
utterly rejected and cast off. For in these words sought out and not forsaken,
we must note the opposition between the time wherein the Lord sued out this
divorce against his people: and that wherein he reconciled those again unto
himself whom he had put away.

THE LXIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Who is this that comes from Edom with red garments from Bozrah? he
is glorious in his apparel, and walks in his great strength. I speak in
righteousness, and am mighty to save.
A prevention of a dangerous temptation.
THE expositors Christian have misinterpreted this place, as if that which is
here said should appertain unto Christ, seeing the Prophet speaks simply of
God himself, and thus they have made a Jesus died all over with red, in
regard he was thoroughly bathed in his own blood which he shed upon the Cross.
But the Prophet had no such meaning at all. The true and plain sense is, That
the Lord presents himself here clothed with red garments before the people,
to advertise all that he would maintain the cause of his chosen, The natural
meaning of this verse.
and be avenged on their enemies. For whilst the people of God were pressed
with infinite miseries, and that the Idumeans, with the rest of their
adversaries (who were as it seemed out of all danger) ouerflowed in all excess
of riot: it might dangerously tempt the Jews to think, either that these
things were guided by fortune; or that God made Jdumeans and other enemies to
be roughly dealt withal, being the sworn enemies thereof? The Prophet
meets with this so cumbersome a temptation by bringing in God the auenger,
Psalm. 94.1. returning from the slaughter of the Edomites, as if he had been
stained all over with their blood.

The force of interrogations.
Now this description is lively and full of efficacy, when he says, Who is
this? For such an interrogation rauisheth the minds of the hearers into an
admiration, and affects them more, then if it had been uttered in plain
terms. The Prophet did the rather use it, that he might thereby awaken the
Jews, who were become dr^uzie and besotted. We know that the Idumeans were
somewhat akin to the Jews, in regard they were descended from the same
ancestors with them. For they were thus called of Esau, who was also called
Edom: Genesis 36.1. These having corrupted the pure worship of God, See Obad.
10.11.
though they had the same mark of circumcision, notwithstanding persecuted the
Jews most despitefully. And besides, they exasperated the rage of other
enemies against the Jews; manifesting to all what great pleasure they took in
the ruin of this poor people, as it appears by their egging on of the
Babylonians. Remember O Lord, says the Church, Psalm. 137.7. the children of
Edom, who in the day of Ierusalems ruin, said, down with it, down with it
even to the ground. Thus then the Prophet denounces, that the Edomits shall
also keep their turn, in being judged according to their deserts, that none
might otherwise think, but they should surely be punished for the barbarous
cruelty by them exercised against their brethren. For the Lord will so avenge
himself of the wicked and enemies of the Church, that he will thereby show
what care he has over her.

Now howsoever blood does usually spot and stain him that vanquisheth, yet
Jsaiah affirms that God shall be glorious in his apparel, after he has made
havoc of his enemies. As in chap. 34.6. we have seen that the slaughter of
the wicked there was compared to the sacrifices, in regard Gods glory shined
therein. For what garment could he put on more glorious then his justice?
Therefore that he might speak honorably of Gods just reuengings, he shows
that the blood wherewith he is besprinckled by the slaughter of these desperate
wicked ones, is glorious and excellent. As if he had said, Think not that God
resembles any common person: for though he be died over with blood, yet shall
not this hinder, but that his Majesty and glory shall shine therein.

The Jewish expositors take the word vvalking diversely: for some among them
refer it to the people whom the Lord should bring back from the captivity:
others, to the nations, whom the Lord would transport into other countries,
notwithstanding they then seemed to have a settled habitation. But I think it
will better suit to the scope of the Prophets text, if we take it absolutely.
The Prophet then describes the glorious vvalking of God, and his noble
presence, by which he will manifest his admirable power.

I am, that speak.] The certenty of the prophesies noted.
The Lord himself answers: which carries much more majesty with it, then if
the Prophet had spoken in his own person. And herein he brings the faithful to
the former prophesies, to inform them, that not only Gods righteousness and
goodness, but also his faithfulness should appear in these judgments. As if
he should say, Now you see the accomplishment of that which hitherunto I have
declared unto you by my servants. For this effect of my promises, plainly
demonstrates that I am true of my word; and that I speak from my heart without
faining, so as I will not by any means disappoint your expectations. Now the
vision of it self had not been forcible enough, unless the Jews had
therewithal bin put in mind of the things they had heard of before. Seeing the
end thereof was to settle their hearts upon the salvation of God, he
therewithal attributes unto himself, an extraordinary power and might to
save.

Verse. 2. Wherefore is thine apparel red, and thy garments like him that
treads in the wine press?
HE prosecutes the same argument. The former argument still prosecuted.
But because the bare recital would not have been of sufficient weight,
therefore he does not at once manifest from whence this red color in Gods
garments did proceed, but rather continues his Interrogation still, that he
might the better rouse up their spirits, to the consideration of so rare and
unwonted a thing. For his meaning is to say, that this sprinkling with blood is
a matter extraordinary, and not seen before. And therefore the similitude of
the presser of grapes, suits very well. For Bozrah, Verse. 1.
which he mentioned in the first verse, was situated in a country of vines:
as if he would have said, the grape gatherings shall be much differing from the
old wont: for blood, in stead of the juice of grapes, shall now be squezed out.

Verse. 3. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all the people, there
was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and tread them under
foot in my wrath, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I
will stain all my raiment.
NOw the Prophet expounds the vision, The vision expounded.
and shows wherefore the Lord is thus died with blood; Verse 1.
namely, because he must be avenged on the Idumeans, and other enemies, who
have used his people very inhumanely. It should be a thing ridiculous to
refer this verse unto Christ; in regard he has redeemed us without the help
of any man: for the Prophets meaning is, that the Lord will so punish the
Idumeans, that he shall stand in need of no man's help, because himself will
be strong enough to root them out. counsels, or forces of men. For they were
surprised with a sudden and unexpected destruction: in respect whereof the
people could not doubt, but that God only was the author thereof, seeing they
had been so often advertised of it before.

Where he says, And of all the people there was not one with him; it is to
show, that howsoever some should be raised up to bring destruction upon Edom,
yet Gods work therein should be separate from theirs. For the infidel enemies
never dreamed of auenging the unjust cruelties of the Idumeans. The Lord would
then that his judgment should shine and be considered of in the clattering of
the harness and weapons, and in these violent moouings.

I will go upon them. For mine own part I willingly retain the future
tence, in regard the Prophet speaks of things to come, and not yet
accomplished. For the Idumeans were to be severely punished for their
cruelty: though for the present, they were at their case, and in great
tranquillity.

We have already in part touched the cause why the Prophet has used the
simililitude of a bloody presser, which is both a hideous and woeful sight:
yet therewithal he adds, that the punishments and vengeances of God against
his enemies are properly his own, as if himself had gathered them together,
when he shall either consume or scatter them. Even as in Chap. 34.6. such an
execution is called a solemn sacrifice: to teach us that we are no less to
glorify God, when he executes his judgments, then when he manifests the
tokens of his mercy. In the mean while he expresses his singular love
toward the Jews, seeing for their sakes he vouchsafes to sprinkle himself
with the blood of his enemies so far; that he uses the verb to stain, or
to defile.

In my wrath.] The Prophet shows that this alone suffices for the
destruction of the Idumeans: namely, that the Lord is angry with them. As if
he should say, No man shall be able to deliver them when God shall have to do
with them. Hence we are to gather, that men's ruin proceeds from no other
cause but Gods wrath: as on the contrary, our salvation depends wholly upon
his mere grace. To conclude, Men's ruin proceeds from Gods wrath.
the Lord meant here to testify that the Idumeans should not escape
unpunished, seeing they had bin persecutors of his Church.

Verse. 4. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my
redeemed is come.
IN the first member of this verse, Though God seem for a time to defer, yet
he will pay home at length.
the Prophet signifies that God will not cease to perform his office: though
he executes not his judgments at the first but deferres them to a fit
opportunity which he foresees to be best fitting. Neither indeed ought we to
prescribe unto him either the time when, or the manner how he is to do this or
that; but to commit it as well to his secret counsel, as leave unto him the
time when to execute all things, according to his good pleasure. Let us not
think then that he sleeps, or is idle, when he deferres.

In the latter member he shows, that all these things are done in respect of
his love to the faithful, when he speaks of the year of his redeemed. Day
and year, are here taken for one and the same term. Only the word year
notes out the length of the banishment, to the end the Jews should neither
despair, nor be discontent, if their deliverance was foreslowed. Thus then the
Lord punishes and destroies the wicked, for the deliverance of the faithful,
and for the redemption of his Church, to which he has a special regard. A
consolation.
And this ought greatly to comfort us, that when the signs of Gods wrath
against the wicked appear, we may therewithal know, that the fruit of the
blows which light upon their backs, shall be ours. By this also we may
evidently perceive, that our gronings have been heard; namely, because that
when God is minded to succor the afflicted, we see he arms himself with
strength, for the confusion of his Churches enemies. Wherefore, howsoever the
cross lie heavily upon us, and presses us down with the weight thereof, yet
in undergoing it patiently, let us learn by hope to raise up our hearts to
this year, which God has limited for the execution of his vengeance.

Verse. 5. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there
was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm helped me, and my wrath it self
sustained me.
A further illustration of the former Doctrine.
ALbeit the Jews were destitute of all help, and that no man relieved them
either by words or deeds, yet he shows that the only arm of the Lord shall
suffice to punish the enemies, and to set his Church at liberty. He teaches
them then to look for salvation from God only; that they should not gaze
here and there, but depend wholly upon God, who stands in no need of other
men's help. For this cause he brings him in wondering, that no man reached him
forth his hand, when he was about to execute his judgments, the better to
imprint this doctrine in the hearts of the faithful, namely, that God needs
no man's aid, but is all-sufficient of himself to obtain salvation for his
people. And by this circumstance he further illustrates that succor, which he
was determined to give unto the faithful; partly to correct their distrust,
and partly to exhort them to thankfulness for the time to come: for when God
says he vvondred, and was utterly astonished; he puts upon him another
person, because this astonishment was indeed properly in the Jews, who neither
would, nor could believe more then what men were able to do. He therefore
opposes his arm to all means whatsoever; showing that he will satisfy
himself with the invincible power thereof, as well to manifest himself the
Savior of his Church, as to scatter and ouerwhelme all the wicked.

Verse. 6. Therefore I will tread down the people in my wrath, and make them
drunken in mine indignation, and will bring down their strength to the earth.
The conclusion.
FRom the former sentence he concludes that Gods wrath is strong enough to
confound the wicked, without having aid from any other; lest the power of the
enemies might any way daunt the Jews from conceiving good hope.

To make drunken, must here be taken in a contrary sense, to that which it is
in some other places, which we have expounded heretofore; as in Chap. 29.9. one
while we are said to be drunk when God takes from us our senses, or smites us
with giddiness; or when as at length he gives us up into a reprobate mind.
But it here signifies no other thing, but to fill, or to beat them to the
full, as we commonly say: and this similitude is often used of the Prophets.

I will bring down their strength: that is to say; though they think
themselves invincible, yet will I bring them down and confound them. The sum
is, that the Jews being afflicted, ought not to despair of their salvation,
as if God hated them; neither to wax obstinate under his rods, as if they were
smitten at all adventure; because the rest of the nations, who now oppressed
them, should be punished, things should be changed, and those that cried
victory before the conquests, should not escape in the end. Now he culles out
the Idumeans for a particular instance and example hereof, because they dwelt
nearest, and were better known then others, who also most molested them.

Verse. 7. I will remember the mercies of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord,
Or, as upon.
according unto all that the Lord has given us; and for the great goodness
toward the house of Israel, which he has given them according to his tender
love, and according to his great mercies.
ISaiah comforts the people in this so miserable and woeful a case, and by his
example commands the Jews that in time of their extreme affliction, they should
call to mind the former mercies of the Lord, and should betake them to their
prayers; that so they might not resemble hypocrites, who never have any taste
in Gods goodness, but in time of prosperity. For in adversity they are so
cast down, that all the promises in the Bible will not be able to comfort
them. What ought to be our meditation in the day of affliction.
Now when the Lord chastens us, we ought to remember his former benefits, and
to break out into the extolling of them, still hoping of better for the time
to come: for God is always like himself, and never changes neither his
counsel, nor will. And therefore, if we give place to his mercy, we shall
never be cast off. This I take to be the context, though others take it
otherwise, namely, that the Prophet having spoken heretofore of the peoples
captivity, comforts now himself by this assurance of Gods mercy, because God
was purposed to save some. But they are deceived, in regard they think that
Isaiah has hitherunto spoken of the Jews; as if God meant to punish none but
them. Whereas he on the contrary testifies, that other nations should also be
chastised, that the Jews should not persuade themselves that God only hated
them. For which cause he now exhorts them to celebrate the memory of those
benefits which God had bestowed upon their fathers, that by their example they
might the better come to apprehend Gods love toward themselves. The scope of
the text also shows, that the Jews are conioined with their fathers, to the
end the covenant common to them both might encourage them to hope for better
times.

According unto all things.] He uses this particle As, to show, that in
adversity these benefits of God given unto his people should forthwith come
unto our remembrances, no less then if they were present before our eyes,
though otherwise they may seem to be worn out with age. For if they
appertained not unto us, it were but labor lost to remember them, which the
Prophet also confirms by the particle Us. Why so? Because the Jews being
members of the same body, he had good reason to account them as the right
successors of their grandfathers, and other ancestors. Truly Isaiah felt not
these benefits past which he here mentions, but in regard they had bin
bestowed upon the Church, the fruit of them reached in part unto him, because
he was a member of the same.

How we ought to esteem of the communion of Saints.
And questionles this communion of Saints whereof we make profession, ought to
be of such value with us, as to think that whatsoever the Church receives from
the hand of God, is also given to us. For there is but one Church of God; and
that which is now, has nothing separate from that which was in times past.

Isaiah also expounds himself when he adds, for the great goodness toward
the house of Israel. Seeing then the Lord showed himself a liberal benefactor
toward his people, we ought at this day to expect the like, in regard that we
be of his household, and members of his Church. Well then, albeit we feel him
angry against us for our sins, yet must we cheer up our spirits through a
lively hope, and arm our selves against all distrust, because God can not
forsake his Church.

In the mean while we have to note that the Prophet highly extols and
magnifies Gods mercy here, thereby to teach us, that the foundation of our
salvation The foundation of our ^^luation.
and of all other benefits flows from thence. And this shuts out all merits of
men, that so no man may presume to attribute any thing at all unto himself.
But to the end this doctrine may be the better understood, let us consider the
time whereof Isaiah speaks. Religion and Justice then principally bare sway
and flourished: for howsoever the people had corrupted themselves, yet Moses,
Aaron, and other holy personages showed forth good testimonies of their
innocence and holiness. And yet the Prophet teaches, that all the good things
which Moses and the rest received, were not to be ascribed to their merits, but
to Gods mercies. But what are we in comparison of Moses, great goodness, tender
love, and great mercies, do greatly serve for the raising up on high the weak
and broken hearted, that they may overcome their greatest temptations, so ought

Verse. 8. For he said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie:
so he was their Savior.
HE speaks of the peoples election, God looks that our conversation should
answer our vocation.
and brings in God discoursing of it, to put us in mind of the end of our
vocation, namely, that he will have a people separated unto him from the world,
in the midst of whom his name may be worshipped and called upon. And yet
therewithal he accuses the Jews ingratitude, who deceived God of his
expectation: not that the Lord was indeed deceived, seeing he foresaw well
enough what they would be, which he had also testified by Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.15.16. But the scripture speaks thus, when men by their unthankfulness care
not to defraud the Lord of his due, as we have seen in Chap. 5. I looked that
it should have brought me forth grapes, but behold, vvilde grapes. He speaks
not of Gods secret counsel, but speaks after the manner of men, to set forth
the mutual consent which ought to be between God and the faithful, that all
those to whom he vouchsafes his presence as their father, should be ready for
their parts to answer when he calls unto them: for this foundation remains
sure, namely, that none of Gods elect can perish, because God knows who are
his, 2. Tim. 2.19. And yet we know that the end of our vocation is to live in
holiness and righteousness, as all the Scripture witnesses, and also according
to that which has bin often said in many places: Chap. 43.21. and 55.5.

The Lord had just cause therefore to say that he had chosen the people to be
holy and true, and that he might have children far from lies and vanity. But
the people did falsify their promised faith, and revolted from that
simplicity of heart which they ought to have followed: for they were wholly
replete with fraud and hypocrisy; and yet the Prophet gives them hope of
pardon, if so be they would seek the Lord, and humble themselves before him
with true repentance.

He also notes out that which is the principal in Gods service, to wit, that
we bring with us thereunto a pure and upright heart. Whence it also follows,
that the Lord never forsakes us, till we have bin disloyal toward him in
breaking our faith. Seeing this people then pleased themselves in their vices,
it was needful they should be first convinced of their infidelity, that being
converted unto God, they might in the end feel him their savior.

Verse. 9. Or, in all their anguish there was no anguish.
In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angel Or, of his face.
of his presence saved them: in his love and in his mercy he redeemed them,
and he bare them and carried them always continually.
The inestimable love which God bears to his Church.
HE amplifies and sets forth Gods goodness toward his people, showing, that he
bestowed benefits upon their ^athers whilst they suffered themselves to be
conducted by him: yea, he had such care over them, that himself was troubled
in their troubles, and bare their miseries and anguishes. In speaking thus, he
notes out the inestimable love which God bears toward his chosen. And the
Lord also the better to draw and allure us to come unto him speaks after the
manner of men, attributing unto himself all the affection, love, and fatherly
compassion that can possibly be in them. No love comparable to Gods love.
And yet it is impossible to think of any love or good will of men in this
world, which he far surmounts not.

I utterly reject not the other exposition, to wit, that the people were not
troubled in their trouble; because God always supplied them with some remedies
for ye asswaging of their sorrows. But in my judgment, the learned expositors
have hit the mark, in taking the first sense: wherein the Prophet testifies
that God laid upon himself the whole weight of the peoples burden; to comfort
them in their calamities and anguishes. Not that he can any way be grieved: God
no way touched with humane affections.
but he attributes to himself humane passions by a figure much used.

Afterward he manifests the effect of this care, namely, in that he always
saved them by his Angel, whom he calls the angel of his face: because he
was a witness of Gods presence; and as it were his herald to execute his
commandments. The service of Angels.
To teach us, that the Angels run not before they be sent, neither that they
intrude themselves into this office of succoring us, by any private motion of
their own. For the Lord uses their services; and manifests his presence to us
by their means. The Angels can do nothing of themselves, neither do they
yield us any succor further forth then as the Lord sends them to be the
Ministers of our salvation: Heb. 1.14. Les us not stay our thoughts upon them
then, seeing their office is only to lead us directly unto God.

If any had rather say that the lively image of God, is here noted out by this
Angel; who being the conducter and protector of the people, did therein openly
manifest the face and presence of G^d as in a glass; such a sense will not be
amiss. And for my part I doubt not but that the office of saving ought to be
attributed unto Christ, Mal. 3.1.
who as we know, is the great Angel of the covenant, under whose leading,
sauegard and protection the Church has ever hitherunto been vpheld in safety.

In his love he redeemed them.] The Prophet shows what the cause is from
whence these great benefits proceeded: The cause from whence all benefits
proceed.
namely, Gods love and good pleasure. As Moses also teaches, Deuteronomy. 4.37, and
7.7.8. Whence is it that God has gathered thy fathers, says he, but because
he loved them, and did set his heart upon them? And thus he meant to
dispossess them of all opinion that they might conceive touching any merit:
for in themselves they were proud and arrogant and insulted more then they had
cause. Now ye see the reason why he shows, that Gods only free bounty was
the cause of so many blessings.

In the next place Jsaiah takes up the similitude which Moses used in his song:
namely, that God bare his people, as an Egle; which teaches her young ones to
fly: Deuteronomy. 32.11. sheep, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall
gather the etc. And yet this similitude of a mother agrees very well: for she
not only bears the child in her womb: but also nurces it up, till it be come
to a competent age.

The sum is, that when the people were delivered, it was not the first favor
that they received from God, but they had tasted so sufficiently thereof in the
whole course of their lives, that it was to him only, to whom they were to
ascribe all the benefits which had been bestowed upon them.

For this cause the clause, God never weary in doing good to his Church.
alvvaies continually, is added: for the Lord is never weary in doing good,
neither contents he himself to manifest the tokens of his favor to one age
only: for he never cease to enrich and adorn his Church with diverse and
sundry gifts.

Verse. 10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against him.
THe Prophet now descends to the second member, The prevention of an objection.
in which he shows that the Lord was turned to be ye adversary of his
children, because they rebelled, and turned back from him; as if the people (in
a word) should thus have objected, God showed many tokens of his loving
kindness to our fathers for a long time together; wherefore taste we not of the
same also? Is he now of another mind. No, God forbid. But we our selves by
our disloyalty, have been rejected: yea, we have thereby repelled and put
back his benefits from us: Ier. 5.25. And yet the Prophet condemns not only
the men of his age, but those also of the ages before. For we see that under
the conduct of Moses himself, they rebelled and murmured against God, Exodus
17.2. Numb. 20.3. Hence it came, that God who tenderly loved them, as it is in
verse. 7. became their enemy, by their own rebellion. Are they punished for
their iniquities then? let them thank themselves for it. For the Lord is
inclined to nothing more then to show mercy, neither is any thing more
acceptable unto him, Mich. 7.18.
then to pursue us with his favors.

Now he says by a phrase of speech borrowed from men, that we vex the holy
Ghost by our rebellion: to teach us to have sin in the greater detestation;
because it prouokes the holy one of Israel to anger and indignation. And seeing
it is one and the same Spirit, by which God works our salvation, the Prophet
aduertiseth us that our sins do estrange us far from God, by breaking the
band of our conjunction. Unto which tends Saint Paul's exhortation, Ephesians 4.30.
Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. From this text also we are to note, that we have no cause to accuse
those, by whom we are molested and persecuted, because it is the Lord himself
who fights against us, and by their hand auengeth himself upon our sins. Let
us rather accuse our sins, and condemn them: for thereby we are exposed to
all the miseries, under which we are pressed.

Verse. 11. Then he remembered the old time of Moses and his people, saying,
Where is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the shepherd of his
sheep? Where is he that put his holy Or, in the midst of whom.
Spirit within him?
The fruit of this chastisement.
THis is the end of the chastisement; namely, that the people might be awakened
out of their drowzinesse, and be brought to think upon the things they had
forgotten before; because prosperity so besots us, that the remembrance of God
is utterly buried. These rods therefore serve to recall those thoughts which
were abolished in us; to wit, where is that God which in times past showed so
many mercies to our fathers? For I refer these things to the time past, and
therefore have translated, from the days of old: for the word age agrees not
in this place, seeing the Prophet mentions that time wherein Moses governed the
people of God. The true sense therefore is, that the Jews being miserably
oppressed, called to mind the ancient times; in which the Lord manifested his
power for the preservation of his people.

Whereas some refer this unto God, as if he had wrestled with their
obstinacy, and had rather gratified the ungrateful, the^ leave that work
imperfect, which he had begun: this seems harsh, and too far fetched. The
Prophet rather recites the sighs and complaints of this poor people, after by
chastisements they had learned how miserable a thing it is, not to be under
Gods protection.

By the Shepherd, he means Moses. Neither see I any reason why it should be
translated in the plural number, rather then in the singular. He also
expresses the means by which he guided the sheep; namely, in that he was
endued with singular graces of the holy Spirit: for to put his Spirit in the
midst of him, is as much to say, as to manifest the power of his Spirit.

Others had rather refer it unto the people. Neither contradict I their
opinion: but in regard that God had chosen and ordained Moses to be the
conducter of his people, it is he principally of whom it is said, that the holy
Spirit was put within him. Now this Spirit was given him for the good of the
whole people, that he might be an excellent Minister of Gods grace, and might
see them at liberty. And so by consequence, the power of the Spirit of God
appeared in the midst of all the people.

Verse. 12. He led them by the right hand of Moses with his own glorious arm,
dividing the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name.
He here prosecutes that miraculous deliverance of the people, He goes on in
describing the peoples deliverance out of Egypt.
who under the conduct of Moses, were brought out of Egypt, and also continues
to recite the complaints: which might happily come into the minds of the
faithful. We see here two things joined together; to wit, the right hand of
Moses, and the glorious arm of the Lord. Who so uses man's travail, that his
praise and glory ought at no hand to be lessened or darkened: for these things
were so done under the conduct of Moses, that they ought wholly to be
attributed to the power of God.

As at this day, when it is said, that the Ministers of the Gospel remit
sins, (which yet belongs to God only) does this diminish ought from his
authority and Majesty? 8. Cor. 3.5.
Truly no: for they are but instruments, who bestow their pains for God, to
whom all the glory thereof must be attributed. Alas, what could the silly hand
of man have done, if the arm of the Lord had not fortified it?

For this cause in the end of the verse he expressly adds, that God at that
time wrought after so admirabe a manner, to make himself an everlasting name:
whereof, seeing it is unlawful to despoile him, so it shall be no more
lawful to attribute the least part of praise unto a mortal man.

Verse. 13. He led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that
they should not stumble.

14. As the beast goes down into the * valley, the Spirit of the Lord gave
them rest: so did thou lead thy people, to make thy self a glorious name.


THis is added to amplify and set forth so great a benefit. These verses are
added as an amplification of the former.
He also conioines similitudes thereto, to express this so great and admirable
a power of God; namely, as the horse in the desert, and as the beast in the
plain: that is to say, he led his people as nicely, as one does an horse upon
the downs. For the word desert, signifies not that desert of Param, where the
people were by the space of forty years: but according to the common phrase
of the Hebrew tongue, it signifies the pastures where sheep and herds of
beasts walk at their pleasure. Which yet better appears by the verse
following, where in stead of desert, he names the plain. And so one and the
same sense flows from them both, namely, that the people walked over deep
pits without stumbling, as horses do in the wilderness.

In a word, his meaning is, to teach that the red sea did no more let or hinder
the people from passing over, through the midst of deep places, then if they
had walked upon a plain and leuelled ground.

In v. 12 he called his name, everlasting: and here he calls it glorious; but
the sense is one. The people then object against the Lord, that if he once
made himself a glorious name; then he ought still to have the same care.
Otherwise it will come to pass that the remembrance of the benefits, which he
in former time bestowed upon their fathers, would vanish quite away.

Verse. 15. Look down from heaven, and behold from the dwelling place of thine
holiness, and of thy glory. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the
multitude of thy mercies, and of thy compassions? They are restrained from me.
The application of the whole.
Having mentioned the benefits of old in the name of all the people: now he
comes to apply the same unto his purpose, and intreates the Lord that he
would look down from heaven upon them.

Look down, etc.] By these words he signifies that the power of God is not
diminished, though it appear not at all times alike. For there must be an
opposition supplied, namely, that God had then as it were hid himself, neither
showed he himself such a one toward them, as he had done toward their
fathers. As if they had said, Albeit O Lord, that we see no tokens of thy
present, but that thou have withdrawn thy self from us, as if thou were shut
up in heaven, so as thou seem utterly to neglect us: yet we beseech thee
vouchsafe to look down once again from heaven, and from the dwelling place
of thine holiness, behold our miseries. How to distinguish between
unbelievers and the faithful.
See how we ought to separate the unbelievers from the faithful, who
acknowledge God to be both mighty and merciful: yea even then when they can
discern no signs at all, either of his power or bounty. And thus they cease
not to call upon him still, though he hides himself far away from them. For
the Lord never cease to have care over his people, seeing without weariness,
he orders and gouernes all the parts of the world.

Where is thy zeal?] By this interrogation it seems the faithful after a
sort vpbraid the Lord, in regard he is no more touched with his wonted zeal
toward them; or that his power is diminished. But the Prophet has another
meaning. For he mentions these benefits, as I have said heretofore, because he
meant thereby to confirm the hearts of the faithful in good hope: thereby also
teaching them that God is always one and the same, and never puts of the
bowels of compassion toward his Saints. And this will be evident enough by ye
which follows.

He takes the multitude of bowels and mercies, for the infinite goodness of
God: for he discouers and powers out his bowels as it were, in showing himself
a liberal benefactor toward us. And these said favors are so great, that we
cannot possibly esteem nor value them as we ought. But it is no new thing to
see the faithful pressed with grief to power out their complaints familiarly
in the presence of God, charging him that he has shut his bowels from them. I
grant they retain this principle, The faithful ever retain this principle,
namely, that God is always merciful.
that God is always merciful; in regard his nature is unchangeable: and
howsoever they impute it to their sins, that they feel him not such a one to
them, yet to preserve themselves from despair they expostulate with him, how
it can be that he should handle them so severely. Yea, in showing them
nothing but the signs of his wrath, as if he had forgotten himself.

Verse. 16. Doubtless thou art our father: though Abraham be ignorant of us,
and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord, art our father, and our redeemer: thy
name is for ever.
THe Lord permits us familiarly to power out our hearts before him. A
definition of prayer.
For prayer is nothing else but a manifesting of the heart in the presence God;
so as the best remedy we have to relieve our cares and anguishes is to lay
them up in his bosom. Cast thy burden, says David, upon the Lord, and he
shall nourish thee: Psalm. 55.22. and 37.5. The Prophet then having numbered up
Gods benefits toward the Jews, whereby his power and goodness was
sufficiently manifested; and yet that men by their sins deprived themselves
from tasting the fruit thereof: he now comes to this point; namely, that Gods
goodness is so great, that it ouercoms men's stubbornness.

He calls him father in the name of the whole Church. For all cannot call him
thus; The Churches privilege.
because it is a privilege that peculiarly belongs to the Church of God to
call him father in his presence. Thence we may gather, God has never been
called upon as a father in the Church, otherwise than by Christ.
or rather as the father, but by him. And again, here we see that the
faithful contend not with God: but only draw arguments unto themselves from
his nature, whereby to overcome all temptations, and to settle their hearts in
good hope.

Though Abraham know us not.] Saint Ierom.
Jerome thinks it was because they were degenerate, and therefore were not
worthy of so great an honor. But I take this exposition to be over curious.
The true sense is, That albeit our forefathers disauow us, yet God still holds
us for his children, and shows himself a father toward us. Those who say
that Abraham and the rest of the faithful had cast off all care, touching the
affairs of this life, do too subtly wrest the Prophets words to a wrong
sense. I speak not of the thing in it self; but I say these words prove not
that the Saints are altogether careless of us. The true sense of this place.
The most native and pure sense is this; Lord, we acknowledge that in regard
thou art our Father, it is a thing so firm and sure, that albeit our fathers
after the flesh should fail us, yet vvilt thou never cease to be a father
unto us: Psalm. 27.10. So as all rights of nature shall cease, rather then thou
should cease to show thy self a father unto us: or that thine holy adoption
should be made void, seeing it is established in thine immutable counsel, and
ratified by the death of thine holy Son.

And yet in the mean while we may hence gather, that the holy men so pray and
present themselves before God, that they look not to the intercessions of
others: for prayer is inioined them upon this condition, that wholly resting
themselves in the fatherly love of God, they reject all other confidences. But
if our Prophet taught the Jews not to direct their hearts toward Abraham and
Jacob (who yet had received so many precious promises) to be heard of God: then
is it certain that we have now no more cause to run to S. Saints not to be
prayed unto.
Peter, to S. Paul, and the rest, then to them. For this is not a private
prayer made by one or two, but public, and appertaining to the whole Church in
general: as if the Prophet had here set them down a form of prayer. And
questionless our confidence ought so to be settled upon Gods favor and
fatherly goodness toward us, that we should shut our eyes against all
intercessions of men, whether alive or dead. In a word, the faithful here
protest, that they gaze not here nor there, but rest themselves in God alone.

Abraham and Iakob, and makes no mention of Isaac? Isaac had no less part
therein then they; but yet he neither received so full, nor so many promises.

Our Redeemer.] Redemption is here expressed as a testimony of this adoption:
for by this experiment, God showed himself the Father of this people. And
therefore the people pray unto God, and with assurance call him Father, in
regard he had manisted unto them so admirable a sign of his fatherly good
will, which gave them encouragement to hope well. But redemption simply in it
self, would not have sufficed, unless the promise had bin therewithal
annexed. Even as then he did once redeem them, so does he promise to be their
father for ever.

The clause, from all time; sets forth the steadfastness and stabilitie of Gods
fatherly love. For we have not deserved the name of children; but in regard
that his will only, by which he has once adopted us for such, is
unchangeable. Seeing the Lord then has an eternal name, it thereupon
follows, that the title and grace which is thereunto conioined and flows from
this eternity, shall endure for ever.

Verse. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, Or, wherefore
have thou turned.
and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake, and for
the Tribes of thine inheritance.
BEcause these phrases of speech seem harsh and tart; some think the
unfaithful are here brought in murmuring against God, and blaspheming him: for
their malice turns into rage, when they have lost all hope. But the scope of
the text crosses this conceit. For the Prophet shows the fruit which should
proceed from these miseries and calamities of the Jews. How? Because being
humbled and brought low, they should cease either to be proud, or to please
themselves in their vices. They were ashamed then that in times past they had
erred so far out of the right way, and acknowledge their own offenses. And
to say the truth, when they attribute their sins to the wrath of God, their
meaning is not to exempt themselves from blame, nor to abolish their faults.

But the Prophet uses a phrase of speech very ordinary. For the holy Ghost is
wont to say, that God causes men to err, hardens, and gives men up into a
reprobate mind: 2. These. 2.11. Romans 9.18. and 1.28. Now when the faithful
speak thus, they mean nothing less then to make God the author of evil, and
of sin, as if themselves were innocent; or as if they meant to extenuate
their crime. But they aim at an higher market, and rather confess that their
sins have separated them from God, and is the cause why they are left
destitute of his holy Spirit. Yea, that thence is came to pass, that they have
been plunged into infinite miseries.

Those who say that God leads us into error by privation, that is to say, in
regard he bereaues us of his spirit, hit not the very white. It is said that
God both hardens and blinds when he delivers men up to be blinded by Satan, who
is the minister and executioner of his wrath, for otherwise we should ever be a
pray unto the will of the devil: but in regard he is able to do nothing of
himself without Gods commandment, God the author of blinding and hardening,
yet not the author of sin.
to whose beek he is subject, we truly affirm, that God is the author of this
blinding and hardening, which also the scriptures do witness in many places.
And yet it follows not thereupon that he should be the author of sin,
because he punishes men's ingratitude by such a blinding. And thus the
faithful in this verse confess that God has left them, but their sin was
the cause, so as they still acknowledge Gods just revenging hand upon them. In
like manner after Moses has said, That thitherunto God had not given the people
eyes to see, nor an heart to understand, he lays not the blame thereof upon
God, but shows the Jews where they were to seek the remedy of such a
benummednes whereof they were convinced, Deuteronomy. 29.14. But these seem to take
another pretext here, in that they ask a reason, and expostulate the matter
with God, as if he had bin bound to have handled them more mildly.

Some refer these words to the captivity, as if the faithful complained of
the Lord for suffering them to languish so long a time in the same. As if the
Prophet should say, That their obstinacy increased, because the Lord gave them
no taste of his grace. For the faithful are often surprised with a very
dangerous temptation, when they see the wicked ouerflow in all abundance, and
are almost discouraged, as David has well expressed it in Psalm. 125. But the
Prophets sentence seems to be more general* for the faithful acknowledge
themselves to have erred, because they were not guided by the Spirit of God:
whereof they complain not, but rather desire that this spirit may be given
them, by which their fathers in former times were governed and obtained all
things prosperously.

Why have thou caused our hearts to turn from thy fear?] Some translate,
Wherefore have thou hardened; but because this suits not with that which
follows, from thy fear, I had rather translate, To turn back. And the verb
also signifies so much.

Some think these words, return for thy servants sake, appertain to all the
people. As the Scripture indeed is wont to term all the household of faith by
the name of Gods servants. But I think it is properly to be referred unto
Abraham, Jsaac and Jacob, which surely is much more probable. Not that the
people rested in their intercession, but in regard that God had made the
covenant of grace with them, that they might deliver it over from hand to hand
unto their successors. Thus then the faithful set not these Patriarchs before
them as common persons only, but in the quality of Ministers, witnesses, or
mediators of the covenant, with the foundation of their faith: as in that song;
Psalm. 132.1.
Lord, remember David. In which place, the name of this good Patriarch is not
set before the Lord, as if the faithful thought he had been their advocate;
but in regard the promise, which was made unto him touching the restoration of
the eternal kingdom in his family, did appertain to the whole body of the
people.

How Papists wrest these words, to prove their intercession to Saints.
The Papists snatch up these words with great joy, as if by them the
intercession of Saints were proved. But by the true exposition of the place, we
may plainly see how easy a matter it is to answer them. For it is spoken of
the Fathers, not as if they deserved ought at Gods hand of themselves, or were
now intercessors between God and us; but because the free covenant, which not
only appertained unto them, but also to all their successors, was contracted
only with them.

To the Tribes.] That is to say; Return to thy wonted favor toward thy
people. By this we see that the things aforesaid, tend to no other end, but
only that the people do labor, thereby to provoke the Lord to mercy, after
they have laid before him their miseries and calamities. How we must come to
God.
Here then we see the manner how we are to address our selves unto God; namely,
by putting him in mind of his former benefits, and by manifesting in his sight
our griefs and sorrows. Thus we must do if we would obtain deliverance.

Of thine heritage.] That is, because God had chosen this people as his proper
portion. As if he should say; What shall become of thy people if we perish?
Not that God was tied to this people, but in respect he had given them his
faith by oath. Thus the people durst very well urge God with his promise, and
importune him by their prayers, in regard he had voluntarily obliged himself
both unto their fathers, and to their children.

But now, seeing all promises are ratified and confirmed in Christ, 2. Cor.
1.20. and that we have the truth of all things, we ought to be built up in so
much the greater confidence; for the covenant is not only contracted in his
hand, but it is also confirmed and sealed with his blood. I grant he was the
mediator as well for the fathers as for us: but all things are now more clear
and manifest, in regard they then stuck in many obscure shadows.

Verse. 18. The people of thine holiness have possessed it but a little while:
for our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.
IT is a wonder yt the Prophet says ye people possessed the land but for a
very little space, seeing 863. years were expired since they began to possess
it, and 1400. years and more since Abraham entered into the land of Canaan. But
the promise must be considered, in which it was said, that Abraham's posterity
should enjoy the land, as an everlasting possession: Genesis 17.8. and 48.4. This
was but a little while therefore, if it be compared with eternity. The
people of God then object this short time unto him, not as accusing him of
breach of promise; but to put him in mind of his covenant, and that he should
rather have respect to his own goodness, then to the chastisements which they
had justly deserved. And after this manner the ancient Church complains, in
Ps. 102.23, 24. that her strength was abated in the way, and that her days
were shortened: and therefore prays, that God would not cut her off in the
midst of her days, because the fullness of time depended upon the coming of
Christ.

Our adversaries.] This complaint was much more grievous; namely, that the
wicked profaned that land, which God had consecrated unto himself. And the
truth is, this went nearer to their hearts, then all the rest of their
miseries. And good reason: for we ought not so much to respect our selves, as
Gods service and religion. And this is the end of deliverance, to wit, that
there might be a people which might praise and worship the Lord purely.

Verse. 19. We have been Or, a long time.
as they over whom thou never barest rule, and upon whom thy name was not
called.
THe Prophets sense may admit two expositions. For some take this place as if
the people objected unto God, that they were chosen when other nations were
rejected, and that this covenant was ratified from the time of old. The other
exposition, which I rather follow, is this; that the people complain and reply
unto God, that there is no difference between them and the heathen; in regard
they had no succor nor refreshing at all in their adversities: which they hold
to be an absurd and an uncomely thing. This is a notable sentence, and very
worthy of memory: for here we see it is lawful for us to power out our
complaints unto God, when afflictions press us above measure; and to set our
calling before him, to move him to succor us; thereby testifying what great
difference he makes between us and strangers.

Over whom thy name is not called upon.] This comes all to one sense. For the
peoples meaning is, that Gods calling ought not to be abolished. And indeed it
is not the Lords will that we should call upon him in vain: for prayers are
unprofitable, and vanish in the air, unless the Lord have respect unto us.
Here note also one mark of the Church; namely, A note of the Church.
that Gods name is there called upon. The wicked cannot call upon him, because
there is no access unto him but by his word; of which, Faith brings forth
prayer.
they have no knowledge: and the refore faith is never separate from prayer.
For where faith is, there is also prayer: and if it be not there, let us know
for a surety that there is no faith nor hope at all.

Oh that thou would break the heavens, and come down: Master Calvin makes
this, part of the 19. verse.
and that the mountanes might melt at thy presence!
OH that thou would break!] The Hebrew particle, as I take it, comprehends
a wish. For though it has many significations, yet the scope of the text
shows, that this agrees better to this place then any other. For the faithful
here enter into a more ardent prayer; as often it falls out when in the
sharpest afflictions, a set form of words, would want sufficient vehemency to
express our desires. He says, that God breaks the heavens, when he suddenly
shows some memorable and rare sign of his power. And the reason of this manner
of speech is not only in regard that men being in great distress, are wont to
lift up their eyes to heaven, from whence they expect help; but because
miracles also make way for them, by breaking the ordinary course of nature.
Now it seems that God is shut up in heaven, whilst he neglects to succor
us, and lets all things in the world to go at six and seven. For this cause
then it is said, that he opens and breaks the heavens, when he gives us some
sign of his presence at such a time as we judge him to be far remote from
us. But these things are spoken according to our natural reason, as is also
the clause, That thou would come down: for what need is there that God
should change his place? He applies himself thus to our weakness, that we
might the better comprehend that which is said to us of him.

That the mountains would melt.] That is to say; Oh, cause thy Majesty and
glory to appear in such wise, as the elements being astonished at the feeling
thereof, might bow, to give way unto thee: as shall be declared more at large
by and by.

THE LXIIII. CHAPTER. That which in our books is made the beginning of this
64. Chapter, is in the Commentary annexed to the last verse of the 63.
Chapter, where you shall find it expounded.
Verse. 2. As the melting fire burned, as the fire caused the waters to boil
(that thou might declare thy name to thy adversaries) the people did tremble
at thy presence.

3. When thou did terrible things which we looked not for, thou came
down, and the mountains melted at thy presence.


A confirmation of the former wish in this and in the verse following.
We may read all this in the future tence, or in the subiunctiue. As if he
should say; Lord, if thou would come down, the people would tremble at thy
presence, thine adversaries would forthwith melt away. But I think it to be
more native, as I have turned it: for it is very sure that the Prophet alludes
here to Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.20. where the Lord manifested himself openly
unto the people. Hence also it appears how unadvisedly this Chapter was
distinguished, seeing the contents thereof is recited for the confirmation of
the former vvish, which should have been placed in the beginning. We have
elsewhere seen, that when the Prophets mention the reliefes which God has
given to his people, they still bring in testimonies concerning the deliverance
out of Egypt. Note.
And as often as they speak of this history, they therewithal comprehend
whatsoever benefits God bestowed upon his people: not only when he delivered
them from under Pharaohs tyranny, and appeared unto them in mount Sinai: but
that also, when by the space of 40. years he furnished them in the desert with
all things necessary; who having subdued and wasted their enemies, did put
them in quiet possession of the land of Canaan.

The Prophet says, that the fire made the waters to boil: in regard that
contrary to their wont, fires and lightnings, were mingled with violent raines
and tempests. As if he should have said, This fire (kindled by the Lord) was
so fierce, that it melted all things, were they never so hard; and drunk up
even the very waters.

To this appertains that which is added touching the melting of the
mountains, before his face. For he opened a way for his redeemed, even through
the greatest encumbrances that they met withal. He says also, that the
Israelites saw things which they never looked for: in regard, that albeit God
had advertised them, and had acquainted them with many experiments of his
power; yet this terrible spectacle whereof, he speaks, greatly surmounted
their capacities and understandings, yea, and all the reason of man.

Verse. 4. For since the beginning of the world, they have not heard, nor
understand with the ear, neither has the eye seen another God besides thee,
which does so to him that waits for him.
THis verse confirms that which we have said before; namely, that the
faithful desire nothing here which is strange and unheard of: but only that
God would but show himself such a one toward them, as in times past he had
done to their fathers; and that he would continue forth his liberality.

And withal, seeing it has been his custom to succor his people, and to give
them some assured testimonies of his presence; that he would not now
discontinue the same for the time to come: that so his almighty power might
still shine more and more. For you must note, that he so brings in the people
praying unto God, that therewithal they should confirm their hope from the
remembrance of the time past, and with the more boldness might have their
recourse to the throne of grace.

The eye has not seen.] Doubtless the Prophets meaning is to magnify Gods
goodness by mentioning these so many benefits, which God in former times had
bestowed upon his people. This manner of commendation also, is very high and
excellent: when being ravished with admiration in regard thereof, he cries out,
that there is no God but he. Likewise, that the things which God has done for
his peoples sake, were never heard of before.

But this may be read two ways; for the word God may be taken in the
accusative, or in the vocative: O Lord, none but thou have seen the things
which thou have done to those that wait for thee. But the other reading is more
received; namely. They have never heard nor seen such a God. In this last
reading the particle of similitude must be supplied; for without that, the
sentence would be imperfect. No ear then has heard, neither has the eye
seen such a God, as does such things. And thus God is here separated from
idols; from which the superstitious sort think they obtain all blessings: but
they are only the devices of man's brain, which can neither do good nor hurt.
Contrariwise, God deals forth his benefits of all sorts liberally to those
that serve him.

It seems S. Paul expounds this place otherwise, Paul seems to have added of
his own, Neither has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them which love him: this he did, that his speech might be
the better understood. For nothing is added which agrees not very well with the
Prophets doctrine. And that we may the better perceive this agreement, we
must consider his drift. In that place he disputes about the doctrine of the
Gospel, which he shows does far surpass all the reach of man's wit. Why
so? Because it contains such a knowledge, as is contrary, and wonderfully
far remote from the wisdom of the flesh. In a word, that it is an hidden
wisdom. For which cause S. S. Paul's drift in alleging this text 1. Cor. 2.9.
Paul worthily breaks forth into this admiration in weighing and pondering
of the same. And our Prophet calling to mind these rare and famous works of
God, never such a thing heard of. So concerning this grace which surmounts all
the rest, namely, when Christ is offered us in the Gospel, we may break
forth after the same manner, and say, O Lord, the mercy which thou shevvest
unto thy people, far surmounts all our reason. Neither eye, ear, heart, nor
spirit, can attain to such an height. S. Paul then you see applies this place
fitly to his disputation: neither does he corrupt the Prophets sentence, when
he exalts above all things in the world that excellent and peculiar grace which
God has bestowed upon his Church.

There yet remains another difficulty, namely, that the Apostle transferres
that to spiritual benefits; which is here said of temporal. But we may
affirm, that Isaiah simply respected the cause from whence these benefits of
God issued, though he therewithal had an eye to the estate of this life
present. For all the good things which God has given us here below for the
sustaining and cherishing of our natural life, are so many testimonies unto us
of that fatherly love which he bears us. The property of faith.
And it is also the property of faith to ascend by visible benefits, to
invisible graces. Thus then howsoever the Prophet seems to meddle only in
matters touching their bodily deliverance, and other things appertaining to
this life present: yet aims he therein at an higher mark, and especially
respects those benefits which in particular manner belonged to the people of
God. The inioying of temporal benefits, should carry up our minds to the
meditation of those that are eternal.
For what a sottishness were it, if whilst we enjoy benefits temporal, we
should not by them mount up to the welspring from which they flow; namely, from
Gods mere love and mercy? Both good and bad do indifferently enjoy these
common good things: but that particular favor wherewith he entertaines us,
appertains to none but to his household servants. Hence it is that we not
only consider that which appears to our outward senses, but we forthwith
ascend up to the very cause. Unto which point, though neither eye, nor ear can
reach; that is, to comprehend therein the grace of adoption, by which the Lord
protests that he will be our Father; yet he reueales this unto us by the
witness of his holy Spirit.

It is also very likely that the Prophet having spoken of a particular benefit
of God, takes occasion thereby to arise unto a general consideration. For when
the matter concerns the meditation of Gods works, the faithful are wont to
ascend from one kind of them, to the consideration of the whole in general.
And therefore this only example of so wonderful a goodness of God, might
well ravish the Prophets mind so high, that in his meditatations he considered
of this infinite abundance of blessings laid up in heaven for the faithful.
Yea, we manifestly perceive that this honorable commendation comprehends under
it the free covenant, by which the Lord adopted unto himself Abraham's
posterity, into the hope of eternal life. The sum of all comes to this; The
sum of this verse.
that seeing the goodness and power of God is so great, we ought not to
distrust him; but our confidence ought so to be settled thereupon, that we
should assuredly rely upon his help. And to this belongs these excellent
benefits which the Prophet here mentions.

Verse. 5. Thou did meet him that reioiced in thee, and did justly: they
remembered thee in thy ways: behold, thou art angry, Or, and.
for we have sinned, yet in them is continuance, and we shall be saved.
In this and in the verse following, the Jews bewail their miseries.
HE prosecutes the same argument. For the people bewailes their miserable
condition, in regard they felt no relief nor ease in their adversity; though
God was wont to be so good unto their forefathers. The faithful then speak
unto God on this sort; Thou were wont to meet our fathers, but thy favor is
now turned away from us: and it seems thou vvilt be no more appeased, seeing
we gain nothing by calling upon thee. For whence comes this adversity, but
from this; that as if thou were now become changeable, thou show thy self
otherwise to us, then thou did to our fathers in times past?

In the next place they confess they were justly chastised, because they had
sinned. The best fence against afflictions.
I have heretofore showed, that there is nothing better for us in afflictions,
then to remember Gods benefits: and not only those whereof we have had
experience, but those also which are recorded in the Scriptures. For we can not
be fenced with a buckler that is more thick nor large then it, against all kind
of temptations.

Those who think these words, him that rejoiced, and did justly, should be
read together, as if he should say, Thou did meet them which served thee
willingly, and delighted in well doing; do ill expound this verse, as I
think. I rather think that by the reioycers those are understood who are
joyful in prosperity, in regard the people were then in sorrow and heaviness.
For there is a close opposition, thus, Thou were wont in times past to meet
our fathers, before they were pressed with any grief, and did glad them at
thy coming: but now thou art far off, and suffrest us to languish with
grief and coffeehouse. To this belongs that which is added, That they
remembered God, because they enjoyed his present grace, and felt him both the
author and vpholder of their salvation. Thus by the ways of God, he
understands all prosperity: be it that he was more near unto remembrance may
be referred to the love of piety. To wit, that they gave themselves carefully
to the service of God: in which sense, these words are the exposition of the
former member, which is a thing usual with the Prophets, who are wont to
confirm their speeches with many words.

To remember God, signifies, to be so sweetly allured with thinking on him,
that we wish for nothing besides, and place our whole felicity in him. For
there is nothing which more rejoices us, then the remembrance of his mercy:
as on the contrary, if we feel him angry, then the remembrance of his name
is terrible unto us.

And we have sinned.] The Prophet renders a reason of that above said, for
they murmur not against God because they felt him otherwise to them then he was
toward their fathers, but they lay the whole blame upon themselves. Hence let
us learn, never to think of the afflictions wherewith the Lord visits us,
unless therwithall we call our sins to remembrance, that so we may both
acknowledge our faults, as also confess that we are justly chastised.

The word perpetual may either be referred to sins, or to the ways of the
Lord. To sins thus: Although we have bin obstinate in our sins, and worthy
to be an hundred times condemned, yet hitherunto we have bin saved through thy
mercy. If we refer it to the ways of God, he renders the reason wherefore
the people were not consumed, to wit, in regard the ways of the Lord are firm
and perpetual, and because there is no end of his mercies. And this sense I
think agrees best to this place.

Some supply, that perpetuity was founded in the ways of the Lord. But I had
rather take the words simply as they sound, as David in the 30. Psalm says,
That the Lords anger indures only for a night, but he is appeased, and shows
mercy for ever: for he is not provoked nor violently carried away with anger,
as men are; but he continues constant and steadfast in his favor and in
well-doing.

But yet we have not attained the Prophets full meaning: for he says, that the
people are saved, who in the mean while were led into captivity, as into a
sepulcher, wherein they bewailed their misery. And therefore I take the time
past for the future tence; to wit, we shall be saved, for, We have bin saved:
for it is rather a wish or prayer, then an affirmation. The faithful then boast
not of that they have obtained, but rather in complaining of their poverty,
they have their recourse to Gods perpetual mercies. They extol that then
which they desire, and not that which they had already attained.

Verse. 6. But we have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness
is as filthy clouts, and we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like
the wind have taken us away.
THe faithful continue their complaint. For they lament their miserable estate
because God regarded them not. Moreover, the Hebrews agree not about the
exposition of these words, filthy cloutes Notwithstanding it is certain, that
they signify a base and vile thing of no price. Yea, such a thing, which in
regard of the lothsomnesse thereof, stinkes in men's nostrils.

Simile.
As when a malefactor would endeavor to pacify his Judge, he lays forth all
his miseries and calamities before him.

Many vex and weary themselves here, because the Prophet speaking of the
filthiness of sins; comprehends all the Jews without exception: though
there were among them many of the true servants of God. But they have no reason
so to do, for he speaks not here of every one in particular, but of the whole
body in general, which he compares to filthy cloutes; in regard it was
trampled under feet, and extremely afflicted.

Some have been wont to allege this place to prove that it is so far off
from meriting any thing by our works; that even our works themselves are
infected and loathsome before God. But this seems, as I think, to be far
from the Prophets intention; seeing he speaks not here of all mankind in
general; but describes their complaints, who being led captives, felt Gods
wrath heavy upon them. For which cause, they confessed, that both themselves,
and their righteousnesses, were like filthy cloutes. First of all

We all fade. This is a very apt comparison: which shows that men wither and
wanze away as soon as they feel Gods wrath. Which point is notably described
in Psalm. 90.5. and 103.15. and in chap. 40.6. We are rightly compared to
leaves then; because our iniquities are the winds which carry us away.

Verse. 7. And there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that stirs
up himself to take hold of thee: for thou have hid thy self from us, and have
consumed us because of our sins.
THe Prophet confirms that which was said before. A confirmation of the former
sentence.
For he admonishes the faithful to acknowledge that they are worthy of such
a revenging hand of God, how sharp and severe soever it seemed. Now he
mentions some capital sins. And because it had bin too long to have stood
deciphering them out one by one, he strikes at the root it self, and says,
that Gods service was contemned.

Under the word Jnuocation, he comprehends the whole service of God, according
to the usual phrase of the Scriptures. For the principal part thereof is,
that we call upon God; thereby testifying that our whole trust is in him. It
is very certain that prayers and vows were always in use among the Jews:
but because they wanted the affection of the heart; and that it was far remote
from God; therefore he esteemed none of these fained devotions. Which he yet
better explaines in the particle following; where it is said, that none stirred
up himself to seek God. But all of them vanished away, and fell to nothing
through their own slothfulness.

First he shows that the thing we ought chiefly to desire is, that we may be
fully conjoined with God. For when we are estranged from him, it must needs
follow of necessity, that all things should turn to our destruction and woe.
Now by nature we are exceeding idle and slothful: for which cause we have
need to be quickened up with the spur. Seeing then that we take pleasure in
our carelessness; it stands us in hand to hearken advisedly to the Prophets
counsel, lest we become utterly senseless. Otherwise it will come to pass
in the end, that the Lord for his part will disdain and reject us. For the
Prophet describes the miserable estate of this people, who had no desire at all
to take hold upon God: neither was there any means left to awaken them up to a
sincere desire of godliness.

And have consumed us.] They complain again that they were overwhelmed with
the weight of their miseries, without being any thing at all relieved or cased
by God. For Jsaiah propounds these things, in the name of the whole people:
and intreates the Lord not to suffer them to languish any longer under so great
calamities.

Verse. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, Or, thou art,
etc.
and thou art our Or, former.
potter; and we all are the work of thine hands.
After the laying forth of their miseries, they cry for pardon in this, and
in the verse following.
AFter they have bewailed their miseries, with which they were almost
overwhelmed; now in plainer terms they desire the Lord to pardon and ease them
of their smart, and withal do more boldly profess themselves now to be his
children notwithstanding. For it was adoption only that could raise up their
hearts unto a lively hope: so as notwithstanding the burden of afflictions
wherewith they were pressed down, yet they ceased not for all that to rest
upon God as father. This order ought to be well observed: elect us for his
children, it is our parts to hope that he will save us, even then when things
shall seem most desperate and confused. Thus then, in regard of the free
covenant, the Israelites protest they are Gods children, that they might feel
his fatherly good will toward them in such wise, that his promises might not
be in vain.

By way of comparison they amplify and set forth Gods grace, in confessing
that they were formed of the clay, for they seek for no excellent matter in
themselves: only in their original they extol Gods mercy, who of mire and
clay, has bin pleased to create them his children. In the second member, where
God is called their former, and the people the work of his hands, it comes
all to one sense, for they wholly attribute unto God their being, and the
author of all they had. And this is a right acknowledgment: God is robbed of
his glory, whilst men glory in themselves.
for God is robbed of his due honor whilst men glory in themselves, be it
never so little. But Isaiah speaks not here of the common creation of men,
but of their regeneration, for which respect the faithful are in particular
called the workmanship of God, Chap. 17.7. and 19.25. and 22.11. and 27.11.
and 37.26. and 43.1.15. Ephesians. 2.10. They here acknowledge then a singular
favor that God has done them, first, in electing them for his people, and

Verse. 9. Be not angry O Lord above measure, neither remember iniquity for
ever: lo, we beseech thee, behold, we are all thy people.
THe people pray that God would mitigate both his wrath and their afflictions.
Not that God ever exceeds measure, but in regard they should be utterly
overwhelmed if he would stand to examine the^ to the utmost. They pray then
that their pains may be moderated. As Jeremiah says, Correct me o Lord, but
in judgment, that is to say in measure, Ier. 10.24. For he opposes judgment
to wrath, as in 2. Sam. 7.14. it is said yt he chastises us with the rods of
men, because he will not come against us himself to utter all his force in
punishing us, lest we should be forthwith ground to powder. The Jews pray not
simply against afflictions.


But it is worth the noting, that they do not simply desire to be freed from
Gods judging of them, but so offer themselves to be chastised, that the blows
may not dash them to pieces. And this is the cause why they desire that the
memory of their iniquities may be blotted out: for if God should not show the^
mercy this way, there should be no end of their miseries.

The Prophet repeates that which he had said before in verse. 8. namely, Behold
we are thy people.
that God had chosen Abraham's posterity. For the best assurance they had to
obtain pardon, was, that God being true of his promises, could not reject
those whom he had once adopted. In speaking of all, he means not every one in
particular, but comprehends the whole body of the Church. And howsoever the
greatest part of them were cut off by their wicked revolt, yet this was true,
that the Jews were Gods peculiar people. Neither was this prayer made for all
indifferently, but only for the little flock of the faithful. Now the people
set not forth their merits before God, but flee to his free covenant by which
they were adopted. For this indeed is the sure and only recourse the faithful
have: this I say is a remedy against all mischiefs, and that is the reason
why Moses and all the Prophets do so often repeat the same, Deuteronomy. 32.13.

Verse. 10. Thine holy cities lie wast: Sion is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a
desert.
THe Church here again recounts her miseries, The Church recountes her misery
again in this, and in the verse following.
that she might thereby bow the Lord to compassion and forgiveness. She says,
the Cities were wasted; and for an amplification she adds, that Zion is become
a wilderness; for it was the seat royal in which God would be called upon.
Then he adds Jerusalem, wherein Zion was. For it seemed strange that the City
which God had consecrated to himself, should be laid on heaps and wasted by
the enemy.

The Prophet calls them Cities of holiness, in respect that as God had
sanctified the people, so was it his will that the Cities, yea the whole
country, should be consecrated unto him. Seeing the Cities then were dedicated
unto God, they were rightly called holy, because God reigned therein, and was
called upon in them. What Cities deserve to be called Gods holiness.
And thus we may call those Cities of holiness, in which God is purely
worshipped, having abandoned all superstitions.

Verse. 11. The house of our sanctuary and of our glory, where our fathers
praised thee, is burnt up with fire, and all our pleasant things are wasted.
THe sanctuary is otherwise attributed to the people, then to God. For it
being a pledge of that holy union between God and the people, it is often
called the house of God, because it answered to his holiness. Here the
faithful call it their sanctuary, in regard they were thence to draw their
sanctity: which they yet confirm more apparently by the word glory. For they
confess they had nothing to glory in but the Temple, wherein God was pleased
to be worshipped and served.

And yet we see that this their reioicing, was often vain; in so much that
Jeremiah reproues them for it, saying; Trust not in lying words; to wit, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord: this is the Temple of the Lord:
Ier. 7.4. But as the boasting of such as made fair shows, and grew insolent,
in regard of some titles was vain: so on the contray, they reioiced rightly,
who honored Gods ordinance, and laid it up in their hearts; and also resting
upon the testimony of the word, were assured to dwell under his protection,
who had chosen out a perpetual habitation for himself in the midst of them.
For the Temple was built by the commandment of God; so as the Jews might well
boast that they had God for the vpholder of their salvation.

But because his service was then marred and corrupted, and that all in a
manner ran riot after superstitions and impiety, the Prophet mentions the time
past, and not the time present. As if he should say; Albeit we have not
yielded thee that obedience which we ought to have done, yet behold it is thy
Temple still, wherein our fathers served thee purely: and vvilt thou suffer it
to be profaned, and to lie waste? Will not this reproach redound to thine own
dishoner, seeing this building was erected for thy vvorshippe? The Jews plead
not their merits here, neither dawbe they over their sins; no, they rather
confess and lay them open: only they put God in mind of his service, that in
remembering his holy covenant, he would not permit his promises to be
fruitless. And all the faithful ought to imitate this their example.

The verb To praise, is taken to give thanks: as if he should say; In this
Temple, the lamentable ruin whereof breaks the hearts of the faithful in
sunder, in times past thy praises were wont to sound, when thou did
entertain thy people there, in thy mercy and compassion.

Verse. 12. Will thou hold thy self still at these things, O Lord? Will thou
hold thy peace and afflict us above measure?
THe people fortify themselves in undoubted hope, that God will not suffer his
glory to be thus trampled under foot, though he be provoked to wrath by men's
infinite offenses. Hypocrites reap no consolation at all by this, but these
things indeed belong only to such as are touched with a true sense of Gods
mercy. Such conclude, and are certainly persuaded, that howsoever death does
menace them; yet God having regard to his own glory, will at the least be
merciful to some; that so the whole seed perish not.

VVilt thou afflict us?] Isaiah shows that God cannot forget his mercy. Why
so? Because he cannot deny himself: for his glory is joined with our
salvation. Gods glory joined with our salvation.
And this is a thing diligently to be noted: or having spoken before of Gods
glory, now he adds, will thou afflict us above measure? The Lord then will
moderate his corrections; for his glory requires it, that we be delivered
from death: which glory he can in no wise neglect. Let us then take up this
prayer, as often as our enemies invade us: not after the manner of hypocrites,
who make a great craking of Gods glory, whereof they have neither taste nor
feeling.

THE LXV. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. I have been sought of them that asked not, I was found of them that
sought me not: I said; Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that called not upon
my name.
In this verse the Prophet turns from the Jews to the Gentiles.
NOw the Prophet passes over to the handling of another point of doctrine. For
he shows that God has just cause to reject and cast off the Jews, because
neither admonitions, nor threatenings would serve the turn to reclaim them from
their errors, nor to bring them again into the right way. But to the end they
should not imagine that the covenant of the Lord should therefore be broken; he
adds, that another people, which then were of none account, should come to
him; and that his name should be honored and magnified in the places where he
was unknown before. The Jews thought this very strange, and judged thereof
altogether contrary to that covenant which God had contracted with Abraham;
namely, that such a grace should be communicated to any other nation, then to
his posterity. But the Prophet meant to pluck this vain confidence away from
them, to the end they should not imagine that God was only tied to the
posterity of Abraham. For the Lord bound not himself unto them, but upon a
certain condition: which if they happened to break, they were to be held as
traitors and disloiall; and so by consequence, deprived of the fruit of this
covenant. Besides, the covenant was not only made with Abraham and with his
posterity, according to the flesh, but also with all such as should be
ingrafted into the family of this Patriarch by faith. But it shall be more
convenient for us to begin at the second verse, that so we may the better
understand, the Prophets meaning: for there the cause of this reiection is
expressed.

Verse. 2. I have spread out mine hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
which walked in a way that was not good, even after their own imaginations.
Here he shows the reason of their reiection.
HEre he accuses the Jews, and complains of their ingratitude and rebellion;
wherein he shows that they have no occasion given them to affirm, that the
Lord offered them any wrong, if he made others partakers of the same grace with
them. The Jews proudly insulted against God, as if their merits had been the
cause of their election. But for this their insolency and unthankfulness the
Lord reiects them as unworthy: and vpbraides them, that he has but lost all
his time, in stretching forth his hand unto them, to draw and unite them to
himself. For by stretching forth of the hands, he signifies a daily
summoning of them. Now the Lord is said to stretch forth his hand diverse
ways. For he draws us to him either by all the day long, aggrauates the
fault greatly, namely, that God ceased not for the space of many years
together, to send his Prophets one after another: yea, as it is said in Ier.
7.13. and 35.14. He rose early, and stinted not his care and pains until the
evening.

First, he calls them rebellious, or disobedient. Next, he shows what this
rebellion was; to wit, Nothing displeases God more then when we follow our
own inventions.
the people walked after their own imaginations: for nothing is more
displeasing unto God, then when men are given to follow their own reason:
which he will have us to renounce, that we may be fit to comprehend the true
doctrine. The Lord here protests then that he was not to be blamed, for not
upholding the peoples good estate, and that he favored them not as he was
wont: but that themselves, through their folly, had revolted, and loved rather
to stick to their own inventions, then to follow him.

Now having spoken of this reiection, it remains that we come to touch the
calling of the Gentiles, The calling of the Gentiles.
who succeeded in the room of the Jews: for it is not to be doubted but he
speaks thereof in the first place. Now the Lord had long before prophesied of
this by Moses; so as this was not to seem any new thing. As they have provoked
me, says the Lord, to jealousy, with that which is no God, and have stirred me
up to wrath by their vanities: so also will I move them to ielosie by that
which is no God, and will provoke them by a foolish nation: Deuteronomy. 32.21. In a
word, the Prophet now pronounces the same threatening which Christ thundered
forth afterward, Matthew. 21.43. when the time of their blinding drew near; The
kingdom of God, says he, shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a
nation that will bring forth the fruits of it.

Where he says in the former verse, that God manifested himself to them that
asked not after him; it is to show, that the Gentiles were prevented with this
grace of God, without giving him any occasion to receive them into favor,
either by merit, or yet by any worthiness at all of theirs. Which manifestly
agrees with that place which we have alleged out of Deuteronomy. 32. where Moses
calls them a foolish nation. Wherefore under this general title, he makes it
apparent what men are, before the Lord has prevented them by his free grace:
for they neither call upon him, seek him, no nor so much as think upon him.
This place then ought to be well noted, The key that opens us the door into
Christ's kingdom.
to establish the certainty of our vocation, which is as it were the key which
opens us the door into Gods kingdom. By this our consciences are quieted and
appeased, which otherwise would always hang in doubt, and be in perplexities,
were they not vpheld by such testimonies. We see then that this was not
written at a venture, nor upon some sudden motion, namely, Our vocation long
since prophesied of.
that we are called the people of God, and are so accounted, because it was
thus foretold long since by many prophecies.

S. Paul from this place ingeniouslie disputes to prove the calling of the
Gentiles: and says, that Jsaiah cries, and boldly pronounces, that the
Gentiles were called by the Lord, Romans 10.20. How so? Because our Prophet
expressed more here then the circumstance of his times would permit. Thus then
by this text we perceive that we were called by an eternal decree of God,
long before the thing it self came to pass.

In that he twice repeates, Behold me, behold me: he further confirms that God
will manifest himself so familiarlie unto strange and profane nations, that
they shall be well assured of his dwelling in the midst of them. And
questionless it was needful that this so unlooked for a change should be thus
effectually confirmed, because it was very hard to be credited. Although even
in this novelty; the Prophet meant to magnify Gods unexpected grace. The
sum is, The sum of this text.
that after God shall be offered to the Gentiles, and that they shall be
received into the holy race of Abraham: then there shall be a Church in the
world, out of which the Jews shall be expelled. Now we see that all these
things which our Prophet here mentions, were accomplished by the Gospel,
wherein the Lord truly manifested and offered himself unto strange nations.
near, and offers himself; that being familiarly known we may with boldness
and assurance call upon him.

Verse. 3. A people that provoked me ever unto my face: that sacrifices in
gardens, and burns incense upon brickes.
The fruit that came from walking after their own imaginations, in this and
the next verse.
HE shows and prosecuteth more at large, in what things the Jews rebelled
against God: namely, that having forsaken his commandment, they defiled
themselves with sundry superstitions. Heretofore he had said that the Jews
had revolted from God, in regard they wandered after their own inventions. Now
he sets forth the fruit of this their wandering: The spring of all superstitions.
namely, that having given their thoughts free scope, they overthrew the pure
worship of God. And this indeed is the fountain, from whence al superstitions
proceed: even when men please themselves in their inventions, choosing rather
to be wise in their own eyes, then to restrain their senses within the lists
of Gods law. It is but in vain then that the superstitious allege their
devotions and good intentions, as they call them: for God so abhorres and
detests them, yt those who rest therein are tainted of high treason, and are
guilty of the breach of Gods covenant; because we ought to enterprise nothing
of our own brain: but to yield our obedience to Gods commandment. In a word,
the beginning and perfection of his pure service consists in teachablenesse.

By the verb to provoke, Isaiah sets forth the inpudencie of the people, who
provoked the Lord of set purpose: neither had they any such reverence of his
Majesty, as to subject themselves under his government. And this he further
amplifies, in adding unto my face. For seeing those that are admonished by the
word have him present as it were before their eyes; they sin with an hie hand
and are more guilty of impudency and rebellion, then such as never heard tell
of the word.

He also mentions the gardens which they had dedicated unto their Idols; and
affirms that God was provoked by them. Some think it should be spoken of
brickes here, by way of contempt; and that they are secretly opposed to the
Altar, upon which God would have them only to sacrifice. And thus they think
the roofes of the houses are here meant; where ye superstitious sort were wont
to sacrifice, in regard they were made of brickes. But I rather think this
word simply signifies the Altars, which they had erected to their idols. In
the mean while, howsoever they had a fair pretense to imitate the form of
that Altar ordained by the Lord: yet he abhorred such an excuse, because it was
contrary unto his word.

Verse. 4. Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the deserts, which eat
swines flesh, and the broth of things polluted are in their vessels.
HE reckons up other sorts of superstitions. Which albeit by reason of the
brevity of the words, it be somewhat obscure; yet from other places of the
Scriptures, it may easily be gathered what they were. For as Necromancy was a
thing much in use among profane nations, so also the Jews went into the
sepulchers and deserts, to ask counsel of devils; whereas they should only
have sought counsel at the mouth of God. And in supposing to fetch answers
from the dead, they delited to be deciued by the illusions of wicked spirits.

Now by the 18. of Deuteronomie, verse. 11. and other places, it appears, how
expreslie the Lord had forbidden this. And we have touched it somewhat before,
in Chap. 8. We are here taught in general, that the Lord requires nothing more
of us then obedience, which he accepts above all sacrifices: 1. Sam. 15.22.

Which eat svvines flesh.] He complained before that Gods service was polluted
by their superstitions. Now he adds, that they rejected all difference of
things: so as they discerned not between the pure and unclean. And he recites
one kind: namely, that they abstained not from swines flesh. This seems but a
light matter. Yet is it not so for all that. For we must not judge how great
this sin is, by our rule: but according to that which the Lawgiuer has
prescribed. Neither is that sin to be esteemed light, which God has
forbidden. This appertains to the external profession of faith; by which the
Jews should have showed, how far off they were from the prophanations of the
Gentiles. We must not recoile then from that rule which God has given us: no,
not the thicknes of our nail.

Verse. 5. Which say, Stand apart, come not near to me: For I am holier then
thou: these are a smoke in my wrath, and a fire that burns all the day.
HE notes out a gross impiety that was among the Jews; namely, that of an
obstinate mind, and an untamed rebellion, they opposed themselves against ye
true servants of God: neither would they obey any admonitions. For whilst we
give ear to admonitions and reprehensions, there is some hope of repentance:
but if we reject them, then is it certain that we be past cure. Now howsoever
the Prophets words in appearance seem to be obscure; yet the sum of them is,
that hypocrites do disdainfully, and malepartly thrust back those, who
faithfully admonish them, because they attribute unto themselves, either a show
of holiness, or, in respect that their pride cannot endure that any should
reprove them: for hypocrisy is never separate from disdainfulnesse Hypocrisy
never separate from disd^infulnesse.
and pride. Let us not marvel then if those who be tainted with this vice,
do insolently exalt themselves, bragging of their holiness, and think that
they excel therein above all others: and if we at this day also do find the
like qualities in the hypocrites of our time, which Isaiah has described to
be in those that then lived. For Satan has so blinded them, that whilst with
a vain bragging of words, they set their devotions to sale, they basely
esteem of Gods word.

The expositors think this should be a general sentence, which reproues the
Jews for not submitting themselves unto the Prophets: but me thinks the
circumstance of the place should be considered, which they have not
sufficiently respected, namely, that this verse depends still upon the former:
so as the Jews are sharply reproved for reuolting from the true religion. And
besides, for that they had maliciously followed their own inventions, so far
forth, that they commanded such to be packing, as soothed them not up therein.
For this word, Go back, signifies nothing else but get thee hence: as if they
should say, We will not meddle with such as show unto us the way to life and
salvation.

Verse. 6. Behold, it is written before me; I will not keep silence, but will
render it and recompense it into their bosom.
THe Prophet alludes to the custom that is among Judges, who have lying by
them upon record, the informations, testimonies, acts, and other pieces of
evidences, that when need requires, the offender may be easily convicted: for
we use to leave those things in vvriting, which we would have posterity to
remember. The Lord then testifies that these things can never be forgotten,
because they be written before him. For howsoever he winkes at things for a
time, yet shall not the wicked escape unpunished, but shall well perceive in
the end that he is a just Judge.

Gods patience must not be abused.
for he cease not for all that to keep a register of all our faults; for
which we may be sure he will one day punish us, unless we repent. I grant the
Lord has no need to write for his memories sake: but it pleases him to use
this phrase of speech, that we should not imagine him to be forgetful of any
thing, when he deferres the execution of his judgments. Nay, in Ier. 17.1. he
says yet more expressly, that the sin of Judah was written with an iron
pen, and with the point of a diamond.

To render into their bosom, is a phrase of speech much used in the
Scriptures, Psalm. 79.12. Ier. 32.18. because men think their sins are either
covered, or that they shall not come into account. And thus, either they lay
the raines of their concupiscences in their own necks; or in attributing
their faults to others, they become utterly fearelesse. This is the cause why
God theatens to recompense their sin into their bosom, to the end they may
bethink themselves what Judge it is with whom they must have to do.

Verse. 7. Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers shall be
together (says the Lord) Or, for they.
which have burnt incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the
hills: therefore will I measure their old work into their bosom.
Here he amplifies that which he said in few words in the former verse. The
former verse amplified.
For he shows that it was not of yesterday that the Jews were guilty of
such a disloyalty; but that it is the example of their fathers, whose steps
they now followed: even as heretofore the Lord complained that he had a long
time forborne this people, and was so weary at last, that he could bear them
no longer. Thus then the Prophet aggrauates their sin, when he tells the Jews
that they have followed the example of their fathers. As if he should say; such
birds, such eggs. For if men have been often and diligently admonished, their
obstinacy is so much the more to be condemned, if they repent not. Here we
see that after they had rejected all admonitions and threatenings, they
perseuered many years in their corruptions and impieties, which is here laid
to their charges, that they should no longer plead their excuses to cover their
faults withal; but that they should rather labor to confess themselves
worthy of most exquisite torments.

Here also we may perceive it to be so far off, The bad example of our
fathers not to be followed.
that the corruption issuing from the fathers, should any way excuse the
children; (as the ignorant are usually wont to make this a buckler for their
defense) that it rather serves as a means to pull upon them a more heavy
punishment.

Are together.] As if the Lord should have said, that he gathered and bound up
in one bundle, both the iniquities of the fathers and of the children, that in
the end he might revenge himself of them: not that the children are guilty or
punished for the fathers wickedness, Ezech. 18.20. but in regard that they
followed the wicked course which their fathers lived in. Therefore it is just
with God to wrap them up with them in the same guiltiness, and to condemn
them according to the same sentence, especially seeing their diseases were
grown incurable.

For they have burnt incense.] The Prophet here recites one particular, under
which he also comprehends all other kinds of vices. For he signifies all such
reuolts as whereby the people were gone back from Gods pure worship, and had
given and dedicated themselves unto strange gods. See here the height of
iniquity: for when the fear of God is stolen out of the heart, then is there
no soundness nor uprightness left behind. He here points out unto us then,
the fountain of all disorders: which we are diligently to observe, in regard
that men flatter themselves, thinking themselves worthy of great praise, when
they serve God after their own fantasies; and in the mean while, consider not
that there is nothing more abominable in his sight, than such a service as is
devised according to the appetites of our carnal imaginations. And no doubt
but the people herein desired that God should accept them, whilst they burnt
incense upon the mountains. But we must not judge of their work by their
deliberation or good intention, as they call it: God reiects our good
intentions, if we have not his word to warrant them.
We must hearken to Gods voice, who protests that he is this way greatly
dishonored, rather than to all the men in the world; lest otherwise by seeking
to rest upon our intents, we make our selves double guilty before his Majesty.

J will measure their work. The word old may be diversely expounded, either,
I will measure again with their oldnesse: or, In the first place; or, In times
past; or, from the beginning. But the circumstance of the place must be
considered. For by that we shall the better attain to the Prophets meaning.
You know he spoke ere-while touching the works of their fathers: there is no
doubt the^ but he here derides the children, who placed their defense in them.
For it is but a silly and vain shift to oppose against God the customs of our
fathers, that is to say, a corruption of great antiquity. Why so? Because in
thus doing, we pull down a more heavy judgment upon our own heads. And yet
many are so bewitched with this excuse, as they think a man ought not at all
to reject the same: neither can you get them an inch further. Note.
Truly, antiquity is honorable: But no man is so to prize it, that he should
therefore in the least thing diminish any of that honor which is due unto God.
See here an excellent place to convince such as will needs maintain
superstitions by succession of years; as if an old error were to be held for a
law.

Verse. 8. Thus says the Lord, As the wine is found in the cluster, and one
says, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so will I do for my servants
sakes, that I may not destroy them whole.
God never threatnes so severely, but he leaves some hope of pardon for the
faithful.
THe Prophet here moderates his former sentence. For otherwise it had been a
thing too severe yt the iniquities of ye fathers should thus be called to mind,
to the end the Lord might destroy their children with them. Yea, this might so
have affrighted the faithful, that it had been enough to have driven them from
all hope of salvation. We ought then you see, to stand carefully upon our
watch, and to consider for what cause the Lord is displeased with us. For his
meaning is so to astonish us, as that therewithal he would draw us to
himself: and not thereby to throw us headlong into despair. He leaves some
hope for the faithful here then, lest they should wax fainthearted: and in
proffering them refreshing, he allures them to repentance, of which he reaped
neither pleasure nor profit.

He confirms this by a similitude. Simile.
As if a man minding to pluck up a vine, yet finding some fruitful branch
thereon, he spares, and reserues it: even so will the Lord take heed how he
pulles up those, in whom he finds any sap or vigor. In the fifth Chapter he
complained, that the people was unprofitable: yea, worse than that; for they
brought forth sower fruits. Jsaiah retains the same similitude: but he applies
it otherwise. For howsoever the people were like unto a bastard and barren
vine; yet there remained some fruitful branches, which the Lord would not
suffer to perish.

But this may be taken two ways: either God sometimes spares the wicked for
the elects sake.
whom the Lord will neither destroy nor wrappe up in one common calamity with
them. And this is manifest enough by diverse examples in the holy Scriptures.
The Lord would have spared Sodom and Gomorah, had there been found but ten
righteous persons there: Genesis 18.32. All those which were in the ship with S.
Paul, to the number of 276. persons, were given him of God, and saved from
shipwreck; that so the power which he showed in his servant, might be the more
evident: Act. 27.32. The Lord blessed the house of Potiphar, and made him to
prosper in all things for Joseph's sake, who dwelt in his family: Genesis 39.5.
Many like examples there be which every one may collect by himself. But I
rather approve of the other exposition; namely, that the Lord so punishes the
sins of his people, that yet notwithstanding he has respect to his beloved
ones; and wrappes them not up all in one and the same ruin. Neither is it his
meaning only that the faithful shall be saved, but that there shall be a
remnant left, in the midst of whom God will have his name called upon. And
this is worth the noting. For he shows that the remnant shall be very small,
in comparison of that great multitude which was then in the land: as we have
seen in Chap. 1.9.

Now whereas the faithful are often punished with the wicked, let us not
think God does them any wrong: For the Lord will easily find faults
sufficient in every one of us to afflict and punish us. Besides, his meaning is
to instruct and awaken us by his rods: for being knit, The faithful must not
murmur, if God sometimes wrap them up in the same judgment with the wicked.
and as it were grafted into the body of a people, it is no wonder if we be
smitten with the same blows, in regard we are members that have drawn
infection from the same. In the mean while, God moderates these chastisements,
lest he should utterly tear up the chosen plants.

Verse. 9. But I will bring a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah that shall
inherit my mountain: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall
dwell there.
An explanation of the former sentence.
THe Prophet explanes the former verse in other words, and shows that the Lord
will reserve a seed unto himself, which shall call upon his name. We must not
judge of the Churches estate by outward appearance.
For he has been wont so to chastise his people, that he has still continued
a Church, in which his truth and pure religion might be kept. For which cause
also S. Paul calls her the pillar and ground of truth: 1. Tim. 3.15. We are
not to judge of the Church then, by the estate of things here below (seeing
there is nothing steadfast in this world) but by the counsel of God, who cannot
endure to see her either overthrown or destroyed. Let us carefully remember
this then, that so no calamities, ruins, nor desolations of the Church may
astonish us.

He calls those inheriters of the mountains, who being set free from under
their captivity, should return home again into their country. Iudeah was
full of mountains, as we know. Again, he expounds that which might seem
obscure: for he signifies that the Jews should return unto their first
estate, and that by right of inheritance they should enjoy that land out of
which they had been exiled. For soon after, Iudeah was exceedingly wasted: but
the Lord protests that it shall not continue so long. For the greater
confirmation whereof, he briefly mentions the covenant, by which this land was
ordained for them to possess as their heritage.

Thus albeit they were a long time retained as prisoners, yet this word
heritage served to put some life into them, that they might come to an assured
confidence touching their being repossessed thereof. But it is to be noted that
this grace is restrained to the elect and true servants of God, lest all
indifferently should presume to apply the same unto themselves.

Verse. 10. And Sharon shall be a sheepfold: and the vallie of Achor shall be a
resting place for the cattle Or, for.
of my people that have sought me.
BY these figures he means nothing else but that the land which was waste,
shall be again inhabited. For we have here a secret comparison thus: howsoever
after the banishment of her inhabitants into a far cuntrie, she should
remain solitary and empty: yet shall she again be inhabited, and that in
such wise, as there shall be abundance of flocks, and herds: of fruitful
pastures, and commons: and should also furnish them in plentiful manner with
all things necessary for the sustentation of men.

Sharon and Achor were places for pastures: but the one was apt for small
beasts, and the other for great. And here we see that Gods promises not only
contain in them the things belonging to the life to come, Godliness has the
promise of things belonging to this life, as well as of those to come.
but also to that which is present; to the end we might taste his bounty and
liberality to the full. For by earthly benefits, we are invited to seek for
greater and more excellent things touching the heavenly life.

Whereas the Lord extends his liberality even to the brute beasts, which were
created for our use: thence are we to conceive a more sure and confident hope
touching his fatherly kindness toward us. For if he be pleased to take care
of beasts which are ordained to serve us, If God take care of beasts, much more
to us.
much more will he furnish us with all things convenient both for this life,
and for that to come. And yet we must keep in mind that doctrine (whereupon we
have insisted heretofore) which brings us from temporal blessings, to the
spiritual kingdom of Christ: Which the Prophets are wont to describe out
under figures.

For my people.] Here he excludes the reprobates, who with brazen faces, will
stand to brag of Gods name falsely and vainly. But howsoever they dare
malepertly brag of Gods promises and sacraments, yet are they never the
nearer for getting any part with Gods children therein, but are deprived of all
hope of Gods blessings, that so they may be fitted to receive the recompense
of their iniquities.

In adding, who have sought me, he shows yet more plainly who they be
that have their part in these benefits: that so he might stop the mouths of
all reprobates and hypocrites, as we have said. See here then the true mark
which separates the sheep from the goats; A note how to discern Christ's
sheep from goats.
and the lawful heirs from bastards: namely, in seeking the Lord. For it is
not enough to shroude our selves under some name or title; but we must seek
the Lord in purity of conscience, that so we may cleave unto him with our
whole hearts.

Verse. 11. But ye are they that have forsaken the Lord, and forgotten mine
holy mountains, and have prepared a table for the Or, army.
multitude, and furnish the drink offering to the number.
LEst hypocrites should beguile themselves with these promises, or, A
prevention.
lest they should imagine that this which is spoken touching the restoration,
belonged unto them; he once again directs his speech unto them. He calls
them Apostataes, because they had forgotten the mountain of Zion: that is to
say, had revolted from Gods pure worship. For by the mountain of holiness, he
signifies the rule of holiness contained in the word of the Lord. For the
Temple was built by his commandment, that in it he might be called upon: with
the altar also, whereupon he inioined No seeking of God without the word and
faith.
neither can faith be separated from the word, Romans 10.17. out of which it is
not permitted us either to seek or ask of God.

In saying, who have prepared a table; he recites their superstitions. The
word Gad, is diversely expounded: for some think he means Jupiter, or his
star: Jupiters star.
others, fortune. Fortune.
Saint Ierom translates; Who prepared the table to fortune: thinking that this
word notes out happy events. But it seems more probable to me, that this word
is taken for a band or multitude; yea, even for an army: and the etymology of
the word suits well enough with the scope of the text. There is one notable
place amongst the rest in Genesis 30.20. which serves for the understanding of
this word, where Leah reioiceth for the increase of her children: for it seems
her speech should be thus expounded; Into a band. As if she should say; I have
now a great number of children: for she had many before; in so much that she
called Gad, her fifth son. So in this place, I think Gad, should be taken
for a band, troop, or army: the reason is, because they had so many gods,
that they were scarsly able to count them for their multitudes.

To furnish, may be taken here two ways; namely, that they furnished all
things for the service of their Idols, liberally and magnificently: for
superstition can keep neither end nor measure. And those, who when the matter
concerns Gods worship, will not spare a penny; will freely bestow all they
have to set up their Idols: or that there is not the meanest of their puppets,
to which they have not offered somewhat: and I rather content my self with
this second exposition. For Idolaters think they have never done enough,
unless they honor every Saint: yea, and the more they serve them, the better
they think to prosper in their businesses. And of this, we have but too much
experience at this day in the Papacy.

By the number, he signifies that which he meant by Army: and this
repetition is much used in our Prophets language. Thus his meaning is then,
that the Table was set up: that is to say, they sacrificed not to one Idol
alone, but to an infinite number: that by this he might show, what sore
punishments these Idolaters were worthy of.

Verse. 12. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and all you shall bow
down to the slaughter, because I called, and ye did not answer; I spoke, and
ye heard not, Or, before mine eyes.
but did evil in my sight, and did choose that thing that I would not.
THe Prophet alludes to the number of gods, whereof he spoke in the former
verse: and shows, that the Lord will easily comprehend their great numbers;
for he will number them to the sword. By this it is evident that he spoke not
in the former verse of the two planets, Jupiter and Mercury, Jupiter and
Mercury.
as some imagine; but in not satisfying themselves with one God only, they
gathered together an army of Idols.

Their conjecture is frivolous, who by the word Meni, which we have translated,
Number, understand Mercury, because Mena signifies to number; and that
Mercury was the god of the Merchants, Mercury, god of the Merchants.
who have their books of accounts. For the Prophets meaning is plain enough,
in that he shows the people shall be numbered to the sword, because they
reioiced in an heap of gods, and refused to rest upon the only true God.

Because I have called.] He amplifies the greatness and heinousness of this
revolt, in regard the Jews sinned of a set malice, and rather against
knowledge, then of ignorance. For they had been often taught and instructed,
but they insolently rejected all admonitions. In which respect, they were much
less excusable then those to whom the Prophets were not sent. For as no man
alive can pretend any cause of ignorance; No man can pretend ignorance.
so yet the Jews much less, and those to whom the word of the Lord has been
published: who for this cause shall have a sharper sentence of condemnation
pronounced against them then, and shall be more severely punished then any
other.

He sets down the means of this call; namely, that he had exhorted them by
his Prophets. For by the clause, I spoke; he repeates one and the same thing
twice, according to the custom of the Hebrews, as we noted before.

To hearken to the Lord, is to obey his word: for it were to little purpose to
lend an ear, unless we follow that which the word propounds unto us. For
otherwise, what difference is between us and the Ass, who wags his ears? God
will be heard with the heart, Prou. 23.26. As for a fained audience, he utterly
reiects it. Now he shows the cause why they would not come at his call; surely
they stopped their ears against wholesome doctrine. For the beginning of
obedience, is to bring with us a desire to learn.

Before mine eyes, is as much to say, as before my face: which phrase of
speech, he used a little before. Every man sins before the eyes of the Lord,
neither can any avoid his presence. But it is properly said that we sin
before his eyes, Who is said to sin in Gods eyes.
when being called by him, we stand not in awe of his sacred presence: for he
is nearest to those whom he calls by his Prophets: yea, to such it may be
said, that he shows himself visibly. Therefore so much the more detestable is
their impiety, and worthy of the more stripes, who as it were with whorish
foreheads despise God, who in such familiar manner summons and calls them unto
him.

Now by the latter end of the verse it appears that the Jews are not
condemned for any enormous sins; but chiefly in respect of their new found
devotions, by which they corrupted the service of God. For albeit they were
forward enough in hunting after their forged sacrifices, thinking thereby to
obtain Gods favor; yet himself pronounces that he abhorres all such
endeavors; because there is nothing but pollution therein. It is not permitted
to every one then to follow that which seems good in his own eyes; We must
not follow that in Gods service which seems good in our eyes.
but we must have an eye to that which God approues of, and not turn therfrom,
no not an hairs breadth. Well, we see that this vice has not reigned in one
age only, namely, that men have followed their fond appetites; and have
worshipped their own inventions in stead of God: when the question has been
touching his pure service. But how great delight soever men take herein, sure
it is the Lord protests that he contemnes and abhorres it.

Verse. 13. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat,
and ye shall be hungry: Behold, my servants shall drink, and ye shall be
thirsty: Behold, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed.

14. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of mind.


Hypocrites distinguished from the faithful.
THe Prophet here distinguishes (yet more clearly) hypocrites which hold a
place in the Church only, from his true and lawful children. For though all
will needs take unto them the title of Gods children, yet he shows that many
were to be chased out of the house; and that those who proudly insulted over
Gods people, should be frustrated of their hope, because it was vain and
false. And we are to note well the remarkable opposition, which is here put
between Gods servants, and those that falsely glory in his name. For he
shows that their vain titles, their boasting, and false persuasions should
stand them in no stead. These words, they shall eat and drink, signify
felicity, and a prosperous estate in this present life. For it is as if he had
promised to have such care over the faithful, that they should want nothing.

hungry, and thirsty, whilst the wicked ouerflow in all sorts of good
things, and abuse them to excess and riot? I answer, Note.
But because it is not expedient that the faithful should fix their hopes
upon earthly commodities, it is enough for them that they take only some
little taste of them, the better to uphold their faith. And if it so fall out,
that they be now and then pressed with wants, yet by feeling the benefit of
contentation with a little, they cease not for all that still to acknowledge
God for their father, and to taste of his liberality. Nay, The faithful
richer in their poverty, then the greatest Kings in their superfluity.
shall I say more; even in their very poverty they are oftentimes richer
indeed then Kings, and great Lords of the earth.

But although the wicked enjoy never so much, yet are they the only miserable
people in the world; because they cannot enjoy their wealth with a good
conscience. The Prophet therefore has respect to the right use of Gods gifts.
For such as serve him purely, receive from him as children from the hand of
their father, all things needful for this life present. But the rest as
usurpers and thieves take whatsoever they possess by stealth and robbery. No
riches nor abundance can satisfy the wicked: No ^iches can satisfy a wicked
man.
they are always in distrust, and trembling: their consciences will never give
them rest. The Lord you see then promises no more here then he truly
performs; neither must we judge of this felicity by outward appearances.

This will be better perceived by the words following, where he speaks of
rejoicing and giving thanks. For no doubt the Prophets meaning is to say, that
contentment consists not in the inioying of abundance, Contentment consists not
in abundance.
but in tranquillity, peace and gladness of mind, because all things are
unsavory to the unfaithful. But the godly take more pleasure in the feeling
of Gods fatherly love, then in all the pleasures of the world. Our chief
felicity.
In the mean while we are to note, that we must wait for all felicity from
God only, who will not permit any of his to want any thing that appertains to
the blessed life.

Verse. 15. And ye shall leave your names as a curse unto my chosen: for the
Lord God shall slay you, and call his servants by another name.
HE prosecuteth the same doctrine, He prosecutes the same matter still.
and shows that God in the end, will separate the hypocrites from his true
servants. Truly, we are not to marvel that the Prophet insists thus long upon
this point: for there is nothing more difficult to be beaten into the heads of
hypocrites, who being puffed up with pride, deceive and beguile themselves.

Now he says, they shall leave their name as a curse, in regard that they held
themselves to be the holy posterity: and that there was none under heaven but
they, worthy of that title. To that also appartaines the verb, To leave: as if
he should say, that their vain arrogancy, to which they were so much
addicted, should be violently plucked away from them. And therefore to the end
they should beware how they pleased themselves in a temporal and transitory
reioicing, the Lord blunts the edge of this their ouerweening, and says, they
shall leave their names as a curse to other servants that he shall have. So as
this example should be solemnly taken up as a common proverb; A fearful
proverb.
God so curse thee, as he has done the Jews.

Shall call by another name.] He refels the ouerweening of thi^ nation, who
thought God should have no more people remaining, if the children of Abraham
were gone. For he protests that he will adopt unto himself a new people, and
that he is not so tied to the Jews, but he will easily find out others,
whom he will adorn with the name of his people.

Whereas some by the word other, understand the name of Christian, it is too
much constrained: and it appears by the circumstance of the place, that the
Prophet had another drift. For, in as much as the Jews proudly bragged of the
antiquity of their name, and thereupon grew insolent, because God had of old
elected them; as if forsooth he could not be without them; therefore he
promises that the Lord will choose and adopt another people. And yet should
they have no cause given them thereby to accuse him either of inconstancy, or
variableness; as if he had changed counsel. Nay, he will rather execute his
decrees and just judgments against all those, who under a false pretense of
his name, do darken his glory, and corrupt all piety.

Verse. 16. He that shall bless himself in the earth, shall bless himself
in the true God; and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the true
God: for the former troubles are forgotten, and shall surely hide themselves.
THe whole world is here opposed to this litttle corner of Iudeah, The whole
world opposed to Iudeah.
where Gods service was in a manner included and shut up. But since God has
manifested himself unto all: he is not now served in any particular region,
but in every place alike. Which Christ also himself teaches, in John 4.21.
saying; The hour is come, and now is, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
nor in Jerusalem, worship the Father. And Saint Paul wills that men in every
place do lift up pure hands unto heaven, without wrath or doubting: 1. Tim.
2.8. He opposes the word, Earth, here then, which signifies all the world,
unto the land of Iudeah.

To bless and swear, is taken for the whole service of God. Swearing is one
branch of this service, as we have seen in Chap. 19.18. and 48.1. For thereby
we leave all judgment unto God, and acknowledge him the true witness of
whatsoever is done or spoken. We are said to bless, when we look for all
prosperity from his hand, and give him thanks after we have received the
same. In a word, when we acknowledge that all benefits flow in unto us from his
mere liberality.

By the true God.] That is to say, by him who is faithful in his promises,
and steadfast in his counsel. Though I deny not but there may be a close
opposition understood between the true God, and the false gods of the Gentiles.

The troubles are forgotten and past.] This promise appertains only to the
faithful. Gods meaning is, that he will put an end to the anguishes and
afflictions, that the Church might know her calamities should not endure for
ever. Now this promise began to take effect, when the people returned from
Babylon: for howsoever they were troubled as well in the way, as in their
Country, yet their afflictions were never so sharp, but God kept a measure in
them, because at their return home, the reedifying of the Temple, and the
restoring of the politic estate, assuaged the sorrow, and cheered up their
hearts in good hope, until the coming of Christ.

Verse. 17. For lo, I will create new heavens, and a new earth: and the former
shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.
BY these similitudes he promises a notable change. A notable change promised.
As if God should have said; I have both will and power to restore my Church;
yea, and that in such wise, that she shall seem to have recovered new forces,
and have an habitation in a new world. These are excessive manners of speeches.
But the excellency of this benefit, which should be offered at the coming of
Christ, could not otherwise be expressed. Neither does the Prophet mean this
alone of Christ's first coming, but of the whole course of his kingdom,
until his last appearing: as we have often said in other places. The world
therefore you see, is created anew (as you would say) by Christ: The world
created anew by the coming of Christ.
for which cause also the Apostle calls it the new world: Heb. 2.5. Neither
is it to be doubted but he alludes to this text. Notwithstanding the Prophet
speaks here of the restoration of the Church, after their return out of
Babylon. This I grant to be true: but yet this restoration is imperfect,
unless it be extended unto Christ: we are but in our course thitherward as
yet; neither shall these things be fully accomplished, until the last
resurrection, which is as it were the utmost bounds and limits of this course.

Where he says, that the former things shall be no more called to mind: some
refere it to heaven and earth. As if he should say; Hereafter there shall be
no more news of these creatures. But I had rather refer it to the former
time: for his meaning is, that the joy of being restored, shall be so great,
that they shall utterly forget their miseries. Unless any had rather refer
it to those benefits which were worthy of memory, and yet were forgotten when
Gods grace appeared. And in this sense the Prophet says, in Chap. 43.18.
Remember ye not the former things? Not that God would have the faithful to
forget their deliverance; but in regard that the one compared with the other,
Simile.
did darken it, as the Sun does the brightness of the stars.

Let us remember then that these things are fulfilled in us, as often as we be
regenerated: but we are regenerated only in part, Our regeneration only in
part.
and therefore as yet we cannot attain the sight of this new heaven and new
earth. What marvel is it then if we sigh and mourn, seeing we have not yet
utterly put off the old man, but many remainders of sin do still stick fast
This renument must begin at us, who hold the first rank: for the creatures in
regard of our offenses, groan, and are subject to vanity, as Saint Paul
speaks, Romans 8.20. But after Hence we may gather that which we have often
mentioned; namely, that the Prophet has an eye to the whole kingdom of
Christ, even unto the end thereof: which for this effects sake, is called the
day of restoration and refreshing, Act. 3.19.21.

Verse. 18. But be you glad, and rejoice for ever in the thing that I shall
create: for behold, I will create Jerusalem as a reioicing, and her people as a
joy.
An exhortatation to rejoice, added by way of amplificatio^.
He exhorts the faithful to rejoice with condign joy, for so excellent a
benefit of God. And this was added for amplifications sake; because men never
esteem of the graces of God, according to their worth, amongst the which, this
here mentioned is the chief and most excellent; for they prize them at a very
low rate. It is needful therefore that the faithful should be rouzed and
quickened up by such exhortations as these, to the end they should show
themselves neither unthankful, nor forgetful: as also that they should not
lightly pass over this benefit; namely, that being redeemed by the hand of
Christ, they might bear the remembrance thereof in their hearts, as the
earnest penny of eternal life. This is the cause why Isaiah teaches that the
deliverance is not acknowledged with such thankfulness as is meet, unless
the faithful continue on their joy the whole course of their lives, exercising
themselves in singing the praises of God.

Whereas Jerusalem is called gladness, and the people thereof reioicing; it
may seem somewhat harsh at the first blush: yet we may thence gather a good
exposition, namely, that in the deliverance of the Church, there shall be such
cause of joy, that it shall abolish all matter of sorrow. And surely when our
miseries themselves do tend to our salvation, we have therein no small
occasion given us of reioicing.

Verse. 19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice
of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.
THe Prophet expresses somewhat more then in the former verse. A lively
desc^iption of that great love which ^od bears us.
For in this his meaning is to say, that the Lord will not only give matter of
reioicing, but also that himself shall be partaker with them in this joy. For
so great is his love to us, that he takes no less pleasure in our prosperity,
then if he himself inioied the same with us. By which, our faith ought to be
much confirmed, namely, when we hear that God bears us such an ardent love.
Are we afflicted or scattered? He says, that this grieves and troubles him.
Contrariwise,

Verse. 20. There shall be no more there a child of years, nor an old man,
that has not filled his days: for he that shall be an hundred years old,
shall die as a young man: but the sinner being an hundred years old, shall
be accursed.
SOme think the difference between the Law and the Gospel, is here noted
out, What blessings belong to them that are in the kingdom of Christ, in his
and in the rest of the verses following.
because the Law is as a schoolmaster, who held his scholars under the first
rudiments; but the Gospel brings us to a perfect age. Others understand it,
that there should be no more any difference of age: for where eternal life
is, there needs no dispute about youth or age. But thus I expound the Prophets
words; Be they young or old, they shall come to a perfect age; so as they shall
evermore be strong, even as in the flower of youth: yea, they shall be always
lusty and strong: for we wax old and feeble by reason of our sins. When
thou art angry, says Moses, Psalm. 90.9, 10. all our days are gone as a tale
that is told. The time of our life is threescore years and ten: and if they
be of more strength, fourscore years; yet is their strength but labor and
sorrow: for it passes away suddenly, Our life passes like the shadow, but in
Christ we have stabilitie.
and we flee away. But Christ is come to strengthen us, and to uphold us in a
perfect estate.

Yet we must distinguish between the two members. For after he has said, that
the Citizens of the Church shall live long, so as none of them shall be taken
out of the world, till they be full of days, nor till they have finished
their perfect course: he therewithal adds, they shall be strong even in age
it self. Now howsoever the greater part of the faithful are hardly able to
endure in respect of their weakness, and that others of them grow feeble
before the time; yet is this no vain promise. For if Christ did truly and
fully reign in us; it is certain that his strength would flourish in us, and
would fortify both our bodies and souls. Let us then thank our own
corruptions, that we are subject to so many sicknesses, The cause of
languishing sickness, and untimely death in our selves.
sorrows, to age and other encumbrances. Why so? Because we will not suffer
Christ quietly to reign in us. As also for that we have not so fructified in
newness of life, as utterly to have put off the old man.

From this place also let us note, that corporal and spiritual blessings are
only to be found in the kingdom of Christ: Corporal and spiritual
blessings only found in Christ's Church.
that is to say, in the Church. For out of it, there is nothing but
accursednesse. Nothing but accursednesse out of the Church.
Whence it follows that all such as are out of this kingdom, are most
miserable. And albeit, they seem lusty and strong: yet are they nothing in
Gods account but rotten and loathsome carions.

Verse. 21. And they shall build houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

22. They shall not build, and another inhabit: they shall not plant, and
another eat: for as the days of the tree are the days of my people, and mine
elect shall Or, shall continue the work, etc.
in old age enjoy the work of their hands.


IN these two verses he puts them in mind of the blessings contained in the
law; namely, that such as served God should inhabit the houses they had built,
and should eat the fruits of their trees: Leuit. 20.10. As on the contrary,
the rebellious should be driven out of their houses to give place unto
strangers: neither should they gather the fruit which they had planted: Deuteronomy.
28.30. From this curse (says Isaiah) shall the Lord deliver you, to the end
you may enjoy your substance. Now thc Prophet sets before them the things
appertaining to this life present: and from thence borrowes similitudes,
thereby teaching us how to ascend up higher, and to apprehend and lay hold of
the blessed and endless life. For we must not stick fast glued to these
transitory things: but rather use them as steps and stairs to scale the
heavens, Temporal blessings ought to be as ladders, by which we may ascend
to the enjoying of eternal benefits.
that being rapt up thither, we may possess the eternal and immortal
benefits. It is also good reason that the enjoying of these blessings, whereof
the unbelievers deprived themselves, should be promised to the regenerated
Church; which rested wholly upon the only free favor and good pleasure of her
God.

Where it is added, According to the days of a tree; some think eternal life
should be here promised: as if men should then enjoy the tree of life. But this
device is utterly frivolous and too far remote from the Prophets meaning.
Neither can I sufficiently marvel at the expositors, who vex themselves so
much about the interpretation of this place; seeing our Prophet speaks not
only of life, but of the quiet estate thereof also. As if he should say; You
shall plant vines, and live of the fruit of them; neither shall you depart out
of this world, till you have enjoyed them; both you and your childrens children.

He takes a similitude from a tree, in respect that before he had spoken of
planting of vines. Therefore he now promises, they shall peaceably enjoy
their houses and vines, without being any more annoied, either by enemies or
thieves. So as this tranquillity should be no less durable, then the life of
a tree.

The work is continued, or is made perpetual, when it has good success;
otherwise, men should travel a long time for nothing, if God did not bless
their labor; because the enemy would rob or spoil that which men have begun:
so as they should not be able to enjoy the fruits of their hands. The work is
continued therefore, not only when it has some good progress; but when it
is come to perfection. Hence let us note, that we cannot so much as enjoy our
goods nor have any true rest, No true rest to them that are out of Christ's
kingdom.
unless we be in the kingdom of Christ (who is the only heir of the world)
and stand ingrafted (by faith) in his body. I grant, the wicked may enjoy the
benefits of this life present: but therewithal they shall be in continual
anguish, and the worm of an evil conscience shall continually gnaw them: so
as even their very abundance shall be their bane and destruction. For only
faith causes us to apprehend the things which belong to the blessed life:
those then that are destitute of faith, can be no members of Christ. Those
that are destitute of faith, no members of Christ.


Verse. 23. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth in fear: for they
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their Or, offspring.
buds with them.
THe Prophet reckons up here other kinds of blessings which God promises to
the Kingdom of Christ. For albeit, God had continued to bless his people
always, yet were those blessings after a sort withheld till Christ's coming,
in whom there was to be seen full and perfect felicity. The sum is, that both
Jews and Gentiles should be every way happy under the kingdom of Christ.
Now as it is a sign of Gods wrath and curse when we receive no fruit at all of
our labor: so on the contrary, it is a testimony of his blessing when we
enjoy the fruits of our travels. For this cause he shows how the Jews being
returned home from their captivity, to enjoy a true and full deliverance,
shall not labor in vain; neither shall their works be fuitlesse. The law
threatnes the death of friends, wars, loss of goods, and anguish of mind:
Leuit. 26.22. Deuteronomy. 28.65. But God here on the contrary promises
tranquillity, fertility, peace, and the fruit of our labors. These blessings
are well to be noted: for there are few to be found, who in taking pains, fix
their eyes upon Gods blessing, Few fix their eyes (whilst they labor) upon
Gods blessing.
so as to attribute all things unto him: or to be persuaded that they do but
labor in vain, unless the Lord give good success thereunto: Psalm.

Some expound that which follows, That the women shall not bring forth in
fear: and that they were not to fear bearing of children; in regard they
should feel no pains therein. We know this punishment was inflicted upon the
woman, because of her sin: namely, that she should bring forth in sorrow;
and should be in danger of death: Genesis 3.16. Children are also begotten with
fear and trembling, when there are any rumors of wars: and it is more likely
that the Prophet alluded to this, to wit, that there should be such
tranquillity, that men and women should have no cause of fear at all. For
these words must be referred to fathers and mothers; who are fearelesse, in
respect of their children in time of peace; which they cannot but fear, when
any calamity threatens us.

The reason that is added, That they shall be the seed which the Lord has
blessed, agrees very well. For whence arise fears, terrors, Whence fears and
terrors arise.
and disquietnes of men, but from Gods curse? when this curse then shall be
removed, the Prophet has good cause to affirm that the fathers, with their
offspring, shall be freed from fears and distractions; because being in Gods
favor, they shall be always so secured from fears and dangers, that they
shall dwell in safety.

And their offspring with them.] This is contrary to the privation of
children, which is reckoned up amongst the curses of God, in Leuit. 16.22. And
it is as much as if he had said, I will no more bereave them of the children
they have begotten; but will cause them (with the rest of other benefits which
I will bestow upon them) to enjoy their children also.

Verse. 24. Yea before they call I will answer, and whiles they speak I will
hear.
SEe here a (most) precious promise. A precious promise.
For what thing is more desirable then to have God favorable unto us, and that
we may with boldness have access unto him? Surely, it is not possible we
should be any way miserable, as long as it is free for us to have our recourse
unto the Lord, though we should be environed with infinite thousands of
miseries and calamities. The Lord here promises us then, that we shall not
put up our suites to him in vain. Prayer, the most principal fruit of faith.
But yet our Prophet confirms this point more and more: hear them: yea,
before they cry. This promise principally belongs to Christ's kingdom, by
whom we are heard, and have access unto God the Father, as S. Paul clearly
teaches in Ephesians. 3.12. I grant the Prophets had the same access: neither could
their prayers have any entrance, but for Christ's sake. But the gate which is
now made large, and set wide open unto us, was then narrow, and in a manner
closed up. For under the law, the people were wont to stay without in the
court: Luke 1 10. Nothing now hinders us from entering into the Sanctuary; Mat.
27.51.
because the veil of the temple is rent in twain. By Christ then we have
entrance into heaven; and may boldly, and with assurance draw near to the
throne of grace to obtain mercy and help in time of need. Heb 4.16.

But some may ask here, thus ready to grant his succors, neither do we
perceive any fruit of our prayers. I answer, Note.
to wait for the event and issue with patience. Neither deferres he, as if he
wanted time or leisure, as men often do: but rather thereby to exercise our
faith, and prove our patience. In a word, God may be said to hear two ways:
First, when he gives us help manifestly: Secondly, The reason why God
deferres to hear our prayers.
when he assists us inwardly by the secret power of his Spirit: so as we
continue steadfast and immovable, even in the midst of our afflictions. Were
this doctrine deeply settled and grounded in our minds, then should we with
more boldness and alacrity have our recourse to our God: neither would we
stand disputing the case touching the invocation of Saints, with so great
headstrongness and obstinacy. For whence is it that men have forged so many
patrons unto themselves, to whom they had rather go then to Christ; but because
they have not received this doctrine, and have rejected these noble and
excellent promises?

Verse. 25. The woolfe and the lamb shall feed together; and the lion shall
eat straw like the bullock: and to the serpent dust shall be his meat. They
shall no more hurt nor destroy in all mine holy mountain, says the Lord.
HIs meaning is, that all things shall be set in their perfect order, when
Christ shall reign; and as it seems here is a close opposition betwixt Adam
and Christ. For we know that all the miseries of this life present, have flowed
into us from the sin of the first man: for then were we deprived of the rule
and authority which God had given man over all the creatures, which before
willingly submitted themselves unto man, and obeyed his commandments: Genesis
1.28. But now the greater part of them rise up against him; yea, and assail
him with open force. When we see wolves, bears, lions, and other wild beasts
to hurt men; and other beasts which serve him, and that those also which should
bring him in profit, harms him, this we must impute to our own sin, who by
our disobedience have overthrown the order of these things.

But seeing it is Christ's office to bring all things into their right order and
perfect estate again, It belongs to Christ to restore all things to their
right order, which by our sins are now out of order.
therefore the Prophet shows that the confusion or scattering which is now to
be perceived in the things of this world, shall be taken away at his coming;
because all corruptions shall then be abolished, and the world shall return to
his first shape. The lion shall live without doing harm, and shall not rore
after his pray. The serpent shall content it self with the dust; and shall
couch close within the earth; without annoying any by his venomous sting. To be
short, whatsoever is out of course and disordered, shall then be set into a
right frame.

And it is not to be doubted, but our Prophet alludes unto cruel and blood
thirsty men, whose wild and furious natures shall be tamed, when they shall
bow down their necks to bear the yoke of Christ. But first of all we are well
to consider what confusion is happened to all creatures, by the sin of man.
For if we have not an eye to that, we cannot rightly judge as we ought of the
excellency of this restoration. We are also to call to mind that which we
have said before in the eleventh Chapter, touching these allegories.

Here we see then what men are before the Lord has converted and changed
their hearts, What men are, being not converted.
and received them into his fold, even vvild and furious beasts; who then, and
not before, abstain from doing evil, when the Lord by the power of his
Spirit, has subdued their cruel and hurtful natures. He adds, in his holy
mountain; because all things that offend, being purged away, the Lord will
gather unto himself a Church, without spot or vvrinckle, Ephesians. 5. For under
the word All, he signifies a general purgation: yet we are not to wonder if
so many do still remain cruel and intractable; because there are but a very
few that are true inahbitants of Gods holy mountain: Few that rightly inhabit
Gods holy mountain.
very few that be faithful and sincere, no not amongst those that make
profession of Christianity. For seeing the old man still rules and reigns in
them, it must needs be that strifes and dissensions should also have their
full sway there.

THE LXVI. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Thus says the Lord; The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footestoole: where is that house that ye will build unto me? And where is
that place of my rest?
THis sermon is different from the former. In the first four verses he directs
his speech to the hypocrites.
For the Prophet inueighs here vehemently against the Jews, who being puffed
up with a vain confidence of their sacrifices, and of the Temple, were iocund
and merry: and under this pretense pleased themselves in their sins. But he
shows that this security of theirs was not only vain and foolish, but
execrable and devilish. Why so? Because such as endeavor to serve God, and to
appease him with outward ceremonies, do grossly flout him to his face. He
therefore reprocheth them that they went about to forge unto themselves an Idol
in stead of God, when they fixed him thus to his Temple. Afterward he
discourses of the Churches renewing, and of the spreading thereof thorowout the
whole world.

Besides, minding to gall such to the quick, as served God by halues, and in
hypocrisy; he begins at the description of his nature. For in assigning unto
God the heavens for his dwelling place, his meaning is to say, that his
Majesty fills all things, and is present every where; neither can he be shut
up, nor circumscribed within any place whatsoever: so far is it off, that they
can include him within the Temple. The Scriptures often affirm that God is in
heaven; not that he should be shut up there, but to raise up our minds far
above the world, lest we should imagine ought of him that were co^temptible or
earthly: for the only aspect of the heavens ought to raise up our minds
higher, and to ravish us into an admiration. And yet he testifies in infinite
places, that he is present with us: that his power is manifested every where,
to the end we should not think it to be enclosed within the heavens. It
seems this was no hard matter to be believed; and that all then confessed as
much. For who among them was ignorant, that Gods Majesty filled both heaven
and earth? Thus they might object Isaiah, thou art angry, and inueighest
against us without cause. Neither is it to be doubted but the people insolently
rejected this doctrine of the Prophet, and were sharply incensed against him,
a^ if he had offered them great wrong. But the answer up their prayers and
sacrifices there. The Prophet shows that we must not measure Gods Majesty by
such an elle; as also, that whatsoever we offer him without the purity of the
heart, is nothing else but vanity. Whatsoever is offered to God, without the
purity of the heart, mere vanity.
For seeing by Gods dwelling in the heavens, it is evident that he is of a
spiritual nature; if his service be not answerable thereunto, it must needs
be corrupt and wicked.

Under the word house, he comprehends all the ceremonies wherein they thought
Gods service consisted. And for as much as they judged of God and of his
service, according to the outward face of the Temple, the Prophet shows, that
it was unworthy the Majesty of so great a Lord, to fix him to a visible and
perishable building. He disputes not here simply about the essence of God, but
therewithal of his true worship, showing that it is spiritual; that so it
may be answerable to Gods nature, Gods worship must be answerable to Gods
nature.
who is a Spirit: John 4.24. For if men did seriously consider what God is,
then would they not forge unto themselves so many bastard kinds of religion;
neither would they measure his infinite greatness according to their shallow
capacities. This common and known sentence therefore has more weight and
efficacy in it, then if the Prophet had spoken unto them of some new matter.
For thus he shows that they were so sottish and senseless, that they were
ignorant of that which was familiarly known to the simplest idiot. As also,
that they rather resembled beasts then men, in imagining that God was set, or
should repose himself in the Temple. By way of contempt, then he asks, where
is this place? For it is not fit that God should dwell upon earth, or be shut
up as within a prison. The Temple also was built upon a little hill, which
little space was unable to comprehend Gods glory: 1. King. 8.27.

That place of my rest.] And yet the Lord had said of the Temple, in Ps. 132.8.
Behold this is my rest, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. And
in 2. Chron. 6.41. Arise O Lord, and enter into thy rest. Moreover, we have
seen before, in Chap. 11.10. that Gods rest in the Temple should be glorious.
In a word, the very name of the Temple was honorable. Why then does the
Prophet now reject it? I answer, Gods rest, because he there showed
testimonies of his presence. For he had chosen this place to be called upon
therein, in which also he manifested evident signs of his power and might. But
he caused it not to be built, that men should therefore believe touching his
Majesty, whatsoever seemed good in their eyes: but rather, that being
admonished of Gods presence, by the visible ceremonies, they might from thence
lift up their hearts into heaven, acknowledging the Lord to be greater and more
excellent then all the world. And yet men being of their own natures inclined
to superstitions; the means which were given the Jews for their help,
proved lets and hindrances unto them by their own fault. So far were they
off then from mounting up to heaven by them through faith, that they kept their
minds groueling here below, and made themselves believe that God was bound
and tied unto them: for which cause they served him by halfes, yea, they toied
with him at their pleasure.

Saint Stephen S. Stephen.
alleges this place to very good purpose, in Act. 7.48. And the Apostle
Paul Saint Paul.
closly applies it to the sense that we have touched, Act. 17.24. For both of
them show, that such grossly deceive themselves, who bring carnal rites unto
God; as if his service and true religion consisted therein: as also those who
wickedly deface his glory, by setting up Idols and Images. For Saint Stephen
Jews, who being fixed to the shadows of the Law, neglected true godliness.
And Saint Paul speaking to the Gentiles, denies that God dwells in Temples made
with hands.

Verse. 2. For all these things has mine hand made, and all these things have
Or, had a beginning.
been, says the Lord: and to him will I look, even to him that is poor, and
of a contrite spirit, and trembles rt my word.
THe Prophet refutes the false opinion which men conceived of Gods service, in
regard they thought that sacrifices and external ceremonies auailed very much
of themselves. For this is the state of the question, namely, that God contents
not himself

Where he says, that he has made all things; it must not only be referred to
the Temple, but to whatsoever was there offered unto God. Now he speaks
expressly of his making of them, to teach men that he has no need of this
external service. As in Psalm. 50.10. he protests that all beasts are his
creatures, and by right belong to him: and yet (forsooth) the Jews would needs
pacify him by sacrificing of them. But see here the disease which is rooted
in the hearts of the superstitious sort, namely, that they transform God into
what Image they list, though himself has ordained an outward worship; not
for his own profit, but for ours, God ordains his worship not for his own
profit, but for ours.
that so we might be exercised therein, according to the reach of our
capacities.

The word beginning, is as much as if he had said; You ought not to compare me
unto those things which heretofore have begun to be, seeing I am eternal,
and without any beginning. I have little need then of your sacrifices, says
the Lord, who was before them. What good, I pray you, then can they do me? In
a word, he contends, that ceremonies are nothing worth in themselves, but
belong to another end. Isaiah also holds it for a thing out of question, that
God can receive no increases: whence it follows, that he only contents
himself with himself, seeing from all eternity he never stood in need of
the worlds help.

A true definition of Gods service.
In the next place the definition of the true worship is added. For in saying
that God regardes the humble, I doubt not but the Prophet here privily
opposes the humble, and contrite in spirit, to that pomp, bravery and
glistering show of ceremonies, which are wont to dazzle men's eyes, and to ravish
them out of themselves. The Lord testifies then, that he rather requires
humble and broken hearts, which tremble at his commandment. Under which words,
he notes out the inward purity of the heart, and a true hunger and thirst
after righteousness: and therewithal also teaches us how we ought to be
prepared to become acceptable unto God.

trembling, it might seem strange at the first, that the Prophet should
require this of the faithful; seeing nothing is more sweet and acceptable,
then the word of the Lord: neither any thing more contrary unto it then
trembling. I answer, Two sorts of trembling.
With one of them those are smitten who flee and hate the Lord: with the other
they are touched and made obedient, who reverence and fear him. I am not
ignorant that some refer this member to the law, which threatens, terrifies
and denounces the horrible judgments of God against sinners. But I take it
more generally, in regard that the faithful themselves tremble at the
promises, A trembling at the promises.
when they receive them in humility. Hence let us gather, that true piety
consists Wherein true piety consists.
in having all our senses framed according to the obedience of God, without
attributing any thing to our selves through pride or vain glory. For it is
the nature of faith The nature of faith.
to yield obedience to God: and to hear him speak, attentively and
patiently. But no sooner does any vain opinion of our own worth puff us up
with pride and loftiness of mind: but we are forthwith destitute of all
godliness and fear of God; because if we attribute unto our selves never so
little; so much the more do we contemn and despise him.

And it is diligently to be observed that he says, that tremble at my word:
for many will brag of their honoring and fearing of God; who yet show
themselves contemners of his Majesty, in that they set light by his word. All
our reverence which we profess to owe unto God, must be manifested by
tre^bling at his word: in which he will be acknowledged, as in his lively
image. The sum is, that God preferres this sacrifice before all others; namely,
when the faithful are so humbled in the true denial of themselves, that they
think themselves nothing, yea and are content to be brought to nothing also in
Gods sight. In which sense it is said: Psalm. 51.17. That a contrite spirit is
an acceptable sacrifice unto God. A broken and a contrite heart O God (says
the Prophet) thou will not despise. Now because this modesty of faith, brings
forth teachablenesse in us; therefore the study of godliness is also added:
that having cast down al our pride and rebellion, we may begin to tremble at ye
word of God.

From these words we have to gather a singular consolation; A singular
consolation.
namely, that albeit we seem to be miserable in this our humility and low
estate; yea, and that we be thought unworthy the looking on: yet cease we not
for all that to be happy; because it pleases the Lord to behold us with a
gracious aspect. When we are solicited then to despair, let us think: surely
the Lord is wont even by this means to raise up his children unto heaven,
howsoeuet being here for a time brought even to ye gates of hell, they seem to
be overwhelmed under the weight of the burden.

Verse. 3. He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that
sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he
blessed an Idol: yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
deliteth in their abominations.
THis present verse contains two members. In the first, Jsaiah plainly
manifests, reiects all the sacrifices of his nation, yea, which more is, that
he abhorred them. In the second, he notes out an horrible the ceremonies of the
Gentiles, among the sacrifices of the law: and by this means had perverted and
corrupted all. Many think that by these words, the sacrifices ordained in the
law are abolished. But they deceive themselves; because Jsaiah handles that
doctrine now, which he touched before in the first, and in the fifty eight
chapters. But Jsaiah does not precisely condemn the sacrifices, but rather the
vices and corruptions which were mingled with them; God condemns not the
sacrifices, but the corruptions mingled therewith.
namely, in that the Jews thought that God contented himself with vain
appearances: and themselves in the mean while neglected his fear, and the
having of a good conscience. He speaks not of the thing it self then, but
taxes the persons who abused the sacrifices. For in thus doing, they offered
him no better then the empty shells. His meaning briefly is to say, That God
approoues of none other sacrifices, but such as proceed from a pure heart and
a sincere affection.

In the mean while it is very likely the Prophet alludes to those horrible and
monstrous sacrifices of the Gentiles. For they sacrificed men alive: or buried
them quick in the earth. And the Romans, who thought themselves more devout
then others; yea, and the Jews also, abstained not from so horrible and
execrable a crime. Nay, which more is, these men in their inconsiderate zeal
defiled themselves with the murdering of many children: thinking therein
forsooth to imitate their father Abraham: Genesis 22.10. And Isaiah therefore
says, that in sacrificing an ox, it was al one, as if they had cut a man's
throat. And thus he shows that albeit the Jews had a religion apart by
themselves, and such a one as was ordained by God; yet were they esteemed no
better then the profane heathen, among whom all things were filthy and
unclean. Also, that God approved no more of the one, then of the other, in
regard his name was no less profaned by their hyprocrisie, then by the
superstitions Gods name no less profaned by hypocrisy, then by superstition.
of the Gentiles. But in another place we have showed how needful this
admonition was. For though the Jews were sufficiently convinced of all manner
of abominations, yet they judged themselves in good case as long as they might
lie lurking under this couerture. The Prophet therefore meets with them in
their turnings, and affirms that they shall gain no more by thinking thus to
pacify God, then if they offered up unto him the sacrilegious abominations of
the heathen.

When in the end of the verse he says, yea, or, in truth; the place may be
translated two ways: because ye relative may agree as well to the Gentiles, as
to the Jews, namely, that the Jews had mingled and entangled themselves in
the idolatries of the Gentiles: or that they followed theit own inventions.
The first exposition is not much amiss, were it not constrained; for he spoke
not of the Gentiles before. And the height of the Jews impiety consisted in
this, that besides the abuse of Gods pure worship, and contempt of the law,
they had profaned the Temple, and all other places with wicked and cursed
superstitions. They set up Altars, they planted groves, they set forth plays,
and sights: so as they walked after every thing that was set up to corrupt
their minds. Thus there was a mingle mangle of all superstions between them
and the heathen: such as is at this day to be seen in the papacy: Where we
behold many fragments patched together of all sorts of superstitions, not only
Jewish and heathinesse, Popish superstitions, Jewish, Heathenish, and devilish.
but also newly invented by the devil himself: that by means thereof they
might under such goodly shows, the more easily cosen and deceive the world.

The Prophet then meant to say, that both themselves and their companions
deserved double condemnation; because whilst they gloried in the name of God,
and made profession of his service, they were not ashamed to pollute the same
with the sacrileges of idolatrous nations.

The other exposition is not obscure: and it also suits well; namely, that the
Jews were addicted to follow the vanity of their own inventions; and so
followed their abominations. And thus he affirms, that such serve not God with
a pure affection, who at their pleasure despise him. Not only in respect that
they are stuffed full of avarice, hatred, ambition, guile, cruelty and
robberies: but in regard that by their inventions, they had corrupted Gods
service. And albeit the relative ought to be understood of the Jews: yet the
Prophet therewithal condemns all the superstitions which they had borrowed
from profane nations. Thus there is no great difference in respect of the
thing it self. For he only teaches that whatsoever proceeded from them was
filthy and abominable, because they had malepertly, and rebelliously shaken
off Gods yoke: so as impiety reigned among them in every place. Simile.
For how can those rivers be pure and clean, which receive nothing but mier
and dirt from an impure fountain?

Their choice and desire did more manifestly discover their obstinacy; for
having wittingly cast Gods commandments behind their backs, they applied
their minds unto things utterly contrary thereunto: as if of set purpose they
had determined to reject whatsoever proceeded from God, that they might yield
obedience to their own perverse lusts.

Verse. 4. Therefore will I choose out their delusions, and I will bring their
fear upon them, because I called, and none would answer: I spoke, and they
would not hear: but they did evil in my sight, and chose the things that I
would not.
THe Prophet meant to say that the Jews should gain nothing by seeking out
goodly pretenses, and starting holes; because God cannot be deluded by the
fained and colored words of men. For what reason is it indeed, that we
should measure God according to our blind reason? neither is it meet he should
stand to man's arbitrament: but we must judge of his works by his word. Gods
works must be judged of by his word.


J will choose out.] That is to say, I will so disperse the fogges and mists
which they labor to spread abroad, that all shall be able to discern of the
illusions. They seem now to steal away in their dark, but a time will come,
wherein they shall be laid open as at noone day. The sum The sum.
is, that in regard the Jews were addicted to such a licentiousness,

Under the word fear, he repeates one and the same thing according to ye
custom of the Hebrews, thus; I will cause them to know that they have erred in
such wise, that that which they feared, shall fall upon their own heads.
Whereby you see that their turnings and windings should stand them in no stead,
in confounding the truth with lies; or to cloak their superstitions: and all
because the Lord has skill enough to separate the one from the other.

For J have called.] The Prophet does again condemn the obstinacy of the
Jews: who could not abide that the Lord should correct them. There is but on
only remedy left to tame our vices; But one remedy left to tame our vices.
that is, to hearken unto God speaking, when he labors to bring us into the
right way. But if we harden our hearts (against this remedy) then are we past
cure. Are men so audacious then as to prize their inventions above the
commandments of God? Surely, then do they openly scorn him, to whose will
they ought to be subject. But this yet is more damnable, namely, when there
was so great hardness of heart, that the gate was shut up against al holy
admonitions. In vain therefore did they boast, that their new found devotions
were of any value, to make their service acceptable unto God; because he
reiects and abhorres all that, which men choose and follow, when they have cast
his word behind their backs.

Isaiah also repeates that which he had said before; namely, that the Jews had
sinned in Gods presence: as if they had wittingly determined to provoke the
eyes of his glory to wrath. But withal he adds the means whereby they
effected it; to wit, in respect that of a perverse desire, they chose to
embrace that which God had forbidden them. Neither is it for nothing that he
thus often taxes the unmeasurable insolency of men, who defrauding God of his
right, care not a button for any thing he approues of.

Verse. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his word. Your
brethren that hated you, and Or, drove you behind them.
cast you out for my names sake, said; Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall
appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.
Here he tu^nes him again to the godly.
Now he directs his speech to the true servants of God, and promises them a
thing which they could hardly expect in these so sharp afflictions. And he
speaks in particular unto them, in regard many at that time bragged fasly of
Gods name. Yea, turning himself from the multitude, he preaches to a small
handful: as has bin showed in Chap. 8. Seal up the Law, and bind up the
testimony among my Disciples. Now by this mark he shows, that Gods true and
lawful children are those that tremble at Gods word: which is a rare virtue
indeed. He therefore opposes i^ to their fained profession, who after they
were circumcised, would needs be held for Gods people, and outwardly made
great shows of holiness; that we might understand, that such only fear and
reverence God, who honor and reverence his word: Such only fear God, as
reverence his word.
that is to say, who being touched to the quick with Gods voice, do subject
all their senses under his obedience: for this is no small testimony of piety
and godliness.

Besides, in as much as hypocrites are wont to cast a wonderful goodly varnish
over their glorious ceremonies, the Prophets intent is, to arm and fortify
the faithful, that they might be able to bear such assaults, lest they should
faint when they should be mocked and abused. As if he should say; You have not
only to fight against strange nations, but also against home enemies, who hold
a place in the Church, and who are your brethren, in respect of that covenant,
which is common to you all. If they scorn your simplicity, in the same sort
as they have proudly despised the Lord himself, you must constantly and
courageously resist this temptation.

Brethren, enemies both to the word, and to the godly that profess it*
He calls them brethren then, who notwithstanding were enemies, both to the
faithful, and to the word of the Lord. For he attributes this name unto them
by way of yielding or granting it unto them; who yet usurped this title falsely.
Whence we gather, that it is no new plague wherewith the Church has bin
pestered; namely, that the enemies, who bear the name of brethren, should be
nourished up in her lap. Hence arises that perpetual conflict which we
must needs have with hypocrites, who cannot endure that we should serve God
in purity and sincerity of conscience.

Who cast you out.] Word for word it is; Who drove you behind them. As we see
how the Pope thunders Popes thunderings.
against us horribly, as if we were most abominable and wretched people. And
thus the hypocrites reject the little flock of the faithful. The multitude
rejects the tlitle flock,
For when they once get a head, and see themselves the stronger in multitude,
authority, and power, then do they exercise such tyranny, that all things
are allowed or disallowed, as they list, and cause the faithful not only to
be disgraced and despised, but they ouerwhelme them with their great
multitude, as the chafe does the good corn, yea, they proudly trample them
under their feet.

Let the Lord be glorified.] Some translate; The Lord is severe: but let us
examine whether of the two expositions suits best. Those who turn it, He is
severe; think that the wicked complain, as if God dealt too severely in that
he spared not his people, and handled them over rigorously. They therefore
think that by this language the people were solicited to despair: for when
the wicked go about to turn us from God, they labor to pluck from us all
hope and assurance of our salvation. But I rather rest in the second
exposition, which also is most received and approved of; to wit, that the
wicked do here scorn both the promises and prophecies, because this glory
which the Prophets do so often mention, did not appear. As if they should say;
Let the Lord show some sign of his glory, that we may boldly rest upon it.
And therefore the Prophet meant to arm the faithful against such a
blasphemy, that they should not suffer their faith to be shaken by the flouts
and mockes of the wicked.

This place also may be taken in this sense, namely, that the wicked promised
themselves wonders and mountains, as if by their good deeds they had merited
Gods favor. Which Amos, in Chap. 5.18. reprocheth the Jews withal; to wit,
that they persuaded themselves God would be merciful unto them, whilst they
obstinately provoked the Lord. In as much then as under pretext of their
sacrifices, they despised all threatenings, and yet made their brags, as if God
would aid them; the Prophet answers, that they shall see the glory of God, but
after another manner then they expected. In a word, it is all one as if he had
said; The Lord at his coming will cause the faithful to know, that their hope
was not vain. For he would appear with favor to the good: but to their
shame and destruction, who affirmed that he would come to maintain their
impiety, whereof he is the enemy and auenger. The one sort should enjoy
gladness of heart and consolation: but the others, shame and confusion. For
they should speedily taste of Gods vengeance, at which they now jest.

Verse. 6. A voice sounds from the City, even a voice from the Temple, the
voice of the Lord that recompenceth his enemies fully.
He confirms the former sentence, A confirmation of the former sentence.
namely, that God has not threatened in vain, that he will quickly come to
punish the hypocrites, that the faithful may with the more cheerfulness of
heart, wait for this promised joy. But all the difficulty is, to know of what
enemies he speaks: for we may understand this place of the Babylonians, by
whose ruin God delivered his Church. It may also be applied to the other
enemies, who were entertained in the bosom of the Church. And I rather incline
to this latter sense, though I deny not but it may be understood of all sorts
of enemies. But he respects the home enemies, of whom he has hitherunto
spoken, who rejected the voice of God, sounding continually by the ministry of
the Prophets. Well, says he, It shall come to pass that you shall hear a
more horrible voice. And yet he forthwith mitigates his speech, lest this
terror should discourage the servants of God.

The sum The sum.
is, that the wicked rejoice in vain, when they oppose their rebellions
against Gods judgments. Why so? Because they shall not escape his hand. Nay,
which more is, his voice shall sound from that Temple, wherein they put such
carnal confidence; and that the faithful shall then receive the fruit of
their patience. Would to God that we at this day did not perceive the like
contempt among the rout of hypocrites, who care neither for admonitio^s nor
threatenings at all: neither bear they any reverence to Gods word. In stead of
that sweet and still voice which they now hear, we are constrained to preach
the voice of fear and tumult, which one day shall ring in their ears; but it
shall be from ye mouths of such masters, as shall be of a clean contrary
disposition. For seeing the world is so audacious, as with a sacrilegious
contempt to reject Gods word, it shall be constrained not only to hear, but
also to feel an armed voice: that is to say, fire and blood.

Verse. 7. Before she travailed, she brought forth: and before her pain
came, she was delivered of a man child.
God prouides for the safety of his children, whilst he chastiieth the wicked.
THe Prophet having before comforted the faithful, to the end the arrogancy
and pride of their enemies (with which they should be afflicted) might not
astonish them: and after that having commanded them to wait constantly till the
coming of the Lord; now he adds therewithal, that the wicked shall be so
punished, that yet God in the mean while will provide for the safety of his
chosen. Neither speaks he only of some one or two men, but of the whole
Church, which he compares to a woman: which similitude he has used
heretofore. For the Lords special meaning is, to gathet us into a body,
wherein we may have the testimony of our adoption: as also to acknowledge him
for our father, and that we may be nourished up in the Church, as in the lap of
our mother. This similitude therefore of a mother is very apt: for it signifies
that the Church shall be so resto^ed, that she shall have a large and ample
offspring, though for a time she was reputed for a widow and barren. And he
repeates the sentence again, which he used heretofore: but now he
expresses somewhat more, namely, that this work of God shall be sudden and
unexpected. For he withdrawes the faithful from all carnal conceits, that
they should not judge of the restoration of the Church according to humane
reason.

Women are wont to bear their children the space of nine months in their
wombes: then at last they bring them forth with great pain: but the Lord has
another way in begetting of his children. It shall come to pass, says he,
that the fruit shall come into the world, before it can be either perceived, or
felt by any pain. And that is the cause also why he attributes the whole
praise thereof unto himself, in regard that such a miracle far surpasses
all the industry of man.

Now he speaks especially of a man child, to set forth the courage and
agilitie of these children. For his meaning hereby is, that such a race shall
be of a noble kind, and not delicate or effeminate. As we also know that the
faithful are so regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, that they finish their
course with an invincible courage. And in this sense Saint Paul says, that
they have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, etc. Romans 8.15.

Verse. 8. Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the
earth be brought forth in one day? Or shall a nation be borne at once? For as
soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth children.
HE extols the greatness of this work, whereof he spoke in the former verse. For
his meaning is, that the restoration of the Church shall be admirable, and
extraordinary, in such wise that the faithful shall confess the whole work
has proceeded from Gods mere grace, and not from the order or course of
nature. For when men think of this, they are like to them that dream, as it
is said in Psalm. 126.1. Moreover, his meaning is not that the restoration of
the Church, shall be perfected by and by. For the aduancements thereof are
tedious and diverse, yea very slow in the judgment of our flesh; but he shows
that the beginning it self surmounts ye reach of al men's capacities. And yet
he speaks not excessiuely neither. For we often see that the Church brings
forth, when she was not judged to be with child before. Nay, which more is,
whilst she is thought to be barren, she is made fruitful by the preaching
of the Gospel; in such wise, that we admire at the thing after it is come to
pass, in respect it seemed incredible to us before.

These things were in part accomplished when the people returned out of
Babylon. But we have a much more evident proof of it in the Gospel; after the
publishing whereof, what an infinite number of children has there been borne
in the Church? And have not we in our times seen the accomplishment of this
prophecy? For since thirty years past that the Gospel has been preached,
how many children has the Church borne? Has not the Lord now troops of them
dispersed throughout the world? Nothing was here foretold then, which we see
not at this day fulfilled even with our eyes.

Now he sets forth the glory of this miracle by a similitude. For what people
or nation came there ever into the world all at an instant? For men are
gathered and increased by little and little. But it is far otherwise with the
Church; who forthwith brings forth and replenisheth many places with great
numbers of her children. The sum The sum.
is, that God will work so powerfully, yt by an extraordinary manner, the
Church shall have an infinite number of children in an instant. The word earth,
may be taken for any country, or for the inhabitants of it.

Verse. 9. Shall I cause to travel, and not bring forth? shall I cause to
bring forth, and shall be barren, says thy God.
Gods power ought not to be called into question.
EVen as in the former verse the Prophet has highly magnified the work of God:
so now he also shows that it is not to be thought impossible; neither ought
any to call his power into question, seeing it far surmounts all the whole
order of nature. For if we consider who it is that speaks, and how easy a
matter it is for him to perform that which he has promised, we shall not be
so incredulous; but that we shall forthwith remember that the restoration of
the whole world is in his hands, who in a moment can create a hundred worlds,
if it please him. A little before by intermingling an admiration, he meant to
extol the greatness of the work: but now to the end the hearts of the
faithful should not be hindered nor depressed, he exhorts them to think well of
his power. And that he might the better persuade them that nothing is so
impossible with man, but it is easy with him, and by and by obeyes his
commandment; he propounds and sets before them the things which we see every
day by experience. For who perceiues not evidently his admirable power in
women's bearing of children? But will not the Lord trow ye show himself, much
more wonderful in the increasing and multiplying of his Church, which is the
most excellent theater of his glory? What a perverseness of mind is it then to
limit and restrain his power, or to think that he is less able when it
pleases him by himself alone to work without meaces, and as it were with an
outstretched arm, then when he uses natural means?

Verse. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love
her: rejoice for joy with her, al ye that mourn for her.
ISaiah promises an happy estate to those who wept and lamented before: Who
are fit to rejoice for the churches deliverance.
for he respects not his own time, in which he lived, but the captivity,
during which the faithful being oppressed and beaten down with sorrow, had
almost fainted. He therefore exhorts and prouokes all those who entirely love
the Church, and hold nothing more dear unto them then her salvation, to
rejoice. Hereby showing that no man has any part or portion in this so great a
benefit, unless such only as bear an holy love unto the Church, and are
thoroughly affected with a fervent desire of her deliverance: Yea, even then when
she is contemptible in the sight of the world, as it is said in Psalm. 102.
namely, That the Saints delight in the scattered stones of the Church, and that
they have pity on the dust thereof.

For this cause he adds, you that mourn for her. For in regard there was a
lamentable and an horrible scattering in the captivity, so as there was no
recovery at all to be expected; he rouzeth up the faithful, and commands
them to be of good courage; or at least. to prepare themselves to joy.

This exhortation contains also a promise and something more then that too:
For a bare promise would not have been of such efficacy: But, these things
must not be restrained to one time alone. We are rather to call to mind our
general rule, whereof we have so often spoken in this prophecy: namely, that
these promises must be extended from the return of the people, to the coming
of Christ; and so to the full accomplishment of all promises at his last
appearing.

Verse. 11. That you may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolation: that you may milk out, and be delighted with the brightness of
her glory.
THis verse must be joined with the former. Because the Prophet shows what
the occasion of this joy The occasion of the former joy.
shall be; namely, that the miserable and scattered estate of the Church,
shall in time turn to be happy and flourishing. By the word to suck, he
alludes to the actions of little infants. As if he should say, Jnioy your
mother, with all her good things, and hang continually at her breasts. Note
here that he compares all the faithful of what age soever unto little
children: The oldest in the church must resemble a little child.
to put them in mind of their infirmity and weakness, that so they might be
confirmed by the power of the Lord. This similitude therefore of milking and
sucking, is diligently to be observed.

Some take the word consolations, in the active signification, and others in
the passive. But I incline to them of the latter sort. For the Prophet means
such consolations, as the Church receives: and which she imparts unto her
children. And indeed what consolation is comparable unto this? For in what can
we find matter of more excellent or full contentment? which better appears in
the member following, where the delectation in the brightness of her glory is
added.

Verse. 12. For thus says the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace over her like a
flood, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye
suck. Ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be joyful upon her knees.
HE prosecutes the same similitude still, The former similitude prosecuted.
and compares Gods children unto little babes which are carried in arms, whom
the mothers cherish in their bosoms: with whom also they use to sport and
play. Now that the Lord might the better express to the full the great love he
bears us, In verse. 13.
he compares himself to mothers, who are wont to surpass all others in
kindness to their children, as we noted in Chap. 49.15. The Lord then will
needs be our mother, as it were, that he may show himself to be tender over
us, (as if he dandled us in his lap: in stead of those troubles, outrages,
miseries, and anguishes which we have sustained.

By peace, he means felicity: and in the word glory, there is a repetition,
under which is comprehended all sorts of riches: so as they should want nothing
appertaining to a full and perfect peace. For in as much as the Gentiles lived
sumptuously before, floods which flow into the sea.

By the continual course, is meant a perpetuity. For God being in himself a
fountain that can never be drawn dry: his peace must needs differ very much
from that of the world; which is in a moment dried up, and vanishes away. As
often then as we behold the woeful and lamentable estate of the Church, let us
call to mind these sweet promises; and remember that they belong no less unto
us then they did unto that people. And seeing God has floods of peace in
store, which he will power forth upon his Church: let us not be discomforted,
no, not in the midst of the greatest and sharpest assaults. But rather let us
sing, and be glad; when miseries and anguishes do most press us.

And whereas he delights in us as in children; and not as in men of a ripe
age, let us willingly acknowledge our condition to be such; that so we may
gladly accept of these consolations. For doubtless it is a sign of Gods
infinite goodness toward us, when he is thus pleased to support our
infirmities.

Verse. 13. As one whom his mother comforts, so will I comfort you, and ye
shall be comforted in Jerusalem:

14. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall
flourish like an Herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known among his
servants, and his indignation against his enemies.


IT is wonderful to see how long the Prophet insists upon this renouation: The
first member of this verse is expounded before in verse. 12.
for it might seem that he had spoken fully of it before. But for as much as
he could not sufficiently express the great love and affection which God
bears us, nor content himself to have spoken of it, therefore it is that he
redoubles and repeates one and the same thing so often.

When he says, they shall be comforted in Jerusalem: it may be expounded two
ways. For the meaning may be, that the faithful shall be glad, when they
shall see the Church restord: or, the Church being restored, that she will
endeavor to comfort her children. The first exposition seems more copious: but
we ought to have an eye to the Prophets meaning, and not to that which carries
a fair show only. In the first place he makes God the author of this
consolation. And has comfort is not offered nor given to the profane
contemners, who care not what becomes of the Church, but to those who out of a
true affection of godliness do manifest themselus to be her children.

The verb to see, expresses a sure experience; that the faithful should not
doubt of the event: but fully embracing this prophecy, they might patiently
endure for a time their mothers barrenness.

He illustrates this by a similitude, when he says, that their bones should
receive new force and vigor, even as dead herbs wax green, after winter. Now
he speaks of the bones, which become withered with sorrow, as Solomon says:
Prou. 17.22. as on the contrary, Joy is wont to replenish and revive them.
Thus he notes out a vehement, and an incomparable joy: and it seems he alludes
to that sorrow which had almost dried up the bones of the faithful in
captivity; in so much that they were become withered, and like dead men. The
Lord therefore comforts them, and promises that his Church shall flourish and
abound in all blessings. Afterward, that he might give them better assurance,
he commands them to lift up their minds unto God, who will then manifest his
succor.

It is added afterward, that the hand of the Lord was not always revealed, but
remained covered for a time, as if he had been utterly careless of his chosen.
For in appearance, it seemed he had rejected them, seeing Daniel and other
good men were carried away captives, no less then Zedekias. When the Sun
should shine again upon them then, there should be manifested such a
difference between the godly and the wicked, that his hand which before was as
it were hidden, should now evidently appear, because he will no more
dissemble the matter, nor suffer the wicked any longer to take their full
swinge, but will openly show what great care he has over his Church. Have our
enemies gotten the start of us then, and have they made their part the
stronger, so as we seem for a time to be forsaken, and left destitute of all
help? a day will come, wherein the Lord will reveal himself, and will set
us free from under the tyra^nie and violence of the enemies.

Verse. 15. For behold the Lord will come with fire, and his charets like a
whirlewind, that he may recompense anger with wrath, and his indignation with a
flame of fire.
THe end of this description is, that when the faithful should see their
miseries to serve in stead of a may game to the wicked, whereat they would
laugh their fill: yet they should not therefore turn from the right way, nor
be discouraged. For the Prophet meant not only to gall the wicked, who are
wont to be daunted with no threatenings whatsoever, but scorn all that is told
them: but he therewithal comforts the faithful, to assure them that they
should be in good case, being under Gods protection: as also that they should
not join in league with the wicked, though all things fell out according to
their desires. Thus then it is to the faithful especially, to whom the Prophet
has respect, to the end they should content themselves with Gods grace and
protection. But it cannot well be affirmed, whether he here comprehends the
last judgment, with those temporal judgments wherewith the wicked begin
here to be punished withal. For mine own part, I nothing doubt, but this
judgment is comprehended with those punishments which are only forerunners of
eternal death.

The Lord will come.] This began to take effect at that time, in which the
people being carried into Babylon, God showed his vengeance upon the domestike
enemies of his coming; by which he showed himself present to his people, fire
to judge his enemies. Lastly, we know that he will come in flaming fire at
the last day, to revenge himself upon all the wicked: 2. These. 1.8. 2. Pet.
3.7. But this place must not be restrained to the last judgment, unless we
also comprehend the rest therewithal. Notwithstanding he opposes these
threatenings especially against the hypocrites, (as we shall see hereafter)
which were among the Jews.

Now these metaphors are much used in the Scriptures: for we cannot otherwise
comprehend this horrible judgment of God, unless the Prophet should use these
similitudes, taken from things in common use amongst us. The Prophets labor
thereby to touch our senses to the quick, that so being moved with the true
fear of God, we should not envy the estate of the wicked, for whom so
horrible and fearful a vengeance is prepared.

By this we may see how fond and unfruitful the speculations of the Sophisters
Fond speculations of Sophisters.
are, who stand to dispute about the quality and sharpness of this fire:
seeing the drift of the holy Ghost is under these borrowed speeches, to set
forth the horrible judgment of God: because otherwise we are not able to
imagine, nor comprehend the same. And this appears yet better by the word
sword, (which he uses in the next verse) for there is the same reason to be
given of it.

Verse. 16. For the Lord will judge with fire and with his sword, all flesh: and
the slain of the Lord shall be many.
He adds nothing different from the former, A confirmation of the former
denunciation.
but only confirms the former sentence; and shows, that this judgment shall
be terrible, lest any should think the matter he speaks of were of small
consequence. Thus then he amplifies this horror, the more to terrify the
wicked, as also to cause the godly to keep themselves in all purity and
integrity, by withdrawing themselves from the society of the godless. And
that therewithal they should also patiently bear the injuries and cruel
assaults of the enemies, until God showed himself with his revenging hand
from heaven, to execute his vengeance. Now he th^eatens the destruction of all
men, in such wise, that there should be great heaps of dead bodies. And this
he added expressly, in regard that impiety reigned in every place; and the
faithful were sharply assailed, in respect of the wickeds prosperity. For as
our minds are variable, so we suffer our selves to be carried away with bad
examples, and the multitude puts many toies in our heads, as if the same were
of sufficient force to withstand the hand of God. The Prophet corrects this
perverse fear of ours; for by how much the more impiety, and the great
troops of the wicked bears the sway, so much the more will Gods wrath be
inflamed to burn the hotter: so as the numbers and plots of the wicked, shall
not hinder the Lord from wrapping them also up in the same ruin.

Verse. 17. They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in gardens,
Or, in a fountain which is in the midst.
behind one tree, in the midst, eating swines flesh, and such abominations:
Or, and.
even the mouse shall be consumed together, says the Lord.
The persons noted, to whom this vengeance belonged.
NOw he notes out these enemies (as with his finger) against whom he said, Gods
ire should be inflamed. For it was hard to discern whether he spoke of
foreign and open enemies; or whether he directed his speech to the contemners
of God; who notwithstanding were mingled among the godly. And therefore he
taxes the false hearted Jews, which had revolted. And I doubt not by eating
of swines flesh.

sanctified themselves: that is, they smoothed over things under the pretext of
holiness: by which means they beguiled many.

They purified themselves in gardens.] That is, they polluted themselves with
diverse superstitions. And yet by such inventions, they thought to make
themselves the purer in

When he adds, by a garden which is in the midst: some expositors supply a
pond or fish poole; as if in the midst of the garden, there had been some holy
water put to wash in. But the other sense agrees also well, in regard yt as
every one had his god apart, so did he also choose out some one tree among
others.

Verse. 18. For I will visit their works and their imaginations: for it shall
come to pass, that I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come
and see my glory.
A confirmation of the former sentence.
He confirms that which he said in the former verse; namely, that all the
wicked should be punished, to the end that howsoever the Lord was content to
let them alone for a while to work their wills; yet should the faithful be
well assured to behold the day of their vengeance, and that this should be as
it were a pteseruatiue to let them from being carried away with the stream of
the multitude. The Lord testifies here, that he so sees and notes their
works, that it shall be manifested by the effects one day, that none could
flee from the regard of his eyes.

Some take it as if the wicked were able to do nothing without Gods
permission: which sentence is true in it self; but yet it suits not with this
place. And every one may see it to be far fetched, and wide from the Prophets
^eaning: for he only confirms that which he said before; to wit, that the
hypocrites and notorious offenders, should be punished at the last; because
God kept a register of all their imaginations, deliberations, and wicked
actions. So as they should gain nothing in the end by their shifts; as if it
were impossible to bring them to judgment.

Because the time is come.] We have here the confirmation of that which has
been said: for he shows that the time draws near, in which he will call
all nations together. and adopt them as one people unto himself, after he has
rejected the hypocrites, and the open wicked ones. The Jews were proudly
conceited of themselves, and contemned all nations besides, as vile and
profane. But the Lord protests here that he will adopt them, that they may
partake of his glory, whereof the Jews had made themselves unworthy.

Truly this is an excellent place, Paul discourses of at large, in Romans 10.19.
and 11.25. where he shows how we are grafted as into an empty stock, after
the Jews by their infidelity had been rejected. Isaiah threatens them now
with it: (as if he should say;) I would not have you so simple as to think
that God can want a people, seeing you forsake him, and thereby make your
selves unworthy of his grace. For there are others in the world besides you:
and in the mean while he will show himself to be your Judge, and will make
you feel at length that he cannot always suffer his patience to be abused.

And they shall come.] For being grafted in by faith, they shall come together
into the Church, with the true Jews, who had not forsaken the true adoption.
For the Jews being near unto God, it was needful that the Gentiles should be
made one with them, that so the discord being removed, they might be joined
into one body.

To see the glory of the Lord, is nothing else but to enjoy the grace which he
had showed unto the Jews. For this was one special privilege the Jews had,
namely, that they beheld Gods glory, and had with them the signs of his
presence. Now he says, that the nations which were deprived of such benefits,
should see and behold this glory, in regard the Lord was minded to manifest
himself unto all without exception.

Verse. 19. And I will set up a sign among them, and will send those that
escape of them, unto the rivers of Tarshish, Pull, and Lud; and to them that
draw the bow, to Tubal and Iauan, Isles a far off that have not heard my fame,
neither have seen my glory and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.
THis may be taken two ways; namely, An amplification of the former sentence.
either that God gives a sign; or; that he marks his with some privy token,
to the end they might escape safe and sound. The first exposition is most
received. But some childishly descant here upon the sign of the Cross: The
sign of the Cross.
others refer it to the preaching of the Gospel: and both of them, as I take
it, are wide from the mark. For he rather seems to allude to that which was
done at the going forth and deliverance of the people: as Moses describes it in
Exodus 12.12. And to that which is said in Revel. 7.4. namely, that the Lord
marked all such as should be saved, when his wrath should be powered out upon
the whole world: as those in Egypt escaped, whose door posts were marked with
the blood of the Passover. Thus he shows that none but the elect can escape
the wrath of God, upon whom this mark is stamped. In a word, the Prophet
amplifies that which has been already said, touching the fearful and
horrible judgment of God, which should light upon the wicked: for it should
consume all, if he marked not some. He promises then to reserve a small number
out of this general ruin of the whole people. This I take to be the true
meaning of our Prophet: according to which he said in Chap. 1.9. and 10.22.
that the Lord would reserve out of this general devouring flame, a little
remnant.

He adds, that some of these shall be his heralds, to magnify his name
among the Gentiles. And we know that the doctrine of salvation was published
far and wide, by the Ministry of a few silly men.

By Tarshish, he means Cilicia; and under that, comprehends all the coast of
the Mediterraneum sea, which lay opposite to the la^d of Iewrie. Others think
that this word signifies Africa, and Cappadocia: but I rather rest in the
former exposition. Some by Lud, understand Lybia: and others, Asia. And by
those that draw the bow, the Parthians; because they were good archers.

Under Tubal and Jauan, some understand Italy and Grecia: and by the Isles, he
signifies unknown regions. For under this word, the Jews comprehend all the
nations that lay beyond the sea: as we have noted before.

Which have not heard.] He means that the knowledge of God shall be spread
through the whole world: for the Greeks, Italians, Parthians, they of Cilicia,
and other nations knew nothing of the pure religion, nor of Gods true worship.
To be short, the whole world was wrapped in deep dungeons of darkness: and
therefore the Lord promises that his glory shall be known every where. But
there is great weight in the word Gentiles: for at that time the Lord was only
known of the Jews; but now he has manifested himself unto all.

Verse. 20. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the
Lord, out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in horselitters, and
upon mules, and swift beasts, to Jerusalem mine holy mountain, says the Lord,
as the children of Israel offer in a clean vessel in the house of the Lord.
Here he clearly expounds that which was said before; namely, An exposition
of the amplificatio^.
that all those which shall escape and survive the rest, shall be
(notwithstanding their small number) Priests unto God, and shall bring
sacrifices unto him from all parts. Now he alludes to the ancient ceremony of
the Law, though he therewithal shows the difference which should be between
these oblations, and the sacrifices ordained by the Law: for here he
institutes new sacrifices, and a new priesthood. And a^ he affirmed that all
nations should be gathered, verse. 18. so now he shows, that the Priests by him
established, shall not travail in vain, because the Lord will add a gracious
issue unto their labors.

He calls them brethren, who were strangers before: wherein he has respect
to that new conjunction which is made by faith. Others draw another sense from
this place, which I do not altogether reject; namely, that when God shall
gather a new people from among the Gentiles, then the Jews, who were scattered
here and there, should be gathered together again: which also came to pass.
But yet this seems to agree better, if we refer it to the vocation of the
Gentiles, in regard that the difference being the^ taken away, a brotherly
conjunction began to be between all those whom the Lord had purposed to
adopt unto himself for his children.

Abraham was the father of one nation, and yet all that descended from him
after the flesh, were not reputed his children: for the Ishmaelites and the
Idumeans were rejected. He was then a father of many nations, Genesis 17.5. when
God adopted and joined unto him by covenant the Gentiles; to the end they
should follow the faith of Abraham. Thus we see wherefore the Lord calls us
the brethren of the Jews; Gentiles become brethren of the Jews.
whereas before we were strangers and far remote from the Church of God: for
before he did cast out the false brethren and reprobates from their place.

We are to note this fruit which issues from the labors of such as endeavor
to serve the Lord faithfully; namely, that they thereby reclaim their brethren
from all pernicious errors, to bring them to God, who is the fountain of life.
And this consolation ought to cheer them up, and to fortify them even in the
midst of all the calamities and afflictions which are incident unto them. The
Lord will not suffer one of his to perish. Happy is our condition then, when
after a sort he makes us saviors of our brethren.

From all nations.] His meaning is, that there shall be no more difference
between Jew and Gentile: because God will break down the partition wall, and
will set up his Church in all nations. Thus was that saying of David in Psalm.
2.8. touching Christ, accomplished: Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost bounds of the earth for thy
possession.

In that he mentions the holy mountain: he applies himself to the custom of
those times. For God was worshipped in ye Temple at Jerusalem. But the Temple
has now spread it self over all the world, 1. Tim. 2.8.
in respect that it is lawful for all men in all places to lift up pure hands
unto God: so as all difference of place and persons is now removed and taken
away. He speaks also of the oblations, add sacrifices which were offered in
the temple: though the sacrifices which we are now to offer be much different
from those of that time. But it was requisite that ye Prophets should borrow
similitudes from things then commonly in use; as we have often said. Under the
Law, they offered brute beasts: but the Apostles and other Priests of Christ
have sacrificed reasonable men: and have offered them living sacrifices by the
preaching of the Gospel: Romans 15, 16.
Romans 15.16. The Apostle testifies that he performed this office by offering
up the Gentiles, through the sword of the Gospel: that they might be an
acceptable oblation unto God sanctified by the holy Ghost. It is no legal
Priesthood then: nor like to that of the Papists, which b^ (...) ^^^ching the
offering up of Christ. But* it is the Gospel, by which men are mortified; that
being renewed by the holy spirit, they may be offered up unto God. Besides,
every one offers up himself in vowing and dedicating themselves to Gods
service: and in yielding him sincere obedience, which is that reasonable
service whereof S. Paul speaks in Romans 12.1. Thus the end of our vocation is
here set before us: The end of our vocation.
namely, that all filthinesses being purged away, and being dead to our selves,
we may in the next place learn to love and follow holiness.

Some seek out allegories upon these words charets, and horses; and they
think the Prophet has used the verb shall bring, in regard the Gospel neither
constraines nor terrifies men, horses, charets, and litters, should not be
wanting unto them. For the Lord has many means at hand, to furnish his
servants withal, and to bring them to his purposed end. Furthermore, I deny
not, but the Gospel may be called a chariot, in regard it brings us to the
hope of eternal life: but yet me thinks the Prophet meant simply to say,
That no impediment should be able to withhold the Lord from gathering in his
Church. Also that he shall have means ready, that not one of the elect which
he was pleased to call, should faint in the mid way.

Verse. 21. And I will take of them for Priests, and for Leuits, says the Lord.
THe Prophet amplifies that which he has already said touching this
extraordinary grace of God. He has already showed that the Church of God
should be gathered out of all nations: so as in despite of all impediments and
difficulties that might be opposed, yet the nations far off should be brought
to the holy mountain. Now he passes on further, and teaches that the
Gentiles should be advanced to a sovereign degree of honor, besides their
adoption. It was much that they had attained unto already; to wit, that
profane people should be received in among the holy people: but now behold
here a thing more admirable, to see them exalted into so supreme a degree of
dignity. Hence we may perceive that the Priesthood under Christ, differs much
from that which was under the Law. For under it only one tribe was admitted to
offer sacrifices: Exodus 28.1. The Gentiles were rejected as unclean, Great
difference between the Priesthood under Christ, and that under the law.
neither durst they once enter into the Temple: so far was it off that they
might be permitted to be Priests. But now all are indifferently received.

Some expound this place generally, That the Gentiles shall be Priests: that is
to say, shall offer themselves to God; for so the scriptures in many places
calls all by the name of a royal Priesthood: Exodus 19.6. 1. Pet. 2.9. Reu.
1.6. and 5.10. Yet it seems he should especially note out the Ministers and
teachers here, whom God should chose out from among the Gentiles; and ordain
them to execute that noble and excellent office: namely to preach the Gospel.
As for example, Luke, Timothy, and the rest, who offered unto God by the
Gospel spiritual sacrifices.

Verse. 22. For as the new heavens, and the new earth which I will make, shall
remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your name continue.
Here he promises that the Church shall be so restored, that it shall endure
for ever: for many might fear that she would be laid waste the second time.
Her estate then shall be perpetual, after God shall have once again restored
her: for which cause, he mentions two excellent benefits; to wit, restoration,
and eternity.

When he speaks of the new heavens, and new earth, he has respect unto
Christ's kingdom, by whom all things are renewed: as the Apostle shows in Heb.
8.8.13. Now this renume^t has this end; namely, that the church might continue
always in her happy and flourishing estate: for that which is old, tends to
ruin; but things which are new made and renewed, are to last long.

God had promised that as long as the Sun and Moon should remain in the
heavens, The promise recorded in Psalm. 89.36.37. really confirmed by Christ.
they should be witnesses of the eternal succession of David's posterity,
which should never fail: Psalm. 89.36, 37. But in respect that by the
disloyalty and vnthankfulness^ of this people which came between, there was
some interruption: the restoration wrought by Christ has really confirmed
this prophecy. Jsaiah therefore rightly affirms that their sons, and their
sons sons should succeed. And as God has established the world, that it
should never perish: so shall the succession of the Church be perpetual, that
it shall endure from age to age. To what this renument ought chi^fly to be
referred.
In a word, he explanes that which he had said before touching the renewing of
the world: lest any man should think he referres this to tres, beasts, or to
the course of the stars: for it ought rather to be applied to the renument of
the inward man. The ancient fathers have missed the mark, whilst they
imagined that these things appertained precisely to the last judgment, and
have neither weighed the scope of the text, nor the Apostles authority. And
yet I deny not but we may extend these things to the last day, because we
cannot expect the perfect restoration of all things, until Christ, who is
the life of the world, shall appear^. But we must begin higher, namely, at
this deuerance, by which Christ regenerates his, that they may be new
creatures: as it is in 2. Cor. 7.1.

Verse. 23. And from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, shall all
flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord.
THe Prophet shows again what difference there should be between Gods
spiritual worship, such as it should be under the kingdom of Christ; and
the carnal, which was under the Law. Every month in the new Moon they
sacrificed; then there were Sabbaths, and other feasts, and solemn days
appointed, which they carefully kept. But under the kingdom of Christ, there
shall be a perpetual and continual solemnity. For there is no more any
certain days assigned to sacrifice this or that in Jerusalem, verse. 19. But
our feasts, offerings, and days of reioicing, have a continual course from
day to day. In the mean while, he alludes to the ancient custom of the
sacrifices: and we have seen in many places heretofore, that these phrases of
speech are very familiar with the Prophets. Thus then God would have us to
offer him sacrifices in righteousness daily: not at set times only, nor such
as were offered under the Law, or according to theirs among the Papists, who
now fondly rest in their ceremonies, as if their sins were abolished by such
baggage; where with a desperate shamelessness, they dare brag that they
sarifice Christ himself. What sacrifices God requires of us.
But of us God requires spiritual sacrifices: that is to say, that we honor
and worship him with a pure and sincere worship.

Whereas some would prove from this place, that the Law and ancient ceremonies
are abolished; me thinks it has but little ground. I grant that these legal
ceremonies are abolished, and it may be so collected from this place: but were
I to prove this point, I would choose out other testimonies of greater weight.
For he makes here an opposition only between the Sabbaths, and feast days,
which they solemnized under the Law, and that perpetual Sabbath which is now
celebrated.

Verse. 24. And they shall go forth, and look upon the carkases of men that
have transgressed against me^: for their worm shall not die, neither shall
their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.
We need not seek out here any far fetched interpretations. For in plain
terms he admonishes those which should be gathered into the Church, that
round about them, they shall behold the fearful vengeance of God. His meaning
is not that these calamities shall break in among^^ the troop of the
^^ithfull; for it should much lessen the felicity of the Church* upon which
God manifests all sorts of testimonies of joy and gladness. But, as formerly
he has spoken of that perpetual glory wherewith God will beautify his
chosen; so now he shows what punishments the wicked shall endure, that the
faithful might be the more careful to hold themselves in the fear of God.

Whereas he threatens them to be tormented with fire; I have told you
heretofore, that this is a figurative kind of speech, which also clearly
appears by the other part of this verse: for there shall come no worms out
of the earth, to gnaw the hearts of the unbelievers. The plain meaning is
then, that men's evil consciences shall play the tormentors to vex them
continually, and that a more fearful torment is prepared for them, then all
torments (in the world) besides. In a word, that they shall be affrighted, and
cruelly disquieted, after an horrible manner: as if a worm should lie gnawing
at the heart of a man: or as if a fire should ever burn him, and yet they
should never die. Now in respect that the wicked are here advanced to great
honors, from whence they scorn the godly, and trample them under their feet:
therefore the Prophet denounces against them, a terrible change, namely, that
they shall be inwrapped with extreme ignominy, with unspeakable torments.
For it is good reason that such as have contemned and scorned Gods glory,
should be covered over with all reproaches, and made obominabe both to Angels,
and to all the world.

Now unto God only wise, be honor, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
FINIS.
A Table of such places as are alleged in this Commentary, out of the old and
new Testament. The first numbers direct to the places alleged: the second, to
the Chapter and Verse in the Prophecy, where they are to be found.
GENESIS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 1 43 13 45 12 2 45 18 41 29 48 13 7
45 12 26 6 8 27 17 7 30 23 28 65 25 2 9 38 7 15 45 12 51 3 19 34 16 3 5 14 14 6
43 27 16 65 23 17 24 6 18 Ibid. 22 16 3 23 51 3 4 7 59 12 11 26 21 13 26 11 26
43 22 6 5 22 13 42 25 7 12 24 17 15 34 16 9 9 45 18 11 55 9 13 38 7 21 10 11 23
13 11 5 63 19 7 Ibid. 29 19 21 31 37 12 41 2 44 7 12 3 14 30 49 24 7 41 2 17 14
27 29 22 34 16 41 2 4 13 18 41 2 14 6 21 2 15 41 2 16 29 22 41 4 17 41 5 15 1
25 9 1 37 23 5 45 25 51 1 55 3 56 3 13 48 3 14 45 4 16 2 51 1 17 1 23 18 58 2 5
51 1 66 20 7 14 32 37 23 41 45 25 55 3 8 63 18 18 21 34 5 3 9 20 6 8 63 19 23
65 8 19 24 1 9 13 19 26 11 34 9 37 15 1 20 2 22 21 3 14 17 34 16 38 4 41 2 14
29 22 16 4 1 18 41 4 21 10 4 1 22 1 6 8 2 57 5 10 37 38 66 3 12 57 5 16 57 5 17
10 22 48 19 56 3 51 1 61 9 18 42 6 60 3 23 6 41 2 25 1 19 21 13 21 11 22 4 1 25
44 2 27 30 26 11 28 19 30 20 65 11 32 10 26 12 30 28 1 3 48 1 36 8 11 14 34 5 6
31 37 13 6 8 39 5 65 8 46 6 52 4 47 30 38 16 48 4 8 21 63 18 16 4 1 EXODUS
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 11 45 7 14 10 24 2 11 51 8 23 45 7 3 6 8 14
38 10 8 32 13 12 37 30 14 47 8 15 55 3 17 32 13 4 22 14 2 43 4 5 3 52 12 7 13
26 10 20 43 19 8 15 2 17 28 16 27 52 12 9 21 2 17 34 2 17 10 22 43 19 50 3 12 3
38 7 13 66 19 29 73 36 43 16 23 4 5 31 52 12 51 11 11 42 24 48 8 13 9 43 16 21
4 5 16 3 38 7 49 10 14 4 33 21 4 43 21 21 11 15 23 11 43 16 50 2 51 15 22 55 12
27 52 4 28 10 26 43 1 29 17 16 44 27 63 13 15 1 51 16 35 49 10 17 2 63 10 6 48
21 49 10 18 21 32 1 19 6 1 9 11 17 7 1 21 41 8 14 43 14 61 1 66 21 19 20 2 3 20
1 25 9 2 43 18 4 36 10 5 10 15 42 8 5 14 21 8 58 13 24 45 13 37 26 56 7 22 22 1
17 27 10 2 23 8 1 23 5 23 25 17 6 2 38 15 27 1 17 8 28 1 66 21 29 13 53 10 24
60 6 30 25 43 24 31 12 56 2 15 56 2 32 13 64 8 32 4 3 33 1 55 3 9 6 4 34 6 9 19
28 21 30 13 7 14 21 30 29 12 LEVIT. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 4 4 53 10 6
13 2 7 8 29 60 6 10 1 6 7 11 7 65 4 18 5 53 11 19 17 1 11 23 39 54 2 25 20 61 2
26 3 30 23 34 16 8 17 9 10 65 22 11 66 1 12 24 5 16 24 6 22 65 23 26 3 1 36 In
the preface. NVMB. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 11 1 63 10 12 6 1 1 14 14 16
3 15 38 57 8 20 3 63 10 12 43 27 21 8 38 7 9 11 10 23 10 38 10 19 26 19 23 3 2
24 23 29 19 33 55 14 28 DEVT. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 2 33 17 2 4 7 5
13 12 40 18 33 50 2 37 41 8 5 32 30 21 5 9 14 21 6 3 32 13 5 1 11 65 10 8 49 16
9 57 8 13 19 18 3 7 41 9 8 63 9 9 5 41 9 10 12 1 4 11 11 30 20 20 57 8 12 13 1
29 18 9 3 62 9 13 3 57 11 14 8 65 4 16 19 1 23 5 23 17 16 2 7 19 17 30 1 20 30
21 18 10 30 21 11 8 19 44 25 65 4 15 41 27 17 In the preface. 24 1 50 1 28 11 1
19 15 24 6 25 3 12 28 18 22 22 2 43 28 30 65 22 39 17 10 33 62 8 37 19 17 43 28
48 65 23 62 30 17 64 16 4 65 65 23 66 In the preface. 67 21 12 29 4 63 17 30 3
43 5 4 In the pref. 11 12 12 30 16 48 17 55 10 19 48 17 53 11 32 1 1 2 5 1 34 1
4 24 16 26 7 9 19 24 11 31 5 46 3 63 9 13 49 11 15 5 2 44 2 63 8 21 55 6 27 48
11 29 27 11 48 18 30 17 9 42 24 IOSHV. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 3 16 11
16 43 16 50 2 55 12 10 10 28 21 13 30 26 23 2 29 22 43 27 IVDGES. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 6 17 7 12 38 7 36 38 7 37 7 12 7 16 9 4 19 9 4 22 49 26 25 10
26 13 22 6 5 1. SAM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 4 1 1 1 3 15 1 1 4 11 26 2
9 9 1 1 21 6 10 10 48 14 25 12 1 12 29 38 3 65 4 11 16 11 11 1 24 4 7 20 2.
SAM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 5 20 28 21 25 28 21 7 12 9 7 10 27 22 22
55 3 62 12 13 29 1 14 9 6 37 35 64 8 24 14 27 7 1. KING. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 2 22 15 2 10 38 10 4 25 62 8 5 1 23 12 8 27 42 22 30 6 1 33 56 7
10 21 61 9 27 61 9 11 7 15 2 16 12 11 9 1 14 45 7 36 7 2 12 28 22 23 17 1 38 7
19 11 2 22 18 45 23 20 23 14 25 22 21 19 14 41 13 2. KING. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 3 5 16 1 6 16 1 10 27 30 40 15 5 6 1 16 2 32 1 5 7 1 9 7 16 11 8 2
17 1 7 16 18 4 36 1 10 11 9 1 37 12 14 33 7 36 2 17 7 3 20 1 27 7 3 20 1 37 22
15 19 2 22 15 12 37 12 28 43 3 35 14 25 22 3 30 25 31 8 20 8 38 7 22 11 30 26
21 13 28 17 34 11 23 10 30 33 1. CHRO. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 14 11 28
21 2. CHRO. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. ISAIAH. 26 21 6 1 30 5 36 1 32 31 39 1
EZRA. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 3 8 58 12 6 8 45 14 NEHEM. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 2 8 45 14 HESTER. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 4 3 6 3 7
10 22 17 JOB. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 1 59 15 5 13 31 2 47 10 7 1 16
14 14 38 15 9 15 38 15 12 18 11 5 22 21 45 1 13 15 26 8 24 38 15 14 5 38 5 6 16
14 26 12 51 15 29 37 38 15 PSALM. ISAIAH. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 5 37 7 41 16 2 1
54 15 7 42 7 7 9 6 8 42 7 66 20 9 42 3 10 49 23 60 16 11 49 23 60 16 5 9 45 13
6 4 38 13 24 16 7 38 3 7 9 38 3 10 24 6 15 10 1 16 33 11 59 5 18 45 8 9 16 59 5
11 7 14 5 24 16 12 7 45 19 14 1 40 27 3 53 6 15 1 11 9 2 48 2 5 57 6 17 3 38 3
18 2 38 9 8 48 21 10 63 19 26 24 4 27 13 9 14 29 19 5 28 10 9 6 10 11 66 2 22
10 44 24 11 46 3.4 18 38 13 19 50 4 27 45 13 23 4 26 8 24 3 11 9 4 48 2 25 3 54
4 27 1 38 9 8 38 11 30 6 64 4 7 38 17 10 38 10 31 20 30 26 55 1 32 6 55 6 9 30
28 33 3 42 10 9 48 13 11 14 27 10 22 9 22 33 2 34 11 33 16 17 14 20 36 7 30 23
37 1 26 14 45 16 3 44 20 5 26 7 63 16 15 33 11 38 4 38 13 39 2 3 10 10 38 2 15
40 7 50 5 41 2 16 4 42 3 38 11 45 8 11 2 13 1 8 46 5 8 7 45 13 6 33 21 45.13,
13 10 32 18 47 3 48 13 48 2 14 13 49 15 50 9 50 10 66 2 13 1 11 14 34 7 15 38 4
43 22 56 15 23 12 2 56 7 51 17 35 5 19 66 2 53 4 53 6 55 22 11 8 56 7 60 9 57 7
33 11 58 11 41 15 59 11 40 6 62 10 40 17 63 2 55 2 63 4 26 1 65 2 29 23 4 45 24
66 12 43 2 68 19 53 12 69 10 22 4 71 9 46 4 72 3 45 8 73 1 60 21 3 38 10 13 13
13 17 24 16 26 14 74 1 14 1 9 40 15 77 2 25 6 26 10 42 1 45 14 48 13 54 5 78 28
57 16 39 2 22 57 16 70 11 1 79 2 14 18 12 65 6 80 9 3 13 5 1 81 6 33 19 82 1 3
13 14 6 14 10 83 14 9 18 10 3 84 11 45 8 12 4 2 86 4 51 9 87 7 44 5 89 5 12 27
19 1 26 11 14 37 29 1 38 5 66 22 38 38 5 66 22 90 4 43 19 5 46 5 9 65 20 10 23
15 65 20 91 11 26 7 37 36 62 6 93 1 54 10 94 17 6 5 95 8 30 8 96 1 42 10 4 36
18 19 97 2 6 4 99 5 60 13 101 5 2 11 102 15 66 10 19 29 23 51 18 24 53 18 27 51
6 8 29 37 26 51 8 54 10 103 5 40 31 11 55 8 12 38 17 13 57 16 14 57 16 15 40 6
57 16 64 5 17 51 8 104 2 40 22 3 19 1 23 5 11 29 2 22 30 32 15 40 7 44 3 4 105
14 41 2 4 107 33 45 18 110 3 1 7 6 42 3 112 6 14 20 9 32 8 114 3 43 20 4 43 20
55 12 115 3 66 1 8 41 29 17 38 18 116 10 26 19 12 24 15 15 26 21 16 4 1 118 8
31 3 18 21 17 22 8 14 119 103 66 2 105 6 10 24 39 3 120 5 63 18 121 4 5 27 6 4
6 123 2 7 1 125 3 63 17 126 1 49 7 66 8 5 25 8 30 19 127 2 71 11 47 13 57 9 5 3
4 48 19 128 2 17 11 62 9 129 3 51 23 6 37 27 8 37 27 130 3 33 16 132 1 63 17 7
60 13 8 66 1 11 22 22 14 11 10 29 1 30 4 37 10 26 35 45 13 66 1 137 4 26 1 5 33
20 6 52 1 8 1 8 9 13 18 138 6 57 15 8 22 11 16 12 46 4 139 7 24 21 141 2 37 4
142 6 12 3 44 3 55 2 144 15 51 21 145 8 9 10 10 1 15 146 3 31 3 4 31 3 147 2 56
8 60 4 4 40 16 9 26 7 20 19 24 PROVE. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 7 19 11
27 11 33 6 9 10 33 6 10 1 29 22 7 14 20 14 13 51 11 16 59 15 16 1 26 7 12 22 23
17 22 76 13 21 30 8 9 25 5 22 23 29 18 3 4 30 19 9 14 ECCLES. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 8 11 2 11 24 16 28 24 10 12 5 11 IEREM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 5 49 1 6 6 11 10 47 1 18 50 7 2 11 44 14 21 3 13 5 1 3 1 30 1 2
57 5 4 31 22 4 7 4 1 11 8 18 22 3 29 1 64 10 11 56 7 13 65 2 21 1 11 21 22 4 10
8 40 18 14 2 8 23 26 7 24 27 8 30 18 64 8 11 7 65 2 21 30 10 17 1 30 8 65 6 5 2
22 9 6 31 3 36 6 10 57 13 18 12 57 10 19 6 30 33 22 19 14 18 23 7 43 18 24 66 1
36 13 1 24 6 49 16 9 18 2 25 15 51 17 27 10 2 4 30 11 30 18 31 25 29 22 34 11 9
32 18 14 21 65 6 35 14 65 2 43 2 30 10 48 2 25 10 7 15 2 13 15 2 14 16 6 32 16
8 9 34 15 5 LAMENT. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 4 32 10 7 30 10 20 41 27
2 5 29 2 7 32 10 3 22 1 9 29 29 22 52 8 38 41 23 EZEKIEL. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 3^ 8 50 7 8 3 48 5 16 3 1 4 57 3 26 30 1 18 2 50 1 20 14 21 43 27
65 7 21 31 6 20 21 26 13 22 56 2 24 26 13 29 57 6 26 2 23 1 33 31 48 1 34 4 56
11 23 2 4 24 2 4 36 22 37 35 43 25 25 1 16 44 3 37 12 9 2 24 2 4 9 7 37 35 45 1
25 2 4 43 15 29 1 45 22 53 10 47 1 2 3 DANIEL. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse.
1 6 66 13 2 14 46 11 5 2 45 9 28 21 7 30 13 12 47 11 21 4 7 27 9 7 16 5 9 2 40
1 24 10 23 27 HOSEA. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 7 27 12 10 9 2 56 3 57
19 2 2 44 9 57 5 5 2 20 18 11 6 35 9 19 1 21 20 56 6 61 10 62 4 3 4 3 2 5 37 35
45 1 4 15 57 5 6 6 1 18 58 9 61 8 12 1 55 2 13 11 3 4 JOEL. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 14 20 2 58 5 2 13 22 12 28 19 19 31 13 13 32 4 3 14 22 AMOS.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 3 17 3 3 6 41 22 ^ 7 41 22 11 7 8 4 1 17 4 28
1 5 10 2^ 21 11 5 9 18 66 5 19 24 17 6 11 5^ 9 8 11 30 21 9 11 9 7 JONAH.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 2 14 27 34 16 38 ^4 3 4 38 4 10 14 27 MICHE.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 11 20 2 2 11 30 10 5 10 2 13 6 7 1 11 7 9 26
20 16 29 22 18 38 17 NAHVM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 3 8 19 13 15 34 4
HABAC. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 16 10 10 45 3 36 18 2 1 18 4 26 20 2 8
1 11 34 14 18 40 18 3 2 30 18 19 47 6 60 10 64 11 14 40 3 45 1 SOPH. ISAIAH.
Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 5 8^ 21 HAGGAI. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 4
44 28 2 4 9 3 7 43 19 10 54 2 1 14 1 16 ZACHA. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse.
1 12 62 7 15 47 6 2 5 54 2 8 14 14 16 4 12 4 2 13 4 20 2 MALA. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 4 34 11 4 23 17 4 34 10 6 46 3 11 19 19 2 7 42 19 4 2 25 7
54 2 60 3 4 40 1 MAT. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 ^5 16 1 24 7 14 2 11 60
6 14 19 1 3 2 6 10 3 40 3 12 26 2 66 21 12 18 6 16 6 1 42 3 4 14 9 2 5 10 16 5
11 16 5 13 28 7 44 41 15 45 5 2 13 10 30 26 6 8 37 14 23 28 7 29 14 21 12 6 24
39 8 7 2 16 3 2 12 30 31 41 15 7 55 6 11 49 15 23 43 1 8 4 42 2 16 53 4 1 18 9
13 58 9 61 8 38 49 17 10 1 60 10 5 6 1 27 22 1 28 2 22 29 45 12 11 5 11 4 5 35
5 19 41 26 27 2 5 28 11 4 28 12 50 4 61 1 11 30 30 6 42 3 12 7 50 9 61 8 1 18
17 42 1 29 49 24 39 42 3 13 25 11 13 15 7 29 13 9 29 13 13 60 21 14 8 20 16 18
49 16 19 22 22 17 21 58 5 19 7 50 1 11 19 21 12 19 21 20 13 56 7 21 23 29 21 43
65 2 44 8 15 22 2 25 6 17 29 21 18 43 3 23 26 19 37 26 9 23 13 42 3 23 1 18 37
31 5 25 1 43 1 26 66 53 9 27 12 53 7 14 53 7 35 50 4 51 56 7 65 24 28 18 14 2
61 6 MARK. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 3 40 3 4 32 11 1 5 43 42 2 11 17
56 7 12 10 8 14 15 14 53 9 28 33 12 16 15 2 3 56 3 65 2 20 10 22 60 8 LVKE.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 34 9 7 16 5 35 53 2 75 9 7 32 16 43 21 2 7 1
3 46 2 3 50 7 15 3 4 40 3 17 18 6 18 61 1 6 25 12 2 7 35 41 26 10 16 7 13 11 17
11 3 22 49 24 12 32 1 9 44 2 15 7 1 21 16 15 45 20 55 ^ 29 8 20 17 27 22 1^ 18
7 26 21 21 18 47 6 19 38 10 22 25 13 2 37 2 4 23 30 12 21 24 47 2 3 45 14 JOHN.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 13 49 21 14 25 9 16 11 2 12 3 55 1 18 9^ 6 25
9 23 40 3 29 40 3 53 7 32 6 1 42 3 2 22 43 10 3 14 11 10 16 12 5 45 22 29 5 1 4
10 55 1 12 5 16 22 25 9 45 14 23 46 2 56 7 66 23 24 6 1 66 1 5 29 26 19 33 50
11 6 27 49 5 44 6 10 8 18 45 50 5 54 13 7 12 50 6 8 6 29 21 36 35 10 42 22 43 8
53 6 61 1 44 41 22 10 3 45 3 16 42 4 49 17 59 20 27 11 12 28 8 18 29 40 12 12
35 55 6 37 53 1 38 53 1 39 6 10 41 6 1, 10 48 55 11 13 3 42 1 14 6 22 22 49 6
14 17 11 2 15 1 5 7 2 5 7 8 49 4 15 9 6 41 8 43 4 16 8 2 4 21 26 17 17 1 49 3 3
9 11 6 8 18 10 42 1 19 53 11 20 53 17 18 36 60 10 38 53 4 19 16 53 9 17 9 6 24
50 4 38 53 9 20 8 43 10 22 6 1 23 43 25 63 12 ACTS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap.
Verse. 2 3 4 5 6 1 16 19 19 41 43 8 3 12 48 5 21 26 19 35 1 65 17 22 In the
preface. 4 11 28 16 5 41 35 10 51 8 7 2 37 12 44 7 4 37 12 48 66 1 51 43 27 8
22 37 4 10 24 56 3 26 49 23 27 1 1 13 5 1 1 47 49 6 48 8 18 54 13 14 1 1 1 14
49 23 17 40 21 15 20 50 6 17 2 1 1 10 1 1 24 66 1 25 46 5 28 10 5 40 17 29 40
18 18 4 1 1 19 1 1 20 35 6 16 21 4 23 18 28 56 5 23 8 29 12 30 33 24 15 26 19
27 24 65 24 28 25 6 10 27 6 10 ROMANS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 5 55 5
8 37 4 17 10 22 19 42 18 20 38 11 63 17 2 5 22 14 15 58 1 26 52 1 27 50 8 3 2
61 9 3 46 13 12 35 6 17 59 8 20 53 11 24 42 6 26 45 25 29 54 5 4 2 45 25 15 53
11 17 66 20 18 36 15 40 12 43 14 19 40 12 51 1 56 3 20 40 12 56 3 24 51 3 5 1 9
6 28 16 32 18 45 24 53 5 56 7 57 2 2 45 24 3 35 10 10 53 11 19 53 7, 13 6 9 9 7
53 8 7 14 10 1 8 3 53 10, 11 15 50 7 66 7 12 61 1 22 38 10 23 35 7 45 15 24 9 6
36 15 25 26 16 38 2 4 14 27 16 5 26 19 55 13 29 8 18 30 8 9 31 51 12 32 55 10
33 50 8 38 37 36 9 3 17 12 4 41 8 56 7 6 1 9 43 6 7 66 20 18 63 17 21 49 9 22
13 5 27 7 25 9 2 57 19 28 10 23 29 1 9 33 8 14 26 16 10 5 53 11 8 55 6 10 53 11
10 45 23 12 49 6 14 19 21 22 33 2 15 62 7 52 7 16 53 1 17 55 3 65 11 19 65 2 66
18 20 65 2 11 1 59 20 4 45 23 12 6 3 17 5 7 24 65 5 25 66 18 26 59 20 29 19 25
41 9 59 20 34 40 13 12 1 19 21 60 6 61 6 66 20 8 23 18 20 11 14 13 1 16 5 22 20
23 12 56 1 14 10 45 23 11 19 18 45 23 17 1 11 35 10 56 7 15 6 12 1 8 42 6 16 11
4 18 7 61 6 66 20 21 52 15 16 9 53 8 20 27 1 27 55 5 61 2 1. COR. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 20 33 18 2 9 64 3 3 2 54 13 6 52 11 7 55 10 61 3 10 54 12
11 28 16 12 54 12 13 54 12 16 61 1 19 31 2 4 4 49 4 50 8 9 25 8 11 65 13 13 51
8 6 11 41 8 19 52 11 7 7 19 21 9 19 21 29 38 16 8 4 41 24 9 16 40 6 10 11 2 2
13 27 8 45 11 11 3 4 1 30 38 16 12 3 35 5 48 16 4 48 16 61 1 12 49 3 13 3 58 10
14 20 28 9 21 28 13 15 32 22 13 36 6 13 26 19 28 23 2. COR. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 20 7 14 9 6 42 1 9 63 17 2 16 11 4 14 29 49 5 62 7 3 5 45 4 49 17
6 44 22 7 55 3 16 29 12 18 2 2 4 3 49 19 6 25 1 8 40 31 13 26 10 17 26 20 54 7
61 7 5 15 18 7 17 61 3 66 22 18 2 4 20 53 11 57 19 21 53 10 6 2 49 8 2 49 8 61
2 8 50 6 16 44 28 17 52 11 7 1 52 11 10 22 13 9 7 23 18 43 22 56 5 9 32 8 10 4
62 6 6 11 4 11 2 5 1 2 62 5 14 36 10 12 7 39 5 9 40 29 31 9 14 18 10 14 18 13 4
53 12 GALAT. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 8 8 20 15 49 1 2 8 1 1 3 12 53
11 13 53 10 16 49 3 24 65 20 4 4 49 8 61 2 6 56 57 28 60 21 5 6 52 1 22 58 6 6
1 11 2 6 32 8 10 28 13 14 14 18 16 45 25 EPHESIANS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse.
1 3 32 3 4 24 1 37 26 41 8 43 21 49 1 60 21 61 3 5 7 14 6 46 13 8 42 1 54 10 10
11 6 49 5 51 16 12 60 21 17 9 6 21 37 36 23 37 26 45 14 2 2 10 6 10 19 25 27 11
37 26 43 1 15 15 13 12 19 25 56 3 13 54 5 56 3 14 27 6 49 8 66 22 26 6 45 20 17
42 6 46 8 57 19 18 65 24 19 63 7 21 6 13 3 9 49 6 10 49 6 12 45 24 65 24 17 45
24 20 2 7 4 7 54 13 8 53 12 11 49 5 13 54 13 15 28 16 28 23 18 30 63 10 5 14 9
2 29 9 16 6 9 24 2 12 9 6 17 8 20 PHILIP. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 6
22 11 26 12 35 9 40 31 2 6 42 1 52 14 8 53 7 12 9 53 8 15 44 21 4 1 49 5 4 22
13 5 35 4 55 6 6 35 4 7 32 18 33 20 61 7 COLOS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse.
1 15 6 1 37 26 2 9 9 6 33 6 14 23 15 23 1 14 29 19 21 3 1 6 7 3 26 19 15 9 6 12
2 61 7 1. THESE. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 2 19 49 5 4 7 44 20 5 3 15 1 47
11 29 17 2. THESE. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 6, 7 51 23 61 2 8 66 15 2 3
54 9 8 11 4 9 41 23 11 41 22 44 18 57 5 63 17 1. TIM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap.
Verse. 1 5 38 3 2 8 1 15 56 7 65 16 66 20 3 15 40 9 43 10 49 3 65 ^ 16 2 4 14 4
1 54 9 8 30 23 65 10 6 10 57 17 15 37 15 16 25 9 2. TIM. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 7 11 2 12 40 12 2 13 41 10 64 11 19 63 8 25 2 6 3 16 30 8 50 4
TITUS. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 2 25 8 9 11 4 HEBR. ISAIAH. Chap.
Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 3 52 9 5 9 6 14 62 6 63 9 2 8 61 6 13 8 18 14 12 5 17 42 1
4 9 66 23 12 11 4 49 2 13 37 4 41 25 45 23 15 7 15 53 6 16 65 25 5 4 49 1 6 16
45 23 62 8 8 8 66 22 13 66 13 9 12 61 6 10 31 28 19 11 3 38 11 6 40 10 26 51 8
27 7 4 12 3 31 4 12 35 4 17 26 11 28 19 26 43 26 29 10 17 33 14 13 16 23 18
JAMES. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 2 43 2 5 47 13 17 1 13 18 37 26 2 13
10 3 16 4 47 6 4 6 10 12 16 7 12 33 22 13 14 13 26 7 5 17 38 7 18 38 7 1. PET.
ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 23 40 8 29 21 25 40 8 2 2 28 9 4 8 15 5 60 13
5 60 6 66 23 6 28 16 9 23 18 41 8 52 11 61 6 66 21 9 43 21 60 21 22 53 6 23 53
7 3 13 32 17 14 8 12 4 11 21 10 17 10 12 13 1 22 5 18 21 11 5 5 16 7 6 45 9 7 1
17 26 7 41 27 43 3 60 19 63 15 2. PET. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 19 45
19 3 4 1 19 38 16 8 43 19 18 11 9 1. JOHN. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 2 18
14 18 IVDE. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse. Chap. Verse. 1 7 34 9 REVEL. ISAIAH. Chap. Verse.
Chap. Verse. 1 6 66 21 5 10 66 21 7 4 66 19

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS CONTAINED IN THE Commentary: the first
number shows the Chapter: the second, the Verse.
A
A Be of the Jews 1. 13 Abimelec, what it signifies 22. 21 Abstinence from
flesh in the Papacy, what 22. 13 Absurd collections of Jews and Papists 60.
6, 7, 10 Abundance sometimes blindes men 35. 2 It profits nothing without Gods
blessing 3. 1 Abundance and excess usually go together 5. 11 It ordinarily
begets dissolution 21. 2 Abundance of the wicked accursed 3. 1. and 35. 6
Abraham once an Idolater 29. 22 The father of many nations, and when 66. 20
Delivered often 29. 22 How ignorant of the Jews. 63. 16 How far his example
must be imitated 57. 5. and 66. 3 Why called the friend of God 41. 8 Why called
justice 41. 2 Brought out of Vr, in Chaldea, by the Lord 41. 2 Called 51. 1 His
example peruersly imitated 66. 3 Acception of persons hurtful in Judges 1. 23
God accepts no persons 55. 1. and 56. 36 Acceptable day 49. 8 Acceptable year
61. 2 Achor a place of pasture 65. 10 No acquaintance with God, unless we come
out of our sins 55. 7 Adam and Christ, wherein they differ. 65. 25 Adoration
called Dulia, a Popish invention 2. 8 Why men's affairs have commonly ill
success 61. 8 How the affections of the faithful must be ordered 12. 4
Natural affections must not hinder the performance of our particular vocations
6. 11 Afflictions short and momentanie 51. 14. and 54. 7. 9. and 63. 18. Of
diverse sorts 42. 25. and 43. 1 They must be imputed to our sins 1. 19. and 6.
4. and 65. 20. 25. Sometimes grievous 51. 21 Their fruit, end, and virtue 9. 1.
and 10. 18. 20. and 19. 22. and 21. 11. and 22. 12. and 25. 3. and 26. 9* 10.
and 16. 20. and 27. 7. 9. and 29. 19. and 35. 1. and 38. 13. 17. and 40. 31.
and 41. 17. and 48. 10. and 59. 15. Why they tarry long 24. 22. and 32. 14.
Afflictions sent of God 5. 26. and 10. 5. 26. and 13. 1. and 14. 5 and 16. 4.
and 18. 3. and 19. 1. and 21. 1. and 22. 5. and 2^. 8. and 24. 6. and 29. 3.
and 41. 25. and 42. 24. and 45. 7. and 47. 6. and 51 17. 20 and 60. 10. and 62.
8. and 53. 6. Afflictions no satisfactions 38. 17 The best fence against
afflictions 64. 5 Never think of afflictions, without calling to mind thy
transgressions 54. 5 Ahaz ungrateful and rebellious 7. 12 Overcome in all his
battles against the Philistims 14. 29 Many, taken for all 53. 12 And all,
taken for many 64 9 The word All, of great emphasis 10. 6* 7 Alluding to the
deluge 24 18 and 25. 2 Alluding to the pillar of fire 4 5. and 49. 10 Alluding
to the redemption out of Egypt. 10. 24. 26. and 11. 16. and 43. 16. and 44. 27.
and 48. 21 and 50. 2. and 51. 9, 10, 15. and 55. 12. The Prophets in all their
sermons allude to Moses 3. 12. and 11. 12. and 17. 9. and 22. 2. and 33. 14.
and 43. 5. 28. and 49. 10. Alluding to Mount Sinai 64. 1 What Almans are in
war 13. 17 Alexandria, an ancient and rich City 19 13 Altar, taken for Gods
service 19. 19 Christ our Altar 56. 7 Why God would have but one Altar
consecrated to him 1. 29 Why that at Jerusalem was more holy then the rest 17.
8 Christ, Gods Altar 60. 7. and 56. 7 In what part Amath a City was situate 3.
6. 19 Ambition condemned 5. 8. 22. 18. and 39. 5 Ambition of Hezekiah 39. 2 The
fond ambition of such as desire to be subject under a King that is Lord of
many Countries 8. 7 and 19* 4. What amity may be had with the wicked 30. 3
Amos father of Isaiah 1. 1. and 2. 1. and 13. 1. and 20. 2 Amos the Prophet
foretells the captivity of the ten Tribes 7. 8 Anabaptisticall revelations
taxed 54 13 Anabaptists would have no Kings 60. ^0 Angels and their office 63 9
Christ the great Angel of the covenant 63 9 Angels Ministers of God 6. 7. and
37. 36 They cannot bear the Majesty of God 6. 2 Called Seraphims, powers, and
why 6. 2. and 37. 36 God may be angry with us, and yet love us 47. 6. See 27.
4. Answer, to witness or confess 3. 9. and 59. 12. Answers given by false
gods, what 42. 9 To answer what 30. 19 Antichrist shall be consumed by the
breath of Gods word 11. 14 The whole estate of his kingdom comprised under
this title 14. 18 The power of Antichrist decaies by little and little 14. 3
Antiquity of Israel, whence he takes his beginning 44. 7 Such as plead
antiquity, refuted 19. 11. and 65. 7 Errors must not be entertained under
pretext of antiquity. 65. 7 What honor is to be attributed to antiquity 65.
7 Antwerpe a City, her Merchants and factors very rich 23. 8 Apostasy of the
Jews 1. 2. 4. 21. and 5. 24. The cause of apostasy 44. 21 Apostles used great
liberty in alleging texts of Scripture 28 16 How they are wont to allege the
prophecies 9. 2 Custom of the Apostles 64. 3 Arabians ruin foretold 21. 13
Miserable flight of the Arabians 21. 14 Arabians, vagabonds and thieves 13. 20
Arc of the covenant, a testimony of Gods presence 37. 26. and 46. 2 Not
worshipped in stead of God, but a sign to draw the peoples minds up to heaven
unto the Lord 46. 2 Arm taken for work 48. 14 For power 33. and 51. 5. 59.
16. and 62. 8. and 63. 12. What difference between arm, and salvation 33. 2
To discover the arm 52. 9. See 53. 1 Jerusalem called Ariel 29. 1 Armies of
Eastern people very great 38. 36 Armorie in Iudeah. 22. 8 Senacharibs army
suddenly discomfited 37. 36 Ar-Moab 15. 1 Aroer, a country 17. 2 Art of
divination condemned 19 12 Art Magike detestable 6. 7 All liberal Arts the
gifts of God 29. 29 To eat ashes, what is signifies 44. 20 Whether sackcloth
and ashes are fitting now 58. 5 Why Ashur is called Gods rod 10. 5 His pride
10. 9. 12 Astonishment, why attributed unto God 59. 16 Assyrians taken for
Chaldeans 52. 4 Their army composed of diverse nations 8. 9 Why compared to a
violent flood 7. 20 Why to a rasor 7. 20. At what time in league with the
Egyptians 19. 23 Chief enemies of the Church 30. 27 Their cruelty 30. 31 In
what sense called vessels of Gods wrath 13. 5 Their ruin foretold 30. 27, 28.
and 30. 1. 2. Their army discomfited 37. 36 Their Monarchy composed of many
nations 8. 9. and 17. 12 Converted unto God 19. 23, 24 Their manner of fight 5.
28 Astrology judicial, and its beginning 19. 12. and 44. 25 Condemned 47. 14
Whether utterly or not 19. 12. and 44. 25 Authority of Christ 42. 7
B
BAbylon in what part situate 14. 23 Why called golden 14. 23. Why called
beauty of kingdoms 13. 19 Why expressed under the name of a mountain 13. 2
Why signified under the word World 13. 11 Punished for her idolatries 21. 9
Twic^ subdued 13. 12 Much renowned after she was subdued by the Persians 13. 12
Her ruin foretold by Isaiah an hundred years before it came to pass 13. 1.
and 21. 2. and 47. 9 Her ruin came of God 21. 1 and 48. 14 Her calamity
sudden and horrible 13. 12. and 21. 4 How her ruin is said to come from Iudeah
21. 1 Her Monarchy tyrannous, and more mighty then any other 13. 11. and 14.
5. 26. and 47. 5 Why her King was deprived of common burial 14. 19, 20 The
captivity of the Jews in Babylon a kind of divorce 50. 1. and 54. 5 Why
compared to darkness, death, and to a flood 9. 2. and 54. 9 Pleasures of
Babylonians converted into horrors 21. 4 Their covetousness and pride 14 3.
47. 7 Their pride joined with violence and cruelty 13. 11 Barrenness of the
earth a curse of God 5. 10. and 15. 6. and 24. 5, 6. and 32. 13. How much a
bath contains 5. 10 If Gods care extends it self to beasts much more to us
65. 10 Why beasts are hurtful to men 11. 8. and 65. 25 Why God sends us to
school to the brute beasts 1. 3 In how many things they surmount man 1. 3 What
effects the inioying of temporal benefits ought to work in us 66. 4. 65. 10.
and 65. 21 Gods benefits must be used moderately 32. 10. 13 Benefits of God
toward Israel 1. 3 End of Gods benefits 12. 1 Bill of divorce 50. 1 Birds
naturally desire to keep their nests 10. 14 Blessing for mirror of blessing
19. 24 To make blessing what 36. 16 All blessings proceed from Gods free
goodness 65. 23 How many sorts of blessings under the kingdom of Christ 65.
23 Gods blessing the cause of all benefits 65. 23 What it is toward the
faithful 30. 23 How slackened 33. 6 Men nourished by Gods secret blessing 3. 1
To bless, put for Gods service 65. 16 Few whilst they labor fix their eyes
upon Gods blessing 65. 23 A desirable blinding 42. 16 What blinding is to be
eschewed 42. 18 Wilful blindness of the Jews 6. 10. 29. 10, 11. and 42. 19.
21 Blood taken for inhumanitie 59. 3 Bloods for murder 35. 15 Bloods of the
earth what 26. 21 Book taken for the Law it self 34. 16 How the books of the
Prophets were gathered 30. 8 Book of life what 4. 3 Reprobates not written in
it 4. 3 To render into their bosom what 65. 6 Brags of the wicked 59. 4 Proud
bragging of the Jews 57. 4. and 65. 15 Brags of Papists 1. 30. and 29. 14. and
36. 19. and 45. 20. and 49. 21. and 62. 5 Branch put for the strongest 9. 14
Bread and wine taken for ordinary food 33. 16 Not bread, but Gods blessing that
nourishes 3. 1 Gentiles become brethren of the Jews 66. 20 Brethren falsely so
called 66. 5 The hurt that comes by taking bribes 1. 23. and 5. 23 Burden, what
is signifies 13. 1. and 14. 28 Burial; a sign of the last resurrection 14. 18
The care of burial not to be condemned 22. 17 Whether the deprivation of
burial is to be esteemed a curse of God 14. 8. See more of this in 14. 20.
and 22. 17.
C
CAines repentance 26. 11 Why Isaiah laments the calamity of the church 15. 4.
and 16. 9. and 21. 3 Why we are called into the Church 56. 7 Calling of Christ
what 49. 1 Calling of God cannot be disanulled 63. 19 What efficacy is in Gods
calling 11. 12 Calling of the Gentiles foretold 2. 3, 4. and 11. 10. and 12. 5.
and 14. 1, 2. and 19. 22, 23. and 25. 7. and 26. 15. and 42. 4. 6. 11. and 45.
22, 23, 25. and 49. 6. 12. 21. and 52. 8. 15. and 54. 5. and 55. 4, 5. and 56.
3. 7. and 60. 9. and 65. 2. and 66. 19, 20. The certainty of our calling 65. 2
The end of our calling 43. 21. and 55. 5. and 56. 6. and 60. 21. and 61. 3. and
63. 8. The calling of the Gentiles admirable to the Apostles 56. 3 Isaiahs
calling confirmed the second time 6. 1 No man ought to take upon him the office
of teaching, unless he be called 61. 1 God has never been called upon as a
Father in the Church, otherwise then by Christ 63. 16. and 65. 24. To call,
what it signifies 44. 5 To be called of God 43. 1 Canaan, a pledge of adoption
to Abraham's posterity 14. 1 Captivity in Babylon a kind of divorce 50. 1. 54.
5 Why compared to a deluge 54. 9 Why to darkness and death 9. 2 Carmel a
fruitful soil 10. 18. and 33. 15. The cause from whence all Gods benefits
proceed 63. 9 Ceremonies must not be separate from the word 1. 11 Not simply
required in respect of themselves 1. 11 Why ceremonies were instituted 1. 13
Why rejected 1. 11 Why necessary 1. 11 Of themselves considered apart, vain
and frivolous 66. 2 Use of ceremonies 1. 11 Abolishing of ceremonies 2. 3 Vain
ceremonies established in the Papacy in stead of sacraments 20. 2 Ceremonies
of the Law obolished, and how 66. 23 Chapters ill divided 4. 1. 14. and 10. 33.
and 14. 28. and 24. 17. and 46. 1. and 53. 1. and 58. 1. and 64. 1. Chaldea
signified by the word Desert, and why 21. 1 Chaldeans severe and cruel,
compared to the Egyptians 5. 29. 52. 4 Chamos an Idol of the Moabites 15. 2 No
change in God 14. 17 Change of kingdoms comes of God 19. 1. and 22. 21. and
41. 4. and 51. 6. Change of the number used among the Hebrews 23. 6 A change
of the person 42. 24 Charra a city 37. 12 Chariots had a double use of old 22.
6 Why the chastisement of the wicked is deferred 10. 13. and 13 6. and 18. 5.
and 26. 1. and 28. 24. 25. and 63. 4. and 65. 6. 56. and 66. 18. Unto us a
child is borne 9. 6 In what sense the Church is said to bring forth a man child
66. 7 In what sense the word child is taken 3. 4 A child unthankful to his
father, a double monster 1. 2 All the children of the Church taught of God 54.
13 Why God gives children 38 9 Children not punished for their fathers offenses
14. 21. and 43. 27. and 65. 7
Christ. God eternal 2. 4. and 6. 1. 10. and 8. 14. and 9. 7. and 25. 9. True
man 7. 15. and 11. 2. and 42. 1. and 53. 11. Wonderful 9. 6 Why worshipped in
the Church 60. 14 Altar of the faithful 56. 7 Soul of the Law 29. 11 Author
of peace 57. 19 Only author of righteousness 53. 11 Head of the Church 54. 1
Head of the faithful 25. 9 Counselor 9. 6 Why called David and the son of
David 37. 35. and 45. 1. Why called Immanuel 7. 14. and 8. 10 Judge of the
whole world 32. 6 Light of the faithful 42. 6 Mediator between God and man 8.
10. and 19. 20. and 37. 35. and 49. 8. and 53. 12. and 63. 17. and 65. 24.
Physician of souls 53. 4 Why sent of God 42. 7 Exposed to the wickeds
reproaches 53. 9 Father of eternity, and why 9. 6 Cornen stone 28. 16 A tried
stone ibid. A stone to stumble at, and why 8. 14. 15. and 28. 16 The first
borne of every creature 37. 28 Prince of peace 9. 6 Promised to all the world
11. 1. and 2. 4. and 42. 6. and 55. 5 Promised to be borne of the virgin Mary
7. 14 Where to be sought 16. 5 Only redeemer 35. 10 Only and most sure refuge
of the faithful in trouble 32. 2 King of Gods people 52. 13 King eternal 9. 7
He only reigns where his Gospel is preached 11. 4 The end of all the
Prophets and promises 29. 11. 42. 1 The Savior of his Church 62. 11 Gods
servant, and how 42. 1. and 43. 10. and 53. 11. and 55. 5 Son of
righteousness 25. 7. and 60. 3 Spouse of the Church 62. 5 The protector of the
poor 11. 4. and 16. 5 The way, the truth, and life, and how 49. 6 He overcame
in the midst of death 53. 8. 12 Justified as he is man 53. 1 Brought in
speaking 49. 1 Always the governor of his Church 63. 16 Wherein his dominion
consists 92. 2 He reigns not for himself, but for his 11. 6 Why silent before
Pilat 53. 3 His coming foretold 9. 6, 7 He came in a contemptible estate 42. 2
The Papists brag of his name falsely 55. 4 We are none of Christ's, unless we be
given to uprightness 7. 8 The nature of Christ's kingdom 11. 4 All things
subjected under him 14. 2. and 45. 23. All have need of him 53 The name Christ,
attributed to Israel 49 3 Difference between Christ and other men 9. 6. and
11. 3 Difference between Christ and the Kings of the earth 42 2. and 49. 2
Christ must be the matter and end of our joy 9. 6 Called Son by way of
excellency ibid. His two natures in one person noted 7. 14 Christ had no
father on earth ibid. Whence it is that we are called Christians 11. 2 A note
to discern true Christians from hypocrites 26. 8
Church. The Church Christ's rest 11. 10 The mother of the faithful 40. 9. and
66. 11 What the true Church is 33. 22 Compared to a building 54. 12 To a city
60. 10. 13 To a widow 49. 21 To a woman that brings forth 66. 7 To a tent 54. 2
To a fan 41. 16 To a vine 3. 13. and 5. 1. 7. and 27. 2 Why said to publish
good tidings 40. 9. and 41. 27 A most sure refuge 26. 1 Contemptible in the
world 1. 9 Why the crown of God 6^. 3 Gods perpetual mansion 11. 10. and 49.
6 She must not be measured by her multitudes 1. 9. and 4. 3. Why called
miserable 51. 21 She is the work of Gods hands 17. 7. and 19. 25. and 22. 11.
and 27. 11. and 29. 23. and 37 26. and 43. 1. and 44. 2. 21. 24. and 54. 5. and
64. 7. She only partakes of Gods blessings 65. 20 Why called barren 54. 1 Why
called a widow ibid. She is Gods wife 1. 21 The City of God 49. 16 What Church
is in the Papacy 11. 2. and 36. 6. 22. The Church wonderfully conserved in the
world 1. 9. and 7. 17. and 29. 18. and 37. 26. and 51. 6. Why she cannot be
abolished 1. 27. Why she is not forthwith delivered 57. 21 She only obtaines
remission of sins 33. 24 Why she is preferred before all the world 37. 26 In
what sense she is said to be unclean 43. 28. and 47. 6 How sanctified 62. 12
Her infancy and perfect age 54. 2 Her extreme calamity 51. 18 The means how
she may be gathered 2. 3 Her condition must not be judged of according to her
estate in this world 37. 27 Her ordinary condition 8. 7* and 33. 20 Her
condition miserable in outward show 6. 13. and 51. 23. Her true establishment
60. 21 Her dignity inward 49. 18. and 56. 4. and 62. 3 God is in her 45. 14 In
what sense her children are called bastards 51. 18 Her fruitfulness 66. 8 Her
felicity perpetual 60. 19 She has always had some form 54. 9 No form of
her left, where prophecies cease 41. 27 Wherein her true glory consists 4. 3.
and 49. 18. and 60. 6 She has two sorts of enemies 41. 12 Domestical 24. 16.
and 41. 12. and 66. 25 And these the worst 25. 10 Her enemies shall be sharply
punished 31. 9. and 34. 8. and 49. 29. and 63. 1. and 6^. 25. Her restoration
promised 1. 25. and 11. 10. and 24. 13, 14. and 27. 13. and 28. 16. and 29. 18.
and 32. 1. and 35. 1. and 40. 1. 15. and 43. 5. and 46. 11. and 51. 11. and 5^.
1, 2. and 58. 12. and 60. 4 and 62. 4. and 65. 17. and 66. 7. 8. 22. The true
way to procure her restoration 49. 17 Her restoration a manifest argument of
Gods power 44. 26 And only appertains to God 11 11. and 16. 5. and 28. 16 and
29. 18. 23 and 31. 7. and 32. 15. and 41. 20. and 42. 16. and 44. 3. and 49. 19
24. and 52. 9. and 56. 8. and 60. 21. Only founded upon the kingdom of Christ
4. 2 Her deliverance, a special work of God 31. 8. and 49. 7 Her conflict
continual 43. 2 How she is said to have a new name 62. 2 Her ornaments 49. 18.
and 54. 13 Her peace 11. 13 Her perpetuity 17. 6, 7. and 28. 5 and 29. 18. and
37. 26. and 43. 1. and 45. 18. and 53. 8. and 54. 10. and 55. 13. and 65. 8, 9.
and 66. 22. Her enlargement, Gods peculiar work 1. 25. and 60. 16. 21. and 66.
7 Her complaint 49. 4 Her true reformation 2. 4. and 32. 5. 8 Her deliverance,
an admirable work of God, and his only work 49. 7. and 54. 12 Her salvation
eternal 45. 1. and 51. 6 Joined with the ruin of the wicked 59. 18 Her
certain victory 11. 14 Her estate among the Jews, how much deplored by Isaiah
29. 7. and 46. 13 What honor belongs to her 45. and 49. 23. and 60. 3 To
forsake her, is to renounce eternal life 34. 4 Dangerous to forsake her for
fear of afflictions 21. 11 Ornament of the Popish Church 48. 18 The Church
sustaines no loss by her afflictions 4. 3 Her true glory ibid We must impute
her wants to our own wickednesses 5. 6 Why God keeps her low 8. 7 Her
calamities must thoroughly affect us 22. 4 To choose, to discern 7. 15. and 48,
10 Also to be accepted 58. 5 The difference between the circumcised and the
uncircumcised taken away 56. 7 Use of circumcision 52. 1 Cities of Gods
holiness what 64. 9 City of David 22. 9. and 29. 1. and 33 20 City of
Jerusalem double 22. 9 City of justice 1. 26 Cilicia, called Tharsis by the
Hebrews 33. 1 Opposed to Tire 23. 6 In what sense the faithful term
themselves clay 64. 8 Commonwealth, how it may be well governed 3. 4 and 32. 1
How we ought to esteem of the communion of Saints 63. 7 Things spoken by
comparison 2. 22. and 43. 18. and 54. 9, 10, 13. and 60. 16 Gods commandments
called paths, and why 2. 3 We must distinguish between two sorts of
commandments 10. 6 Compassion commended 20. 2. and 22. 4 Complaints of the
faithful under the Papacy 26. 13 Complaint of the faithful 63. 15 Complaint
of the Church 49. 4. and 63. 15 Complaints of hypocrites 1. 18 Complaints of
Papists touching the abolishing of their divine service 36. 10 The company of
the wicked to be eschewed 33. 15. and 59. 5 Brotherly concord commended 11. 6
It flows from piety 19. 23 Upon what conditions to be desired 19. 18 Men's
condition out of Christ miserable 49. 8, 9 Condition of Pastors 50. 6. and 51.
8 Condition of the Jews miserable 3. 12 The condition of the wicked woeful 3.
11. and 5. 18. and 15. 2. and 21. 12. and 28. 20. and 57. 2. 20. Condition of
the faithful happy 4. 6. and 30. 26 Condition of the faithful miserable in
appearance 26. 19. and 33. 20. and 41. 14. and 49. 7. and 51. 23. and 54. 3.
Confidence in man vain 2. 22. and 29. 5 Confidence of hypocrites vain 1. 28.
and 10. 20, 22 Confidence in Idols vain 8. 21 Confidence of the Israelites
false 17. 9 Of the Jews 30. 17 Of the Egyptians 19. 1 Of the Jews 20. 1. and
22. 3. and 29. 1. and 30. 1, 2. and 66. 1 Of the Philistines 14. 29 Confidence
ought to be placed in God 7. 4. and 8. 12. and 17. 8. and 26. 19. and 30. 15,
16. and 31. 1. and 33. 20, 21. and 36. 15. and 42. 13. 17. and 43. 6. and 50
11. and 51. 12. and 57. 13. and 59. 16. Confession, a fruit of faith 26. 19
Confession of sin, necessary 64. 5 Outward confession required in Gods true
service 19. 18 Auricular confession a device of the Papists 38. 15 Conjunction
of God with the Church 60. 11. and 65. 19 Conjunction of God with Idols in the
Papacy 17. 8 The wicked always miserable, because they cannot enjoy their
goods with a good conscience 65. 13 A good conscience how necessary 58. 4 A
quiet conscience only proper to Gods children 32. 18 A wicked man's conscience
never quiet 65. 13 Peace of conscience a fruit of the Gospel 2. 4 An evil
conscience always flees Gods presence 31. 2. Always unquiet 32. 18 How
sleepie consciences must be awakened 58. 1. 8. 13 The conscience of Papists 32.
18 An evil conscience discouers it self in the countenance 2. 11. and 3. 9 A
general consent a shrewed temptation 8. 11 Consolation for the faithful 1.
25. 28. and 4 2. and 5. 17. and 6. 13. and 7. 4. 19. and 8. 10. 17. and 9. 1.
and 10. 5. 12. 22. 24. 26 and 11. 1. and 12. 3. and 14. 14. 24. 28. 32. and 15.
9. and 16. 14 and 17. 61. ^. 14. and 18. 4, 5. and 19 18. and 21. 1. 15. 16.
and 22. 11. and 23. 17. and 24 13. 14. 22 23. and 25. 10. and 26. 12. 13 21.
and 27. 4 and 28. 16. 25. and 29. 21 22. and 30. 19. 21. 29. and 31. 9. and 32.
15. and 33. 5. and 35. 5. and 37. 26. and 40. 1. 8. 29. and 41 8. 9 10. 14. and
43. 1. 14. 25. and 44. 2. and 48. 11. and 49. 24. and 50. 10. and 51. 1. 17.
21. and 52 9. and 54 11. and 55 6. and 57. 15. and 59 15. and 63 4. 7 and 65.
8. and 66. 2 5. Consolations for the poor 10. 2 Consolations added to
threatenings 4. 2 and 5. 17. and 27. 6 A consolation for good Princes 22. 23 To
whom consolation belongs 40. 7 Whence it is to be drawn 37. 2. and 40. 8 and
50. 4. 11. and 51. 8. 16. and 52. 9. and 57. 18. and 66. 11 Conspiracy taken
in good part 8. 12 Conspiracy of the Papists 44 11 Constancy of the faithful
8. 12. 56. 2 Constancy of Pastors 8. 16. and 29. 21 and 50. 7 The constancy
of Isaiah 8. 18. and 30. 8. and 39. 3. 5 Contempt of Gods word, the perfection
of all evil 5. 24 Contentment consists not in abundance 65. 13 Continency a
rare gift 19. 21 God looks that our conversation should answer our vocation
63. 8. and 43. 21 Conversion of the Egyptians to God 19. 19. 21 Conversion, a
kind of resurrection 19. 22 What men are without conversion 65 25 No salvation
without conversion 59. 20 The converted ought to labor the conversion of
others 2. 3 Conversion of the heart, and change of the life must go together
55. 7 Conversion what 19. 13. and 28. 16 How corn and wine is said to be ours
62. 9 Corrections benefit us nothing, unless God touch our hearts by his holy
Spirit inwardly 1. 25 A sign of desperate malice, not to benefit by
corrections 9. 13 When God begins to correct, he makes not an end by and by 1.
7 Necessity of Corrections 25. 3 God corrects in measure 27. 8. and 64. 9
Covenant of God cannot be disanulled 7. 14. and 19. 25. and 24. 5. and 45. 25.
and 55. 4. and 59. 20. and 65. 1. Covenant of God free 55. 3. and 61. 9. and
64. 7. Covetousness condemned 1. 23. and 5. 8. 23. and 33. 15. and 57. 17.
Cursed of God 5. 10 Exceeding hurtful in Judges 1. 23 God will create
Jerusalem a reioicing 65. 18 God creates new heavens, and a new earth 65. 17.
and 66. 22 The end of our creation 29. 23 Creation taken for regeneration 17.
7. and 19. 25. and 27. 11. and 37. 26. and 43. 1. 15. 21. and 44. 2. 21. 24.
and 51. 13. and 54. 5 and 64. 9. and 66. 22. God the creator of all 37 15 In
what sense God is called the creator of Israel 43. 15 The confusions which are
among the creatures, the fruits of our sins 65. 25 All the creatures are
under Gods command 11. 15 All creatures are ready armed against the wicked 13.
10 The creatures groan in regard of our offenses 65 17 If insensible creatures
be moved at Gods voice, much more we 6. 4 All creatures at Gods beck 55. 12
Many depart from Christ, because of the cross 53. 5 Christ's government laid on
his shoulder, fained to be his cross 9. 6 Sign of the Cross 66. 19 Cruelty
always joined with impiety 51. 23 Cruelty of the Assyrians 30. 31 Of the
Babylonians 13. 11 Of the Medes 17. 17 Of Babylons King 14. 17 Of the Moabites
15. 1. and 16. 3 Of Satan 49. 24. and 59. 17. and 66. 3 Of Sennacherib 33. 7
Cup of wrath taken in a double sense 51. 17 Curiosity ought to be avoided 9. 4
Cyrus called of God, and how 48. 15 Named a long time before he was borne 44.
28 In what sense he is said to obey God 41. 25 Gods hired soldier 43. 14 How
said to be favored of God 44. 14 Why called anointed 45. 1 How he builded
Jerusalem 45. 13 Very vicious 48. 15 Whether he became a convert 45. 1 His
prosperity proceeded from God 48. 15

D
DAmascus a capital City of Syria 7. 8 The ruin of Damascus 17. 1 Darius the
servant of God 21. 9 Darius signifies a lion 21. 7. 8 Darius an herald of Gods
judgment 21. 9 Darkness taken for affliction 8. 21. and 50. 10. 18. and 58.
10. and 59. 9. David a figure of Christ 37. 35. and 55. 3. 4 Why David called
Gods servant before he was borne 44. 1 Why David's name is sometimes put for
Christ 2. 4 City and house of David what it is 7. 2. and 22. 9 Days of a tree
what 65. 21 In what sense it is that days will seem years 54. 8 What the day
of the Lord signifies 13. 6 Day put for time, prefixed 22. 5 Why the day of the
Lord is called terrible 13. 9 The Jews began their day at Sun setting 30. 29
Death of Christ the cause and fountain of life 53. 8 Fruit of Christ's death
53. 5. 11 Death often noted out by the word Grave 53. 9 In what sense it is
said, the dead sing the praises of God 38. 18 Whether the dead know our
necessities 29. 22 Delicacie, the ruin of the Roman Empire 2. 16 Deliverance
of the Church admirable, and Gods proper work 31. 8. and 49. 7 Difference
between the deliverance out of Egypt and Babylon 52. 12 See Redemption.
Deafness of the Jews proceeded from their rebellion 28. 12 Why God deferres
to succor his people 33. 9 Demosthenes alleged 47. 3 Denis the second, how he
became blind 28. 4 Denis the tyrant, a contemner of religion, and his impiety
36. 18 What a misery it is to be deprived of the use of holy things 48. 19
Deserts for meadows 63. 13 Desert taken for Chaldea 21. 1 When descriptions are
necessary 21. 3 Disloialtie of the Israelites 17. 9 Disloialtie of Senacherib
33. 8 Divination condemned 19. 12. and 44. 25 Papists will not have their
divine service examined 44. 20 Complaints of Papists touching the abolishing of
their divine service 36. 10 Devotion of Papists what 1. 14 Superstitious
devotions 65. 3 The devil serves to Gods glory 2. 19 Difference between
David's kingdom and Christ's 2. 4 Difference between him that fears God, and
him that fears him not 5. 20 Difference between God and men 1. 15. 18. and
30. 30. and 31. 3. and 40. 30. and 48. 12. and 55. 8. and 57. 15. and 59. 12.
and 60. 22. Difference between the elect and reprobate 5. 19 Difference
between God and Idols 21. 9. and 37. 18. and 40. 18. 28. and 41. 21, 22. and
42. 8, 9. and 43. 9. and 44. 7. and 46. 3. and 48. 12. and 64. 3. Difference
between true and false worshippers 29. 13 Difference between a true servant
of God, and a false 22. 20 Difference that is among men, proceeds from Gods
vengeance 19. 2 Difference between the affliction of the elect and reprobate
12. 3 God will be the defender of his discipline perpetually 49. 10 Dimon a
flood of Moab 15. 9 A right order of discipline described 49. 16 Distrust of
the Jews 30. 1. and 49. 14 Distrust naturally in men 8. 7. and 43. 5 Docilitie
a gift of God 30. 21. and 32. 2. and 42. 4. and 43 8 Docilitie how necessary in
the faithful 48. 17. and 50. 10 Docilitie proceeds from understanding 41. 22
Doctrine of Gods word most necessary 3. 4 Doctrine only makes the sacraments
20. 2 A general doctrine drawn from a particular 54. 8 Particular doctine
necessary 1. 17 Doctrine of the Prophets indures ever 37. 2. Doctrines false,
refuted by Gods word only 11. 4 Doctrine, Gods scepter 2. 4 Domitian and his
cruelty 59. 7 Diversity of gifts, the ornament of the Church 54. 13
Drunkenness spiritual 19. 14 Drunkenness detestable in Ministers 56. 12 Dumb
dogs 56. 10 Drunkenness condemned 5. 11. 22. and 22. 13. and 24. 9. and 28. 1.
and 56. 12. Duty of the faithful 43. 10 Duty of Pastors 6. 9, 10. and 8. 16.
18 Ruin of Duma foretold 21 Dumeans and their original 21. 10
E
Ear, what the opening thereof signifies 50. 5 Earth taken for such Countries
as were known to the Jews by traffic 24. 1. 17 Earth taken for her
inhabitants 66. 8 New earth what 66. 22 Fruitfulness of the earth proceeds
from Gods blessing 1. 19. and 35. 1. The earth barren by Gods curse 5. 10. and
15. 6. nd 24. 5, 6. and 32. 13. The word Earth, put for all the world 65. 16
Earth covered or discovered, what 33. 1 Why the earth sustaines us not 24. 5
Earth taken for any Country 66. 8 Those of the East abounded in ceremonies 58.
5 The signs of their sorrow 41. 4. and 43. 27. and 51. 1. and 65. 7. Egyptians
gross Idolaters 19. 1. 3 Punished for their pride 19. 4. 2 Egypt abounding in
Cities 19. 8 Would be esteemed the storehouse of all liberal sciences 19. 3.
1 Delivered by Christ 19. 19 How it was given in ransom for the Churches
deliverance 43. 3 Per perdition 19. 1 Egyptians swollen with a false opinion of
wisdom, proudly despised all nations besides as Barbarians 19. 3. 16. 1 More
effeminate then other nations 19. 16 In what time they had truce with the
Assyrians 19. 23 And in continual war with them ibid. In what sense their
senslesnesse is attributed to God 19. 14 Their pride 19 15 There conversion 19.
19. 21 Elam taken for the Country of Persia 21. 2 Gods election free and
unchangeable 14. 1. and 44. 1. and 66. 18. Gods free election the beginning of
our salvation 45. 4 Election depends upon Gods promise 41. 8 The end of our
election 41. 10. 43. 10. 21 Elect taken for excellent 4. 21 Elect only believe
8. 18. and 53. 1. and 54. 13 Elect only escape Gods wrath 66. 19 Elect only
enjoy the redemption purchased by Christ 59. 20 Elect only saved 66. 19 Elect
cannot perish 8. 18 Difference betw^ene the elect and reprobate 2. 10. and 3.
10. and 4. 3. and 5. 20. and 7. 2. 4. and 8. 12. and 10. 15. 18. and 12. 1, 2.
and 13. 3. 5. 9. 19. and 14. 1. 5. 20. 29. and 16. 6. and 19. 22. and 21. 11.
12. 17. and 25. 10. and 26. 10. 16. 19. and 27. 4. 7. and 28. 15. and 29. 13.
17. and 30. 26. 28. 32. and 32. 17. and 33. 6. 14. and 35. 4. 10. and 39. 8.
and 40. 30. and 41. 22. and 42. 17. and 43. 1. 2. 21. and 45. 2. and 48. 10.
and 51. 8. 17. 23. and 54. 7. 13. and 55. 6. and 26. 5. and 57. 2. 20. and 59.
12. 13. 20. and 60. 2. 6. 19. 21. and 63. 5. 19. and 64. 3. 11. and 65. 8. 10.
13. 14. and 66. 2. 5. 12. 16. 19. God sometimes spares the wicked for the
elects sake 65. 8 Eliakim of the blood royal 22. 24 Put in Shebnaes place 22.
20 In what sense he is said to be called of God ibid. Enemies domestical 24.
16. and 36. 3. and 66. 5. Enemies of two sorts 41. 12 Brethren enemies 66. 5
Envy the welspring of dissensions 11. 13 Epicures and their language 39. 8
Epha, a measure of dry things 5. 10 Ephraim taken for all Israel 17. 3 For the
ten Tribes 28. 1 An ancient error must not be received as a law 65. 7
Efficacy of error given to seducers to deceive the world 19. 14 Two parts of
equity 58. 7 Esau and his repentance 26. 11 Eunuch, who 56. 3 Obstinacy of
Europ 9. 10 Excess in apparel taxed 3. 16 We must not be led by ill examples
2. 6 Execrations must be avoided 5. 9. and 14. 24 Exorcismes condemned 19. 12
Expositions forced and wrested, to be avoided 48. 16 How we are said to sin
before Gods eyes 65. 12 Women's wandering eyes 3. 16 Isaiah saw God with his eyes
6. 5 We must not follow that in Gods service, which seems best in our eyes
65. 12 Few whilst, they labor, fix their eyes upon Gods blessing 65. 23
F
FAble of the Papists touching the ox and the ass 1. 3 A fable of the
ancients, touching the cities of Egypt 19. 18 Faith. True faith what 43. 10 Not
common to all 53. 1 It must not be separate from the word 55. 3 The mother of
prayer 1. 15. and 33. 2 It consists in certainty and sound knowledge 52. 15 It
has need of confirmation 37. 2. 21 It makes us partakers of all Christ's
benefits 11. 2 It begins at obedience 41. 22 It goes before confession 43. 10.
Implicit faith of Papists 43. 10. and 52. 15. and 54. 13 The nature of faith
55. 3. and 64. 3 Property of faith 64. 4 Preparation of faith 43. 10 Trial of
faith 33. 2 Power of faith how great 43. 14 The unity of faith must be held
12. 6 Difference between faith and a bare knowledge 45. 24 Difference between
faith and experience 60. 6 Those that are destitute of faith, no members of
Christ 65. 21 The principal fruit of faith 65. ^4
Faithful. All the faithful are friends of God 41. 8 Why called trees of
righteousness 61. 3 Happy in every respect under the kingdom of Christ 30.
25. and 35. 5. and 65. 3. Exposed to diverse slanders 36. 10. and 41. 12
Exhorted to constancy 8. 19 Compared to doves 60. 8 They only fit to sing
Gods praises 42. 10 Why compared to little children 66. 11, 12 Why held for
monsters 8. 18 How called the work of Gods hands 29. 23 Compared to sheep 14
30 The faithful Gods plant 60. 21. 61. 3 Precious in Gods sight 43 4
Regenerate only in part 65. 7 They are careful of others 2. 3 All Priests,
and how 23. 18. and 52. 11. and 56. 7. and 61. 6. and 66. 20. 21. All the seed
of Christ 53. 10 They only obtain remission of sins 33. 24 Why sometimes
left destitute of humane helps 59. 16 They are said to dwell before God 23. 18
They offer themselves in sacrifice to God 8. 7 Sometimes constrained to blush
29. 22 Why often wrapped in the same punishment with the wicked 65. 8 Gods
witnesses 44. 9 They are brought to Christ 16. 5 They overcome by patience 11.
14 In what their affection ought to appear 12. 4 Their afflictions diverse,
sharp, and tedious 26. 17. and 43. 1. and 51. 21 The faithful subject to many
miseries 4. 6 Hated of all sorts 8. 18 How their afflictions are of short
continuance 26. 20. and 65. 16. Their cheerfulness 11. 2. and 40. 31 Their
extreme calamity 51. 8 Their condition happy 4. 6. and 30. 26 Yet miserable
and contemptible in appearance 26. 19. and 33. 20. and 41. 14. and 49. 7. and
51. 23. and 54. 2. Their consolation 4. 2. and 5. 17. See consolation. Their
constancy 8. 12. and 56. 6 Their principal exercise 58. 2 Their felicity 65.
13 And joy 9. 3, 4. and 12. 6. and 30. 16. 29. and 35. 10. 41. 16. and 43. 3.
and 51. 3. 8. 11. and 56. 7. and 61. 7. and 65. 10. 18. and 66. 5. 10. 11. 14.
Their imprecation against the Babylonians 13. 12 Their magnanimity vpheld by
the word of God 8. 9 Their perpetual conflict 8. 9. and 11. 13. and 26. 8. and
36. 15. and 54. 15, 16. and 66. 5. How they ought to behave themselves 11. 6. 9
Their death 57. 1. 2 Their obedience 11. 6 Their office 43. 10 Their prayers
not in vain 47. 8. and 65. 24 Their patiench 10. 12. See patience. Their
number small 1. 9. and 4. 3. and 8. 16. and 11. 11. and 26. 2. and 43 6. and
45. 20. and 50. 10. and 51. 1. and 58. 1. and 60. 22. and 65. 25. and 66. 5.
Their perseverance 25. 6 Their complaint under the Papacy 26. 13 Their
perpetual Sabbath 58. 13. and 66. 23 Their spiritual sacrifices 66. 23 Their
salvation everlasting 51. 2. 8 Their salvation joined with the ruin of the
wicked 63. 4. and 66. 7 Their salvation joined with Gods glory 43. 7. and 46.
13. and 48. 11. and 60. 2. Their posterity blessed 65. 23 Their victory
certain 8. 9. and 9. 4 Their zeal must be moderate 36. 21 Whether it be
lawful for them to deride others in their miseries 14. 3 Faithful for firm
and stable 22. 23
False teachers dangerous 56. 10 Famine of the word what 30. 21 Men's fantasies
the fountains of superstions 1. 29. Error of fantastikes, touching the
sleeping of souls 57. 2 Of such as separate the word from the Spirit 59. 21
False doctrines only refuted by the word of God 11. 4 Favor of God toward
his Church 1. 9 Fatness for prosperity 10. 16 Fasting depends upon prayer 58.
5 Fasting a solemn part of repentance 22. 12, 13 How acceptable unto God 58.
5. 6 Use of fasting 1. 11 What the fast of hypocrites is 58. 4 What the fast of
Papists is ibid. Lenten fast ibid Fasting the handmaid of prayer 58. 5 The
Jews fast not to be condemned 58. 4 Fasting approved when charity is joined
with it 58. 6 The bad example of our fathers not to be followed 65. 7. Sect. 2.
5. The abuse, and not the use of fasting taxed 58. 4. 5 A sovereign remedy to
moderate inordinate fears 8. 13 A double fear in the faithful 7. 4 Where the
fear of God is, there is steadfastness 22. 17 Such only fear God, as
reverence his word 66. 5 Fear of the faithful differs from the fear of
unbelievers 8. 12 Fear of God 50. 10. Fear of God taken for a pure affection
to serve him 11. 2 Taken for a certain rule of justice 11. 3 How necessary it
is 8. 13. and 29. 23. and 65. 7 The fountain of wisdom 19. 11 In what sense
called the beginning of wisdom 33. 6 What fear necessary in the faithful 66.
2 Two sorts of fear ibid. Feasts of Christians 66. 23 A fiction confuted 19. 1
A fiction of the Poets 3. 12 Fifties among the Jews, what 3. 3 Fire for
extreme torment 30. 33. and 66. 15. 24 For Gods vengeance 26 11 Fire of
Purgatory invented by Papists 33. 24 Fire and water taken for all sorts of
miseries 43. 2 Two fish pooles in Jerusalem 7 3 Food taken from men two ways
3. 1 To turn the foot from the Sabbath, what 58. 13 Force of Christ
invincible 42. 4 Foreknowledge of God, what 41. 22 Foreknowledge and power
belongs to God only 45. 10 Forgetfulness of God the cause of all sin 17. 7
Forgetfulness of God punished 17. 10 Form of an oath 5. 9. and 10. 4. and 22.
14. and 45. 23. and 49. 18 A right form of teaching 2. 3. and 55. 12 The
foundation of our salvation 63. 7 Men's fantasies the fountains of all
superstitions 1. 29. and 65. 3 The fountain from whence all plagues issue 5.
13 Christ the fountain of living waters 12. 3 Free will confuted 1. 19, 20.
and 49. 9. and 2. 22. and 52. 2. What it is in man 1. 15. 16. 19. and 2. 24.
and 54. 13 Frenchmen naturally imitate the vices of others, rather then their
virtues 30. 1 Frenchmen brag to their hurt, of being subject to great Princes
19. 4
G
GAbrias, his coniuration 21. 5 Situation of Galile, and why called Galile of
the Gentiles 9. 1 Gates for places most frequented 14. 31 Mourning of the gates
3. 25. and 14. 31 Calling of the Gentiles foretold 2 3, 4. and 11. 10. and 12.
5. and 14. 1, 2. and 19. 22, 23. and 25. 7. and 26. 15. and 42. 4. 6. 11. and
45. 22. 23. 25. and 49. 6. 12. 21. and 52. 8. 15. and 54. 5. and 55. 4. 5. and
56. 3. 7. and 60. 9. and 65. 2. and 66. 19, 20. Glory of God joined with the
salvation of the faithful 43. 7. and 46. 13. and 48. 11. and 60. 2. The glory
of God shines in the accomplishment of his promises 42. 8 In his works 26. 11
And in the restoration of his Church 26. 11. and 42. 8. and 45. 23 His glory
spread thorowout the world 6. 3 His glory must be advanced above all things 43.
21 His glory must not be profaned 48. 11 Why the wicked see not Gods glory 26.
10 Gods glory advanced in the destruction of the wicked 63. 3 Glory taken for
salvation 62. 2 God is robbed of his glory, whilst men glory in themselves 64.
8 Gods glory joined with our salvation 48. 11. and 64. 12 Gods glory must be
sought in him only 45. 25 Christ's glory hidden 52. 14 Christ shall be
glorified and his Ministers, though the wicked be not bettered by their
ministry 49. 5 We must not judge of Christ's glory according to carnal
reason 53. 2 Gluttony condemned 5. 11. 22. and 62. 13. and 38. 3 God. What God
we must worship and acknowledge 21. 17 God eternal 40. 28. and 43. 13. and
48. 12 Why he is said to hide himself 45. 15 No accepter of persons 55. 1. and
56. 36 Why called Isaiahs friend 5. 1 In what sense author of all things 42.
24. and 45. 7 God is not the author of evil 19. 14. and 45. 7. and 63. 17
Whether the author of men's blinding 19. 14 The author of Babels ruin 13. 17.
and 14. 5 Author of Ierusalems ruin 22. 5 Author of peace 32. 17 Only author
of our purgation 6. 7 Bountiful by nature 1. 19. and 24. 19. and 40. 28. and
63. 10. and 64. 4 Gracious by nature 55. 7, 8 The comforter of his Church 51.
h6 The creator of all 37. 15 Why called Isaiahs God 7. 13. and 51. 21 Why
called the holy one 1. 2. 6. and 40. 25. and 43. 15 Why called God of Israel
21. 10 Why called Lord of hosts 3. 1. and 14. 22. and 21. 10. and 51. 15 and
54. 5 God the only teacher of his Church 2. 3. and 8. 19. and 30. 21. and 41.
21. and 48. 17. and 54 13. God the only Lord by nature 11. 15 Only conducter
of the faithful 35. 9 Why called the former of Israel 17. 7 Why compared to a
lion 31. 4. and 38. 13. and 40. 18 And why compared to a mother 42. 14. and 46.
3. and 59. 15. and 63. 9. and 66. 12. Why called the mighty one of Israel 1.
24. and 30. 29 Why compared to fire 33. 15 Why called the mighty one of Jacob
60. 16 God faithful and true 42. 9. and 49. 7 Creator of Israel 17. 7. and 22.
11. and 27. 11. and 43. 1. and 45. 11 Enemy of the proud 2. 11 Judge of the
whole world 3. 13. and 5. 16. and 19. 14. and 21. 15. and 22. 14. and 33. 22.
and 59. 12. God the only Lawgiuer 33. 22 God the only King ibid. Only wise
31. 2 Only Savior 43. 11. and 65. 8 Only husband of his Church 57. 8 God
merciful 54. 10. and 55. 7 Almighty 41. 22 The creator of his Church 22. 11
The feeder of his flock 14. 30. and 44. 6 How he is near us 55. 6 How we must
seek him 9. 13. and 30. 4. and 55. 6. and 65. 10 In what sense said to be
first and last 41. 4. and 44. 6 King of Jacob and Israel 41. 21. and 43. 15.
and 44. 6 Always like himself 2. 3. and 14. 1. 27. and 26. 4. and 31. 5. and
41. 9. and 44. 6. and 46. 4. and 48. 12. 16. and 51. 6. 9. and 59. 20. and 63.
7. God the fear and dread of his people 8. 13 The perpetual protector of his
Church 37. 35. and 54. 14 True in all things 14. 26 The chief minister of his
word 50. 8 A most just revenger 9. 19 Why he is said to hasten his work 21. 16
He works three ways by men 10. 5 How he works by Satan 19. 4 How he handles
the reprobate 16. 3 Why he handles the obstinate so severely 1. 7 God draws
men to him by two means 65. 2 How he appeared to the fathers 6. 1 God hears
two ways 37. 4 Why he does good to his Church 42 21 How God created all things
together 48. 13 Why he deferres his help 42. 14. and 51. 9 Why he deferres to
punish the wicked 10. 3. and 13. 6. and 18. 5. and 26. 21. and 28. 24, 25. and
63. 4. 65. 6. and 66. 18. God teaches two ways 54. 13 He hears two ways 65.
24 Only one true God 47, 8 How he blindes and hardens men 19. 14. and 44. 18.
and 63. 17 He can manifest his power every where 14. 25 God has a special
care of his elect and faithful ones 1. 17. and 8. 14. and 11. 11. and 13. 1.
and 14. 1. 5. 7. 14. 25. 30. 32. and 15. 1. and 16. 3, 4. and 17. 3. 13. 14.
and 18. 4. 7. and 21. 1. 12. and 26. 1, 4, 7. and 27. 2. 3. and 30. 25. and 31.
5. and 33. 2. and 37. 7, 9, 30, 31, 35. and 41. 10, 18. and 42. 14. and 43. 3,
7. and 45. 4, 12, 18. and 46. 3. and 48. 16. and 49. 9, 15, 16, 24. and 51. 3,
6, 22. and 54. 17. and 57. 1. and 58. 11. and 5. 59, 18. and 60. 2. and 62. 12.
and 63. 9. and 65. 8. God dwells always in his Church 10. 19 How God drives men
into error 63. 7 He beholds the heart 1. 16 Never angry causlesly 24. 19 Why he
swears, and that by himself 14. 24. and 45. 23. and 62. 8 God speaks after
the manner of men 1. 24. and 5. 3. and 6. 8. and 14. 22. and 43. 24. and 48. 18.
God cannot hate his chosen 27. 4 God commands two ways 10. 6 He punishes men's
impiety two ways 29. 11 How God reigns 51. 4 Why he reiects the ceremonies
which himself has commanded 1. 11 How God sanctifies his chosen 8. 14 God
robbed of his honor in the Papacy 43. 11 God all-sufficient in himself 40. 10
The faithful content themselves with one God only 8. 7, 19. and 10. 21 How he
is said to rise 2. 19. How he handles the wicked 9. 12 In what time he comes
50. 2 God calls two ways 44. 7 God allures men to repentance by two means
22. 12 How and how far he serves himself of the wicked 7. 18. and 10. 5. 15.
and 13. 3. 17. and 14. 21, 22. and 21. 7. and 27. 7. and 36. 19. and 43. 14.
and 45. 7. and 54. 16, 17. God sometimes chastens the wicked by degrees 24. 22
God loves his chosen with an infinite love 40. 3. and 42. 14. and 43. 4. and 46.
3. and 49. 11, 15. and 53 10. and 59. 18. and 65. 19. and 66. 12, 14. How great
Gods authority is 45. 9 To whom God promises succor 42. 16 Gods love to his
Church 1. 9 Gods secrets must not be searched into 14. 26 His counsel must not
be balanced by our reason 26. 3 His counsel manifested in his word 46. 12
His counsel unchangeable 14. 27. and 38. 4. and 65 15 What his purpose is in
requiring sacrifices 1. 11 God, a wonderful workman 10. 7 God rules all
actions 10. 15 Why God is said to hold in the Ministers with his hand 8. 11 God
will be a sanctuary to such as sanctify him in their hearts 8. 14 He pleades
not with us to pursue us in rigor 1. 18 He judges otherwise then men do 1. 15
He cannot away with excess 3. 24 What is meant by the turning of his hand 1.
25 In wrath he remembers mercy 1. 9 God takes strength from bread two ways 3.
1 Nothing can please him that comes not from a pure conscience 1. 18 God the
author both of weal and woe 62. 8 Godliness has the promise both of this
life, and of that to come 65. 10 Two offices of godliness 58. 6 The golden
world 11. 6 Not unlawful to have abundance of gold and silver 2. 7 Good
always mingled among the bad 2. 4. and 8. 14. and 26. 2. and 6. 21 The good,
thin sown in Isaiahs time 26 2 Goodness of God toward his children 41. 13
Goodness of God manifested in Christ 12 3 Wherein the sovereign good consists
64. 6
Gospel. The Gospel the spiritual food of the soul 25. 6. and 55. 1 A two
edged sword 11. 4 Why compared to a Sine 60. 21 Why compared to a standard 11.
12 Gospel, the doctrine of reconciliation 2 4. and 57. 19 Why so hated in the
world 23. 5 It came forth of Mount Zion 23. 6. 25 Preached thorowout the world
by Gods commandment 45. 20 The praise of the Gospel 25. 7 Upon whom it works
61 1 Who are capeable of it ibid. The doctrine thereof not new 42. 4 The
dignity and excellency thereof 33. 6. and 49. 9 The end 61. 1, 2, 3 Nature of
the Gospel 14. 21 And office 11. 4. and 49. 2 The preaching of the gospel
Gods gift 52. 7 Difference between the law and the gospel 56. 7. and 66. 21
The gospel not only sets God and man at one, but man with man also 2. 4 The
only means to quiet dissensions ibid. Gozan, a City of the Medes 37. 12
Grace. Fruits of Christ's grace 25. 2 Seven formed grace fondly invented by
Papists 11. 2 Grace of God preuents men 19. 20 Gods grace freee 14. 21 Praise
of Gods grace 43. 7 To be published and communicated to all 35. 4 Contempt of
Gods grace shall be severely punished 5. 5 Tenure of Gods grace 41 8. and 46. 4
Grave put for death 53 9
H
HAnd of God never separate from his mouth 14. 26 Turning of Gods hand, what 1.
25 Hand put for succor 25. 10 To minister 53 10 To work 26. 11 Put for rule
11. 14 They were wont to spread the hands in prayer 1. 15 What profit comes by
handicrafts 3. 2 Wherein true happiness consists 25. 8 God is said to hear
two ways 65. 24 No true fear of God, where the hearing of his word is
contemned 50. 10 Integrity of the heart required 29. 13. and 38. 3 Hearts of
men in Gods hands 13. 3, 14. and 19. 2 Heaven spread out like a curtain 40. 22
How heaven is said to be Gods seat 66. 1 To break the heavens, what 63. 19
Heavens new 65. 17. 66. 22 Help of the wicked vain 30. 1. 31. 1 How
farreforth it is lawful to seek the help of man 8. 7 Hell taken for the
grave 5. 14 Heshbon a city of Moab 15. 4 Hezekias a lover of peace 36. 3
Wonderfully troubled 37. 1 His faith 34. 4 His sickness 38. 1 His pride 39. 2
His sin 39. 2, 5 The highest service we can perform to God 6. 3 History of
Alexander 45. 4 Of an ambitious Preacher 42. 4 A pleasant history of Maximilian
the Emperor 10. 11 History of Sir Thomas Moore 22. 17 Use of histories 26. 2
Why God uses the word Hissing, rather then the sound of a trumpet 5. 26 The
reason why the Prophet uses this word Ho, 55. 1 Hobgoblins 13. 21. and 34. 14
The holy Ghost sends the Prophets 48. 16 The holy Ghost God eternal 6. 10. and
48. 16 Why compared to water 1. 16 The true teacher of the faithful 29. 24.
and 53 1 His efficacy must not be separate from the preaching of the Gospel
49. 22. and 59. 21. See Spirit Hope ought to be confirmed by the remembrance of
benefits formerly received 11. 11. and 22. 10. and 29. 22. and 30. 18. and 37.
31. and 41. 5. and 42. 9. and 43. 3. 16. and 44. 24, 27. and 48. 21. and 51. 9.
and 63. 7 and 64. 3. It is not expedient that the faithful should fix their
hopes upon earthly commodities 65. 13 House put for Temple 15 2 House of David
put for the Kings palace 7. 2. and 22. 22 House of prayer 56. 7 House put for
all ceremonies 66. 1 Humanity commended 11. 4. 6 and 16. 4, and 53. 7. and 57.
15. and 59. 34. and 61. 1. Humility the beginning of faith 43. 10 How
necessary in the faithful 16. 7. and 26. 5. and 30. 17. and 57. 15. and 61. 1.
and 66. 2. Humility of Christ 7. 15. and 42. 2. and 52. 1 Husbands proper
office to provide for the family 4. 1 Husbandry a gift of God 28. 29
Hypocrisy the mother of all vices 10. 6 Always joined with disdain and pride
65. 6 Discovered by the Gospel 32. 5 How detestable 1. 15. and 9. 17. and 10.
6. and 26. 2. and 29. 13, 14. and 48. 1, 2. and 50. 10. and 63. 8. and 66. 17.
Discerned from Gods true service by the works of charity 1. 18 No true prayer
where hypocrisy reigns 1. 15 Hypocrites greatly given to ceremonies 1. 11, 18
Mingled among the faithful 1. 28 Always proud 65. 5 How they seek God 9. 13
Why compared to bulrushes 58. 5 Casheried 52. 1 Their fond confidence 10. 20,
22 Their complaint against God 1. 18 Their babbling 1. 15 Their customs 1. 22
Their works abominable before God 58. 4 Their prayers and sacrifices vain 1.
15 Their vows what 19. 21 They only gape after earthly felicity 1. 19 They
are wont to quarrel with God 1. 18 Threatenings must be redoubled against them
4. 1 Hypocrites only careful about ceremonies 1. 18 Never the better for the
promises 1. 28 How they must be handled 1. 4, 10, 18 Distinguished from the
faithful 65. 13, 14
I
Jacob put for the ten Tribes 17. 4 How he is said to be confounded being
dead 29. 22 His wrestling what 48. 1 Iauan, what 66. 9 Iazar, a City of Moab
16. 8 Idleness condemned 32. 9 It is begotten by riches and abundance 32. 10
What use we are to make of the furious zeal of Idolaters 44. 14 Idolaters
vain and miserable 41. 2, 9. and 44. 9 Their zeal 44. 12 Their hypocrisy 10.
10 Their horrible ruin 1. 31. and 2. 18. and 65. 12 Their liberality 65. 11
Carnal sense the schoolmaster of Idolaters 16. 12 They wholly depend upon
events ibid. Their obstinacy 2. 20. and 44. 19 Sottishness 42. 17 Fury 46. 6
Idolatry possesses men's minds 1. 29 How augmented 41. 7 The spring of all
mischiefs 27. 9 The most hateful kind of whordome 57. 5, 7 How detestable 41.
22, 24 From whence it springs 40. 19 Outward idolatry condemned 2. 8 How
fearful we should be of being corrupted with idolatry 44. 14 Idol
ministers 56. 10 Roman idol 60. 14 Idols matches to kindle Gods wrath withal
1. 31 Things of naught 2. 8 They must be utterly rejected 17. 8. and 30. 22.
and 31. 7 How they are said to be made of naught 41. 24 The works of men's hands
2. 8. and 17. 8. and 31. 7 The trust in idols vain 8. 21 Their Oracles, how
ambiguous and deceitful 41. 9, 22 Their vanity how great 41. 29. and 46. 2
Idumeans, and their beginning 63. 1 Sworn enemies of Gods people 63. 1, 2
Their ruin foretold 34. 1, 10, 11. and 63. 1 Iehu profaned Baals altars 30.
22 Iereboam has many followers 22. 23 Jerusalem miraculously saved 10. 32 Why
called the City of God 45. 13 Why called the daughter of Zion 1. 8 Why called
City of vanity 24. 10 How said to be formed of old 37. 26 How she is said to
have played the harlot 1. 21 In what sense called virgin 37. 21 How her
foundations are said to be everlasting 44. 7 Jews. Jews original 41. 4. and
43. 27. and 51. 1. and 65. 7 Apostataes 1. 4 Bold in forging fables 37. 36. and
40. 31. and 48. 21 Corrupters of the Scripture 49. 6 Why called a nation
spoiled 18. 2 A pattern of cursing 65. 15 Their children degenerate 29. 22. and
31. 6. and 48. 1 and 57. 3 How enemies of God 1. 24 Inexcusable 2. 5, 3. and
31. 4. and 40. 28. and 42. 20. and 44. 8. and 48. 5. and 50. 1, 2. and 65. 12.
and 66. 4. Defiled with the corrupt customs of the Gentiles 2. 6. and 48. 5
The first borne in the Church of God 14. 2. and 19. 25 Why compared to a worm
41. 14 They leaned upon the power of the Egyptians 19. 1. and 30. 1. and 31. 1
Why it is said they offered no sacrifices to God 43. 23 Their afflictions
diverse 1. 2 Their apostacy 1. 2, 4, 21. and 5. 24 Their insatiable covetousness
2. 5 Their blinding 6. 10. and 29. 10, 11. and 42. 19 Their wilful blinding
42. 21 Their woeful condition 3. 12 Their false confidence 30. 17 Their
rebellion and obstinacy 1. 5. and 6. 9, 10. and 9. 8, 13. and 22. 6, 7. and
29. 7. and 30. 1. and 31. 1. and 48. 4. and 49. 6. and 57. 10, 17. and 59. 1.
and 65. 2, 5. and 66. 4. Their distrust 30. 1. and 49. 14 A fable of theirs
touching Senacherib 37. 38 Their vain confidence 20. 1. and 22. 3. and 29. 1.
and 23. 1, 2. and 66. 1 Their boasting 57. 4. and 65. 15 Their hypocrisy 20.
13, 20. and 30. 10. and 58. 3 Their pride 22. 3. and 65. 15 Idolatry 1. 29. and
2. 8
Impudency 48. 3 Infidelity 65. 3 Ingratitude 1. 2. and 2. 5. and 5. 2. and
22. 11. and 24. 5. and 26. 10. and 27. 11. and 28. 7. and 29. 22. and 31. 1.
and 41. 9. and 46. 8. and 48. 3. and 50. 3. and 63. 8. and 65. 3 Their
desperate malice 1. 4 Their diseases incurable ibid Their fathers how wicked
43. 27 Their prerogative 19. 25. and 22. 1. and 42. 6. and 61. 9 Their
presumption 30. 12 Headiness 20. 2. and 26. 2. and 29. 1 Their sottish
brutishness 29. 9. and 42. 22, 25. and 57. 10. and 60. 9 Their superstition
65. 11. and 66. 3 Carelessness 1. 7. and 28. 9 Equality of Jews and Gentiles
45. 23 Why the Jews were discontented with their estate 8. 6 Titles given the
Jews to their disgrace 7. 13 Provoked by the Gentiles 2. 5. and 55. 6
Ignorance voluntary condemned 5. 13 Whether it be the cause of all evils 5. 13
Ignorance excuses not 27. 11 A learned ignorance 6. 4 Why the Hebrews call
all sins ignorance 27. 11 Of a simple and an affected ignorance 5. 13 Nothing
more unseemly in Ministers of the word, then ignorance 56. 10 Iim 13. 21 An
abomination to erect and set up Images 40. 18 Images held to be lay men's books
2. 8 And what fruit they reap by them ibid A wicked imitation 57. 5. and 66. 3
Immortality of souls 57. 2 Impatience must be corrected 16. 5 Impenitencie
how displeasing to God 22. 14 A great sin ibid. Implicit says of the Papists
what 52. 15 Imprecation of the faithful against the Babylonians 13. 12
Incredulity a dangerous sickness 42. 8 It only prouokes God to wrath 45. 24
The punishment of it 6. 10 Signs of infidelity 40. 5 Infidelity cause of
trouble in the mind 30. 15 Infirm, how they must be supported 42. 3
Ingratitude a detestable vice 44. 21 It ought to be eschewed 60. 15 Inhumanitie
flows from the contempt of God 59. 3 Inhumanitie condemned 16. 4 Innocence of
Christ 53. 9 Good intents of Papists confuted 66. 4 God reiects our good
intentions, if they be not warranted by his word 65. 7 Use and force of
interrogations 23. 9. and 43. 19. and 48. 11. and 51. 19. and 57. 6. and 63. 1,
12. All inventions of men condemned 1. 29 Why men please themselves so much in
their inventions 1. 12 Nothing angreth God more, then when we follow our own
inventions 65. 2 Invocation of Gods name accompanied with true repentance 19.
22 Invocation put for Gods whole service 64. 6 Very necessary in the faithful
41. 17. and 55. 6 Invocation of Saints departed, confuted 65. 24 True joy
flows from Gods favor 12. 2, 6. See Faithful, Wicked. Isaiah, the kinsman of
Christ 5. 1 Exposed to the outrages of the wicked 50. 4 Why he was commanded to
walk naked 20. 2 A Prophet appointed for the Jews 1. 1. and.6 and 23. 18 He
bewailes the desolation of the Church in pitiful manner 22. 4 Why he bewailes
the calamity of the Churches enemies 16. 9. In what sense he terms the Idols
profaned 30. 22 Why he separates himself from the crew of the wicked 42. 24.
and 59. 3 How he is said to command the Medes and Persians 13. 2. and 21. 2 He
speaks in the person of another 16. 9. and 21. 3 He represents Gods person 21.
2 Why he preaches to the afflicted Jews of his time 1. 7 How he is said to
see God 6. 1 Why called Gods friend 5. 1 His authority confirmed 6. 8. and 7.
11. and 13. 2. and 16. 13. and 50. 4 His invincible constancy 8. 8. and 22.
17. and 25. 1. and 30. 8. and 39. 3. 5. and 62. 1. Whether his nakedness was
unbeseeming him or no 20. 2 His vocation newly confirmed 6. 1 Isaiah the son
of Amos 1. 1. and 2. 1. and 13. 1. and 20. 2 Israel a name most honorable 1. 3
Named by way of dishonor 4. 7 Israel double 43. 6 Cause of the Israelites
ruin 17. 10 Their false confidence 17. 9 Their ingratitude 17. 9, 10 Their
disloialtie 17. 9 Their pride 28. 1 Italians, and the signs of their sorrow
15. 2 Judah put for the whole nation 1. 1 Iudeah and the ruin thereof foretold
22. 1 Why called the valley of vision 22. 1 Judea full of mountains 65. 9 Why
called I Will 20. 6 Judgments of God true 1. 15. and 59. 12 Why compared to fire
66. 15 Gods judgments against the wicked, terrible 9. 17 How they ought to be
pondered 19. 13. and 28. 13 Always most just 14. 21. and 16. 3. and 21. 2. and
30. 31. and 33. 1. and 39. 5. and 41. 15. and 65. 7. Their use 26. 9 To judge,
put to rule 2. 4. 16. 5 Judges ought to be eyes, ears, hands, and mouth for
the widows and fatherless 1. 23 Judges put for all sorts of governors 3. 2
Judgment put for right 40. 27 Taken for moderation in afflictions 30. 18. and
64. 8 Put for form of government 51. 4 For right 1. 17, 21. and 4. 4. and 32.
16. and 61. 8 For protection 16. 5. 59. 9 Justice taken for equity 33. 15 For
succor 46. 13 For protection and faithfulness 16. 5. and 45. 13. and 51. 5.
and 54. 14. and 59. 9 For integrity of heart 48. 1 For right 54. 17. and 62. 1
For a State well governed 48. 18 For testimony of justice 58. 8 For truth 63. 1
What true justice is 57. 1 It must be sought in God only 45. 25 Justice has
two parts 58. 7 Just taken for tried 41. 26
K
Keys of the kingdom of heaven what 22. 22 Keys a sign of possession ibid
Key of the house of David ibid The key that opens unto us the door of Christ's
kingdom 65. 2 King of Judah figure of Christ 14. 30 King of Babylon, why
compared to the morning star 14. 12 Cruelty of the King of Babylon 14. 17
His pride 14. 13 A King ought to be a father of the Country 22. 21 See Princes.
Duties of Kings 49. 23. and 60. 16 In what sense called nursing fathers of the
Church 49. 23. See more in 60. 11. and 62. 2 No true rest out of Christ's
kingdom 65. 21 Kingdom of Christ eternal 6. 7. and 16. 5 Established in
despite of all his enemies 29. 22 Why called the end of days 2. 2
Contemptible in appearance 53. 2 Kingdom of Christ and David, in what they
differ 2. 4 Kingdom of Christ not yet complete 60. 18 Prophesied of 2. 2
Peaceable 2 4 Spiritual 11. 2, 4, 14. and 16. 5. and 42. 1. and 56. 7. and 60.
2. and 61. 6. and 62. 6 Beginning of Christ's kingdom 53. 2 Kingdom of Judah a
figure of Christ's kingdom 33. 17 Why the kingdom of Israel is called
anointing 10. 27 Wherein the defense of kingdoms consists 19. 3 To bow the
knee before Christ, what it signifies 45. 23 The knowledge of Gods name
consists in three things 52. 6 Knowledge of God engraven in the minds of all
men 33. 15 The foundation of all true religion 19. 21 Men cannot attain the
perfection of it in this life 6. 2 Men may come to the knowledge of God by
bestolding the heavens 40. 26 Knowledge of God certain in the gospel 25. 9
How necessary the knowledge of God is 11. 9. and 26. 8. and 54. 13
L
FEw whilst they labor, fix their eyes upon Gods blessing 65. 23 Land of the
living 38. 11 Law and the Gospel wherein they differ 66. 21, 27 Law called
Oppia 3. 17 Law taken for gospel and doctrine 42. 4 For the word of God 2. 3
The praise of the Law 8. 20 The principal end and use of the law 45. 18. 19.
and 51. 4 The excellency of the Law 8. 20 How needful the publishing of it is
42. 21 The seat of the Law in the heart 51. 7 The difference between the law
and the gospel 66. 21, 23. and 61. 1 Leprosy a civil death 6. 1. 58. 4
Lenten fast 58. 4 Leuiathan what 27. 1 Lycurgus made no law against the
ungrateful 1. 2 Liberality of God toward his 12. 3. and 65. 10 True
liberality what 32. 8 Our life but a vain imagination, till Gods presence
has awakened us 6. 5 Life, how it ought to be ruled 33. 19 Life of man limited
38. 5 Shortness of man's life 38. 12 The end of man's life 38. 11. 18. 22
Fragilitie of man's life 40. 6 We must labor after integrity of life 26. 2. and
43. 23. and 52. 11. and 56. 1 How far lawful to desire long life 38. 10. 22
Light taken for prosperity 58. 8, 10. and 59. 9 No light where the doctrine of
the Prophets is wanting 60. 3 Libna a City what 37. 9 Lip put for tongue 19.
18 To look put for hope 20. 3. and 31. 1 To look to God what 17. 7 No love
comparable to Gods love 63. 9 Infinite love of God toward his 40. 3. and 42.
14. and 43. 4. and 46 3. and 49. 11, 15. and 50. 10. and 59. 18. and 65. 19.
and 66. 14 Self love the welspring of all evils in men naturally 11. 9 A
notable description of Gods love 65. 19 Lucifer held for king of devils
absurdly 14. 2 Judgment day terrible 10. 3 Luther a Prophet of God and of his
death 57. 1
M
MAdian 10. 16 Madianites subdued by Gedeon 9. 4 Magike condemned 19. 3
Magistracy and ministry what 56. 10 Magistrates called of God 22. 20 A
singular blessing of God to have a good Magistrate 1. 26 Evil Magistrates sent
of God in his wrath 22. 21 Authority of Magistrates 3. 13 Their duty 3. 4.
22. 21, 24. and 20. 22 Consolation for them 22. 23 Their office an office of
labor 22. 4 They ought to be the fathers of the Country 3. 5 Gods majesty
opposed to the pride of Magistrates 3. 15 In what sense God is said to be our
maker 17. 7. and 37. 26. and 51. 13. See creation new. The word Many, taken for
All 53. 12 Whether marchandising be lawful 23. 15, 17 Often times replenished
with deceits 2. 16 Merchants of Venice 23. 8 Sacrifice of the Mass impudently
maintained by Papists 19. 19 Meeknes in Pastors required 42. 4 Meeknes
commended 11. 4, 6. and 53. 7. and 57. 15. and 61. 1 No true meekness without
the Spirit of Christ 11. 6 Meeknes of Christ 42. 3 All the promises grounded
upon the Mediator 9. 6 The benefit of meditation 26. 8 We must meditate in Gods
works of old 51. 9 What ought to be our meditation in the day of affliction
63. 7 The Medes authors of Babels ruin 13. 17 Their cruelty 13. 18 In what
sense called vessels of wrath 13. 5 How said to be sanctified 13. 3 Men
miserable by their own fault 59. 11 Why compared to grasshoppers 40. 22 They
do in vain promise unto themselves any certain abiding here 34. 17 To trust
in men vain 29. 5 Their felicity consists in obedience 1. 19 Their glory
vain 19. 11 Their blockishnes 55. 2 Their hearts are in Gods hands 13. 3. 14.
and 19. 2 Their condition out of Christ 49. 8. 9 Their nature before their
conversion 65. 25 Men's days limited 38. 5 That which is attributed to them,
is taken from God 31.3 Their power not to be feared 7. 4 Why that is sometime
attributed to men, which belongs to God 1. 16. and 41. 16. and 45. 14. and 62.
12 God corrects in measure 27. 8. and 64. 9 Menaces of the Prophets to be
feared 13. 5 Mercy a testimony of piety 1. 18 It ought to be preferred before
sacrifices 58. 9 To whom it is promised 64. 11 Mercy of God great 23. 17. and
19. 24. and 30. 18. and 31. 6. and 33. 2. and 40. 2. and 54. 7, 10. and 55. 7.
and 57. 16, 18. and 63. 7. 15. Nerits of men refuted 43. 4, 25. and 44. 2. and
63. 7. and 65. 2 What ought to be the principal care of Ministers 62. 1
Ignorance in Ministers unseemly 56. 10 Ministry of Christ effectual 42. 4. and
53. 10 A commendation of the ministry of the word 50. 10. and 62. 7 With what
authority Ministers must be furnished 21. 10 What a majesty the word has in
the ministry of man 13. 2. 4. and 21. 2 A lesson for Ministers 2. 10 The voice
of Gods Minister, the voice of God 50. 10 Ministers must look to meet with
oppositions in their ministry 50. 6. See Miracle. What discretion ought to be
in Ministers 1. 28 Miracles joined with the word, are as seals put unto it 7.
10 No new miracles must be forged to purchase authority to Christ 1. 3 Use of
miracles 7. 10 It is a miracle that a faithful Minister should stand 49. 2
Moabites and their original 15. 11 Their cruelty and inhumanitie 15. 1. and
16. 3. and 25. 10 Their ruin foretold 15. 1 Their flight 15. 4. and 16. 2
Their obstinacy 16. 1 Their pride 16. 6 God must not be mocked 30. 28 Monks
and their vows 19. 21 Monarchy of the Babylonians composed of diverse nations
8. 9. and 17. 12 Stronger then other Monarchies 13. 11, 14. 26, and 47. 5
Monarchy of Tire very renowned 23. 12 Mount Olympus 2. 2 Mountain put for
Temple 16. 1 Moudt Zion put for the Church 10. 12 Consecrated unto God 18. 7
Mountain of holiness put for the rule of well living 65. 11 High mountain
for Babylon 13. 2 The multitude reiects the little flock 66. 5 In what sense
the word Murderers is taken 1. 15. 21 Music not to be condemned 5. 12
N
NAbalists described 58. 7 Nabuchadnezar Gods scourge 42. 25 Name taken for
renowned 62. 2 A new name given the Church 62. 2 Fathers must impose the name
upon their children 7. 14 Name of God for God himself 30. 27. 32 Name called
upon what 4. 1 Nature of Christ's kingdom 62. 6 Nature in a manner restored by
Christ 16. 8 Navigations not to be condemned 2. 16 Nebo an Idol of the
Chaldeans 46. 1 A City of Moab 15. 20 No new thing for brethren in the Church
to be enemies 66. 5 New heavens and a new earth 65. 17. and 66. 22 New for
notable and excellent 42. 10 Nilus 11. 15. and 18. 2. and 19. 5 A flood
watering Egypt, and serving in stead of rain for the Country 19. 7 The drying
up of Nilus, a sign of barrennes ibid. Niniue the capital City of the
kingdom of Ashur 37. 37 Noph a renowned City in Egypt 19. 13
O
OBedience the mother of true religion 1. 29 Most acceptable to God 1. 12. 19.
29. and 6. 8. and 43. 23. and 58. 14. and 65. 4. Obedience nothing without
faith 65. 11 Passive obedience of Christ 53. 7 Christ's obedience absolues us
before God 53. 11 Obediencee to the first Table, must be tried by obedience to
the second 1. 18 Obedience better then sacrifice 1. 29 He that is oldest in the
Church, must resemble a little child 66. 11 Oath, a kind of Gods service 19.
18. and 45. 23. and 48. 1. and 65. 16 An oath must be taken with reverence 45.
23. and 62. 8 Form of an oath in the Scriptures 5. 9 Why the form of an oath
is not fully uttered 14. 24. and 62. 8 How much an Omer contains 5. 10 Onias
and his counsel to Tholemeus 19. 19 Oracles of the Idols false 41. 22. and 42.
9 Oreb a City, whence it took her name 10. 26 Order perverted 5. 27. and 38.
22 God has care of orphans 1. 17. 23 Ornaments of the Popish Church 48. 18
Organs 1. 30 Ouerweening of the Jews 29. 9. and 57. 10 Pride and ouerweening
vain in the wicked 5. 26. and 7. 2. and 9. 19. and 16. 1. and 24. 17. and 28.
15. 18. and 29. 1. 15. and 32. 10. 17. and 47. 7. and 50. 11. and 59. 4
Ouerweening rooted naturally in the flesh 44. 19
P
THe impiety of the Papacy discovered by the gospel 32. 6 Papists the sworn
enemies of the gospel 34. 5 Why they cannot agree with the gospellers 31. 3
Papists abhor gospellers as strange monsters 8. 18 Papists confound remission
of sins with repentance 59. 20 Papists join God with Idols 17. 8 Papists rob
God of his honor 43. 11 What schoolmaster has taught the Papists to speak
like Christians 36. 13 Papists glory in their multitude 44. 11 How Papists take
Kings for nurcing fathers of the Church 49. 23 Papists prefer their idle
ceremonies before the true Sacraments 20. 2 Papists will none of Christ for
their teacher 55. 4 Whence the Papists fetch their authority for abstaining
from flesh 22. 13 Whence the Papists prove auricular confession 38. 15 Whence
they have drawn their seven formed grace 11. 2 How they establish their free
will 1. 19. 20 How they prove the dead see all we do 29. 22 Upon what they
ground the intercession of Saints 37. 35. and 63. 17 Pride of Papists 1. 26.
and 8. 14. and 41. 19. and 61. 3 Their boldness in profaning Gods mysteries
1. 3 Their sottishness touching the worship called Dulia 2. 8 Their
execrable blasphemy touching the reading of the Scripture 48. 17 Their
blindness 44. 15 Their slanders against the Ministers of the gospel 32. 6. and
36. 7. 10. 14. and 54. 17. Their conscience always in perplexity 32. 18 How
vain their service is 29. 13 Their childish distinction touching remission of
sins 33. 24. and 38. 17. and 43. 25. and 53. 5 Their doctrine touching
repentance 55. 7 Their Church what 11. 9. and 28. 17. and 33. 6. 22 Their
Bishops what 48. 16 A fable of theirs touching the Ox and the Ass 1. 3 Their
implicit faith 43. 10. and 52. 15. and 54. 13 Their opinion touching the work
wrought 1. 11 Their felicity 46. 5 Their fury in maintaining their
superstitions 44. 14 Their idolatry 1. 29. and 40. 18. and 41. 7. and 44. 10
Their impudency 11. 4 Their woeful perplexity of spirit 28. 12 Their vain
travails 30. 6 Their bounty in Idol worship 65. 11 Their language heretofore
barbarous, now what 36. 13 Their obstinacy, and whence it springs 41. 1 Their
sacrifice full of sacrilege 61. 9 Their sacraments what 20. 2. and 66. 23 Their
satisfactions confuted 33. 24 Their hurtful simplicity 6. 4. and 44. 20 Their
superstitious service of Angels 37. 36 Their extraordinary prayers 16. 12 Their
bragging 1. 30. and 29. 14. and 36. 19. and 45. 20. and 49. 21. and 62. 5.
Their vows what 19. 21 Pastors. Pastors must not only feed, but defend the
flock 62. 6 Pastors faithful, a singular blessing ibid. How necessary in the
world 49. 17 Why so hated of men 30. 10 Exposed to the slanders of many 29. 21.
and 50. 6. 8. and 51. 8 All Priests 23. 18. and 61. 6. and 66. 20. 21 How the
spouse of the Church 62. 5 They have need of confirmation 8. 11 How they are
said to remit sins 43. 25. and 63. 12 Their cheerfulness 51. 8 Covetousness
in them condemned 56. 10 What the authority of Pastors is 43. 25. and 47. 1
Their condition 50. 6. and 51. 8 Their consolation 6. 10. and 8. 16. and 28.
14. and 29. 21. and 49. ^. and 51. 16. and 62. 7. Their constancy and
magnanimity 8. 16. and 29. 21. and 50. 7 Their contempt 59. 21 Drunkenness
detestable in Pastors 56. 12 Confidence of Pastors 7. 13. and 50. 8 Their glory
^9. 5 Their labor most acceptable unto God ibid. Their meeknes 42. 3 Their
conflict 42. 1. and 49. 4. and 50. 7 Their sending 52. 7 Their duty and office
2. 10. and 5. 23. and 7. 13. and 11. 4. and 21. 10. and 22. 4. and 35. 3. 4.
and 39. 3. 8. and 40. 6. and 42. 3. and 47. 1. and 49. 3. and 50. 4. and 51. 6.
and 56. 10. and 62. 1. 6. 10. 11. Two offices in Pastors 4. 30 Their prayers
62. 7 They must be regarded 46 23 Their patience 51. 8 How necessary their
presence is 49. 17 Their discretion 1. 28 Complaint 49. 3. and 53. 1 Severity
58. 1 Vehemency ibid. Slothfulnes condemned in Pastors 56. 10. 11 What care
Pastors ought to have for the salvation of the people 6. 11 What trust God
commits to Pastors 5. 1
Patience. Patience of God 42. 14. and 57. 11. and 65. 6 Gods patience must not
be abused 65. 6 Patience necessary in the faithful 13. 22. and 16. 5. and 18.
7. and 24. 22. and 26. 8. and 20. 21. and 30. 18. and 33. 2. and 34. 8. 16. and
40. 26. 31. and 42. 10. and 45. 9. 15. and 49. 14. and 51. 4. 7. and 53. 7. and
61. 7. and 62. 1. and 65. 24.
Peace promised to the Church 11. 13 Peace put for prosperity 9. 6. and 26. 3.
12. and 48. 18. and 52. 7. and 54. 10. 13. and 66. 12. Peace proceeds from
Gods presence 41. 10 Peace nourishes justice and integrity 59. 8 How far to
be sought 32. 17. and 38. 17. and 59. 8 Peace of conscience the fruit of the
gospel 2. 4 Peace of conscience proper only to the faithful 32. 18 The
gospel sets man at peace with man 2. 4 Way to seek peace 32. 17 Pellagians,
heretics 54. 13 Papists become Pellagians 54. 13 The chief perfection of
righteousness 1. 4 Three persons in one divine essence 6. 3. 8 Perseverance of
the faithful 25. 9 Whether Peter were at Rome or no 29. 1 Peter made to work
miracles by the Papists being dead, who protested he did none by his own power
being alive 48. 5 How Philosophers dispute of virtues and vices 32. 5. and 53.
11 Physic not to be contemned 38. 21 In what sense it is said that a pillar
should be set up in Egypt 19. 19 We must not plead nor contend with Infidels
36. 21 The end why we are planted in the Church 60. 21. and 61. 3 Two sorts of
planting 61. 3 Popery, with all the filth thereof, has proceeded from the
domestike enemies of the Church 24. 16 Popish Priests sacrilegious 61. 6 Popish
preparations 61. 3 Pope, Antichrist 49. 23 He impudently brags to be Christ's
Vicar 60. 10 Thunderings of the Pope against the true servants of God 66. 5 Why
his impiety was not forthwith discovered 29. 15 Whence it comes that many
defend his tyranny 49. 23. and 60. 9. 10 His Persian like pride 49. 23. and
60. 10 And his Clergies also 60. 10 A profane King 49. 23 Posterity of the
faithful blessed 65. 23 Posterity of unbelievers accursed 14. 20. and 34. 11
Care must be had of the posterity 38. 9. 16. 19. and 39. 8. and 41. 25. and
43. 10. and 49. 18. The faithful often times richer in their poverty, then the
greatest kings of the earth in their superfluity 65. 13 Power of Christ
invincible 9. 6 Power of God must be considered two ways 52. 10 Gods power
must be joined to his promises 14. 26 His power not idle 26. 4 It must not be
measured by men's capacity 21. 10 It must not be tied to second causes 42. 15.
and 43. 21 Invincible 28. 21 Infinite 21. 10. and 40. 22. and 46. 5. and 48. 13.
and 49. 24. and 50. 2. and 51. 9. 12. and 54. 5. and 55. 12, 13. and 59. 17.
and 62. 10. and 63. 5, 6, 15. and 66. 19. We must not fear the power of men 7.
4 Gods power must not be separate from his word 44. 24 What the Papists mean
by Gods absolute power 23. 9 How Gods power must be considered 14. 26. and 21.
10. and 29. 22. and 30. 30. and 40. 12. 26. and 42. 5. and 43. 11, 12. and 44.
24. and 45. 7, 16. and 49. 10. and 61. 11. Prayer put for Gods whole worship
64. 6 Prayer is a pouring out of our hearts before God 63. 16 Prayer necessary
in the faithful 41. 17. and 51. 9 To lift up prayer what 37. 4 Prayer of
Papists full of doubtings 33. 2 Prayer joined with praise 12. 4 Prayer and
preaching must go together 62. 7 Prayer the greatest service of God 56. 7. and
64. 6 Praises of God ought to sound without ceasing 6. 3. and 38. 18. and 42.
10. 12. and 44. 23. and 49. 13. Gods praises must proceed from affection of
the heart 25. 3. and 29. 23 Gods praises must be sounded forth every where 24.
16. and 43. 21 Who fit to praise God 12. 4 High Priest, a figure of Christ 29.
14 Evangelical priesthood 66. 20 Popish priesthood what 61. 6. and 66. 20
Prerogative of the Jews 19. 25. and 22. 1. and 42. 6. and 61. 9 Presence of
God chaseth away fear 41. 10. and 43. 5 A dangerous thing to accept presents
5. 23 Pride. Pride of women 3. 16 Pride of the Jews 22. 3. and 65. 15 Pride of
the Israelites 28. 1 Pride of the Moabites 16. 6 Pride of Papists 1. 26. and 8.
14. and 41. 29 Pride of Babels King 14. 13 How detestable pride is before God
2. 11. 13. 11. and 14. 15. and 16. 6. and 23. 9. and 26. 5. and 30. 17. and 39.
5. and 47. 8 Pride always joined with impiety 51. 23 How pride must be
repulsed 2. 22 Pride the cause of ruin 16. 6, 7
Princes are called of God 22. 20 They ought to be fathers of the people 22. 21
Their duty and office 30. 22. and 32. 1. and 49. 23 What course Princes take
to plunge themselves the more freely in their pleasures 21. 5 It is not always
profitable to be subjects of great Princes 8. 7. and 19. 4 Princes do great
harm by their bad examples 1. 23 Good Princes must not only care for their
own times, but for the posterity also 22. 24 Princes haunted with flatterers
19. 11 Princes must beware whom they advance 22. 18 A consolation for good
Princes 22. 23 Princes can hardly be brought to think themselves men 10. 18
Princes houses should be Gods houses 3. 14 Principality of Christ 9. 7
Profanation of Gods service 1. 14 Outward profession necessary in the
faithful 45. 25 Promises of God most certain 52. 6 We must patiently wait
for the performance of Gods promises 7. 9 The promises of God include temporal
blessings as well as spiritual 65. 10 The promises and the execution thereof
go together 52. 6 The necessity of prophecy 42. 27 In what time the
prophecies were gathered 7. 7 Prophecies were not orderly collected 22. 9. and
44. 17 Prophecies were not written for the men of one age only 30. 8 Authority
of prophecies established 44. 28 Use of prophecies 41. 17 Prophecies agreeing
to Christ 11. 1 Whereunto the prophecies tend 15. 1 Vehemency of the Prophets
1. 2. and 2. 9. and 3. 15. and 7. 13 Prophets put for all teachers 3. 2
Prophets Gods servants 43. 10 How far subject to Kings 39. 5 Why in old time
called seers 1. 1. and 21. 5. 6. and 29. 10. and 30. 10 Counsels must be asked
of the Prophets in times of calamity 37. 2 Prophets spoke not of themselves 1.
1 God never threatens so severely by them, but he leaves some hope of pardon
65. 8 They spoke of Babylon obscurely 21. 1. 3 The Prophets in their sermons
are wont to allude much to M^ses 3. 12. and 8. 20. and 11. 12. and 17. 9. 10.
12. and 22. 2. and 33. 14. and 34. 16. and 43. 5. 28. and 51. 3. and 65. 21.
Prophets the mouth of the Lord 8. 19 Why the Prophets are wont to enforce the
duties of the second Table rather then those of the first 1. 18 To reject the
Prophets, is to reject God himself 30. 10 The Prophets sometimes speak in the
person of another 21. 3 The doctrine of the Prophets indures for ever 37. 2
Prophets never void of humane affections 6. 11. and 22. 4 They often take upon
them the person of the Churches enemies 15. 5. and 16. 9. 11. and 21. 3 In
denouncing judgments against nations, they mention those things chiefly in
which they most abounded 16. 8. and 19. 8 Prophets, the friend of the
bridegroom 5. 1 Rules to be observed in reading the Prophets 1. 2. 18. 29. and
5. 17. and 7. 14. and 9. 6. 7. and 10. 24. and 13. 9, 10, 19. and 14. 22. and
27. 10. 13. and 30. 8. 25. 30. and 32. 1. 16. 19. and 34. 1. 4. and 41. 16. 24.
and 42. 1. and 44. 1. and 48. 14. 21. and 9. 1. 3. and 54. 2. and 55. 12. and
56. 1. 7. and 57. 3. and 60. 6. 10. and 61. 21. and 64. 1. 4. and 65. 13. 21.
and 66. 15 20. 25 Prosperity of Cyrus was of God 48. 15 Prosperity of the
wicked transitory 5. 16. and 7. 2. and 8. 21. and 13. 13. and 15. 4. and 16. 3.
and 18. 5. and 26. 14. and 28. 1. and 32. 10. and 34. 5. and 41. 14. and 45.
16. and 47. 7. 8. and 51. 7. and 61. 7. and 66. 15. Prosperity must not be
abused 38. 17 Prosperity must be used with sobriety 32. 13 God cannot endure
the proud 13. 11. and 16. 6, 7. and 22. 17 Prouerbiall speeches, applied to
sundry uses in the Commentary: and noted out in Chapter, verse, and section. As
like as one egg is to another 1. 10. 1 Every one has the heart of a King 2.
11. 2 The vine loves the high hills, the West, and the side of a wood 5. 1. 5 An
ill weed grows apace 14. 21. 4 Venetians revenues lie in the sea 23. 3. 1 The
daughter devoured the mother 23. 12. 3. and verse. 13. 2 Joy shines then in her
perfection, when there is matter of joy 24. 11. 2 The Church cannot flee her
home enemies 24. 16. 6 It is best never to be borne, or being borne, to die
quickly 26. 17. 4 To fly without wings 30. 1. 9 An hours bird 32. 8. 2
Caterpillars the calamity of the Commonwealth 33. 4. 2 A rich son of a
great thief 37. 10. 2 Man, a days bird 38. 13. 1 It is harder to bear
prosperity, then adversity 39. 2. 2 The Prophets trouble the feast 39. 3. 1
The Eagle in the clouds 40. 31. 2 Of a naughty Crow, a naughty egg 43. 27. ^
Money the sinews of war 44. 2. 1 To howl amongst wolves 59. 15. 1 Such birds,
such eggs 65. 7 A terrible proverb 65. 15 Providence of God how considered
10. 13. and 18. 4. and 23. 9. and 25. 1. and 40. 22. 23. and 42. 24. and 43. 9.
and 44. 28. and 45. 18. and 51. 6. and 54. 16. and 57. 1. 15 That the world is
guided by Gods providence, is not a thing easily believed 13. 1 In what sense
the word Proverb is taken 14. 3 Purgation of sins must be sought in Christ
only 53. 10 The Church is purged by the Spirit 4. 4

Q
Diverse questions with their solutions 1. 7. 18. and 6. 1, 4, 10. and 7. 12.
and 7. 12. and 10. 6. 15. and 11. 13. and 14. 21. 27. and 19. 14. and 27. 9.
and 37. 26. and 38. 4. 7. and 44. 25. and 54. 16
R
Rabbis coiners of fables 37. 36. and 38. 1 Rabbines careful obseruers of the
least pricks in the Hebrew 9. 7 Rabseche proud and a blasphemer 36. 10
Rabseches speech full of pride and outrage against God 36. 13 Rabseche the
devils mouth 36. 10 Rain, rare in Egypt 19. 7 Rebellion the cause of all evils
6. 10 Rebellion of the wicked 5. 24. and 16. 1. and 18. 19. and 57. 11
Rebellion of the Jews 1. 5. and 6. 9, 10. and 9. 8, 13. and 22. 6, 7. and 26.
7. and 30. 1. and 31. 1, ^. and 48. 4. and 49. 6. and 57. 10, 17. and 59. 1.
and 65. 25. and 66. 4 The true way to be reconciled unto God 59. 20 Renouncing
of our selves goes before our reconciliation with God 55. 7 Redemption a
special gift under the kingdom of Christ 35. 10 Redemption obtained by
Christ, ought to be prized above all other benefits 9, 6 Redemption wrought by
Christ, excels all things in the world besides 43. 18, 19. and 52. 12
Redemption must be extolled openly 42. 12 The end of our redemption 27. 13. and
29. 23. 32. and 35. 10. and 43. 2. and 44. 28. and 55 13 and 63. 18. Difference
between the redemption out of Egypt, and that out of Babylon 52. 12 The true
reformation of the Church 2. 4. and 32. 5. 8 Our regeneration only in part 65.
17 The end of our regeneration 43. 7. 21 See new creation. All religion out of
Christ, false and vain 25. 9 Difference between religion and superstition 41.
22 But one remedy left to cure our vices 66. 4 Remedies lawful not to be
neglected 31. 1 Popish distinction between the remission of the fault, and
punishment refuted 19. 22. and 33. 24. and 38. 17. and 43. 25. and 48. 9. and
53. 5 The renouncing of our selves needful 55. 7 Repentance true, what 19. 22.
and 30. 22. and 55. 7. and 59. 12 The doctrine of repentance handled 22. 12 The
nature of repentance handled 55. 7 What our repentance ought to be 27. 9
Repentance the proper work of the holy Ghost 1. 25 Repentance the beginning of
healing 6. 10. and 19. 21, 22 Repentance commended 31. 6. and 33. 15 It is the
proper work of God 1. 16 Late repentance taxed 16. 1. 3 No repenting in God
14. 27. and 19. 25. and 41. 9. and 59. 20 Repentance of Cain and Esau 26. 11
Repentance must never be severed from the promise of salvation 55. 7 Fruits of
repentance 1. 16. and 27. 9. and 31. 7 and 56. 1 Beginning of repentance 9. 21.
and 31. 7 Two parts of repentance 1. 16 The true means to attain repentance
ibid. Signs of repentance 22. 12. and 30. 22. and 37. 1. and 45. 14. and 58. 5
Repentance contains in it the change of the whole man 55. 7 When reprehensions
have their use 7. 13 Reprehensions how necessary 29. 21. and 39. 8 Reprobates
tamed by Gods scourges, and how 2. 17 How dead whilst they live ibid. How
instruments of Gods glory 43. 21 Inexcusable 10. 6. and 8. 4. and 16. 3. and
26. 10. and 40. 21 God forgets their names 43. 1 Their names not enrolled in
the book of life 4. 3 Difference between the elect and reprobate 5. 19 Where
God is said to rest 11. 10. and 29. 1. and 30 and 37. 10. 26, 35. and 45, 13.
and 66. 1.4. Rest for the Church 11. 10 Restoration of the Church, a singular
argument of Gods power 44. 26 The restoration of the Church belongs to God
only 11. 11. and 16. 5. and 28. 16. and 29. 18, 23. and 31. 7. and 32. 15. and
41. 20. and 42. 16. and 44. 3. and 44. 19, 24. and 52. 9. and 56. 8. and 60. 21
The restoration of the Church founded upon the kingdom of Christ 4. 2
Restoration of the Church a special work of God 25. 3 Resurrection of Christ
52 14. and 53. 8 Resurrection of the wicked shall turn to their ruin 26. 19.
and 66. 3 Resurrection common both to good and bad 26. 19 To return into ones
heart, what it signifies 49. 19 We must look for no new revelations 59. 21 Two
ordinary means of revelation 1. 1 Whether it be lawful to revenge 41. 15 No
riches can satisfy a wicked man 65. 13 To rise in the morning, what it
signifies 5. 11 How God is said to rise 51. 9 Rome once how great, and what now
37. 16 Rome a shop of all wickedness 37. 16 Romans sacrificed men alive 66. 3
Romanists ridiculous 29. 1 Whether Peter were at Rome ibid. Roman Idol 60. 14
Ruin of Assyrians foretold 30. 27, 28. and 33. 1 Ruin of the Babylonians
foretold 13. 1. and 47. 9 Of Damascus fortold 17. 1 Of Duma foretold 21. 1
Ruin of Idolaters fearful 1. 3. 1. and 2. 18. and 65. 12 Ruin of the wicked
incomprehensible 30. 33 Why compared to a sacrifice 34. 6 Ruin of the wicked
aduanceth Gods glory 63. 3 The horrible and sudden ruin of the wicked
described 3. 1. and 5. 16. and 10. 17, 18, 26. and 13. 6. and 14. 30. and 15.
1, 9. and 16. 9. and 17. 12, 14. and 18. 5, 6. and 19. 1. and 21. 10. and 24.
17. and 26 14. and 29. 17. and 30. 13, 14, 27, 30. and 31. 9. and 33. 4, 11,
23, 24. and 34. 4, 7. and 37. 38. and 40. 24. and 43. 17. and 47. 11. and 49.
24. and 50. 9. and 51. 23. and 59. 17, 19. and 63. 1. and 66. 6, 8, 24 Ruin of
Iudeah foretold 22. 1 Ruin of the Moabites foretold 15 1 Ruin of Palestina
foretold 14. 28 Ruin of Syria foretold 17. 1 Of the Idumeans 34. 1, 10, 11.
and 63. 1
S
SAbbath put for Gods whole service 56. 2, 6 The Sabbath of the faithful
perpetual 58. 13. and 66. 23 Why the Sabbath is carefully commanded 58. 13
Sackcloth and ashes signs of repentance 22. 12 Sackcloth in old time a garment
testifying sorrow 20. 2. and 58. 5 Whether sackcloth and ashes be fitting for
our times or no 58. 5 Sacraments must not be separate from the word 6. 7. and
20. 2 Sacraments serve as ladders to Gods children 37. 15 The end and use of
Sacraments 6. 7. and 20. 3. and 38. 7. and 40. 19 The thing it self is given
in the Sacrament with the sign 6. 7 Sacrifice of the Mass impudently
maintained by the Papists 19. 19 Spiritual sacrifices of the faithful 66. 23
Sacrifices of hypocrites execrable 1. 15 Sacrificing of children 57. 5
Sacrificing of men alive 66. 3 Three things noted in the sacrifices of the
Jews 60. 6, 7 Saduces and their error refuted 30. 32 Saints departed, no
intercessors 63. 16. verse. 17. sect. 6. and 65. 24 Whether the Saints dead,
pray for us 63. 16 Intercession to Saints invented by Papists 63. 17 How we
ought to esteem of the communion of Saints 63. 7 How Papists snatch up words
to prove the intercession of Saints 63. 17 Salmanazar an enemy of the Jews
9. 1 Salvation must be expected from God only 63. 5 Salvation of the Church
eternal 51. 2, 8 Salvation of the faithful joined with Gods glory 48. 11. and
64. 12 Salvation of the Church joined with the ruin of the wicked 59. 18 So
the salvation of the faithful 63. 4 and 66. 7 Why the Medes and Persians are
said to be sanctified 13. 3 Sanctuary, what 8. 14 Satan minister of Gods
vengeance 19. 14 How he serves to Gods glory in despite of him 2. 19 How he
turns men from their confidence in God 36. 17 How powerfully he works in the
wicked 57. 5 His guiles 26. 20. and 27. 1. and 30. 6. and 36. 6, 10. 13, 15,
16, and 37. 2. and 38. 3. and 40. 17. and 41. 12. and 42. 8. and 45. 20. and
49. 17. His tyranny against the Church 1. 21 His kingdom shall be destroyed
27. 1 Satisfaction for sin must be sought in God only 33. 24 Popish
satisfactions refuted ibid. Whence the doctrine of satisfaction came ibid.
Satyrs, how called by the Frenchmen 13. 21. and 34. 14 To say, put for to
think and resolve 3. 10 To Say, To conclude 14. 13. and 47. 7 Scribe put for
Clerk of the tributes 33. 18 The holy Scripture speaks after the manner of
men 40. 12. and 59. 16. and 63. 19. and 65. 6 How needful it is to read the
Scriptures 48. 17 Utility of the Scriptures 30. 8. and 48. 17 Use of the
Scriptures 50. 4 Seleucia builded near Babylon 13. 12 Inordinate use of smells
taxed 3. 24 Sennacherib slain by his own sons 37 38 His desperate fury and
cruelty 33. 7 His disloialty 33. 8 His pride 14. 14 He committed a double
blasphemy 10. 10 Sepulcher put for death 53. 9 Why the Angels are called
Seraphims 6. 2 The service of Angels 63. 9 Gods service spiritual from the
beginning of the world 1. 13. and 56. 7. and 66. 1 Service of God spread every
where 65. 16 Which is the true and lawful service of God 1. 12. and 45. 24 God
requires as well the outward, as the inward service 45. 23 Service to the
Saints in the Papacy 48. 5 Servants of God who 11. 3 How Christ is said to be
Gods servant 42. 1. and 43. 10. and 52. 13. and 53. 11. and 55. 5 Severity in
Pastors 58. 1 A note how to discern Christ's sheep from goats 65. 10 Shebna
the Chancellor of the King 22. 15. and 36. 3 A traitor and an hypocrite 22. 15.
and 36. 22 Why sent to Rabsheche 36. 3 In what sense his state is said to be
firm 22 25 His pride 22. 16 His banishment foretold 22. 15 Sidon, a City much
renowned, and her situation 23. 2 Signs for the situation, course, and diverse
aspects of the stars 44. 25 Signs of infidelity 5. 19 Signs of sorrow
particular to every nation 15. 2. and 32. 11 How far lawful to require
signs 7. 12 Signs of repentance 22. 12 Two sorts of signs 7. 12. and 37. 30
Use of signs 7. 10. and 38. 7 The truth never separate from the signs, though
distinguished 6. 7 The thing it self given in the Sacrament with the signs 6.
7 Siim, what 13. 21 Silence put for death 6. 5. 15. 1 Silo a flood 8. 7 Single
life rashly vowed among the Papists 19. 21 Simplicity of Papists, what 6. 4.
and 44. 20 That sin is not to be esteemed light, which God has forbidden 65.
4 Sin put for offering for sin 53. 10 Confession of sin necessary 64. 5
Remission of sins proceeds from Gods free mercy 43. 25 How men suffer
themselves to be allured by sin 5. 18 Sinners put for wicked 13. 9. and 33.
14 Slownesse of men to acknowledge Gods judgments 21. 3 Prosperity must be
used with sobriety 32. 13 Sobriety commended 19. 13 Senslesnes of the Gentiles
45. 20 Of men 55. 2 Of Idolaters 42. 17 Of the Jews 1. 7. and 28. 9. and 29.
9. and 57. 10 Wicked willingly senseless 26. 11 We must shake off all
senslesnes betimes 5. 4. and 7. 25. and 9. 14. and 31. 9. and 38. 17. and 41.
17. and 43. 5. and 44. 19. and 50. 4. and 51. 12. and 55. 2 The overthrow of
Sodom, set as an example before all reprobates 13. 19. and 34. 9 Song of the
harlot 23. 15 Song of Hezekiah 38. 20 A new song 42. 10 Of songs, See Chap. 5.
1. and 12. 1 Sons of the Church taught of God 54. 13 The Sophisters
distinction touching the fault and the punishment 33. 24. and 38. 17. and 43.
25. and 44. 22. and 48. 9 Tattle of Sophisters touching the nature and quality
of hell fire 30. 33. and 66. 15. 24 Sovereign good, what 64. 6 Soul immortal
57. 2 Principal parts of the soul 26. 9 Soul put for the stomach 5. 14
Error touching the sleeping of the soul 57. 2 Spaniards addicted to spoil in
wars 13. 14 Speeches of the wicked 9. 10. and 10. 13. and 22. 13. and 28. 15,
19. and 29. 15. and 33. 14. and 41. 5. and 56. 12. and 66. 5 Speech of
Idolaters 42. 17 To speak to the heart, what 40. 2 Speaking by way of
comparison 2. 12. and 43. 18. and 54. 9, 10, 13. and 60. 16 Wicked spirits why
they seek places uninhabited 13. 21 Spirit put for understanding 40. 14 Office
of Gods spirit 40. 7. Gods spirit wont to attribute that to men, which himself
works 1. 16 Why the Spirit of God has composed some writings in verse 5. 1
Stars infinite in their multitudes 40. 26 Their darkening put for Gods
extreme indignation 13. 10 Superstition the cause of all evils 1. 29 Always
accompanied with pride 36. 18 Painted over with the color of devotion 1. 29
Welspring of superstitions 8. 11. and 65. 3 Superstition of the Jews 65. 11.
and 66. 3 Of the Israelites 17. 8. and 65. 4 Of the Papists in worshipping
Angels 37. 36 Heap of superstitions in the Papacy 66. 3 How to discern
superstition 1. 14 Superstitions so many corruptions of Gods true service 1. 14
The superstitious sin not of ignorance 44. 18 Supply to the text 1. 16. and
8. 21. and 24. 11. and 44 2. and 50. 4 Extraordnary supplications of Papists
16. 12 Aganst such as deny the use of the sword 2 4. and 3. 4 Why God is feign
to swear 14. 24. and 45. 23. and 62. 8 To swear, put for Gods whole worship
65. 16
T
FEast of Tabernacles 54. 2 Why the Prophet urges the duties of the second
Table rather then those of the first 1. 17 The sum of the second Table 56. 1
The duties of both Tables must go together 56. 2 The observation of the whole
Law comprehended under the duties of the second Table 58. 6 Tail put for false
Prophets 9. 15 Tail put for the meaner sort 19. 15 True manner of teaching 2.
3. and 55. 12 None shall ever be a good teacher in the Church, that has not
first been a good disciple of the Church 50. 4 None fit to teach others, but
such as have been first taught of the Lord 50. 4 The excellency of Christ's
spiritual Temple 60. 17 Temple taken for all the ceremonies 66. 1 Why the
Temple is called Gods rest ibid. The Temple of God, indifferently in all places
66. 20 The Temple in Jerusalem enclosed with walls 22. 9 How it is Gods house
56. 7. and 66. 1 How sanctified 64. 10 The second Temple far inferior to the
first 60. 17 Temple of the Jews profaned 56. 5 Use of the Temple 64. 10
Temple of Ianus 2. 4 The Church compared to a Tent, and in what respect 54. 2
Tentations of the faithful 25. 21. and 36. 10. and 63. 17 To tempt God, what
7. 12 Testament old and new, how they differ 19. 21 Those taxed that allege
texts insufficient, to prove the thing in question 4. 2. and 6. 3. and 26. 12.
and 53. 8. and 64. 6 Thanksgiving commanded 12. 1. and 25. 1. and 26. 1. and
41. 16. and 42. 10. and 44. 23. and 49. 13. and 51. 11. and 52. 9. and 61. 11.
and 62. 9 Tartan a Captain 20. 1 Tharsis, and what is meant by it 2. 16. and
31. 1. and 66. 19 All things both in their beginning and end, depend upon God
19. 15 A great misery to be deprived of holy things 48. 19 Things to come may
be prevented three ways 19. 12 God has two thrones 57. 15. and 66. 1, 2
Titles of Christ 9. 6 The tongue the instrument of speech 3. 8 The tongue the
image of the mind 59. 4. and 33. 15 Tongue of the Egyptian sea 11. 15 The
tongue a pestilent enemy 54. 17. Tophet, how it signifies hell 30. 33 Men's
traditions and their worth 29. 13 Traffiques of Papists 33. 21 Tranquillity of
the faithful, what 3. 22 Travail of the wicked vain 17. 11. and 57. 9, 10
Trembling double 66. 2 What necessary in the faithful ibid. Trembling of the
wicked 7. 2 Trust in man vain 2. 22. and 29. 2. See confidence. Tumults of
people come of God 19. 2 Turks prosperity, whence it comes 36. 9 Pride of the
Turks in regard of their multitude 45. 20 Pride of the Turks in respect of
their victories 36. 19 Turks have gotten great ground within few years 13. 5
What god the Turks and Jews worship 25. 9 Whether towers and foretresses be
pleasing unto God 26. 5 Tyrants. How odious Tyrants are to all the world 14. 7
Why compared to clouds 14. 16 Their death 14. 7, 18 Their dominion proceeds
from Gods wrath 26. 13 Tyrants have their bounds limited, which they cannot
pass 33. 1 Tyrants had rather be feared then loved 14. 17 Tyrants flattered of
all whilst they live, but detested of all being dead 14. 20 Why God suffers
them to take their swinge for a time 22. 23
Tire, a rich and renowned City 23. 1 Why called the daughter of Zidon 23. 12
Why compared to an harlot 23. 16 The Monarchy of Tire in times past very
renowned 23. 12 The wealth of Tire described 23. 3 Her ruin foretold 23. 1 Her
conversion 23. 17, 18
V
VAlley of Achor 65. 10 Valley of vision put for Iudeah 22. 1 Vanity of men
40. 6, 15, 17, 30 Vanity of Idols, how great 41. 29. and 46. 2 Vain boasting
of the wicked 59. 4 Of Papists 1. 30. and 29. 14. and 36. 19. and 45. 20. and
49. 21. and 62. 5 Vanity and pride of the Jews 57. 4. and 65. 15 Vehemence of
Pastors 58. 1 Of the Prophets 1. 2. and 2. 9. and 3. 15. and 7. 13 Venice a
City most wealthy 47. 1 Never taken 23. 12 Venetians rich Merchants 23. 8
Victory of the Church certain 11. 14 Victory of the faithful certain 8. 9.
and 9. 4 Victory comes wholly from God 47. 6 We must not glory in victories
ibid. Christ's victory made ours 53. 12 Victuals are taken from men two ways 3.
1 Vision of God why it brings death to men 6. 5 Visions and dreams, the two
ordinary means by which God manifested himself to the fathers 1. 1. See Chap.
21. 2. and 22. 1. 5. and 29. 11. Visitation put for judgment 10. 3 To visit,
for to judge, and destroy 13. 11. and 24. 21 To visit, put for to behold 24. 22
In what sense God is said to visit 24. 2 Of the uncircumcised 52. 1 Union
between Christ and his Church described 49. 3. 8 A place misapplied to the
Virgin Mary 53. 2 Virgins but too curious in decking their hair 47. 2 For the
phrase of virgin daughter, see 23. 12. and 37. 22. and 47. 1 Voice of God
understood of dumb creatures 1. 2 Vows, a part of Gods worship 19. 21 Vows
of hypocrites, what ibid. Vows of Papists, what ibid. Gods word the rule of
vows ibid. Why God yields not forthwith to our vows 30. 19 In what sense
Vriah is said to be a faithful witness 8. 2 Gain of usury 58. 4
W
A Lawful war is a means of peace 3. 4 War not condemned of it self 2.
4. and 3. 4 War against the Babylonians, fierce and cruel 13. 12, 16 Wars
proceed from Gods wrath 32. 17 Every war not lawful 3. 4 Wars fall not out
by chance, but by Gods direction 5. 26. and 7. 16. and 13. 5. and 19. 2 Waters
put for the holy Ghost 44. 3 Water of the feet for vrin 37. 12 Water how
necessary 12. 23 Way put for estate and affairs 40. 27 There is but one way of
well living 33. 6 How Christ is called the way, etc. 49. 7 Ways of God for
happiness 64. 6 The weak must be supported 42. 3 How those of the West
testify their sorrow 15. 2 Wicked. The wicked shall be everlastingly tormented
66. 24 No peace to the wicked 57. 20. 21 The wicked inexcusable 10. 6. and 8.
4. and 16. 3. and 26. 10. and 40. 21 The wicked unprofitable 59. 6 The wicked,
ministers of Gods wrath 10. 5. and 17. 5 The wicked mingled among the good 1.
28. and 8. 18. and 11. 9 The wicked not to be feared 8. 12 How the wicked and
hypocrites must be dealt withal 1. 4, 10, 15, 18. and 2. 6, 10, 21. and 3. 9.
and 8. 18. and 9. 12. and 13. 9. and 28. 7, 22. and 29. 15, 16. and 30. 8, 15.
and 23. 14, 15. and 42. 3. and 48. 1, 22. and 36. 9. and 57. 3. 4, 15, 21. and
58. 1, 2, 8, 13. and 65. 15. and 66. 6. The wicked never the better for their
chastisements 8. 21. and 9. 10, 11, 26. and 28. 19. and 29. 2. and 57. 17 How
God blindes the wicked 44. 18 How they deny that GOD has formed them 29. 16
They cannot hurt as they would 7. 9. and 14. 25. and 17. 6. and 26. 5. and 27.
1. and 29. 6. and 33. 1. and 37. 7, 29. and 42. 8. and 43. 3. and 54. 16. and
59. 19. Their abundance accursed 55. 6 Their distress 21. 12 Their pride 8. 10
Their succor vain 30. 1. and 31. 1. and 57. 9 How their blasphemies must be
refuted 36. 21 Their blinding voluntary 28. 13 Their vain endeavors 17. 3. and
54. 15 Their estate miserable 3. 11. and 5. 18. and 15. 2. and 21. 12. and 28.
20. and 57. 2. 20. Their evil conscience 59. 12 Their vain and feeble
counsels 8. 10. and 16. 6. and 19. 3. and 33. 11. and 37. 28. and 47. 13. Their
company must be eschewed 33. 15. and 59. 5 Their vain confidence 14. 29. and
16. 9, 10. and 28. 18 Their joy accursed 22. 13. and 28. 11 Two sorts of the
wicked 66. 17 Their vain boasting 59. 4 Their ignorance inexcusable 27. 11
Their cruelty 59. 8 Their impudency 57. 4 Their horrible ruin unutterable
30. 33 Why compared to a sacrifice 34. 6 Their horrible and sudden destruction
3. 1. and 5. 16. and 10. 17, 18, 26. and 13. 6. and 14. 30. and 15. 1. 9. and
17. 12. 14. and 18. 5, 6. and 19. 1. and 21. 10. and 24. 17. and 26. 14. and
29. 17. and 30. 13, 14, 27, 30. and 31. 9. and 33. 4, 11, 23, 24. and 34, 4, 7.
and 37. 38. and 40. 24. and 50. 9. and 51. 23. and 59. 17, 19. and 63. 1. and
66. 6. 18. 24. Their labor is in vain 17. 11. and 57. 9, 10 Their memory
dishonorable 14. 22 Their death full of fears 57. 2 Their nature 5. 27 Their
works, what 59. 5 How God serves his turn of them 5. 26. and 7. 18 God hears
none of their prayers 59. 1 Their terrors come of God 13. 8 Their obstinacy 5.
24. and 16. 1. and 18. 19. and 48. 4. and 57. 11 Their prosperity transitory
5. 16. and 7. 2. and 8. 21. and 13. 13. and 15. 4. and 16. 3. 5. and 24. 14.
and 28. 1. and 32. 10. and 34. 5. and 41. 14. and 45. 16. and 47. 7, 8. and 61.
7. and 66. 15. Their resurrection shall turn to their eternal perdition 26.
19. and 66. 3 Their wisdom dangerous 5. 21 Their vain confidence 5. 26. and
7. 2. and 9 19. and 16. 1. and 24. 17. and 28. 15, 18. and 29. 1. 15. and 32.
10, 17. and 47. 7. and 50. 11. and 59. 4. Their posterity accursed 14. 20. and
34. 11 Their voluntary sottishnes 26. 11 Their estate easily overthrown 14. 3
How great their pride 2. 12 Their pride in regard of their victories 10. 10
Their pride shall be overthrown 2. 11 Their wicked sayings 9. 10. and 10. 13.
and 22. 13. and 28. 15, 19. and 29. 15. and 33. 14. and 41. 5. and 56. 12. and
66. 12 God spares the wicked sometimes, for the godlies sake 65. 8 We must not
always reason with the wicked 36. 21
Widows under Gods protection 1. 17. 23 The widows cause seldom defended,
and why 1. 7 Red wine, what it signifies in the Scripture 27. 2 East wind
hurtful to Iudeah 27. 8 Wind of the Lord for whirlewind 11. 15 Wisdom true,
what 33. 6 Christ's admirable wisdom 11. 3 Wisdom of the wicked dangerous 5.
21 In what sense God is called wise 31. 2 How the faithful may serve for Gods
witnesses 44. 8 One woolfe will not devour another 9. 19 Woes 3. 9, 11. and 5.
2, 21, 22. and 10. 1. and 28. 1. and 29. 15. and 30. 1. and 31. 1. and 33. 1.
and 45. 9 10. Pomp and pride of women condemned 3. 16, 17 Women bear in
sorrow because of sin 65. 23 Women's wandering eyes true messengers of a
dishonest heart 3. 16 What vice most predominate in women 3. 17 Women's
superfluity flows from pride 3. 16 Women's replies met withal ibid. A woman's
cabinet called a world 3. 17 Women made an vproare at Rome, because of a law
made for restraint of brave apparel ibid. Women afraid of Sunburning 3. 24
God shows an admirable power in women's bearing of children 66. 9 Word of God,
how eternal 40. 8 Why compared to letters sealed 8. 16 Why resembled to rain
55 10 Gods word the rule of vows 19 21 The rule of all our actions 29. 13 The
word must not be separate from the Spirit 59. 21 How the word blindes the
reprobate 6. 10 Why the word is preached to the reprobate 6. 10. and 8. 4, 16
Gods word suffices Gods people 14. 26. and 28. 12 Authority of Gods word 8.
20 Certainty of Gods word 52. 6, 7 Contempt of Gods word the fountain of all
evils 30. 9 Whence the obscurity of Gods word proceeds 45. 19 Gods word is
plain ibid. The majesty of the word 50. 10 Work put for judgment 5. 19. and
15. 19 New work put for extraordinary 43. 19 Work wrought a popish invention
11. 1 What the works of the wicked are 59. 5 Works of God how they ought to
be considered 5. 12. and 14. 5. and 34. 16. and 41. 5. The world as it were
renewed by Christ 65. 17. and 66. 22 Unthankfulness of the world 41. 5. and 49.
4 World taken for Babylon 13. 1 Taken for the reigons known to the Jews 4.
17. See 14. 26. and 24. 1. 4 Worm that dies not 66. 23 Worm Jacob 41. 14
Gods worship must be answerable to Gods nature 66. 1 Wrath of God much to be
feared 9. 14. and 13. 9 We must not judge of it by outward appearance 5. 26
How wrath is attributed to God 47. 6 Gods wrath toward the godly lasts not
long 12. 1. and 54. 7, 16. and 57. 16 Gods wrath against the wicked terrible
and insupportable 9. 18. 21. and 10. 4. 6. 25. 26. and 12. 1. and 15. 9. and
21. 17. and 24 2. and 26. 17. and 27. 4. and 28. 19 21. and 30. 32. and 34. 10.
and 38. 12. and 42. 25. and 63. 1. 3. 6. and 64 5. 8. and 66. 6, 15, 16, 19 Why
Gods wrath is compared to a fire 1. 31 Signs of Gods wrath in the stars 13.
10 An hyperbolicall description of Gods wrath 13. 10 God in wrath remembers
mercy 30. 18, 19. and 47. 6 and 60. 10. and 64. 11 In what sense God is said to
have things written before him 65. 6
Y
The acceptable year put for the preaching of the Gospel 61. 2 Year of
Iubile ibid. Years of an hireling 16. 14 Year of my redeemed 63. 4 A year in
days 32. 10 A child of years 65. 20 A sinner of an hundred years 65. 20
Fifteen years added to the days of Hezekias 38 5 Isaiah walks naked three
years 20. 3 Isles put for regions lying beyond the seaes 41. 1. and 42. 4. and
59. 10. and 60. 9. and 66. 19.
Z
Zeal put for indignation 26. 11 Inconsiderate zeal taxed 56. 4 The zeal of
the faithful moderate 36. 21 Zeal of Idolaters 44. 8 Zoan, a City renowned
in Egypt 19. 3 Zoar a town far remote from the Moabites 9. 5 Why compared to
an heifer of three years old 15. 5 Mount Zion consecrated unto God 17. 8 Zion,
a City of David 33. 20 Why preferred before all other mountains 18. 7 In what
time founded by the Lord 14. 32 Zion publishes good tidings 40. 9
FINIS.
Authors alleged in this Commentary: the third number notes the section.
ANacharsis, his saying 5. 9. 2 Aristotle 40. 31. 2 Athanasius 14. 16 Augustine
6. 4. 3. and 39. 5. 1 Taxed 41. 22. 7. and 42. 4. 4 A place of his alleged
against the Pellagians 54. 13. 6 Why Calvin is brife in his expositions 53. 5.
3 Caluins Institutions 58, 4 Chalde Paraphrast 11. 5. 2 Chrysostom his elegant
speech 5. 8. 1 His exposition taxed 53. 8 Demosthenes, his saying 47. 3. 1
Ierom 1. 2. 3. and 8. 7. 2. and 14. 18. 1. and 40. 2. 6. and 41. 14. 2. and 46.
7. 3. and 49, 12. 1. Horace 21. 16. 1. and 23. 16. 1. and 44. 15. 1 Jonathan
13. 15. and 38. 1. 5 Josephus 5. 10. 1. and 19. 19. 2 An history of his in 45.
4. 4 Isocrates 19. 1. 4 Lycurgus 1. 2. 3 Lucanus 4. 1. 3 Plato 3. 4. 1. and 11.
9. 1 Pliny 23. 4. and 37. 12. and 40. 31. and 59. 6 Physicians of our time 38.
21 Sayings of profane Poets 30. 27. 2. and 37. 10. 3. and 40. 26. 2
Oecolampadius 53. 9. 1 Satyrike Poet 14. 10. 2 Virgil 16. 10 Xenophon 13. 15.
1. and 21. 5. 1
The names of diverse persons mentioned in the Commentary.
ALexander 13. 3. and 23. 1. 1. and 45. 4. 4 Athens 16. 4 Apollos 41. 25. 3
Antiochus 54. 9. 3. and 54. 16. 1. and 56. 9. 3 Crassus 37. 1 2 Croesus 44. 2.
1. Saint Clade, Laudie of Lauretta 16. 12 Cyrus 44. 28. and 45. 1 Darius 21. 9.
1 Domitian 59. 12. and 59. 6 Dionysius a tyrant 28. 4. 1 Evil Merodach 14. 18.
1 Erasmus 22. 17. 7 Gabrias 21. 5. 3 Herod 60. 6 Iaddus 45. 4. 4 Joseph of
Aremathea 53. 9. 1 Jupiter 41. 25. 3 Jupiter God of the Merchants 65. 12 Lyddia
an ha^lot 23. 16. 1 Lucianists 28. 15. 3 Luther 57. 1 Maximilian the Emperor
pretily flouted by his Cook 19. 11. 5 Milo 51. 9. 6 Nebuchadnezar 23. 1. 1
Nerna 32. 1. 3 Nero ibid Onias 19. 19. 2 Parmenion 45. 4. 4 Philip King of
Macedon 47. 3. 1 Pyrrhus and Croesus 41. 22. 5 Saleucus 13. 12. 4 Thomas Moore
22. 17. 7 Zadius a Jew 40. 31. 2
FINIS.
PLACES CITED OVT OF THIS Prophecy, in the new Testament, and by Master Calvin
compared and reconciled. The first number notes out the Chapter and verse in
the Prophet: the second, the Chapter and verse in the books of the new
Testament.
Isaiah 1.9. Romans 9.2. Isaiah 2.21. Luke 23.30 Isaiah 6.10. John 12.41. Acts
28.25. Romans 11.8 Isaiah 8.1, 2, 13. 1. Pet. 3.14 Isaiah 8.14, 15. Matthew
21.44. Luke 2.34 Isaiah 8.18 Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.8. Heb. 2.13 Isaiah 8.20 Luke
16.29 Isaiah 9.2. Matthew 4.15 Isaiah 9.6. Luke 2.11 Isaiah 9.7. Luke 1.33
Isaiah 10.22 Romans 9.27 Isaiah 10.23. Romans 9.28 Isaiah 11.4. 2. Thessalonians
2.3 Isaiah 11.10. Romans 15.12 Isaiah 25.8. Revelations 21.4 Isaiah 28.12.
Matthew 11.28 Isaiah 28.16. Romans 9.33 Isaiah 29.13. Mat. 15.7, 8 Isaiah 31.5.
Mat. 23.27 Isaiah 35.3. Heb. 12.13 Isaiah 40.3. Matthew 3.3 Isaiah 40.14.
Romans 11.34 Isaiah 42.1. Matthew 12.18, 19, 20 Isaiah 45.9. Romans 9.20, 21
Isaiah 45.23. Romans 14.11 Isaiah 49.8. 2. Cor. 6.2 Isaiah 50.8, 9. Romans 8.33
Isaiah 52.7. Romans 10.15 Isaiah 52.11. 2. Cor. 6.17 Isaiah 52.15 Romans 15.21
Isaiah 53.1. John 12.37. Romans 10.16 Isaiah 53.3. Matthew 8.17 Isaiah 53.7. 1.
Pet. 2.22, 23 Isaiah 53.7, 8. Acts 8.32, 33 Isaiah 53.12. Mark 15.28 Isaiah
54.13. John 6.45 Isaiah 57.7. Matthew 21.13 Isaiah 57.20. Ephesians 2.17 Isaiah
59.7, 8. Romans 3.17 Isaiah 59.20. Romans 11.26 Isaiah 61.1. Luke 4.18 Isaiah 64 4.
1. Cor. 2.9 Isaiah 65.2. Romans 10.20 Isaiah 66.1. Acts 7.48. and 17.24
FINIS.
Faults escaped. The first number notes out the Chapters the second, the verse:
the third, the section: the fourth, the line.
R signifies read. P signifies put out. A signifies add.
Chapter 1. verse 7. section 3. line 21. add, the. 1. 16. 3. 16. read, cease.
1. 24. 3. 31. r. quiet. 3. 12. 1. 17. a. even. 5. 6 2. 10. a. ought. 5. 7. 2.
19. put out, 5. 9. 1. 20. add a. 6. 19. 1. 32. a. it. 9. 12. 1. 14. a. i. 9.
12. 1. 15. a. s. 9. 19. 2. 12. r. yet he. 14. 30. 3. 5. r. of which the King
was. 21. 1. 2. 2. a. that. 21. 5. 2. 10. p. yet. 21. 5. 2. 13. p. and. 22. 17.
2. 6. a. Now. 23. 2. 1. 20. a. loss. 25. 9. 3. 16. a. somewhat. 26. 21. 5. 12.
a. it. 27. 4. 2. 69. p. not. 27. 8. 4. 11. put; before and. 27. 8. 4. 12. a.
that. 30. 1. 6. 14. p. own. 32. 6. 2. 18. r. the, for sow. 32. 18. 1. 33. p.
s. 32. 19. 1. 11. a. we. 33. 15. 4. 6. r. polleth. 33. 22. 1. 1. r. sits. 34.
7. 1. 7. r. bounded. 34. 11. 2. 15. a. ought. 35. 5. 2. 13. a. swift. 35. 8. 4.
6. place period after the word before, and make period following, a comma. 35.
9. 1. 39. a. that. 35. 10. 1. 28. r. we. 35. 10. 3. 5. p. And. 36. 6. 3. 25. a.
not. 36. 16. 1. 10. mend thus: he covertly sets up himself, or the Assyrian,
etc. 36. 19. 5. 22. p. so. 36. 19. 5. 23. p. much as. 36. 22. 1. 26. a. nor
godliness. 37. 4. 2. 2. r. understood. 38. 10. 1. 24. p. rather. 38. 10. 3.
42. r. pangs. 39. 3. 2. 2. a. to. 40. 2. 4 17. a. will. 40. 11. 2. 5. r.
meeknes. 40. 24. 2. 3. r. tickle. 40. 30. 1. 26. p. prosperity. 41. 22. 3. 21.
r. rejected. 42. 3. 4. 7. r. furious. 42. 16. 3. 8. a. although. 42. 17. 2. 27.
a. their. 42 20. 1. 7. r. we. 44. 19. 1. 12. r. but. 44 24. 3 20 r. had. 45.
9. 3. 4. a. to. 45. 11. 5. 15. r. it. 45. 18. 6. 16. p. and not. 46. 6. 8. 3.
p. ing. 47. 13. 4. a note in the margin ill pointed. 48. 5. 2. ^. p. came. 48.
5. 2. 6. a. by. 50. 4. 5. 7. r. him. 51. 6. 1. 9. after tempests, a period. 54.
7. 3. 13. a. not. 54. 16. 3. 5. after simple, a period. 58. 4. 2. 16. a. take.
58. 6. 1. 3. recommended unto us. 59. 16. 4. 8. a. the. 61. 10. a note
misplaced in the margin. 63. 17. 6. 15. r. which as; for, with. 65. 12. 6. 3.
a. are. 65. 17. 2. 13. a. period.


