FOUR Godly sermons against THE POLLVTION OF IDOLAtries, comforting men in
persecutions, and teaching them what commodities they shall find in Christ's
church, which were preached in French by the most famous Clarke Ihon Caluyne,
and translated first into Latin and afterward into English by diverse godly
learned men.

PSALM. 16. I will not take the names of the Idols in my mouth.

Printed at London by Rouland Hall, dwelling in Golding lane at the sign of
the three arrows.

1561.

ROVLAND HALL TO THE READER.
THere be three causes specially that moves me to printe these sermons of
master Ihon Calvin the faithful servant of god and the apostle of our time.
The One is the worthiness of the matter set forth in these sermons. The other is
the plains and simplicity that this great clarke uses in all his sermons to
the people. The third is the reverent handling of the scriptures, without
tauntes, skoffes, or iestes, or any trifling tales, whereby our english nation
may se and judge what power the word of god has of it self, when it is most
naked and bare and void of that painted sheathe that men would put upon it. The
matter is mete for all men to know, and stands in these four points. First,
there is a general admonicion to fly idolatry. Secondly an exhortation to
follow Christ in suffering of persecution, and bearing of the cross. Thirdlye
the liberty to serve god, and the commodity to live in the church of god is
commended. Fourthly with how great pains and care this liberty to worship god
purely in some christen congregation oght to be soght for and desired of all
christians, is described. And for a conclusion there is addded the exposition
of the.87. psalm, which teaches that the church of god though it seem
miserable in this world, yet does it excel all the kyngdoms of the earth because
god loves it governs it, stablisheth it, multiplieth it, and takes the
count and number of his elect people out of it.

Concerning the second point. The simplicity is such, as our Savior Christ
and his apostles used in their sermons, of the which saint Paul speaks to
the Corinthia^s, saying that he came not with excellency of words, or of man's
wisdom to show unto them the testimony of God, lest the cross of Christ and
the power of God workyng thereby should be of none effect, whiles men should
attribute that to eloquence which only is wrought by the spirit of god in the
hearts of the faithful.

For the third: he observes the precept of saint Peter. If any man speak,
let him speak as the words of God So that all his sermons seem nothing else
but the sweet licour of the scriptures and lively word of god set furthe before
our eyes in Christalline vessels to entice us to behold them and to provoke us
to taste and to smell of these lycours of life which he brocheth unto us of that
abundance which god has given unto him in these our times. God grant us grace
thankefully to receive Gods good gifts in this and all other things offered
unto us. So be it.

A Sermon wherein AL CHRITIANS ARE MONIshed to fly the outward idolatrye,
taken out of the.iij. verse of the.xvj. Psalm.
I will not communicate with their bloody sacrifices, neither will I take their
names in my mouth.
THE DOCTRINE Which we shall entreat in this place, is plain enough and
easy, saving that the greatest part of those that profess them selves to be
Christians, do seek out and bring, I can not tell what subtelties to cloak
their evil withal. But the sum of this wholle doctrine is, that after we
know the living god to be our father, and Jesus Christ our redemer, we oght to
consecrate both body and soul unto him, who of his infinite goodness has
taken us into the number of his sons: and to acknowledge with all kind of
benevolence, honor, and obedience, that same benefit which our most dear
savior did vouchsaffe to bestow on us after he had bought it with so great a
price. And because we are bound not only to renounce al infidelity, but also to
seperat our selves from al superstitions, which do as well disagre with the true
service of god the father, as the honor of his son our savior and which can
by no means agree with the pure doctrine of the gospel and true confession of
the faith, I said this doctrine of it self to be so easy, that only the
practice and exercise thereof oght to remain unto us, saving that many me^ do
seek certain deceitful shifts, through which they will not be overcome in that
thing, the which is most chiefly condemned by gods own mouth. This cause
constrains us at this time to tarry longer in the declaration of this matter,
that every man may know his own duty, and deceive not himself, thinking that
he is escaped when he is covered, as the common saying is, under a wette sack.
But for that there be many of this opinion, whose churches ar thoroughly purged
from the filthiness, and idolatries of the papisme, that this argument or
treatice is but superfluous, before we pass any further, it is not
unprofitable to declare such me^ most foully to be deceived. First when it is
declared, how great an offense it is, for us to be polluted and defiled with
the idolatours, feininge our selves to cleave and consent to their impieties,
we are admonished to mourn for our former syns, and to ask of god forgeuenes of
the^ with all humblenes, and in this thing to acknowledge the singular benefit
which he gave unto us, drawing us forth of that same filth wherein we were
holden down and drowned. For we truly are not hable to set forth this so great
a benefit wortheli enough. And for that we know not what shall happen unto us,
and to what end God does reserve us, it is very expedient to be prepared and
armed in time, that into what state soever we shall come, or with what soever
temtations we may be oppugned, we never swerve from the pure word of god.
First it may be that many of this our church and congregation, shall trayueil
into some papistical country, who oght greatly now to be in a readiness and
armed to batel. Then albeit God does give us at this time liberty to serve him
purely and godlilye, yet we know not how long this our benefit shall continue.
Let us therefore take this time of our quietness and tranquillity, not as though
it shall always last, but as it were a time of truce, wherein god does give us
leisure to strengthen our selves, lest when we shall be called to utter the
confession of our faith, we be found new and unprepared because we contemned
the meditacion of that matter in due time. Nether truly ought we to forget in
the mean while our brethren which are kept under the tyranny of Antichrist,
oppressed with most miserable bondage, but to take, remembrance, pity over
them, and to prai god to strengthen them with that constancy, which he
requires in his word. We must also admonish and solicit them by all ways,
not to rest in places where men are fast on sleep in their voluptuousness, but
to apply diligently this thought, and will, that they confess the glory due
unto god. For we are not taught of god only for our selves, but that every man
after the measure of his faith, should brotherly communicate with his neighbors,
and distribute unto them that thing he has learned and known in gods schole.
Now se we then that it is profitable, yea truly necessary so well to our
selves, as to our brethren, that the remembrance of this doctrine should be
renewed very often, especially seeing the text it self which we shall expound,
does lead us to the same purpose. David does openly protest, and as it were
does make a solemn vow, that he will never be partaker in the sacrifices of
Idolaters, and also that he will so detest, and grievously hate the idols that
he will not at any time once name the^, as though he should defile his mouth in
naming them.

This is not the fact of some one man but the example of David the most
excellent king and prophet which oght to be unto al gods children a certain
common rule to right and godly life. And to thentent we may the better perceive
this thing and more vehemently be moved with, the true fear of god the cause is
to be noted which he adds wherein truly rests as it were a certain
foundation of that same alienation and offense whereby he does most greatly
abhor the communion of idolatours. The lord, says he is mine enheritaunce.
But is not, this thing common to all faithful and godly men. There is no man
truly which would not glory in so excellent athyng. And this is sure without al
doubt, that god being once given unto us in the person of his son, does daily
entise us to possess him. But there be very few which are so affected in this
part, as the greatness and worthiness of this same matter should seem to ask and
deserve. Nether truly can we by any means possess god, onles on this condition
that we also be come his. David therefore of good right and worthily did set the
foundation of his godlynes, and religion in this sentence and reason seeing that
god is his enheritaunce, he will refrain from all pollutions of idols which do
turn us, from God himself. This is the cause why the prophet Esaias, when he
had vpbraided the jews that they had given themselves to falls and strange
gods, who^ they had made, added afterward, these, says he, ar thy portion
signifieng by these words, that god does deny to the worshippers of idols all
bond and felowshyppe of couenante and disenheryteth them, and utterly depriueth
them, of that so infinitely great benefit, which he would have bestowed on
them, giving him self unto them. Some man will except and sai that the prophet
entreats in that place only of them which put, their affiance in idols, and
deceaueth them selves through opinion and incredulity. I grant but this also I
answar if they that do transfer gods honor: unto idols, are utterly
separated and cut of from his fellowship, they also do are and decline some
what from him, which do feine them selves to consent to supersticions through
fear and weakness of mind.

For no man can in heart or any conformable fashion or in will, and in purpose
of mind, or faining, or by any true or fained way approach to idols, but he
must so far go back from god. Wherefore let this sentence be thoroughly persuaded
and remain depely printed in our hearts, that they which seek god with a true
and pure mind, to the end to possess him for their enheritance, will have no
communion and fellowship with idols, with whom god has that divorce and
debate, that he would have al his to proclaim and make continual and deadlye
war upon them. And in this place David by name does express, that he will
never be partaker of their oblations, nether have their names in his mouth and
talking. He might have said on this wise, I will not deceive my self with unwise
and folishe deuocions of the unbelievers, I will not put my trust in such
abuses, nor I will never forsake gods truth, to follow these lies, but he
speaks not on this manner, but does rather promise constantly, that he will
never be co^uersant among their ceremonies. Therefore he does testify so far
forth as concerns the service of god, he will abide continually in all purity
and holiness both of body and soul. And first in this place we must consider,
whether this be not idolatry to signify and declare by outward tokens, our
agreement with those supersticions, wherewith the service of god is corrupted and
utterly perverted. They that swim (as the common saying) betwixt two waters,
allege this saying, seeing that god would be honored in spirit, idols ca^ by no
means be honored unless a man put his trust in the^. But to this may be easly
answered, that god does not so require the spiritual service and adoration of
the mind, that he grants and remitteth the other part of our nature unto
idols, as though that part should seem nothing at al to belong unto him. For it
is said in many places, that the knees must be bowed before god and also the
hands lifted up to heaven. What then? surely the chief honor that god requires
is spiritual but the outward signification wherbey the faithful do testify
that it is god only who^ they serve and honor, must so immediately follow, that
they must at one time be joined together But one place shall so suffice for all,
to confute that objection which they snatch of one word, that they shall be
plainly rebuked and convict. In the.iii. chap. of Daniel it is written that
Sidrach, Misach and Abdenego, refused and denied under any manner of color, to
consent unto the superstition set up and erected by Nabuchodonosor, declaring
that they would in no wise honor his gods. If these goodly witty sophisters had
been there at that time, would have laughed to scorn ye simplicity of these
three servants of god. For I suppose they would have taunted them with such like
words, you folish me^, this truly is not to honor them, seeing you put no
affiance in these things. There is no idolatry but where there is deuocio^,
that is to say, a certain bending and application of the mind to honor and
worship the idols. But these godly men did follow a better and wiser
counsel, for this answer which they made, proceeded not of their own wit, but
rather of the holy ghost, which moved the^ thus to speak, who^ if we will not
resist, we must accept this place and this example, as a certain rule and
definicion, that idolatry is an outward action against gods honor, yea although
it proceed not from the will and purpose of the mind, but be only colorable and
feined. In which matter they make goodly cauilatio^s that there is no idolatry
at all when as our affiance is not put in idols. Yet shall these me^ continually
remain condemned by the sentence which the mightiest judge has pronounce. But
these me^ do contend only for the name, only going about somdeal to lesson
their fault, which they can by no means defend or excuse. Yea, they will grant
that this thing is evil done and not rightly, yet notwtstanding they would have
this fact to be judged as a certain veninal syn. But although we grant the^ as
touching the name yt thing they ask yet they shall not get so much thereby that
they may make their cause much the better. Let us sai thus, that such manner of
feined worshippi^g of idols, is not called idolatry, yet nevertheless it shall be
a traitorous enterprise against god, a certain fact repugnant to the confession
of faith, and a foul filthy polutio^ most full of wicked sacrilege. I pray you
when the most sacred service and honor of god is so violated that we falsely
break ye promise we made to him, that through cowardice and faintnes of stomach
we deny croeedly and fasly our christian profession, that we become inconstant
and double, that we defyle our selves foulye with those things, which god has
cursed with all kind of maledictio^: is this so light a matter that after we
have done it, we oght only to wipe our mouth, and confess that we have
committed a certain small fault? Let us therefore put away these shifts,
specially seeing they serve for no another thing, but to make us boulder, and to
give us greater, liberty to sin, and does nothing, at al diminish our fault?
There be also other more impudent, which do not only, changing the name go
about to persuade that it is not so great and unworthy a sin: but do plainly
and precisely deny it to be sin. It is sufficient say they that god be
honored with heart and, mind. Even so truly if the heart it self were not
dowble. For when the mind is truly sound and pure the body shall never be
drawn into a contrary part. I would know of them what that is that moves and
leads their fete to the temple. For when they go to here mas, their legs
will never be stirred of their own motion, but must needs be moved by the
inward power of the mind: Then must they needs co^fes that there is in them
selves a certain desir and motion, of mind where of they be carried to worship
idols, and chefely because they covet to apply them selves after their will and
opinion, which are enemies to the truth yea and do so conform them selves to,
please them, that they do much more esteem there favor and there own lif then
gods honor and glory. Besides this, their impudencye is so manifest and
shamful, that i am ashamed to disput against it, as though it had some color
or lyknesse of reason, yet I must needs do it, seeing they do please them selves
so greatly, and are, as it were men dronken in their own opiniones and
pleasures, fallen fast on sleep. They think this is inogh to worship god in
sprit, whose then shall the body be? Truli. S. Paull moves us to honor god,
both in body and spirit, for they be his own and belongs to none other. God
has created the body, and shall it be leafull for us therewith to serve and
honor the deuell as though he should seem to be the author and maker, thereof?
It were better they would profess them selves openly to be maniches and deny
that god made the whole man. If they had never so little taste of the gospel they
would not burstout in to so lice^tious impude^cy. But now it is plain enough,
that they in no wise know, what is the power and greatness of this benefit, to
be redeemed with the blood of gods son. And to prove this true, how can we lok
for the resurrection of the flesh except we believe that Christ Jesus is the
redemer both of bodies and souls? Corin. i.
Saint Paul also does admonish us, not to be the servants of men, because we
were bought and purchased with so great aprice which is the blood of gods
son. Then he that does ioyn and addict him self to the wicked service of
idols, does he not tread under his feet the most sacred blood of Jesus
Christ, wherein does consist the price of the eternal and immortal glory, which
we look for in our bodies? What reason is it that our bodies should be defiled
and profaned before idols, seeing the crown of eternal life is promised unto
them in heaven. This wallowinge in satan's stews and most filthye defilyng is it
a mean and way where by we may come to the kingdom of god? Moreover it was not
said without a great cause, our bodies ar the temples of the holy ghost,
therefore they which perceive not, that they ought to be kept in all holiness,
do plainly show them selves to perceive and understand nothing at all of the
gospel. also they declare that they know no whit at al what is the power of
Jesus Christ and of his grace. For when it is said on this wise that we are bone
of his bones and flesh of his flesh he oght to understand that we be joined
with him both in body and soull. Therefore no man can defile his own body
with any manner of superstition, but he does separat himself, from that
conjunction and vnto^ whereby we are made the members of the son of god. But
now let these wity and subtle doctors answer me, whethere they have received
baptism only in there souls, or whether god has commanded rather and
instituted that this sign should be imprinted in our flesh. Shall the body then
wherein the mark of Jesus Christ is printed, be polluted and defiled with so
contrary, repugnaunt, and so wicked abominations? Also the lords supper, is it
received in the mind only, and not also in the hands and mouth? Has god
engraven in our bodies the arms and badges of his son, that we afterward
should pollut our selves with all uncleanness, with most foul spotes and shame,
and so unseemly deforme our selves that no kind nor likeness of christian
beauty should apeare. It is not lawful in coyni^g one piece of gold to printe two
contrary coins, nether to set two sealles the on repungnaunte to the other,
unto one writing: and shall a mortal man take up on him to countrefete and
corrupt baptism, and the most holy supper of Jesus Christ, and also behold
to say that, there is no euel in so great and mischeuous a fact? Such men truly
ar worthy, that their servants should persuade. And make them believe, they
have a great, pleasure, to do them service when notwithstanding, they give them
selves to sleep, pleasurs and al idleness, and do not move one finger to do any
work at all. If they say it is not alike reason, because we have need of their
labor that be under us: I answer although god have no need of us, yet for that
he will use our labor, service, and obedience, to serve and honor him, truly
it is to much unseemly, and for us the greatest shame and infamye, to do all
thing other wise then he will, and clean to be void of the study and duty
which we own unto him yea our shame is so much the greater, that the worm of
the earth, and an vnliuing creature shall requiere more power over us, and
honor then his creator. But yet we must talk with these beasts more
plainly. They say it is leafull for them to feign and cloak what so, ever they
will among the papist, and to conform them selves to that manner and fashion of
religion, which is thought most apt to norish superstition. Who is he then
that gives them bread to be fed with all there? Who does make the ground
fertile to bring forth fruit? If god do feed and norishe them in those places
where they dwell as he does al other men in the other parts of the earth, why do
they not honor the geuer of yt benefit wc that part of the^ self, which is so
bountifully norished of him? Why do they rather obey and serve the devil with
their bodies? If these men were in any part of christians, I would use with them
more weighty and higher reasons, and I would ask of the^, to what end we live
in this world, and where unto our life oghte to be referred. But O miserable
case that they which with subtelties and shifts will daily with god, are so
brutish, that they must be handled, as me^ not only destitute of gods spirit,
but in a manner void of natural common sense. They think this is a sufficient
excuse to sai, they do nothing in this kind, but for fear of peril and danger,
but if this color may take place, then must we say that Joseph should have
done no evil, if he had committed whordome with his maistres when it was
violently offered him, seeing he should not have followed his own will, but have
given place to necessity and violence which she did unto him. It should have
been a folishe fact of him, to enter such peril and infamy, as afterward he
suffered by the false accusation of that noughty woman, seeing he might have
escaped those evils if he had accomplished her will. But we oght rather to follow
the example of Joseph, and allow the testimony of the holy ghost, who does
commend his constancy. If there be no wickedness in taking upon us idoletrous
religion when we do it to avoid the raging cruelty of the papists, the
servant shall not sin, who for his masters pleasure, shall play the band,
kill, and play the traitor, for fear to displease him, under whose power he
is. But I abide to long in this matter, wherein (as I said before) there is no
dout or difficulty. It shall not be far from the purpose to consider into how
great confusion they fall, which trauail with all their crafts to escape gods
judgment. Others there be that have found another shifte and sterting hole,
they grant, that ye supersticion of the gentiles is a wicked and detestable
religion, but it is not al one reason of these and the supersticions which are
in ye papisme. As though all the false religion that ever was among the
heithen, was not a corrupting and deprauation of the true religion of god. From
whence did ye heathen draw and tak to themselves their ceremonies but of ye
holy fathers? In which doi^g this was their great faut, yt they depraved and
vtterli perverted those thigs which they had received well and wisely instituted
of god. But yet al ye abominacio^s yt ever were i^ ye world have been cloked with
a beutiful title of god himself, and the couerture of his religion. But those
cou^terfeit religions had never yt commendation, power and authority, yt god
did at any time approve those services and congregatio^s, or ye faithful me^
did use and frequent the^. Go to let us proceed further. Although I should grant
the idolatry of the papists to be unlike and differ from the superstition of
the old gentiles, yet can they not deny but god so ernestly did forbid the
religion wickedly set up in Bethel, as al other superstitions which were
instituted and celebrated in other places. When the calves were erected in Da^
and Bethel this was instituted and don under a certain color of his name which
had broghte his people of Egypt, yet yt same religion which was there appointed
is manifestly against the doctrine of the law. God does condemn al those yt go
thither to defile and polute themselves. And truly ye supper of Jesus christ
and the popish mass are no less repugnant and contrary the one to the other
then ye sacrifices of Moses and Ieroboa^. From whence then is this dispensation
and license to go and here mass under this color that the supper of Jesus
christ is but tra^sformed yea rather in deed deformed? But I say and affirm
contrary, yt al thie that do fear god truly and honor hi^ godly, ought so much
the more to hate and detest it, for that it does more openly violat and profane
the holy institution of Jesus Christ, then if it were not so repugnant and
contrary unto the same. Wherefore let us keep this common rule generally, that
all the ordinance and inuencions of men proponed and taken in hand to corrupt
the simple truth of gods word, and to pervert that religion which he requires
and allows, ar very sacrileges with which the christian man may in no wise
comunicate, without that injury and contumelye, which treads under fete gods
honor most wicked. I know well enough how grievous and intolerable this severe
judgment seems to them, which would after their own lust and delicat mind, be
more nicelye and mekely spoken to and taught. Wherein what would they I should do?
What moderation and lenity should I use? Truly now I perceive how tender and
deintie they ar, I covet so much as may be to spare the^, but both I and they
must be condemned so sone as god has spoken: therefore if we will tender our
own salvation, let us take it in god part. They say they find no man more
severe and sharp then I am, but I will declare unto them, on the other part,
that I handle them more mekely and tenderlye, then the truth of the cause, the
worthynesse of gods name, and their own salvation did require. Which thing
being so in ded, truly they can not excuse and deliver them selves from the
necessity of that duty and testimony, that the prophet Jeremy does requier
of the Jews captives in Babylon who^ he not only forbids to come near the
abhominacions of the Chaldeans, or colourably and feinedly to give any consent
to them, but also does give a plain commandment that they should declare the
wicked religion of the Chaldeans to be unto them a most often filthy savor. You
shall say to them (says the prophet Jeremy) the Gods which have not made
heaven and earth shall perish both out from the earth, and also from under
heaven. There is also in this place another circumstance to be marked, that
when the prophet had written his book in Hebrew yet he put in this sentence
expressed in the common vulgar spech of the Chaldea^s, as though he would by this
means constrain the Jews, to change from their tongue, to the end they might
more apartly profess the hatred and disagreme^t they have with the wicked
idolaters. Now let our nice yonglinges complain of me as though mine
aduertiseme^t excedeth all measure, and yet I have not any time desired ye half
part of the duty which yt prophet requires and asks so earnestly: but
whatsoever be ye manner other of my saying and moderation, or else of my silence
and taturnitie, nevertheless we are tied and bound to that law which god does
give unto us. And truli it is not without a cause that god speaking to his
faithful says to the, you are my witnesses and my servants who^ I have
chose^. Wherefore whosoever will prove himself to be a member of Jesus Christ
oght by all means to declare, yt the praise and honor of gods name does so
apertain to him, that they which by their faini^g do hide and buri ye testimoni
of his truth, do leave the^ selves inexcusable. What I prai you, is to be
thought of the^ that do al their life time subvert ye same? Of what sort are
they yt do not only hide ye profession of ye christian religion, and shows no
toke^ thereof before me^, but also commits many things, and those most
co^trari and unseemly: this therefore rests yt gods children which live where
the impurities and abominatio^s remain, do morn after ye example of that godly
man Loath, and also speak so freely against so many and so great abominable vices
of men, as god shall give to them power and opportunity. Let us now com to show
certain kinds of idolatries, which are of most estimacio^ in these days. Among
which sort ye mass is chief, whereof I have touched somthi^g before. For
although it be so famous and notable blasphemy both in absurdity and greatness
of mischief yt nothing ca^ be imagined mor foul and wicked, yet still be they
patro^s found for an evil cause, which do trifle forth in this part. But will
they nil they, they shall be compelled to co^fes this yt I say, that ye mass by
it self is a denial of Jesus christ's death, and a certain sacrilege invented
and ordained by satan to abolish ye sacrament of ye supper. Nether ar they able
to deny but yt the i^uocatio^ of saints, and suffrages for the dead, are wicked
abuses, whereby ye invocation of gods name, a thing of al other most holy is
profaned and they who among ye papists do defile the^ selves with these
abominations do think themselves gilty of no fault. What should we do sai they?
It is not lawful for us to correct and amend those things, which we know evil
and fautie, we are private men and they that have the power and public
authority do ernestly defend these things Therefore we must suffer that violent
necessity. I grant all this to be true. But I say this is not to the
purpose. It belongs not to their office to correct and appoint a common order
for the people, nether does any man requier this at there hand, yet
nevertheless they are admonished to amed them selves, and to institute an
honest and manerly behauour of private life, which thing whitout all doubt
pertains to their duitie. Nether do we command them to cleanse the temples
and the common streates, but that eueri man keep his own body and heart in
purity and holiness, and labor by all means that god may be honored, served
and obeyed, in his own house. For these are fare unlike and much dissonaunt to
abolishe the mass in any region, and not to be present at it, when as the use
thereof and that religion can by no other means be let but they repete and
iterate their saing, that is, that they do not deny the death and passion of
Jesus Christ seeing, they have no such purpose, to worship it in their mind.
But I do ask of them, what is that a Christen man does confess with his
mouth, but that same that he believes in his heart? This is plain and, manifest
enough, that this thing which they do, is most disagreing with the confession
of faith. So that, as much as in them lies, they do not only hyde the true and
propre testimonye of faith but also do utterly deny and forsake it. I will
yet talk with them something more familiarly and plainly. For the Papists do
say the mass is a sacrifice wherein they will offer Jesus christ to reconcile
them selves to god. But if this be so, it follows that Jesus Christ has not
optained unto us by his death righteousness and eternal salvation. Let them seek
all the, compases and shyftes they will, yet must they come here unto that all
which go to mass, under the name of devotion and religion, do profess that
they consent there with. Therefore as much truly as in them lies they show that
they have not their redemption perfect inogh by the death of Jesus Christ. There
be many that speak not so largely, nether suffer their talk, to wandre
thorowout all sorts of masses, that is to say, sacrileges. They chose out one
kind of masses only and that they defend: it is called the parish mass, or
the high mass, for in this they think there is more likeness and agreing with the
supper of Jesus Christ. And truly it might be said more aptly, yt al masses
which are said both of the priests of the lowest degree, and also of ye canons,
or of those priests yt have certain chapels, and all other which are founded by
any man's will or that are so saleable that they be set forth daily to sale, that
all these I say are not unlike to harlots which in ye stews setting the^
selves to sale without all shame and honesty do make their bodies common to al
men, but ye high mass to be very like ye same harlot which does craftily abuse
the honest name of an husband to hide her unshamefastness, and to reteyn and
defend the estimacio^ of an honest and chaste wife. Although this similitude
does not agree on every part, because yt an harlot joined in matrimony to an
husband will have some shamfastnes and modesty, yt she will not set forth and
make herself common to al yt comes: but the parish or high mass is an worish
idolatry of al other most common, ready and set forth to al men's desires and
wicked lusts: although these filthye bawdes, do color and smoth here with
this color and such bewty, that they retain still some relikes of Jesus
Christ's supper. It is with this as with the thief who braggeth and bosteth
himself then more highly and, gloriouslye, when he has wo^ne and is clothed
with the spoils of him whom he has slain and whose horse he rides on. We,
say they, seek the supper of Jesus Christ, and when we can not being oppressed
under that tyranny, where in we dwell, have the same pure, we must be content
with that which is left to us, loking for the helping hand of God. For such a
goodly and pretty excuse. By cause they have no, right and perfect use, of the
supper, as though they had gotten a prouison, they witness and openly profess
that they have not Jesus Christ the eternal and only priest and therefore
every weke do seek a new sacrifice, to put away their sins. For all this is
in ye high mass, as well as in that which is said in the name of Nicholas or
for the dead. In which thing they feign them selves to worshipe an idol, and
yet do boste that they seek Jesus Christ: and because they would not seem to
fight against god without swerd or buckler, they bring and object the
authority of this or that man, as though the absolutio^ of any one manne may
exempt and deliver them that they be not condemned of god. I will not say that
they lie greuouslye, when they alege such men as they do for the defense of
their cause. But in case it were so that a devout and godly man, were sometime of
this mind, that he thought it was nothing euel to come to the high mass, yet
afterward when he knows the truth, if he does disalowe and condemn his
former judgment, his latter is so much the more to be believed, for that God
has brought him, or rather compelled him to disalowe the same, and because he
perceueth and plainly knows that he is overcome in that thing which he before
did greatly embrace and allow. But what need we herin to stir the truth, as
if we should bloundre and trouble a water that is pure and clear. Do they think
that with the judgment and sainge of a mortal man they may stop god and hedge
him in? We know that there is nothing besides the truth that in judgment oght
to preuaill without the respect of any person this matter is such that the
parish or high mass is instituted to sacrifice Jesus Christ, and to reconcile
the favor of god both for quick and dead, and also that a piece of bred should
be there worshipped as though it were the son of god I do not examine thorowli
all the abominations and wickedness, that are in that mass for they be almost
innumerable. But I do rehearse only the worse and grosser. Now let them that do
but feine a consent with such wickedness and corruptions, wash their hands so
clean as they will, yet shall they never be more just and innocent then Pilate.
But this is a meruail that this good and religiouse parishioners at easter time
do seek some by chapel, or some mockchristian mo^k, which may prepare and
deliver unto them the apish and cou^trefet supper. If the high mass is most
nearest the supper of Jesus Christ, as they say it is, why do they not observe
and keep it? But how after that they have, been at the high mass every sunday
through the year, because they would seem to co^municat in ye sacrament of the
supper a right, they suddenly shake of and forsake the high mast But we should no
meruaill at such inconsta^t they say, for this is a sure and due punishment,
for them which have laid no foundation at any tim of truth in there minds, that
they should always waver and be contraie to the^ selves in all things they do
and take in hand. As touching that same hypocritical supper, I know that they
be of this mind, that they suppose it to be the greatest iniurys to the selves
that may be when it is rebuked and improued. But what can we do in that matter
saying it is nothing agreeable to Christ's rule? Nether do I find fault with
this that they do it secretly, for I know that the supper was never better
celebrated, nor more devoutly, the^ when the disciples went into some secret
place to fly the tyranny of the enmies. But here ar two faults truly not to
be suffered. One that they which do make such a supper and like apes do
falsely and corruptly countrefet the true supper of Christ, do feine that they
keep and worshipe their mass. The other is that the minister, which for the
most part is some religious man the rather to dissemble the matter, does not
that office as a christian, but as a pressed of the popish profession. And in
this they suppose they have an honest and sure defense if the mass saier have
not this purpose to show the bread and wine to them to be worshipped, if he
leave out the canon wherein ar contained many great impieties, and if he deliver
the sacrament to all that be present under both kinds. But when they shall come
before the highest judge then shall they feel the fruit that they sought by
such glosing and lies, yea truly they oght now already to perceive it. For I
do judge those same goads and pricks wherewith their consciences ar prikt and
wounded to be agreuous fealing of that same judgment. And truly this cause
must be decided and plainly debated in that same place and court, where the
truth has her grave and true witnesses. For to be short, they the^ selves do
know them selves giltye of that matter whieh they have purposed to declare both
to gods enemies and also to the common people. But god must neds deny him
self, if he allow the order and doing of that profession. If all the me^ in
the world with one mind and purpose would conspire to pronounce these men
ryghteous, yet none be he never so ready and mighty can excuse and deliver
them from this but they shall be thought to halt on both sides. And god does
declare by his prophet, yt no such halting of any man shall be ever allowed
before him. As touchi^g the man whom they chose to be the minister of their
supper it is a folysh thing to abuse his person, as though they could seem to
make him an apt man to that office and function. Yea but the virtue of that
same sacrament say they, rests not in the virtue of the ministers. That I
grant and add this to also, if any devil should minister the supper, it should
be never the worse. On the contrary part if an angel should sing mass, yet
then should it be no whit the better. But we are now in another question, that
is, whether orders given by the pope to a monk do make him apt to the office
and and function do a pastor. If they say contrary that they perceive, that
thing does make nothing to the purpose, and that they do not chose in that sort
the thing it self shows contrary. But let it be that they as touching the
minister have no such respect. Yet must I abide in that outward profession
which they take upon them and worship, yea I must press it earnestly, as a
profession most contrary and unworthy a christen man. For this is plain and
manifest that they do and will defend and cover themselves, under the person of
a priest made for the nonce to color and dissemble. But if they would rightly
and lawfully celebrat yt supper, it were their duty so to seperat themselves
from the order and profession of idolatours that they should apear in that to
have nothing common with them. But now they be so far from this separation,
that they ascribe themselves into their fellowship and communion, and do every
one of the^ feinedly profess themselves to be members of that body. After this
they will compare us to the old heretics, that did refuse the use of the
sacraments for the vices of the ministers, as though we do here respect the
proper sins of every man and not rather the common state and condition. I do
pass over this matter shortly, because that which is spoken is sufficient
enough to convince so foul and shameful impudency. But if these men be so
folish and dull witted that they perceive not this filthiness, the word of god
must suffice us, when the lord says by the prophet Jeremy, Israel if thou
do turn, turn unto me. In which words is most plainly expressed with what
simplicity and integrity of mind we oght to deal and walk before god,
without any thought and will to return to those things which we know are not
tha^kful nor allowed of him. Which is a cause why S. Paul also does testify
that he was sent to turn ye unfaithful from their vanities unto the living
god, as though he would say, it is to no purpose to change some one old and
accustomed evil with other hipocrises and feinings, but utterly to abolish al
superstitions, yt the true religion may be set in her own purity and holiness.
For without this faith and integrity, men never come the right wai unto god,
but do alwais waver and ar uncertain to what part they may turn themselves.
There be others yt ar come thus far yt they disalow and refuse the mass, but
they would have some patches kept still which they call gods service, least as
some men say, they should seem to be destitute of al religion. And it may be
that some of these be moved with a godly mind and zeal at the least I will so
think, but what soever their zeal and purpose be, yet may we not say that
they keep, the true rule or any good measure. Many say we may come to their
baptismes, because there is no manifest idolatry in the^. As who would say,
that this sacrament were not also corrupted, and utterly deformed with all kind
of corruption, in so much as Jesus christ may seem to be still in Pilates house
to suffer all opprobries and shames. To conclude, whereas they say yt this is
the cause, why they would retain some ceremonies, least they should appear to
be void of al religion, if one should examine their consciences, the same
truly will answer, yt they do it to satisfy the papists, and they change
their countenance to fly persecution. Other some do watch a time least they
come in the mass while and yet they com to the temple, that me^ should suppose
they here mass. Other some com but at euensong time, who^ I would know, whether
they think this to be nothing, that at that same the idols be honored, that
the pictures and images be sensed with fumigatio^s, that a solemn prayer be made
in the intercession of some saint, and grounded on his merits, that Salve
regina be song with a loud voice, and that on every side a matter is hard so
filled and replenished with deuilish and cursed blasphemy that ye mind shall
not only abhor the offense of the ears and eyes there present, but most
vehemently they thought and recordacion thereof. I do pass over that ye singing
it self in an unknown tongue is manifest profanacio^ of gods praises and of
holy scripture as S. Paul does admonish in the.xiiii. to the Corinthes. But
let this last faut be forgeuen them. If they come to euensong to give some
sign and testimony of their christianity, they will do this chiefly on the
solemn feasts. But the^ there shall be solemn ensensing the chifest idols,
and great plenty of sweet fumigatio^s powered out, the which is a kind of
sacrifice as the scripture teaches. It was also a manner used among the
ge^tils, and whereby they compelled ye weak me^ to deny god. And for this
cause the greatest part of martyrs did suffer death constantly, for that they
would not make perfumes and burn incense to idols. When these men be come thus
far, that they receive in there, noses the savor of the sensours they also
pollute them selves with that pollution which is most greatest and execrable
there and yet they think we oght, to hide and cover this so great wyckednes and
mischef. But I beseech them in the honorable and holy name of god, that they
will diligently mark this saing of the Psalm, that idols ar so to be detested
of the faithful and godly man, that they should not be in his mouth or tongue,
least ye talk had of the^ should seem to co^taminat and defile him. This one
word oght to fraie and with draw us from al congregation and feloship of
idolatours, because that we liui^g in yt congregation may easeli be wrapped in
and defiled. But to speak plai^ly and freely what I think of all these which
sek amean wai betwixt god and ye deuel: they have double and variable minds,
and I can not find out a more apt and fete co^pariso^ to set the^ out and
paint the^ in their liueli colors, the^ that same which may be braught of
Esau ye same filthy and double man. For when he saw his brother Jacob sent by
his father Isaac in to Mesopotamia to seek a wife, because the women of ye land
of Canaa^ did so much mislike the father and his wife Rebecca yt they thought
their life bitter and irksom to live among the^ and rather wishes death, he
marieth a new wif, somewhat to satisfy his parents, but he does not put away ye
old. So yt he does kep still yt evil whereof Isaac did so grievously co^plain, but
somdeal to amend ye matter, he marieth a new wife. Even so they ye are so
wrapped up in ye world, yt they ca^ in no wise follow god do mi^gle and toss
together many and diverse ki^ds of religions and supersticio^s, yt they may
apply and confirm themselves by some way to ye will of god, and they alwais
keep still some corruption, so yt what soever they do ca^ not apear to be pure
and sincere. I know also righ well yt there be in those places many miserable
souls, which live there in great difficulties and cares, which truly coueteth
to walk rightly without hypocrisy, and yet can not louse themselves, out of many
doutes and scruples, which is no meruel i^ so great and horrible confusion as
we see at this time in the papisme. Yea I do greatly pity their miserable
state, which seek means whereby they may serve god devoutly and live among
the enemies of faith if it may be possible by any ways. But what will we? I can
do nothing else to the one or to the other, but declare their error and sin,
that they them selves may add the remedy. If they come herafter to ask of me
this or that more diligently and particularly, I will send such curiouse
inquisitours to the common rule which have of god. I speak this for that there
be some of this sort of men so importune, that if a man should answer all their
difficulties and doutes, he should seem never to make an end of any thing. And
me think such men may well be compared to them who after they be taught in a
sermon to use sobre apparel and decking of the body whthout all dissolute and
sumptuouse trimming, they would have the priacher to make their hoose and sewe
their shoes. Well what must we do the^? In this matter there is a certain thing
set before us where unto we ought to derect and confer our wholl mind, study
and thought. That is that the zeal of gods house may eat up our heart and so
move us, that we bear and take upon our selves, al dishonours, contumelies, and
opprobries, which are done most unworthily against gods holy name. When such
desire of gods honor, and fervent love shall be kindled in our hearts, not
like dry stubble sone set on fire and easily extinguished, but lik a fire that
burns continually, a man shallbe so far from suffering or approving these
abomitio^s where with the name of god most shamfully and vnwortheli is
polluted, that when he shall behold them, he shall be able in in no wise to
suffer dissimulation, silence and taciturnitie. And it is diligently to be
marked, that he says, the zeal of gods house, that we should know that to be
referred, unto the outward order which is instituted in the church, that we
should exercise our selves in confession of our faith. I do not wey the mockers
which say, that I my self living here without ane danger, yea rather in great
quietness, do talk goodlely of this matters. I am not he with whom these men
have any thing to do. For this is well known I have here no land of mine own.
So may we think and sai of al these philsophers which give their Judgment
without knowledge of the cause. For saying they will not here god, who does now
truly speak so iently to them, to teach them: I do declare the day and
judgment, at what time being called before the judgment seat of god, they shall
hear that sentence, against the which there shall be no answer nor defense. For
seeing they will not hear him, as the best and most meke master, they shall the^
know at the last, and feel him as their most seure and just judge. At which time
the stowtest and ye craftiest of the^ shall perceive and know, yt they were
deceived in their opinions. Let the^ be so well exercised and prepared as they
will, to observe or subvert justice and epuitie, yet their lawlike and judicial
ornaments, and the badges of the great dygnitie and power, wherewith they now
prowdly war insolent, shall not thine give them the victory. I speak this by
causa counseilours, Judges, proctours, aduocats, and such othere bearinge the
swing in courts and judgments, are not only bold to strive with GOD, and so to
contend that they would seem to have gotten a certain right to scorn and mock
his majesty, but also rejecting al holy scripture, do spue out their
blasphemies, as the greatest sentences of the law, and most high decrees. These
me^ whom ye world does honor as certain idols, so sone as they have spoken
one word, can not suffer reason and truth to have any place to rest in. But
yet by the way I admonish and warn the^ before hand, that it shall be better
for the^, to have some remembrance of that same horrible vengeance, which is
ordained for them that change justice with iniquity, and truth, with lying.
Nether the doctors and chamber masters the delitious ba^ckettours and very
voluptuous me^, take any high degree here, the^ that they may chatter in their
feasts, and banquets and babble forth their words against ye heavenly master,
to who^ truly al me^ oght to give most dilligent ear. Nether ca^ their goodli
and famous titles pluk any man from this judgment, in which the lordly and
reverent abbotes, priors, deans, archdecons, as chief masters of ye game
shall be compelled to lead ye dau^ce in yt co^de^natio^ which god shall make most
grievous Now although the courtears are wont to gratify men with the sprinkling
of their holy water, let them not think that they can with that kind of doing
satisfy god. To conclude, al iesters and praters let the^ hold their tongue and
bost not out their merry witty sayings, onles they will feel his mighty hand,
at whose word they ought to tremble. Wherein their error is to much folishe
that believes because they take me for their adversary therefore they shall not
have god to be their judge. Let them scrape my name out of their books and
utterly bloth it forth, specially in this kind of cause and question, wherein
my purpose is only that god be hard and obeyed, not that I should rule men's
consciences after my lust, and charge them with any necessity or law. As for
all others which do not so proudly despise gods word, and yet ar so delicate
and weak that they can in no wise be moved, I do most heartily beseech them,
that they will take more thought and regard to their own duty, salvation, and
gods honor, and do no more flatter themselves, as they have done hitherto. Let
them therefore open their eyes, and rear up them selves that they may behold
the misery wherein they are.

I know well enough the evils, difficulties, and stoppes wherein they be wrapped
among the papists, I do not speak unto them, as though it were an easy matter
in the midst of ye idolatries to take upon them to defend the pure and
sincere religion of god, but if they lack strength, I advertise the^ to fly
unto god the autour of all power, that they may be made strong by him and learn
to prefarre his glory before al things of this world. For I do earnestly desire
that all faithful men which are miserably afflicted in the papisme, should
understand and know this, how that the prophet Jeremy remaining at Jerusalem
in Iewry did send this advertisement and exhortacion unto the people which were
holden captive and oppressed in Babylon. If the tyranny of the pope and of all
his ministres be to them sharp and cruel, they must consider, that the Jews
also of that time suffered heavy and bitter bondage and yet they are commanded
in the vulgar speech of the country to execrate the idolatry of the
Chaldea^s. It is not reason that the tyranny of men should break or any deal
diminish from us that due honor we ow unto god. Here is no exception or
pretense of preuelege, which high or low rich or poor may or ought to usurp
unto them selves. Let al men therefore bow down their neck, and with most
humility submit them selves to god. Let the poor man have the true fear of
god, let him not say inconstantly I know not what to do, least god answer him,
nether know I what to do with thee. The rich and wealthy men let the^ not like
drunken sloggards sleep in their wealth, and consume in their prosperity and
abundance of al things, as it were in a certain draftubbe, but rather after the
example of S. Paul, let them learn to esteem all that, as dirt and damage
which does withdraw us from godly and christian life, or may seem any thing to
hinder us. We also which live here in rest and quiet enioyeng the use of ye
greatest and singular benefits of god, let us not forget that I touched in the
beginning, that we apply these things to our learning, that what so ever
hereafter befall us, or into what soever country we shall be led, yet may we
always constantlye abide in the pure confession of our faith, detesting al
idolatrous religion, superstitions, and abuses, which are against gods truth,
do obscure his honor, and utterly subvert his religion.

The.ii. sermon Containing AN EXHORTATION to suffer persecution, that we may
therein follow Jesus Christ and his gospel, taken of this saying, in the.13.
Cap. to the Hebrews.
Let us go forth to him without the gates, and suffer rebuke with him.
ALL the exhortations which can be made to instruct us to suffer patiently and
constantly for Christ Jesus name and his gospel, shall not much move us, onles
we know and be perfectly persuaded of the right, truth, and worthenes of the
cause wherefore we contend. For when we be in that Ieoperdie and danger that we
must loose our life, we ought to be most certain of that thing, wherefore we
enter to so great peril. But that constauncye and firmnes of mind ca^ not be
had, onles it be depely founded in a certainty and sure persuasion of faith.
There be many which will vnaduisedly^ and rashly ventre to dye for certain
folysh opinions invented of their own brain. But such forwardnes of mind
ought rather to be thought a furiousnes then a christian zeall and love. For
assuredly there is no firmnes other of mind or wit or of common sense, in these
men which do cast them selves in to peril with such hardy rashness. How so ever
it be, god will not acknowledge and take us for his martirs and witnesses,
without a good cause. For death is common for all men, and also the
condemnation of thieves and of gods children, the sufferaunce of shame and
punishment seems to be al one, but god makes a difference betwixt the^,
because he can not deny and forsake his own truth. This also is required that
we have a sure witness void of al error of that doctrine, which we will
defend* Wherefore as I said, there is no exhortation so weighty, that can move
and persuade us to suffer for the gospel, but if a true certainty of faith be
imprinted in our hearts. For to put our life in danger, without any
consideration unadvisedly, and chaunceably, is most against nature. And so to
do, should be thought rather rashness the^ christian boldness. Morouer god aloweth
nothing that we do onles we be plainly persuaded that it is for his name sake,
and for his cause that the world is so against us, and does hate us. But when I
speak of such certai^tie and persuasion of mind, I do not only understand
this that we should know to discern and judge betwixt the true religion, and
folish opinions, and constitutio^s of men, but also that we be thoroughly
persuaded of everlasting life and the ^roune promised unto us in heaven after
^ure conflict in this world. Let us now mark well that, these two reasons do
partaine to our duty, and must be Joined to gether, that the one may ^n no
wise be separated and disioyned from the other. It is mete therefore to take
our beginning of this that we understand and know, what is our Christian
religion, what faith it is that we oght to hold and follow, what rule of life
god has given us. Nether must we only have our minds instruct with this godly
doctrine, but also have our minds so armed and prepared, that we may freli and
boldly damn all errors, lies, and superstitions, which Satan has brought in
to the world, to corrupt the pure simplicity of gods doctrine. Therefore it is
no meruaill, yt there is so small a number of men, that have a ready mid and
desire to suffer for the gospel, and that the greatest part of them, ye
profese them selves Christans, knows not the power of the Christian religion,
and there own profession. All me^ in a manner are negligent, and have no desire
or very small, to here and read, who thinks it sufficient, if they have
gotten some small taste of the Christian faith. And this is the cause why there
is seen in these no surety and constancy of mind, and that so sone as they
come in to any conflict, they are so abashed, as though they should hi^ and by
utterly perish for which consideration our desire oght to be greater to pursue
and search out most diligently gods truth, that therwt our hearts may be
persuaded with out any doubt. Nether is this al to have such knowledge and
understanding. For we see many so well travailed in gods doctrine that they
seem as though they were stained and died there with, in whom never the less
there is no desire and love of god, no more truly then if they had known
nothing at any time of the godly doctrine, but by a certain unsure, light, and
wavering opinion. But what other cause is there of this so great uncertainty
and leuitie, but that they did never perceive in there mind the majesty of
the holy scripture. And truly if we would rightly way, that it is god that
speaks to us theirin we would here him with more diligence, attention and
reverence. If we would think in reading the scripture, that we are in the schole
and discipline of angels, we should have an other manner of desire to exercise
our selves in that doctrine, which is set forth to us, to confort, strenghthe^,
and instruct our mi^ds. now we se what is ye wai to prepar our selves to
patience and sufferau^ce for ye gospel, yt is so to go forward in the doctrine
thereof, that being thoroughly persuaded of the true religion and that doctrine
which we oght to hold and defend, we may nothing esteem, and despise all the
frauds and illusions of the deuell, and all the inuencions of men, as things
not only of value but also execrable, because they utterly corrupt the
christian sincerity. And here in we differ as true martyrs of Jesus Christ,
from the furious and stifnecked men, which suffer for their own folishe
opinions. Secondly we ought to be so minded, that being assured of the right
and goodness of the cause, we should be enflamed with this due desire to follow
god whither so ever he shall call us, to embrace his word with such reverence as
it is worthy, and being called back from the deceitful fashion of this
world, as men ravished, with their whole mind and endeavor should be carried
to an heavenly life. But O most miserable case, that when the light of god
does shine unto us in these days so bright as it did never shine in the
remembrace of men, yet so little zeal favor and love should be found. Wherein
our misery is so much the greater, that in so great filthiness and
unthankfulness we are not overwhelmed with blushing shame. For we must shortly
come before that judge, before whom our vice and evil which we by all means
go about to hide, shall be brought forth, with that rebuke and check whereby the
just cause of our destruction shall appear. For if we be so endetted and bound
to god, that for the knowledge he has given us, we ought to give to him
honorable and thankful testimony, why is our stomak so abashed and fearful to
enter into the battle? Especially seeing god in this our age, has so opened
himself, that it may be rightly said and truly, that he has opened and plainly
set forth, the greatest treasures of his secrets. May not this be said, that
we so think of god, as though we seemed to stand no need of him at all? For if we
had any consideration of his majesty, we durst never be so bold to turn ye
doctrine which proceeds out of his mouth into philosophy and vain
speculation. In fine we can have no excuse, but this must be unto us the
greatest shame, yea an horrible condemnation, that in so great knowledge,
obtained by the singular goodness of god we have so little love and mind to
defend and keep the same. For first, if we will call to our remembrance the
martyrs of old time, and compare their wonderful constancy with this our tender
slouthfulnes, we shall find passing great cause to detest our own filthiness.
For they were not for the most part so travailed and exercised in the
scriptures, that they could lernedly despute of al matters. But first of al,
they knew and held fast this, that there is one god, who^ they oght to serve
and honor: then, that they were redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ, that in
him only and in his grace they should put their affiaunce, and trust of
salvation. Moreuer they did judge all other inuencions and ordinances of men,
to worship god, so unworthy filthiness, that they could easly condemn al
idolatries and superstitions: to conclude in few words this was their
deuinitie, there is one only god the maker of the whole world, which has
declared unto us his will by Moses and the prophets, and then by Jesus Christ
and his apostles. We have one redemer, with whose blood we were bought, and by
whose grace we hope to be saved. All the idols of the world, are to be
detested and accursed. They came stoutly and boldly to the fire, or other kind
of death, and punishment, instructed with no other doctrine and more hidden
knowledge. And the number of the^ was not small, as of two or three, but so great
that the multitude of thee^, which were cruelly vexed and tormented of the
tyrants seemed innumerable and infinite. But we are so taught and instructed,
that we pass all our auncetours in knowledge and understanding of holy
scripture. We think in our selves and it is true, as touching the
understanding of ye scripture, god has endued us with so much knowledge, as he
has given to any age at any time. And yet there is in us scantly the least
drop of fervent love toward god. There is no reason whi we should norish this
nice cowardnes of mind, unless we would willingly and wittingly provoke ye
wrath and vengeance of god, against our selves. What must we then? Truly we
must take to us a stout, bold, and co^sta^t mind. We must chefly consider how
precious and honorable ye confession and testificatio^ of our faith is before
god For we do little know, how god does esteem this confession, when our life
which is of no value, is more set by and dear unto us. Wherein our wonderful
and beastly folishnes is showed: for we can not in this sort spare our life,
but we must needs confess that we set more thereby, then by gods honor and
our own salvation. A certain heathen man could use this saying, that it is a
miserable thing, to forsake and betray the causes why we life for ye
conseruacion of life. Yet he and his like did never know truly to what end me^
were set in the world, and wherefore they lived therein. They might well say,
that virtue is to be esteemed and followed, and that we oght to live an honest
life without blame. But all their virtues were nothing else but colors and
shadows. But we have better understanding, whereunto our life must be
referred, which is, that we honor god, with all praise and glory, that he
himself may be our glory. Without him, our life is miserable, the which we can
not continue the least moment, but we shall heap upon our selves, a perpetual
malediction. And yet we are nothing ashamed for the winning of a few days, for
this feeble life, to refuse the eternal kingdom, and to seperat our selves from
him, by whose power we are continued in this life. If a man should examine the
most unlearned, yea those whose wit is so dased, and whose life is so
voluptuous, that they be most like to brute beasts, what manner of life is
appointed them, they durst not say plainly and openly, that it should consist
only in eating, drinking, and sleping. For they know that they are created to
a better, worthier and more higher thing: which is nothing else, but to serve
and honor god with all kind of honor, and to suffer our selves as good
children to be ordered and ruled by our most benign father, that after the end
of this frail and unsure life, we may be received into his eternal heretage.
In the appointyng and winning of this end, consists the chefest and greatest
point of our felicity, yea all the whole weight of everlasting life. But when
we carry our minds and thoughts another wai, and do snatche fast hold of this
present life worse the^ a thousand deaths, what excuse ca^ we have? For, to
live and be ignorant of yt causes wherefore we live, is unnatural. But to
forsake the causes wherefore we live here for the desire and love to prolo^g our
life as it were for three days in this deceatful world, and to be separated from
god the author of life, is such a bewitching and furiouse madness, that I know
not with what words we oght to express and show it. But what so ever knowledge
we have, and how so ever our life is appointed, for so much as not with
standing the persecutions are no less and bitter, let us consider how and by
what means the Christian men may confirm them selves in patience, and so
strenghthen their minds, that they may constantly venture to danger their life
for gods truth. This same text which we have recited, being well
understood may bring us to that indifferencye of mind, yea to that
willingness, that we shall not refuce to suffer death for Gods name. Let us go
forth of the city, says the apostle, after the lord Christ, beri^g his
opprobrie, first he does teach and admonish us, that although ye swerds are not
alreadi drawn to kill us, or the fires kindled to broile and burn us, yet that
we can not truly be joined with the son of god, so long as we have the roots of
our thoughts and desiers fixed in this world. Wherefore the Christen man must
alwais, although he be in quiet, have one foot lifted up to the battle, and not
only that, but also his mind must be utterly separated from the world although
his body be therein. Although this at the first fight may seem unreasonable, yet
one saiing of S. Paul, oght to be sufficient to persuade us, for that we be
called and appointed to this, to suffer persecution. As though he should say,
such is the condition of our christianity, that we must needs enter in and
pass through this way if we will follow Christ. In the mean season, to ease our
infirmity and to mitigate the tediousnes and heaviness, which persecutions
brings, we have this great and sweet comfort, that we suffering all these
inco^modities, opprobries and dangers of life for the gospel, do as it were
set our fete in every fotestep of gods son, and do follow him as our prince and
guide. If it had been only said unto us, that we must pass through all the
opprobries of ye world to keep the christian profession, and also suffer death
freely and without fear when soever gods will were, methink we should have had
some color to answer and say contrary, that it is a thing diverse and
abhorring from our nature to wa^der so without a giude But seeing wear charged
and commanded to follow ye lord Jesus, his leading ought to seem so right and
honorable, that we have no just excuse to refrain or refuse his commandment.
But that we should have more earnest love and desire toward this lawdable and
helthfull example, it was not only said that Jesus Christ does lead the way as
a guide and prince but also that we are made like unto his image. For so. S.
Paul in the epistle to the Romans speaks, that god has chose^ and called al
them whom he has taken in to the number of his children, that they should be
like fashioned after the Image of him which is appointed the pattern and head
over all. What, are we so nice and tender that we can or will bear and suffer
nothing at all? Then must we needs refuse gods grace whereby he caleth us to ye
hope of salvation and leads us there to by this way? For these two are so
joined to gether yt the one can not be separated from the other, that we be the
members of Jesus Christ, and that by means of this conjunction and communion,
we be exercised with many afflictions and calamities. This same manner of our
life so joined with gods son, and such conformity to him, we oght to esteem
more the^ we do, and also to Judge it not only by all ways most worthy to be
professed but also to be followed. The suffering of calamities for the gospel,
in the opinion and Judgment of the world, is the greatest infamy but seeing we
know that all the unfaithful ar so blinded, that they can see or rightli judge
nothing at al, ought not we to have clear eyes, and to judge more perfectly? It
is shame to be afflicted and vexed of them that occupy the seat of, justice.
But S. Paul does show us by his example, that we have great occasion to glory
in the scarres of Jesus Christ, and as it were in certain marks imprinted in
us, where with we being marked and decked, god does acknowleg and receive us for
his servant and elect. And we know this yt S. Luke does rehearse of Peter and
John, that they were very glad and joyful, that they were thought worthy to
suffer for the lord Jesus name, sclander rebukes and shame. Where in two
things may be seen contrary in them selves, shame, and honor, by this that
the world running hedlong in fury and madness, does judge against all reason,
and by this means does change the glory of god with dishonor and infamy. Let
not us now disdain so to be despised and to be rebuked of the world, that we
may hereafter obtain with god and his angels, honor, glory and praise. We se what
gteat labors ambitious me^ takes to obtain the order of some king, and after
they have atcheued it, what triumphs they make: but the son of god does
offer to us his order, and yet eueri one despises it and is turned with the
whole power of the mind to ye vanity of the world. I pray you when we behave
our selves proudly and vntha^kfully, ar we worthy to have any thing common with
him? Although our understanding can perceive and comprehend nothing herein, yet
of a truth these are the proper and honorable badges and arms of heavenly
nobility. Imprisonmentes, banishments, maledictions, after the opinion of men
bring nothing else then great shame and infamy. But what does let us to see
what god does judge and pronounce of these things, saving our own infidelity?
Wherefore we must labor yt the name of gods son be of such authority,
weight, and honor with us, as it is most worthy, that we think we are well and
honorably dealt wtal, that his burns as it were certain badges are printed in
us, or else our unthankfulness can in no wise be borne. If god should persecute us
after our merits, has he not just cause every day to chastise and punish us
infinite ways. Yea surely no deaths put unto us were able to recompense ye
least part of our mischief. But of this great and infinite goodness, he treads
under foot al our sins, and does utterly abolishe the same, and whereas he
might punish us according to ye greatness of our sins he has invented
another merueilous way whereby the afflictions are traduced from our deserved
pain and punishment, to a great honor and a certain privilege and singular
benefit, because that by the partaking and suffering of them we are received
into the fellowship of gods son. May it be other ways said or judged, then
that we, seeing we despise and disdain this so excellent and blisfull condition
and manner of living, have little profetted in the christian doctrine? This is the
cause why S. Peter after he had moved us to live a godly and holy life in ye
fear of god, far from that life wherefore other men as thieves, whormongers,
adulterours, and menkillers suffer, by and by adds this, if we must suffer
as christen men, there in we give glory to god for that great and singular
benefit, which he has bestowed on us. Nor it is not for nothing that the holy
man speaks thus, what are we, I pray you that we should be witnesses of gods
truth and as it were proctours appointed to defend his cause. Behold we be
miserable men as it were worms of the earth creaturs full of vanities and
lies, yet god will have his truth defended by us, which is truly so great
honor, that it seems not to pertai^e to ye angels i^ heaven. This one reason
well considered, oght it not to inflame and stire up our minds, to offer our
selves wholly to god, and to show our wholl endeuoire in so holy and excellent a
matter to please him? And yet many ca^ not forbear but yt they will speak
against god or at ye least they will complain, that he has no greater regard
to ease their imbecillitie. it is a merueilous matter, sai they, yt sei^g god
has borne us thus much favor, yt he has chose^ us to be his children, yet he
will suffer us to be so cruelly vexed and oppressed of wicked men. I do yet
answer these men, that although we know no reason why god does so deal with us,
yet his authority should be such with us yt we should apply, and conform our
selves to his will but now when we se Jesus christ to be set for an example to
us least we should seek any other, oght we not to think our selves greatly
happy, yt we be so drawn after his image and liknes? Morouer God does set
forth and show plain and manifest causes, wherefore he will have us to suffer
persecution, emonge which, if there were non other but ye reason and
aduertisme^t which. S. Peter gives we must needs be very peuish and sturdy,
onles we be satisfied therwt This is his reason, yt seeing gold and silver which
are corruptible matals are purged and tried in the fire, it is reason that our
faith also, which in value excels all riches, be tried and approved with
such perils of life and greues. He could by and by after our calling, without
any conflict and sufferyng of these calamities have crowned us. But as he would
have Christ to reign in the midst of his enemies, even so he would have us
also dwelling among the self same, to bear and suffer their violence and
oppression until we be delivered from these afflictions and calamities by him.
And I am not ignorant, that the flesh will then greatly spurn and refuse to be
ruled, when it must be brought into this state, but yet the will of god must
rule al our thoghts and lusts. If we feel in our selves some contradiction and
resistance it is not greatly to be merueyled at. For that is planted and
engraven in our nature to fly the cross. Yet let us abide still, in that
tenderness of the flesh, but let us go on forward, knowing that our obedience
is thankful and acceptable to god, so that we cast down our senses and
appetites, and d^^ so subdue them, that they be under his power. Nether did the
prophets and apostles come to death with mind, that they did not perceive their
will to be against it, and enclining another way. They shall lead the whether
thou would not, said our lord Jesus to Peter. So when such fear of death does
prick our minds let us labor by all means, that we may have the ouerhande,
or rather that god may overcome, and in the mean while let us thus persuade
our selves, that it is to him a most pleasant sacrifice when we resist our
appetites, and do so withstand the^, that by this means being subdued under
his power, we may order and lead our life after his will and pleasure. This is
the chefest and greatest battle, whereunto god will have al his with al their
power to apply, to the end they may labor, to cast down and depresse all that
which does so much exalt it self in their senses, wits and appetites, that it
does carry and wtdraw them from the way, which god does show to the^. In the
mean season, ye consolatio^s are so great and weighty, yt it can not be
expressed, how much deinty cowardnes is in us, when we wax faint hearted and
give over for these perils and troubles. In old time the number was almost in
finite of them, which for the desire of a garland made of corruptible leaves,
did refuse no labor, pain and wrastlinge and also did so suffer death it
self, that they might seem to have their life in no price. And yet there was
none of them, but did contend chanceably being uncertain, whether he should
win, or lose the game. God does set before us an immortal crown, wherein we
may optaine his own glory. And he has not appointed us, an uncertain and
chanceable conflict, but does promise such a reward, to the which we ought to
confer all the cou^seills, studies, and desiers of our life. What is the cause,
that we are so faint herted in the largenes and worthiness of this honor, which
is certain and eternal? Do we think that this was spoken in vain, that we
shall live with Christ, if we be dead with him? The triumph is prepared for us,
but we so much as we may do fly from the conflycte and battle. But this
doctrine is such, that it seems plainlye to disagre with man's Judgment. This
is true.

Nether also Christ, when he pronounces them blessed which suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, does propound such a sentence as ye opinion of ye
world would allow or receive. Yea he will have us to think that the chefest
felicity, which we judge the greatest misery. We think our selves most
miserable, when god does suffer us to be afflicted and oppressed with the
tyrany and cruelty of our enemies. But we do wonderfully err in this, that we
set not before our eyes gods promises, which do plainly confirm unto us, that
al things shall come to our perfect, joy, and salvation. We cast down our
stomachs and despair when we see wicked and noughty men to have the over hand
on us, and to do that cruelty to us yt they seem to tread down our neck with
their feet. But this same most cruel vexation of the wicked and so great
trouble and confusion of things, as S. Paul warns, oght rather to confirm
our minds raise up and lift the^ into heaven. For because of our own nature we are bent to the study and love of things present, and ar so i^flamed that with our
whole knowledge, mind and cogitatio^, we are occupied in to much loui^g and
using this vanity: god, when he suffers us to be thus eue^ vexed and handled,
and the wicked to grow and flourish in all things, does teach and admonish us by
these plain and notable sings of his most just Judgment, that, that day shall
once come, when all things that be now troubled and confused, shall be sattled.
But if that same time seem far and long to, let us fly to ye reamedie, and let
us not flatter our selves in our vice. For this is certain that we have no
faith at al onless we cast ye eyes of our mind to the honorable coming of
Jesus Christ. And because god would leave out no consideration, that might be
apt to move and stir us, he does set forth one that one part promises, on ye
other part threatenings. Do we feel that the promises of god have not force
Enough and authority in us? To confirm them withal let us Ioin there to the
threatenings. We show our selves wondrously forward, sense we believe gods
promises no more then we do. When the lord Jesus Christ. says, he will
acknowledge us for his own and confess so of us before his father, so yt we
also confess him before me^, what should let us to give to him yt confession,
which he requires of us. When men have done al they can, the worst they may do
is to take away our lives. How precious then shall the heavenly life be unto us
when it is compared with this present life which is lost? It is not my purpose in
this place to collect all the promises set forth in the scripture to this end.
Yet sense they be repeated so often times renewed unto us, we oght so to be
experiensed not only in the reading, but also in ye knowledge and co^solatio^
of the^, that we might be as it were died and surely confirmed in them. But if
when the plage hangs over our heads three or four of the^ are not sufficient
to confirm and strengthen us, truly an hundredth should be sufficient to ouerco^
al aduersete and contrary tentatio^s. But if with these great sweet promises
can not entice and draw us to him, are we not very great dullerds, and betle
heads, when nether ye sever threatenings can work any more in us? Jesus Christ
does apoint a dai to accuse al the^ before his father which deny the truth for
fear of losing this life, for whom he declares destruction both of body and
soul to be prepared.

Also in another place he protests that he will refuse all manner of communion
with them that deny him before men, These words unless we be utterly void of
all sense ought vehemently to move our minds and so to fray us, that for fear
the hears of our head should stert up. But how so ever it be, unless we be
so affected and moved as the greatness of the matter and danger requires, there
remains nothing else for us, but to look for horrible and most miserable
confusion: wherein we may excuse our fault so much as we lust, and we may say
that in this great frailty and weakness of nature, we rather are worthy of
mercy the^ of any severity and sharpenes of punishment, it will not serve. For
it is written on the contrary part, that Moses after he had seen god by faith
was so hardened and strengthened, that no violence of temptacion could melt
his mind, and bend him from ye great constancy. Wherefore when we be so
tender and flexible yt there apear in us no power of firm and constant mind,
we signify and declare plainly that we be utterly ignorant of god and his
kingdom. Also when we are warned that we ought to be joined and coupled with our
head, we have gotten a goodly color to exempt and separate our selves from
him, if we say we are men. And were not they that were before us men so well as
we are? Yea if we had no thing else, but even the bare doctrine of godliness, yet
were all the excuses which we can bring weak and of no value. But now are
worthy more greater check and condemnation, sense we have so great and notable
examples, whose great authority oght vehemently to excite and confirm our
minds. There are two chief parts of this our exhortacion or consolation to be
considered. The first is yt this has been a common state to the universal
body of ye church always and ever shall be to ye end of the world, yt it was
vexed with such injuries and contumelies of the wicked as it is reported in ye
Psalm. cxxix. They have vexed me even now from my youth hither to, and have
drawn a plough over and over every part of my back. The holy ghost in this
place does bring in the old church speaking on this wise that it should not seem
now unto us a new thing nor grievous, if we se in these days our cause and
condition to be like. S. Paul also reciting the same place of an other Psalm.
where it is said. We were as it were sheep led to the slaughter, does declare yt
this pertai^ed not only to one age, but it was and shall be the common, usual
and continual state of Christ's church. So that if we see in this time the
church to be so handled and vexed, by ye insolency and pride of the wicked,
that some bark at her, some bite her, many afflict her, and always invent some
mischef and pestilent destruction to her, yea and set upon her without ceasi^g
as it were mad dogs and wild raueni^g beasts, let us call to remembreunce
that she was so vexed afflicted and oppressed in all times before. God does give
unto her sometime, some rest and refreshing and as it were atime of truce. And
this is that which is spoken in the psalm oboue alleged, the righteous lord does
cut in so^der the cords of the wicked: and in an other place, that he breaks
their rod, lest the good being to much pressed should and move their hands:
to inniquitie. But god would always have his church to be tossed in this world,
and as it were always in a certain conflict reserui^g for her quiet rest in
heaven. The end of these afflictions was always blessed, yea truly god wrought
this ye the church always pressed with mani and great difficult calaminites,
was never utterly oppressed. As it is said in an other place, the wicked with
all their labor did never optain that they desiered. S. Paul also does so
glory of like happy end and issue of afflictions, that he shows this grace
of god to be perpetual in his church. We says he, are pressed with all kind of
afflictions, but we are not killed with sorrow and care, we live in great need
and poverty, yet are we not forsaken we are cast down but perish not, alwais
carrieng about the mortificatione of our lord Jesus Christ, that his life also
may be declared in our mortal body. This issue and end, as we see that god
has always made, it happy and prosperouse in the persecutions of the church,
oght to bolden us, seeing we know that our fathers, who also acknowleged their
frailty and weakness, had always thee victory over their enemies, be cause
they continued, constaunt In paciencye.

I do entreat this first part of my exhortacion briefly, that I may come the
sooner to the second, which does more pertain to the purspose. And that is,
that we apply certain examples of the martyrs which were before us, to our
consolacion and comfort. And in this kind or number there be not two or three,
but a great and thick cloud as the apostle writes to ye Hebrews.xii. Whereby
he signifies, that there is so great a multitude of them, which have suffered
for the testimony of the truth, that so well the abundance of excellent
examples, as the most grave authority ought to provoke us to contentacion,
patience, and moderation of mind. And least my oration should wax to long in
heaping up together an infinite multude of examples, I will only speak of the
Jews, which suffered most grievous persecution for the true religion, both
under the tyranny of king Antiochus, and also shortly after his death. We can
not say that the number of the afflicted men was small, when a great mighty
army as it were of martyrs was prepared to maintain and defend the religion.
Nether can we allege yt they were certain excellent prophets who^ god had
chosen forth and separated from the common sort of people, for there were
women, boys, and infantes, also in that number of martyrs. Nether will we say
that they passed through that persecution, only with some light loss, without
great peril of life, without great pains and torments of bodies, seeing, there
was no kind of cruelty vpproued in afflicting, vexing, and torme^ting them.
Let us here also what the apostle does say of them, and does set forth for us
to follow. Some faith he, were hanged up like belles and stretched, dispising to
be delivered that they might optaine a better resurrection: other were proved
with opprobrious words and strippes, or with bonds and prisonment: other were
stoned or cut insonder, or killed with ye swerd: other some went wandering
hither and thither through hills and caves of the earth. Let us now come to
make comparison betwixt them and us. If they suffered so many and great
torments for the truth, which was as then but obscure, what oght we to do in
this great light, which has shined unto us in this time? God speaks unto us
now as with full mouth. The greatest gate of the kingdom of heaven is made
open unto us. Jesus Christ comen from heaven unto us does so call us to him,
that we have him present as it were before our eyes. In to how great
ingratitude and shameful wickedness shall we run into if we have less stomach
and love to bear and suffer for the gospel, then they had which did behold
the promises of god but as it were a far of, who had but a very little door
opened to inter into the kingdom of god, who had received only a remembrance
and obscure testimony in figures of Jesus Christ? These great matters can not
be declared and expressed with any words as they be worthy. Wherefore I leave
them to be weied in every man's thoughts and meditacio^s. This doctrine as it
has a common and universal reason, so it must be referred to the exercise and
order of every ma^s life. But every man must apply it to his propre use and
profit apt for his own consolation. And I speak this for this cause least
that they which see them selves to be in no manifest peril, should suppose
this doctrine to be vain and not to pertain to them. Now they are no in the
hands of tirantes, but what know they how god will deal with them herafter.
Therefore we must be of that mind and judgment that if any persecution, which
we looked not for happen unto us, that we fall not therein to unawares and
unprovided, but that we come to it prepared long before hand. But I fear there
be many deaph ears to whom this my oration is made without fruit. For their
that live in quiet having all things at will, are so far from preparing them
selves to take and suffer death when need shall be, that they have no care nor
thought of serving god at all. But this ought to be al our study continually,
especially in these great troblesom times, wherein we live in great peril. In
the mean time they whom god calls to suffer for the testimonye of his name,
must think in very deed that they were prepared long be fore, and brought to
this sufferance of evils, by the mocion and certain judgment of the spirit,
that they might bear them selves therein boldly and constantly. Then also they
must diligently call to the remembrance all the exhortations which they have
herd before, and be so stirred with the aduertisment of them, as the valiant
souldiare to take his armor when he hereth ye trumpet blow. But what seek we?
Truly in these perils we do nothing else: but seek shifts and ways how to
escape. I mean this by ye most part of men. For this same persecution is as it
were a touch stone, wherewith god does try and prove who be his: but there are
few found of that faith, cowrage and godliness toward god, that they will
offer them selves frankely and freely unto death for his names sake. This is a
thing almost incredible, that they which do glory, that they have some knowledge
in the gospel, are so impudent and unshamefast, they will use such cauillatio^s.
Some will say, what shall it auail to co^fess our faith before those stubborn
stifnecked men, which are purposed to war against god himself? Is not this
to cast pearls before swine? As who would say, Jesus Christ does not most
plainly declare, yt he does requier of us ye confession of his name yea among
most perverse and wicked men? But if this our testimony do nothing profit to
their edifiing, yet shall it profit to their co^fusio^. Always ye confession
of our faith does savor swetly before god although it bri^ge death and
destruction to wicked men. There be other also which will say this, what shall
our death profit when it shall seem to give more offense then utility? As
though god has left to them selves fre choice to dye when they will or when
they shall think it the most apt time of death? But we contrary wise do obei
him but as for ye fruit that must come by our death, we leave to the hand and
providence of god. Wherefore the christian man must most chifly in what place so
ever he be, diligently se that he live in that simplicity and integrity that
god requires, and that he be not brought from that mind and manner of godly and
holy life at any time with any dangers or threatninges. Let him eschew so
much as is possible the ragi^g madness of the wolves, so that the same warenes
be not joined with the prudence and craftines of the flesh.

First of al let him do this, that he give over and resign his life into the
hands of god the most faithful keeper. When he has ordained and kept
diligently this manner and fashion of life, if afterward he fall in to the
hands of enemies let him think and persuade himself, that he is brought into
that place of god, for this cause that he may have him a witness of his son.
Therefore seeing he is called and brought to that confession by the certain
decree of god, there is no way to go back, onles he will be unfaithful unto
him, to whom we have promised all our endeavors both to live and dye: yea
whose we are although we had promised nothing at all. I mean not hereby to
drive every man of necessity at all time to give a full and perfect confession
of their faith, no not some times when they be asked. For I knowe-what measure
and moderation S. Paul used, who was as ready with heart and mind to defend
the gospel as any other. Neither was this spoken by the Lord Jesus and
promised without a cause, that god would give us in that time and matter, a
mouth and prudence. As though he would have said, the office of the holy
ghost, is not only to confirm us, that we may be willing bold and strong,
but also it consists in giving us judgment, prudence and counsel, how we
may, as it becomes us, govern and rule our selves, in so great and so hard a
matter. Truly this whole treatise is to this end that they that be in such
distresses should desire and receive from heaven that moderacion and prudence,
not following the counsel of the flesh to seek some shifts to escape. But
there be that do object in this place, that the lord Jesus yea when he was
asked would make to them no answer. But I say that this suffices not to
take away that rule, which he has given to us, to witness our faith then when
the confession thereof is necessarily required. Furthermore, that he did never
dissemble or keep silence for this purpose to save his life. Last of all that
he did never make so doubtful an answer, but it contained an apt testimony
of that which he had spoken before, or else did first satisfy the^ that lay in
wait to mark both his words and deeds Wherefore let al christians be well
persuaded and sure of this thing, yt no man oght more to esteem his life then
the testimony of the truth wherein god will have the praise and glory of his
name to appear. Is it without a cause that he calls his witnesses (for this
does the word martyr signify) who are brought to make answer before ye
enemies of faith and religion? Or is not this rather the cause, for that he
would use al their speaking and whole course of life to the confession of his
name? Wherein every man must not so look to his neighbor and fellow, that he
will seem to do nothing at al without his example and testimony. And this
curiosity is so much the more to be eschued because we are prone to this vice
of our own nature. Peter when he had heard of Christ that he should be led in
his old age whether he would not he enquired what should become of John his
fellow and companion. There is none of us, which to avoid peril and danger,
woudl not gladly make answer in that wise, because when we should suffer any
thing, by and by this comes into our mind, what is the cause wherefore I
should suffer more then others. But Jesus Christ does counsel and monish other
wise us al in common, and every man privately, to be prepared and ready, that
as he calls one or other, so every man comforth in his order. And I have
showed this before, that we shall be unarmed and unprepared to take and suffer
martyrdo^ unless we be fe^sed and armed with the promises of god. Now
remains to declare plentifully such promises, not that we will set forth
every one exactli but to show the chief and most excellent thing, which god
would have us to hope for, to comfort us in our calamities. And there be three
such things, the first that seeing all the times both of our life and death do
consist in his hand, he will so defend us by his power, yt not one hear of our
head shall fall but after his will. Wherefore al faitfull men oght thus to be
persuaded, in whose hands so ever they be tossed, that god in no wise will lay
a side that governance and custody, which he has taken upon him for them
with so great care. If this persuasion of gods fatherly care and providence did
rest and cleave deep in our hearts we should be delivered out of hand, of ye
greatest part of these doubts and difficulties, which do now trouble and
hinder our duty We behold now ye bitterness of the tyraunts, and unbridled
cruelty, brawling pinishly in all sharpnes of punisme^ts. And here by we judge
that god has no more care, nor regard to defend and keep us in sauetie. And
therefore we be so stirred and provoked, by our own reasons to look and
provide, for our selves, as though ye whole hope of gods help and succor were
clean taken away. But on the other part, the so great providence of god as he
has showed unto us, oght to be unto us like a strong fenced castle, which can
be overcome with no power. Let us therefore learn and hold fast, this short
sentence, that our bodies are in his hand and power, who also did creat them.
And this is the cause, wherefore god has delivered his, after a merueilouse
sort, and contrary the opinyon and hope of all men, as Sydrach, Misach, and
Abdenago, forth of the burning oven, Daniel out of the lions den, peter out
of Herod's prison, where in he was short and watched most diligently fast bound
in chains. By these examples he would declare unto us, yt he could stay our
enemies as it were with a certain bridle, and that he had that power that when
he would, he could preserve and as it were pluk us out of the mouth of death it
self. Not yt he does always thus deliver his from such perils, but of right
having the authority to apoint our life and death, he will have us persuaded,
that we are so continued and kept under his custodye and tuition, that what so
ever the tyraunts do inue^t, or with what fury so ever they set upon us, yet
it is only in his hand to apoint life or death: and therefore this matter oght
only to be refferred to his will. But if he suffer ye teraunts to kyl us, yet
our life is unto him dear and much more set by of him then it is worthy. The
which he did plainly declare to be so when he pronounced by the mouth David,
that the death of his saints was honorable and preciouse in his sight. And
also when he say by esaias, that the earth it self should show forth the blood
that was shed which seems al to gether hidden. Now then let the enemies of
yt gospel be as bou^tiful and prodigal in sheddi^g ye martyrs blood, as they
will yet this must be, yt they shall make a reckening and horrible account of the
effusion of that dear and precious blood, yea even to the uttermost drop.
But now, in this time they do scornefully and proudly laugh, when they burn
the faithful men, and after they have dipped and washed them selves in their
blood, they become so dronken, that they care nothing at al what murders they
do. But if we will have this stay and moderation of mind, that we can patiently
abide, god will at the last declare, that it was not without a cause that he so
greatly esteemed our life, and had it in so great honor. In ye mean while, let
us not take it to grief, if it be now bestowed to confirm and garnish the
gospel, which excels heaven and earth in worthiness. And that we may be more
surely persuaded that god will never leave us as abiectes in ye hands of the
enemies, let us not forget that same saying of Jesus Christ, wherein he says,
that it is he himself who^ men do persecute in his members. God had said before
by Zachary, who so touches you touches the sight of mine eye.

This is much more expressed, if we suffer for the gospel sake, it is even as
the son of him self were and suffered in that affliction. Therefore let us
think so that Jesus Christ must forget himself if he should have no care and
thought of us at the time when we be in prison and danger of life for his cause
and glory: and let us also know yt God will take all the contumelies and
injuries, as done against his own son. Let us come to the second place of
consolation, which is one of the greatest among gods promises: that god will so
hold us up with the virtue of his spirit in these afflictions, that our enemies
whatsoever they do, nor Satan their chief captain shall in any thing go away
with the ouerhand. And truly we do see how in that necessity, he does show
the succor and helps of his grace. For the invincible stoutnes and constancy
of mind which is seen in the true martyrs, is a notable token of that same
most mighty power which god uses in his saints. There be two things in
persecutions grievous tediouse and intolrable to the flesh whereof the one
consists in the checkes and rebuks of men, the other in the pain and torment
of the body. In both these kinds of temtations god does promise so his
assistaunce that we shall easily ouercom all the infamy and violence of the
grefes and pain. And truly what he promises he does perform in deed with most
manifest and assured help. Let us then take this bucklere to defend us against
al fear, and let us not measure the power of gods spirit so sclendrely, that
we should not think and believe, that he will easily overcome all the injuries,
bitterness, and contumelies of men. And of this divine and invincible operation,
among all other we have a notable example in this our age. A certain young
man, who lived godlylye here with us in this city, when he was taken at
Dornick was condemned with this sentence, that if he would deny the confession
of his faith he should be but beheaded, but if he perseuered in his purpased
opinion, he should be burned. When he was asked whether he would do, he answered
plainly, he who will give me this grace to dye patiently for his name, will also
work by ye self same grace, yt I may abide broyling and burni^g. We oght to
take this sentence not as pronounced of a mortal man, but of ye holy ghost, yt
we should think yt god ca^ so well confirm; and make us ouercom al payns and
torments, as to move us to take any other kind of meker death in good part.
Yea we see and often times, what co^sta^cy he gives to euel and wicked men,
who suffer for their euel deeds and wickedness. I do not speak of such as be
obstinat and hardened in their wickedness, which have no repe^ta^ce, but of the^
which do perceive co^solatio^ by ye grace of Jesus Christ, and so do take and
suffer quietly and with good will most grievous and sharp pain as we see a notable
example in ye thief who turned at ye death of our lord Jesus christ. Will god
who assisteth with so great power wicked men that suffer co^dingly for their
evil acts, forsake them who defend his cause, and will he not rather give the^
invincible power? The third place of promises, which god promises to his
martyrs, is ye fruit which they oght to look for of their sufferi^g and of
death it self if need so requier. But this fruit is, yt after they have set
forth and honored gods name, and edified his church with their testimony, they
may be gathered together in immortal glory with the lord Jesus. But because we
have spoken largely enough before of this reward of eternal glory, it is now
sufficient, to renew the memory of those things that are already spoken.
Wherefore let the faithful learn to rear up their head to the crown of
immortal glory, whereunto god does call them, let them not take the loss of
this life grievously, considering the greatness, and worthiness of the reward. And
that they may be sure and perfectly persuaded of this so great a good thing, as
can not be expressed with any speech, nor in thought be comprehended, nor with
any honor enough esteemed, let them have continually before their eyes this
like and conformable reason with our Lord Jesus Christ that in death it self
they behold life, as he by ignominy of the cross and infamy came to
glorious resurrection, wherein all our felicity, triumph and joy consists.
Amen.

The third Sermon WHEREIN THE FAITHFVL are admonished how greatly they oght
to esteem it to live in the church of god, where they may purely and with
liberty worship him, taken forth of this sentence of the. Psalm. 27.
One thing have I demanded of the lord that will I require, that I may dwell in
the house of the lord all the days of my life, that I may see the beauty of
the Lord. etc.
ALthough among men, there be soche a variety and defference of minds and
desires, that it is a world to se them, yet do all consent and agree in this one
point most plainly, that with hole heart and mind they are occupied in the
world Every one I grant, will have some what apart, wherein he does set his
hole felicity, and whereunto he will apply and thereupon bestow all his care
and study and the whole trade of his life. But this vanity bears rule
generally in all, that they seek their felicity and principal commodity, none
other where, but in this present life subject to corruption. The which thing
declares most evidently that men which have cast down their minds, hope
and iudgemen, from the dignity and excellencye of their nature, are so
degenerat and grown out of kind, that they seem utterly to be brute beasts.
For we were created to another end far contrary, that whiles we remain in
this world, we should with our whole mind and care contend toward the
heavenly kingdom of God. And this is the very cause wherefore this present
life is named a certain pilgrimage course or travail.

Wherefore who soever will not wittingly and willingly deprive himself of the
eternal inheritance of the kingdom of god, he must needs begin his course and
journey at this principle to wit, that he oght to cut of all the folishe and
light desires whereby he may be retained and withholden in the world: so that
his chief care and desire always be to draw nere unto God, and that he have
none impediment, but that in mind and desire at the least he have thither. In
mind I say and desire at the least, because it were greatly to be desired and
wished, that all earthly affections, which do withdraw us from God, should be
utterly plucked up and rooted forth of our minds that we might spedily pass
over ye race and space of this world which we have to run through, and to
atteyne to that place whither our journey lies. But because we are so far
unable to have such a mind as is pure and void from all euel affections: this
remains that we conquer and overcome all the impedimentes that hinder us,
that what faut or stop so ever be in us, we pursue our course with that mind
and desire, that in our greatest infirmities, we always prefer the heavenly
life to al worldly things. But now let us consider by what ways and means
we may learn this. It neither lies in man's wit nor authority, to invent or
appoint them: but those ways are to be trodden and holden, which god has
ordained and appointed unto us whereof the chief and most sure are here named
of David, that is to say, the order and policy and state of a church so
governed, that we may be taught therein and instructed in the word of god,
that we may worship him with common consent, and pray unto him and praise him
with one voice, and have the right use of his sacraments as the aids and
stays of his whole worship and religion. For these are the rules wherein we
must exercise our self, that we may be confirmed in faith, in ye fear of god,
in holiness, finally in contempt of the world and love of the heavenly life.
And to this purpose and none other pertains David's testimony and prayer,
that emonges many things which he was moved to wish and desire in his
banishment this was the chief and principal that he might dwell in the temple
of god. For under this name of the temple he does comprehend that fredome and
liberty, wheteby he may both worship god purely and godly with the faithful,
and give the confession of his faith, praise god and make his prayers, and to
be partaker as well of al these so great comfortes and joys, as also of the
sacraments which were in that temple rightly and lawfully institute. For at
that time in deed God had chosen a certain place, in the which he commanded to
offer sacrifice unto him, and to show him all reverence and honor: whereby
they might profess and testify that he was their only god in whom they put
their trust, by whose law they should be instructed and finally should there
have all the tokens of his presence. And doubtless he himself utters most
plainlye, what it is that he chiefly regards in this request when he desires
to dwell in the temple of god, seeing he does ioygne this thereunto, that he
does require this for that cause that he may behold the beauty of the Lord.
Wherein he declares that the temple of it self was nothing, neither that he
had fastened his eyes upon it alone, but that he rather had his heart and his
mind bent upon that use and worship whereunto it was consecrate and appointed.

If we should suppose that he regarded or desired nothing save the buildyng
made of wood and stone we should judge far a mysse and injuriously of this
most godly and wise man: for this cold not be given him as a commendation of
virtue but a wicked superstition. We must therefore rather judge and believe of
such a man, that by the declaration of such a fervent desire he has
testified, how honorable he esteamed ye outward order and regiment whereby the
faithful are governed in the church. And to utter in few words what I judge
hereof he signifies and declares that it is a singular benefit and such a
special prerogatyue as can not for ye great dignity thereof sufficiently be
pryced to remain and live in the church, that he may be partaker of all those
things whereby God does vouchsafe to allure and to ioyngne his children unto
him. And let us note diligently his dignity and authority ye speaks thus.
For he was not one of the rude multitude a man without knowledge and experience,
but the most excellent prophet that ever was both in virtue and knowledge
and inspiration of the holy ghost.

He does not here speak what is profitable or comfortable for the multitude
but in this peticio^ having only regard of his own profit and welthe, he
does witness most planly, that he neithere wishes nor desires any thing
more earnestly, then to be in that company and assimbly of the people of god,
wherein he may declare his faith, and may confirm and edefye himself, by the
holy sacraments and the wholesome doctrine there preached. Nether gives, he this
testimony in this place only but also in many other he declares his most
fervent desire to the same as in the former psalm. he says, O lord I love the
habitacion of thy house, and the place wherein thy glory has his residens.
Again psalm.xlii. like as the Hyndebrayeth for the water brokes so my soul
pants after god my soull is a thyrst for God even, for the living God saing,
when shall I come and appear, before god? It had been enogh to have said these
words but his vehement affection does carry him higher. For emmediatly he
adds that he was fed with tears in stead of bread all that time that he was
absent and cold not come to the temble of god. And he forthermore adjoined
that this heart is powered forth like water, within him self, for the
remembrance of that time when he come to the, temple with the multitude of the
faithful to praise God The^ after so many and so great morni^gs and wailings,
and desires most lame^tably oppressed, he fyndeth no better comforthe then in
that expectacion and hope which he conceiueth of god, that he will restore
again unto him the benefyte and comforth which he had lost. My soul says
he why art thou so vexed so unquiet and troubled within me? put thy trust in
God for I will yet give him thanks for the comforthe of his countenance. And
in the.lxxxiiii. psalm he declares an especial desire of goinge to ye
tabernacle and visitinge, the court of God, for after he had made an
exclamation. O lord of hoastes how amiable is thy tabernacle? he says that
his heart and body did leap and dance for ye earnest desire to enter into
the court of ye lord, and he gives this reason: for they are al Blessed that
dwell in the house of God: because they do praise him, that is to say they
acknowledge his benefits with a thankful mind and with one comune consent
and yelding a confession of their faith do glorify him.

Now when David such a worthy man which was so deaply grounded in all godlynes
and religion who lived in ye world like an Angel sent from heaven does
confess himself nothing notwtstanding to have need of such aids means and
spurs as God has appointed to his people, what is to be supposed of us I
beseech you, who are so rude and carnal, and whose faith is so weak whose
religion is so cold and barren? Surely we oght thus to judge and think of our
selves, that although david for his perfection cold have wanted these
inferior aids and helps, yet unto us they are always most necessary,
namely for that infirmity wherewith we are oppressed continually. But whereof
doubt we? Such as have attained to greater perfection, and more worthy
commendation of virtue, do better understand how much they yet want then
those which have no virtue at all. David was endued and adorned with Angelical
virtues. The which excellency of virtues and perfection in him makes him
better to understand and perceive, how necessary, it was unto him, and how
mete for the comforth of his conscience, and his salvation, to be styrrid up
and inflamed more and more to the love and desire of a godly life, by the
preaching of ye word, by sacraments, and other such like exercises. But these
great boasters void of all virtues, but notable in all syns and vices which at
this day despyce things so excellent, so necessary, so wholesome, declare thereby
most evidently that they have not one drop of Christen religion and true
holiness. I do speak of such great clerks and grave philosophers, in corners
and chambers which do live in the papistry not professing any religion.

Such do say, O it is a goodly matter and much to the purpose, that no man
can be a, Christian onles he run to Geneua, that he may there fyl his ears
with the sarmons and use such ceremonies as in that city are observed, can not
we ourselves every one, alone both read and pray? what? must we all needs
go, to the church to be taught, when every one has the scripture at home. To
the which things I do thus answer. We do bind no man to depart from that
place wherein he dwells and has his certa^e trade. But rather if my man do
live purely and godly under ye same tyranny of the pope, and worship. God as he
oghte, I will account him of far greatter price, then us that have this rest
and lyberty. But hear I must demand.ii. questions first, whether such do syn
which feeling their infirmity and weakness do resort to some Christian
church, that they may find there that comfort and confirmation of conscience
which David sought for at Jerusalem in his time? Secondly, whether that all
generally, even such as be retained and oppressed by violence, oght not to
sobbe and to syghe to mourn and to lament, when they se themselves destitute
of those means, and far of from those ways which might, guide them and bring
them unto God. The brute beasts which want all reason, do cry for fode when
hounger, assaileth. And shall they which profess themselves to be the sons of
God have no care nor consideration of that thing, wherein only the most wholesome
fode of faith and the most stable comforth thereof is contained? Or can they
not be thus content, thus proudly themself to tread under foot the graces of
God so excellent and precious onles also they deryde them which fly into
strange countries to seek such comforthe by Godly zeal and do enjoy the
same with most pleasant, tranquillity of the mind and joy of the spirit
wherein their proud stomak and ye arrogance whereby they are brought to this
opinion to judge sermons, sacraments and publyke prayers unprofitable and vain
for them is so sure and clear a testimony yt they oghte to be excommunicate
and cast forth of the church, that there need none other witness. For paull
does not say that this order which the lord has appointed in his church,
does only perteine to the rude and ignorant, but that it is, commune to all
members, of the church without exception, of any. The lord says he, has
ordained teachers, Apostles and pastors to the restauratio^ of the saints, to
the edification of the body of christ, until we all do come to the unity of
faith, to a parfyte man, to the measure of a perfyte age in Christ. first of
all let us, note that he says, not that god had left his scripture for eueri
man to read it alone, but that he has ordened such a policy and order of
the church, wherein certain men appoi^ted should teach others: by the which
only office he understands comprehends all other things which, depend of
the same doctrine. Wherefore though every man may pryuately read it, yet this
oght to be no hinderance but that, they should hear it openly. But who are
they whom he calls to this, public doctrine and discipline? Both high and
low without any exception. What does he bind it to one day? No surely, but
he comma^deth to use continually this order of public and ecclesiastical
discipline unto the last end of our life, even to the day of death wherein
begins our redemption. Such therefore as disdaigne to be brought under this,
discipline as unto a certain order whereby they being governed by the commune
order of the church, may grow forward in faith and in all kind of
virtues, can cut themself of from the communion and feloship of the children
of God by nothing so much: Let them excuse the matter as fynely and craftily
as they list. For the sentence of paul is most evident, yt none is of Christ's
body neither can or oght to be compted a membre thereof, onles he submit
himself to this commune rule and order. Wherefore dear brethren, Let us not so
proudly lift up our hearts: but rather derecte and cast, down our selves, and
let us, not tempte God with this great temeritie, thinking ourselves able to
fly without wings. But some man will obiecte: That david did speak of that
time, when the shadows and figures were in their force. For God then governed
his people like children with childlike discipline. As sante paull speaks,
and therefore those so fervent, desires do not belong to us at this present
especially now, seeing we are compared, unto them, who being passed their
infancy and childhode are grown to a more strong and stable age. Aganst the
which opinion and reason thus I answer: that we have as great necessity as had
the ancient fatheres, to be taught by sermones, to be confirmed by sacraments,
to be exercised in commune prayers, and to make confession of our faith. And to
this purpose pertain so many promises, especially those yt Esaias writes: by
whom god pronounces that his church shall have infinite children, whom it
shall, not only conceive and bear but, also norishe and bring up. The which,
thing can by no means be denied but that, it pertains unto the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and to this our, time especially. Now God does planely and
evidently send home her children into, the bosom and lap of the church,
their mother and norce. And wherefore does he so, but that an order and rule
might be kept which he has appointed to gather, and keep together his flocks
in the church. The which thing also is expressed, lively by a very apt and
godly simitude which the same prophet uses where he says in the.liii. chapter
that the Christians shall be like dooues which come to gether by flights into
their doouecotes. And what is that doouecote I pray you, and commo^e cote of
comforthe for all the faithful but the place wherein the word of God is
preached, the sacraments are, ministered and the name of God is called upon and
praised? And surely those which think themself so stable and strong, that
they have no need of this order and governance do not yet well understand their
own state and condition. For why has God ordined and appointed us the
sacraments but that whiles we are closed about and clothed with these bodies,
we are ouerdull to perceive spiritual things, onles we be helped up with such
corporal things and signs which may be known by our syghts and senses. The
angels have the veretie and truth of the sacraments, the which is to them
sufficient: but our rudenes and ignorance requires that God submitt himself
much more unto us, and apply himself to the, weakness of our capacity. But
these fantastical Christians which are led with their false opinions and
vain, imaginations of their proud heart, must spoil, themselves of their
bodies and transform themselves into angels and then truly they shall not need,
these small aids, and helps which they now so, smally do regard.
Notwithstanding they which, are deprived of the use and liberty of the
sacraments and of the comforthe of calling upon his name and can not feall
their misery to mourn, for the same do far pass all brute beasts in,
dulnes insensible.

Moreover this I do affirm that if. David had a just and necessary cause to
make this exclamation, O lord, how amiable is thy temple. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy house. My soul is, kendled with most fervent, desire to
enter, into the courts of the lord: then have we, this day a far greater, more
just and necessary cause, that we should be enflamed with care love and
desire, of the church of God. For what were those godly and comfortable things
of the temple whereof David had such necessity, that being absent and depryued
of them, he did account his life altogether bitter and unpleasant: They were
in effect and substance the same that, we have this day. How be it we do know
that they were but dark shadows whereby god did not so declare and set forth
his grace, as he has at this present powered it out and made it to shine
before our eyes. For god has opened and uttered himself unto us in the hole
order of his church so mercifully and so familiarly, that the very heavens
seameth after a sort to be opened unto us. Neither do the sacraments signifye
Jesus Christ afar, of unto us like as under the law: but they paynte him
before our eyes. Wherefore we must needs be to much unthankful except we do
prefer these so great and so excellent benefytes, which God bestows upon
us, to that comforth and Joy which was offered unto david in the temple of
zion. We are not now, in the utter courts as, David speaks, neither is there
any veal Drawn any more to hold us back from the santuari wherefore i^ will
affirm plainly that we smally regard and do not rightly know, yt greatness of
so liberal benefits, when our desyers are not equal at the least to the
godly zele of david. And this do I speak to teach the matter simply and
plaineli: as for exhortation it shall follow afterward in due place. Now then
let us consider what was his so great zele and desire yt thereunto we may apply
and frame our life as unto a certain form, and rule whereby we should lead our
life. One thing says he, have I required of the lord, where speaking of one
certain thing he does signify that he was so desirous and care full thereof
that he contemned al othere and despised, them as though he had utterly
forgotten them.

And had David all other things to be desired so at will, that he wanted
nothing but this one thing which he so earnestly required? Nay surely he was
banished his country and fled from place to place as an exile. And in the same
exile and banyshement he wanted his fathers house, and the most sweet company
of his friends and familiars, he was spoiled of all his goods, depryued of
most high honors and dignities which he had in his country, his wife was
taken from him. Finally he seamed in ye exile to be a man spoiled of al good
things and commodities and utterly deformed and defaced with, all calmities and
myseries, yet for all this of so many so great and most comfortable things
which he then wanted, the want of none was so grievous and painful unto him,
as that he might not go and have the exercise in the temple, emongs others,
like as he concludes the same thing in ye contrary affection of gladness, when
he had, all things at, pleasure, where he gives thanks unto God for all the
benefytes which he had abundantly bestowed up on him and after he had spoken
of meat drink and rest and other corporal commodities in ye end of the
psalm he thus concludes his prayer and thankesgeuing: that he will dwell, all
the time of his life in the temple and house of God. By the which desire and
earnest purpose he testifies yt in all his welthe, pleasures and quietness, he
cared for nothing more nor compted any thing more pleasant or more precious,
then that kind of life and conversation, wherein he was like a sheep in the
flock of the faithful and there fed most sweatly, that so he might be led to
the chief felicity. Wherefore let us consider diligently, that David in all
his changes both in adversity and prosperity retained that mind and desire,
that he might use that liberty continually which God had given to the children
of Israel: which can be compted no small virtue. For we see very many, who when
they are in danger and distress in affliction and misery do remember God
gladly: but so soon as they are delivered and have eskaped all dangers, when
their are once as they would be, then cast they all memory and remembrance of
God forth of their mynds, yea and which is most shamfull, they rage and flynge
up their heels aganst God, like horse that are fed and kept over proudly.
And others do bear such adversity so heavily and greauously and are so angry
and grudging aganst God that they are most greauously offendid if there be any
thing but spoken of God. But David had a far other mind toward God always.

was he not so, afflicted and oppressed with calamities and miseries passing
number and measure, that he seemed most miserable of all men in the world?
Yet was the grief of his mind so far from woundyng and oppresing him, that
he should be trobled or grieved at the mention of God, that co^trarywise that
same mention that he makes of his most grievous sorrows is a most sweet
comforth unto him, even then when he is not able to think any thing of, God
but with this complante, that he is banished from the temple and depryued of ye
sacraments and other exercises of the faith: nevertheless the consideration
and lamentacion for those, discommodities was most pleasant unto him of al
other things Now of the other side when ye state was changed and he was
restored to al honor and prosperity, was he thereby changed? Did he not so
ouercom his enemies yt he enioied ye kingdom well and peaceably drad of all men?
Had he not also that abundance of all things such plenty and liberty that
he might have given himself to enjoy all pleasures? Yet does he still keape
that constant mind and purpose, that he alwaes esteameth and judges it to be
his only felicity, that he has access and entrye into the temple of god
that he may be partaker of the order appointed in the church. Therefore do we
see that he professes boldly and Godly, that he has not in vain required of
the lord this one thing so often and earnestly. For this was so dear unto him
and so much desired, yt he cold be well content to give al his other
commodities honors and Joys for the same.

Now let us considre which of us has the desire and judgment that david the^
had. Will they think you (who set their hole felicity in those goods which
they now enioie) prefere this liberty to call upon the name of God purely, to
hear his word, to use his sacraments, before their accustomed commodities
and pleasures? Nay verily, they are all together so brought a sleep with the
feading of their panshe and fat belly, and dream so much of their delites
and pleasures, that they care for nothing but to panpre their carkes and to
live delicately. And to speak the matter at a word such is the Judgment and
desire of the hole world, yt it had rather to have a troghe farced and filled
with meat, like a fylthy swyne all given to the belly, and more they set by it
then by the holy temple of God. So soon as any talk or rumor is raised of
those wars, and tumultes which are begone al ready and are like mo to follow
more greauous, every man does fear the spoil of his goods and other
descomomodities trobles and dangers which do enseue ye wars. But to lose ye
preaching of ye doctrine of salvation to want ye pure administration of ye
sacraments and other helps and exerccises of religion wherewith, we are joined
unto God no man makes mention, neither does so great an evil and perylous
Danger, any whytte move, us. Neither do we see them that are utterly destitute
and depryued of these so many and so great treasures and comforthes greatly
care for them: Onles there rents and revenues be able, to keape them through out
the hole year and manteine the^ in that state of life, pomp and vanity
whereunto there ambition moves them: if the ways and means of keeping their
trade and increasing their substance do fail, if they lose their honor and
estimation emongs men.

They are so, trobled and vexed that they think themselves utterly undone
whereas in the mean ceason they utterly defye and set at noghte the peculiar and
true food the ordinary and usual meat of the sons of God for yt which they
should be most hungry and careful yet the lord threatening by his prophet yt
he would send a famine, not of bread and water but of the word of God does
declare planely yt no greatter evil can come unto man wherefore dear brethen
let us take head with all care, study and diligence, lest we by the snares of
Satan and the enticement of the world become so brutish that we loathe and
despise this so great goodness, so necessary to salvation: but yt we do compte
it ye most dear and precious thing, of all yt can be bestowed upon us in
this life. This is it I mean that we should remane continually in Gods fold
under yt rule, discipline and order ye which he has appointed emongs his
people. The which thing is more planli declared and set forth by yt which david
adioyneth, yt he will require again ye thing which he before had asked: whereby
he signifies yt he was not enflamed with any sudden passion which shortly after
was feeble and cold, to have this care of religion, but yt he was then constant
and would so remane in searching for this principal matter. We do see some
which are moved with such a fervent zele and sodane motion, that the next
day after they be so touched, they seame ready to forsake, all yt ever they
have. But that constancy whereof david speaks is a certane rare and special
virtue. In so much yt the most part of the^ in whose minds any zele of
religion has been kendled, whereas they oght to cherishe that fire yt there zele
and love might encreace they do wilingly extinguishe yt same. But as concerni^g
david, we have the like testimony in that psalm which I before alleged. For
where it, might have been said unto him, that being banished and driven from
Jury, he might go hear or there, to some othere place, he makes an
exclamation: Thine alters o lord of hosts, my God and my king, as thoghe he
should say. That thoghe he had at commandment and possessed all the palaces of
the world, yet cold he find no place, pleasant nor acceptable unto him,
whiles that he had no access to the temple of God, he does also complain yt
sparrowes and swallows does find them forth places to build there nests
there: but his condition was much worse. why so I pray you? Was it because he
had nether kitchen nor chamber? Not so: But because he found no place mete nor
pleasant, for him to lead his life therein wha^ he was secluded from the altars
of God. And in this banishment no place cold be so pleasant, but he would
compte it bitter to dwell therein. Now this is most certane ye if this doctrine
were well persuaded unto our hearts we should not be so much hindered, or rather
so with drawn from ye exercise and practice of those means which god has given
us to go forward in yt wai which leads to euerlastig life But will ye have ye
very cause thereof? the ambitious desire of honor wtholdeth some in executi^g
their offices and mainteining their estates, and entiseth others to seek and to
covet the like dignities and promions, covetousness enrageth others with a gredy
desire of gain and carries the^ backward, an other sort minds nothing else but
their delits and pleasurs and their vain and dissolute wanto^ life. Yea al
every one do so wallow i^ their lusts and carnal co^cupisce^ce, yt not at al
thus cries: thine altars o lord where ar thine altars o my god and mi king? No
certainly: ye vanity of this world bears such rule amo^gs the^ yt they ca^ by
no means suffer ye obedience of god. This word also is of great importance,
where David faith ye he has ernestly required of god ye thing whereof he
speaks. It is a very small matter to give such tokens of holiness and religion
before me^ yt they may seem to be set on fire with singular zeal and love thereof:
but the^ may a man say assuredly yt he co^eth vnfanedly to be co^uersa^t among
ye lords flock when he is moved with this ernest desire of holiness although he
have none other witness of his mi^d but god alon for when we must come to this
judge, then all hypocrisy and fained show of holiness must be put away: and the
truth and pureness of the heart will appear. Mind we then to follow the notable
example of David? Let every man enter into his own conscience and direct his
prayer unto god and say. O Lord thou know that I do esteem the society of
thy church more then all the goods of the world hereof also are we in this
place to be admonished, lest in sorowing, mourning, or complaining, we byte the
bridle and grudge at our state: but direct our desires unto him, and power
forth our complaints as it were into his bosom, which only can remedy our
grief and miseries. And this must we know assuredly that this horrible
corruption and confusion of religion which we see at this day in that the whole
worship of god is corrupted, the doctrine of the word is adulterat, depraved
and altered, all the sacraments are contaminate defiled and perverted, is the
grievous and sore punishment of sins procedyng from gods most just judgment.
To whom then shall we fly for the redress and amendme^t of these so great
evils, that we may obtain the pure doctrine of the sacraments and call upon the
name of god with liberty and make confession our faith, but unto him which does
chastise us with this so miserable want and loss of so great treasures? Howbeit
yet this grievous bitterness of pain and punishment oght not so to alienat and
turn us from god, that we should not come unto him in who^ all succor and
mercy is only to be found. Much less then may we kick against the prick,
grudgyng and dis^^yning wc our selves to seek the remedy at his holsom hand who
has laid this grievous and dangerous plague upon us. David in deed knew right
well yt he was banished from Jury not without gods providence: yet is he not
thereby stayed nor let to come unto god and to make his complaints unto him:
not because his tentation was easy and light, for he seemed utterly to be cast
of from god if we only consider ye miserable state of this present life. But
his faith which he had in ye promise made unto him causes him to surmont al
difficulties, holds him up and brigeth him into ye confidence, yt he prays
god to give him ye fruitio^ of ye thing continually which he had taken from him
but for a certain space hear me think I have sufficently applied this
doctrine unto us and to the state and condition of our times, but that ye wits
of certain men ar so dull that nothing ca^ enter into their hearts and minds,
unless ye matter proposed as ye meat of most holsom doctrine, be minced and
cheued, and made most small that so it may be offered to ye stomach and
received. Although to speak ye matter plainly, it is not the sklendernes of the
capacity or ye obscurenes of ye doctrine which hinders ye understanding of
these matters so much as their own wicked wills wherein they wrap themselves,
seking al shifts that they can by their subteltie find out to obscure that
thing which is of it self clear and evident. But in this resistance yet find
we this commodity that we are compelled thereby to declare more plainly and
diligently how this doctrine which we have pronounced, does also pertein unto
our age I do grant in deed that now there is no more material temple unto the
which we must go to offer our sacrifice, but yt we are now ye spiritual temples
and that we may in all places lift up our hands to the heaven: notwithstanding
the order and manner of calling upon god is always one. Niether may ye
invocation be co^pted amo^gs the figures of ye figures of the old testament:
but judged and esteemed as a most certain rule that our lord Jesus has given us
to observe unto the end. Wherefore though the temple of Sion and the manner of
the sacrifices then institute and religiously observed makes some difference
and diversity betwixt us and David: yet surely in this point we are like unto
him, yt we call upon god and pray unto him publicly and with one consent and
that we come into one common place to declare the confession of our faith. We
are not now as children to be kept under ye skali^g of Moses law: yet are we
me^ and shall be so long as god permits us in this world. Wherefore though ye
figures and shadows which had their force in ye time of david do now nothing
pertein unto us yet have we great necessity to be stirred up and drawn to ye
service of god both by the preachi^g of ye gospel and ye administration and
partipacio^ of ye sacraments. Now if any will strive against this sentence and
order very experience may be brought to convince him. For they that have most of
al profited in religion do most evidently declare in the course of their whole
life the necessity of this godly help to be most mete and profitable to releue
their i^firmitie. We take not in hand here to dispute whether god can govern
and lead his people without any inferior aides or means, but to declare how
his will is to govern and guide us and to reteyne us in his true worship and
service. For this is certain that god of his great love and mercy seeing our
infirmity and weakness, has given us as it were certain aids and stays
whereby we being weak and feable might be stayed. What folly I pray you, and how
great folishnes is this, when we feel our feet to fail, and our legs to
bow under us to contemn and despise these so great and necessary helps to
prop and stay our feet, as though there were no profit at all of such things.
Wherefore what difference soever is between us and the Jews, yet must we know
that this doctrine which David here sets forth is common for all. The name of
the temple only must be changed because yt we are no more bound nor tied to
one certain place But as concerning the order and manner to worship God truly,
which David chiefly regarded, that pertains as much unto us as to him. Now
proud men which have a false opinion of themself will not much regard this
exercise of religion and order by God appointed that the faithful should come
to one place to hear the word of God to make public prayers, to use and
receive the sacraments. But we though there came no profit, only because it is
the most holy institution of God himself, would yet rest thereupon most
wilingly, and would give him most hearty thanks yt it pleases him by such
means to cherishe and sustain our infirmity how be it yet as we have before
declared we do feale ye fruit of religion which comes unto us of this
institution and ordinance of god to be most abundant and most excellent. How
so ever the matter is, where as S paul declares yt this is thouly way which
leads to the perfect and blessed life that we do remain in ye order of the
church, which Christ ordained when he appointed pastors: cursed be their pride
and arrogancy, which will fle in the air and wc their vain speculations
clymbe up to heaven setting at noght al doctrine and sermons and use of the
sacraments, as though they were such vain ceremonies, whereof small commodity
and profit cold be received. And hear dear brethren I desire you to considre
and mark of what manner of me^ I do now speak. For I do grant vndouttedly
that god does preserve his under the tyranny of Antichriste, and that
miserable captivity, althoghe they do want these aids and helps which we
have with great liberty. The word of God is not preached unto them, neither
have they any place wherein it is lawful to make profession of their faith, yea
ye Sacraments are taken away from them. But because they separate themselves
from the abomination of Antichrist and do syghe and morn and compte it an
heavy burden that they want those things which they do compte most necessari
to consolation and comforth, god by the virtue of his spirit works in the^
and supplieth their want. But there be others, which is ye greattest part of
those yt there do tarry who thoghe they be utterly destitut of these most
necessary and comfortable things yet are they very well pleased and being in
extreme famine, they have no lust at all to eat. Those are ye men yt feygne
themselves great philosophers, and profess themselves high clerks, which
think it enoghe to know all yt can be known if they have red over one leaf
or twane. These men think wc the^ selves yt they have no need of preaching and
doctrine for as concerning ye lords supper they think it makes no matter at
al unto the^ though they never come near unto it. And they reiecte ye outward
policy of ye church to young children as over base and vnworthi for the^. what
I pray you may we judge or say of this kind of me^ but yt they are utterly
blind in mind and judgment? Yet notwtstanding they ca^ accuse us, because we
exhort them unto whom God has declared his will to use those reasons and
means which God has prepared to increase our faith and to confirm it and to
manteine ye same unto ye last day of our life. Why do they so? but that they
can not abide to be admonished by us and to be wakened as it were forth of
sleep, that they may have some savor and felyng of those euyls wherein they
are. Let us thus judge and think of them that they do not worship nor
reverence Idols with the other papists, yet truly they can not deny but yt it
is a miserable bondage and by all means to be abhorred and avoided that they
can not be suffered not only to call upon the name of God and Jesus Christ
with any publyke testimony of their confession neither yet to mention or
acknowledge the same by any means. The holy ghost when he would wound the
consciences of the faithful which were at Babylon most deply, he gives them
this sentence to grate upon how can we sing ye praises of ye lord in a strange
land. I do grant verily that the kingdom of God is now in every place, and
that there is now no difference betwixe Jury and other contreyes: yet do I thus
plainly Judge and pronounce yt every land and country out of ye which yt order
of true religion and holiness is absent, is worthy to be compted of us strange
and polluted. Then must this of necessity be concluded yt they which are
nothing moved with any grief of mi^de or sorrow of heart for this cause yt they
ca^ make no protestation of their faith nether set forth and publishe ye praise
of God by any means are all together oppressed with most gross dulnes and
daising madness. Now ye children of god must take heed and be taught by this
admonition diligently to beware yt they do not cast themselves into ye same
error and daising of heart. But as concerning the^ which scornefully do babble
and question if there be none other way to heaven but by Geneua: would to God
they had ye heart and care, yt in what place soever they remain they would or
cold have some holy assemblies and co^gregations gathered in the name of Jesus
Christ, and that they would set up in their own houses and their neibors the
form of such a church as may be like this of ours in some point. How be it lo
their great and excellent wisdom, that in dispising and casting away these
stays of religion and salvation, they will be counted religious and to have
salvation. This is as much, as if they should ask if they might sail into
the haven, dryuing to the contrary side as far from the haven as were possible:
for so do they tempting god and declininge from the way of salvation inquire if
they can not com to salvation. But let them make as bold bragges and take unto
them as high and stout courage as they list, that so resting upon their power
and pride they may fall down headlong to destruction, so yt faithful men take
that they be not puffed up so proudly with them, but that they retain
themself in all modesty humility and reverence. And if there be any of them
that can by no means live in Christ's church, yet let him do that thing which
no man can let him, that is to say that he mourn day and night with david:
Thine altars o lord. There is none other thing that I desire but thine altars
o my God and my king. And the fere of this most holy love and desire oght so
inflame al good hearts, that they should not think it painful to suffer any
thing that can come, no not to consume themselves wholly by this so great zele
and desire, neither that there should be any time so long differred which should
quench or diminishe this fervent desire, but rathere continally require this
thing most carefully that they may once be brought unto Christ's fold.

Moreover every man oght to considre this by himself how he may most
speadily get himself to the standerd, so soon as our lord shall grant any
liberty to come thereunto. Finalli to make an end of this exhortation, now it
remai^eth that we do diligently note yt which david adioygneth that is: That he
will behold ye beawty of the lord and consider his temple. For it is not enoghe
yt we should be exercised in ye outward order and discipline of ye church
except we have our eyes bent and special regard to this end that we may know
god himself ever more and more. There be two things which are hear required:
ye one that we do occupy the time of ye preachings and public prayers with all
care and diligence: the other that we do understand the cause of our assemblies
and coming together in ye churches. For many do come thither drawn with a
certane folishe devotion, thinking yt they have done their hole deuty if they
come forth into yt place and show themselves once in ye temple let us take
head therefore diligently dear brethren that we do not fall into any fault of
negligence of ignorance or of folishnes.

For it is greatly to be feared lest the most part of the^ that are herewt us
may be condemned in ye one of these two vices: yt either they are negligent to
come to these assembles in ye church, or else they do not whaigh with themselves
nor well understand wherefore they do come thither. How many are they ye come to
the sermones, which would be most glad never to hear of any sermons. But I will
not speak of the^ which in the hole course of their life do show themselves
manifest contemners of God. I do speak of ye contempt which is many who would
never remember to come to the sermon but that ye sunday does monishe them and
move them to com thither and that for manner sake only as thoghe they would then
make up ye number of mani runi^g together to god. The bell may well ring daily
and call the^ together. But it is sufficient for such if then at last they
come forth in the end of ye weke unto ye church and company of ye
congregation. They are called four times every so^day, but they come very
notably, if they once may be seen to have been there. For there be many of
them also which take to them this lyberty that they will scarce come every.xv.
Day. And surely the most part proves this proverb to be true that being
nygh to the Church they are very far from god. And some of them be of that
sort which have left their country that they might serve god, who yet in this
part of gods service do show themselves over negligent. What oght we tha^ to
do? Seeing god does so show himself unto us let us behold his beauty: and not
pass by the means whereby we may most clearly have the fruition and
co^templation of this his beauty. That is to say to yt we may be moved and as
it were ravished with the love of him and as S. Paul says that we be transformed
and changed into his simitude and likeness. And to come to this point, we must
consider more diligently and earnestly then we have accustomed what god does
propou^d unto us in his church. For what is the cause I pray you, why we do
take so small profit of the sermons and sacraments, but that we give no
diligence to the things that are their spoken and done? We have our ears
beaten with continual doctrine whereas our minds are void and barren of good
mocions and not touched with any good affection. Moreover also there be some that
here never the whole sermon but here and there a word or half a word rather
with out regard. Wherefore David says not without great cause, that he would
go to the temple of the lord to visit and regard it, with great care and
diligence and the whole study of his mind. And doubtless the excellent
treasures of ye great wisdom of god which are therein set forth unto us, are
most worthy to have ye eyes of our minds wholly bent and set thervpo^. But as I
have now touched god would not have us to behold these treasures only to
please our eyes and so to depart without any profit. Let us therefore understand,
that ye doctrine of christ has then showed in us her force and fruit when our
minds life and manners are so changed yt we can worship god purely and serve
him without corruption. And this is it that David says. psalm. lxxxiiii. That
they which dwell in ye house of ye lord shall praise him for ever. Wherefore
the^ do we assemble our selves i^to one place? whi is yt gospel preached unto
us? why do we use baptism and the lords supper but yt god should be praised and
magnified by us with all kind of praises? the which praise stands not only in
the lips, but continues al ye life long and florisheth for ever. Therefore
says he in another place. I will wash my hands O lord in innocence and then
will I enter unto thine altar. Now do we see what is the true and lawful use
of all the order in the church, to wit, that we being diligently instructed
therein may worship God purely and as becomes his servant. In the old time
under the law they that came to the temple to worship god, especially the
preistes when they should execute their office, they continually washed them
selves. This ceremony in deed is passed away, but the truth that yet remains
oght of us always to be mainteyned and practiced. And because we now do know
all the wais and means, whereby we may atteyn to the most perfect and pure
worship of god wherefore we must enter and hold the way of life more warely
the^ others. For the more furtherance yt we have granted us by god, so much
less of excuse shall be left onles we do appli ye same both unto our use and
profit and also to ye true worship of god. For if we do stumble by the way it
is not because we do not see a plain and trodden way before our fete. And if we
do stray forth of the way and wander without assurance, we can not blame god
therefore as though he did not continually set up the clear light of this word
And if we do forget our duty, this negligence and forgetfulness comes not
hereof, that we not admonished of god most diligently called to all Christian
duetye: for god leaves no means at all where in there may be any furtherance
to religion, to holiness, to salvation. Therefore let us fear yt rebuke which god
uses by ye mouth of his prophet Esai. I have daily stretched forth mine arms
unto a stubburne and rebellious people. If they which wander and go astray by
the desert places of the papistrie and that horrible wilderness, shall not escape
just punishment and vengeance because they have not followed the right way,
what may we look for which are brought up and norished at home like children in
the eyes of our heavenly father. Some has leaft their most dear country and
the place wherein they were borne and brought up, that they might come to some
christen church. Other has gotten a greater benefit and as it were a special
prerogative, that it pleases god to visit the^ in their own country as it
were in their own nest. Now if they that are borne here will not acknowledge
this so great favor of god, and means of salvation most to be desired and with
thankful minds and mindful hearts testify ye same yt they may wholly give and
consecrat themselves unto god yt comes so nigh unto the^ can this ingratitude
remain unpunished? Let them rather say thus: O Lord thou have here builded
they temple and set up thine altar amongs us: grant we beseech thee for thine
everlasting goodness and exceeding mercy that grace unto us that we may be
purged in mind, life, and manners, that we do not polute thy holy gifts with
the filthy spots of our sins and so turn the excellent glory of thy
benefits into reproach and shame. And they which do come from far countries
must be ware, wise, and diligent, yt they do live so godly and blameles as
becomes men in ye house of god. They might have lived in other places wildly
and wantonly neither should they forsake the papistrie for this end, that they
should lead a dissolute life not comely for the gospel in the church of god.
And surely there be some to who^ it had been much better that they had broken
their necks when they set yt first foot forth of their doors, then that they
should enter into this church to behave them selves therein so shamefully and
wickedly. Some linck themselves with the scorners and mockers, and so confirm
the^ more and more in their malice. Other do live most rietously in meat and
drink and al kind of pleasures. Some as enemies of all peace and concord,
covet nothing but discord, debate and brallings And there be some families
wherein the man and wife do braule and strive like dogs and catts. And certain
will seem young princes, increasing and amplifiyng their state without measure,
given wholly to pomp, to costlynes, and to excess of this world. And others
are so idle so deynty so delicate, that they can not tell what it is to labor,
and yet no living can satisfy them. Finallye there be some sklanderous
backbiters which could find some fault even with the very angels: who ready
to breast with their manifold vices, set all their holiness only in this, that
they requier a strait account how their neighbors do live, supposing that God
is much in their debt because they are come to Geneua, as though it had not
been better for them, most filthyly to have corrupted in their own donge, then
to give such offenses in the church of God.

Wherefore if the life by passed have been full of such vices and sins, now
let every man take care and diligence that he convert and bestow all the
residue of his time to a better, more sobex and more honest kind of life.

And if there be any so hardened in their vices that they can by no means be
corrected nor amended, yet the children of God must confirm and arm them
selves with this doctrine, that they be not corrupted or infected with the
noughtye and wicked life of others. Verelye we ought always to take it
heavenly and to lament, when we do see the Church of GOD profaned and defiled
with so many fylthy blottes and malicious wickedness: But seeing that we must
hear live conuersaunt with the wicked as the Corn is mixed with the Chafe,
let us suffer this confusion with all patience and quietness whiles that god
shall take us clean away from the company of ye wicked. For it is no doubt but
that this church (wherein we are) is like a touch stone appointed to try many
men and to make the^ known. How so ever the matter be let us now bend our
selfs to this mind and purpose seeing god by his wonderful and infinite mercy
has gathered us home into his family from that miserable wa^deryng, that we
bestow al our diligence upon pureness of life innocence and holiness, abhorryng
from all polution of the world which may spot or blemishe the profession of
an holy and christen life, that after we have ended the course of this life,
the Lord Jesus at that great and glorious day may acknowledge us and account
us among that company that have called upon his name purely and truly without
any untruth or hypocrisy.

The fourth Sermon WHEREIN IT IS DECLARED with how great pains and care the
liberty to worship God purely in some christian church oght to be sought, taken
forth of this sentence of the.27. Psalm.
My heart has said of thee, seek ye my face. Thy face will I seek O Lord.
Like as men cast themselves into horrible confusion, when they louse the
bridle to their concupiscence and lusts runnyng at riot whyther they lust, even
so is it a rare and most high wisdom to search forth the commandments of god
and to embrace and follow them with the whole heart and diligence. Whereof we
have in this place an excellent example most worthy to be followed. For David
was not fre nor void altogether of those perturbations of the mind whereby we
are sore enticed and driven the contrary way: but he doutles was moved with
such tentations whereby his spirit might wander and go astray from God.

How be it to find a remeady against al such occasions, whereby we fall from
the fear of God and true holiness, and to keape the sure way, he does only
regard that which God does declare unto him, that does he meditate and ponder
in his mind. And to declare this precepte and admonition in few words, God
does styre all the faithful and exhort them to seek his face. Now David
witnesses that he has so aplied all his dilygence in observing and keaping
this commandment, that there is a goodly harmony consent and agreement betwixt
god that thus speaks and commands: Seek ye my face, and him that answers
so, my lord I will seek thee. But hear must we consider, wherefore God
puts this name face expressedly. For if he had no face but as it were a
show and shadow of a face wherein he would show himself unto us, he should
dysceaue us, commanding us, to seek that which cold not be found nor
perceived in him. Yet am I not Ignorant that there be many which would show
the, sharpenes of their wits in this place, saying that this is no more then
if it had been simply spoken. Seek me. Notwithstanding those that have been
diligently exercised in the holy scriptures shall easily perceive that God
would note forth and declare a certain manner and order, which he alwaes uses
to show and offer himself unto men most familiarly. And certainly to name the
sanctuary and the arc of the couenante the face of God, is a kind of speech
so, usual and commune in the scripture, as any can be.

And why so? Because GOD who in his Nature and Majesty is Incomprehensible
finds certain means meet for the Weakness and rudenes of men whereby he may
bring them unto him.

The world in deed does make to it self alwaes false and vain Images
counterfaiting the face of GOD corruptly and fondly.

For those that we invent by our wits are none other but false and
deceauable visers whereby GOD is phantasyed or to speak more plainly What I
do Judge of that supersticion when men do faigne to themselves any form or
image, that they may have god visible they do nothing but make and worship an
Idol. But when god by his good will and pleasure does represent himself unto
us and gives us such toknes and signs whereby he may be known of us, then
re^eameth he as it were a certain face wherein he may be known. Wherein he
admonishes and commands us, yt every one of us should turn our eyes to
that countenance and that we should behold it with great heed, care and
diligence. For this certanly is our felicity wherwt we must once be satiate
and filled abundantly, yt we may have the fruition of the sight and face of
God with all abundance of all Joys as was said in the.lx. psalm. And because
we can not clymbe to so high a place without the aid and help as it were of
ladders and stayres, this his benefit must be set and accounted in the second
place because it offers those means whereby we may come to that principal
and chyefe Goodness. Wherefore let us note that this sentence where God commands
us to seek his face, has such power as thoghe it did open the gate unto us,
whereby he would bring us into eternal life. It was no great matter as may
appear in ye time of david to come to the temple, that men might se so many
ceremonies as there were done and celebrate. But if we rightlye considre ye
spiritual exempler and pattern which was showed unto Moses, we shall neither
judge it strange nor without reason that God does call it his face. For doutles
seeing christ was there revealed, what other thing can we say then that God
offered himself to be beholden and seen? Now let us considre: Whether God do
not order and set forth unto us some means whereby he may after a sort be seen
and felt of us. It is very true that he has appeared in his son who is his
lively image and in whom only he will be perfitely known. Yet nevertheless
saint Paul declares that the gospel is a certain glaffe wherein al men must
behold and considre him. Thee Sacraments have the same power and nature:
finally the hole order Institute in the church by him, does show the same
sight unto us.

Therefore let the proud braggers of this world mock this order and
contemplacio^ of god as much as they will: yet seeing that god deals so lovingly
and gently with us, that he does submit him self by this means unto us, let
not us be ashamed to render this honor to his word and sacraments, that we
behold and se him in them as it were in the face. Not that we are retained and
holden in the elements of this world subject to corruption like the papists,
who abuses these signs supersticiously to ydolatrie, which God has given
unto us that we should be brought by them unto Jesus Christ. But if we will
hereafter have the fruition fully and perfitely of that most comfortable
presence of god which is most to be desired, we must even by this humble and
low way and manner come unto him.

How be it this that I say is not so straightly to be understand as though the
faithful did never approach or come near unto God save then, when they come
into the temple. For this opinion resting and styckyng to any certain place
were a superstition over folishe. But thus I do mean, that we may not set God
oboue the clouds (as certain men do in their speculations) thinkyng they can
see him when they shut their eyes imaginyng of his divine Majesty, what soever
comes into our brains neglectyng both the preaching of the Gospel and also
others such like aides and helps necessarily required to the knowledge and
contemplacion thereof. For this is most true that those which despise the use
of the Sacraments whereof I speak and of all the order of the Church, they
disdeygne to see GOD at that time when he does offer him self to be seen and
beholden.

Now let us see how necessary this grave and vehement exhortacion and
provocation is unto us whereby GOD calls us unto him.

We have all ready spoken what favor love and honor he does show unto us,
when he does call us so louyngly and gently unto him that he may work our
Salvation, and that he may bring us unto the true and perfect felicity from
the which we are so far away by nature. But this must we also mark and
consider that god does prick and move us by all means, to take heed that we
fall not into misery. First of al we have eyes so wandering and wanton, that
it seems a very miserable case. For i^ all this our life there is nothing but ye
vanities of this world which do keep all our senses occupied, and Satan has
infinite delusions and those most crafty, whereby he continually does
circumuent and begyle us. Although al his gyles and disceats are none other
thing, but certain folish visers and shows triflyng and counterfaite pageants
and iuglings of game plaiers. But experience does teach plainly how folishe we
are, how mad and destitute of all sense seeing that we suffer our selves so
easly and so often times to be deluded and deceived. Wherefore if we were wise
and well advised this voice should sound continually in our ears. Seek my
face. And what sekee we? The more careful and dilligent that god is in
procuryng our salvation, we are the more careless and slow in following after
it. And would to god we were not like kicking and resty horses more ready to go
backwarde then forward. Not withstanding this example is not set fotrh unto us
i^ vain. For this reverent answer and protestation of David that he did
meditate this doctrine in his heart, whereby he and all the faithful are
admonished to seek the face of god does declare unto us to what thing we ought
to apply our study and diligence, that god calling us unto him lose his labor
altogether upon us. And in this doctrine there be two points most worthy to be
marked. The first is that so soon as God had thus spoken and commanded. Seek
my face: he answers with most earnest affection unto this word. The second is,
that after he has consented to the precept of god and affirmed it, he
promises that he will seek the face of god in deed, in work, and diligence
show the same. And surely this is the order that we must keep in worshippyng
of god, first of al to give access and entry to the word and commandment
of god as we are taught in another psalm. If you do here his voice this dai
harde^ not your hearts. But very few ar found which embraces ye commandments
of god of this mi^d, though ye most part will sai after this sort and use ye like
answer truli it is our duty: we oght not nor ca^ not speak against it. But that
whereunto they agree with their mouths, is far away from entri^g and perci^g into
their minds. Therefore let us learn hereby to lay ye beginning of our religion
that we do answer unto god truly and vnfeindly yt we do fully understand and
feel his most excellent benefit when he calls us so mercifully to behold his
face. When this sense and feli^g has thus touched the heart and prepared it, it
ca^ not be but yt the other part of religion and duty shall straight ways
follow, which is, a power to perform yt ye which we do know to be most justly
commanded of god and to belong to our singular commodity. For David had no
cold nor dead meditation without any mocion or application of ye whole life to be
bestowed i^ ye seking and beholdi^g of ye face of god. But so sone as he has
determined yt he oght to seek god he goth forward with this protestation yt he
will prosecut this desire of his heart with al diligence. wherein they must needs be
much ashamed which profess themselves christians and nether have yt desire of
heart nor good mocio^, nether yet apply nor exercise themselves in ye duty of
life which depends therevpo^. But some will sai thus, yt it is not lawful for
the^ to forsak their contrie wherein they ar born: although they be destitute of
ye fode of life and nothing be seen there but an horrible desolatio^ whereby ye
hole order of ye church is deformed or rather destroyed. Whi so? lest they
break their allegiance they say ye which they do ow to their natural and civil
governor, I will answer to this their excuse i^ few words: I do ask of the^ this
thing only if they were i^ such penury and want of living yt they had nothing at
home to eat and dri^k would any such dout stai the^ in those places? there is no
man truly which would not ask pardon to forsake his country yt he starve not
for hu^gre. I will also put this case which is of no necessity: if there should be
offered unto the^ in a strange co^trei six times so much riches as they have i^
their own, there should nothing stai the^ from yt journey yt they might attain
such possessions. What need they then to bring such cloks and colored excuses
seeing yt it is evident and plain that their talk is far away from that they
do feel in their own conscience. We treat not this matter that they may be
let with nothing but yt they may pray holily purely and profitably for this
prince and all his subjects. Now such a Iornay plainly taken to such a place
ca^ be no more crimninal the^ others which are taken for ye commodities and
apportunitie of this present life, which no man ca^ blame i^ any point. But let
us farther se if this necessity do sufficiently excuse them. Behold it is the
lord which comma^deth and says: Seek you my face. The ciuilemagestrates now
fall from god and decline away most far and do compel others to the same
desection and rebellion, or at ye least do depryue the miserable souls of
their daily fode and raise up the inue^tions of supersticious Idolatries in the
stead of the face of God. Is it right in this point to prefer mortal men to
ye living and immortal God. If God must be obeyed, they oght rather to trauail
in to all ye coasts of the world to seek his face, where he does show it the^
to lie lurking and pyning in there nestes wha^soeuer then ye princes command or
enterprise anithi^g prejudicial unto him yt has ye chief authority and power
over the^ and upon every one of the^ there is no injury done unto the^ though me^
do not obey the^. Although, besides yt which I have now spoken, such me^ do
suffeciently declare, yt they never have considered nor ponderred what is there
state and condition, how miserable and filthy is yt captivity wherein they are
retained and oppressed? Onles their conscience were altogether brought a sleep,
it were not possible but yt they should be in continual angrish and grief of
mind as great as if their body were in pain and torment. For what liberty
have they to honor God in their famylyes and houses by any means? As for an
example. If any of the^ have a child borne, his deuty is to offer him to God with
prayer and thankesgeuing, and to require, yt his bodi may be sygned with baptism
which is ye sign of salvation Now we do know yt baptism is so corrupt i^ ye
papistri and so defiled with such superstion and pollution, that the child can
not receive it, but yt he is straight wais polluted and defiled. So yt ye
father ca^ not baptize ye infant without syn. And if he abstein he synneth
likewise, althoghe it were in nothing else yet in this point yt he gives
offense unto me^ omitting and neglecting ye sacrament which ye son of god has
institute. In what perplexity then stands his mind, yt ye matter ca^
neither be done nor undone but yt god must most grievously be offended? I do not
rehearse their other inco^medities and miseries, for this only example is more
the^ sufficient to declare their miserable state and condition. Now when a man
has been in this miserable perplexity, all his life long vncertane whether
to turn himself, yet at ye death must he look for most greauous assaltes and
tentations, for then certainly satan will heap together al his ar tillarye and
of this miserable captive was let before yt he cold not serve god for ye
solicitude and care of his wife and family then at ye point of death his
state is most miserable. Wherefore they which doubt whether they may rid
themselves forth of this mire or rather forth of this helly pit, under a
certain pretense of obedience unto worldly prince, do peruerte al ye order of
nature. For that lawful prayer which God allowethe that we should make for our
princes, is agreeable and very convenient, both to their authority which he
gives them and also to the office wherewith he has bound and charged us
toward them. Thus S. paul does exhort unto prayers to be had and made for
kings and magistrates, yt we may lead a godly quiet and peaceable life with
honesty and the fear of god. But this amplificatio^ and setting forth of ye
obedience unto erthly princes is to far above measure, when it is joined with the
departing from god and ye diminishing of ye honor and worship which is dew to
ye heavenly king. The miserable Jews in deed were compelled to remain so long
in ye bondage of Babylon whiles ye time was fulfilled which was appointed of
god to suffer ye miserable captiuiti: but let these me^ yt talk so much of
ma^s law and obedience, with who^ I have to do, declare yt we christians are
bownd so far by like obedience, yt of our own accord we must deprive our
selfs of those spiritual benefits which god gives most liberally to his
children. They do feel a great necessite wherewt they are soore pressed, and
they are greatly enticed by their own infirmity: but god shows the^ ye
remedy for these so great evils. What is ye cause that they despice these so
great helps and benifites for ye obedience and service of the^ yt take their
bread forth of their hands? The cause is greater of a man toward his wife or
of the wife toward the husband. For seeing that god has joined the^ together
into one flesh, ye one ca^ not do well in any case to forsake the other under a
certain color to seek god. Not only that they may not depart far a sunder to
let the duty betwixt man and wife but that eueri one oght rather by all means
and with all diligence to labor that he may draw and bring the fellow and
companion of that holy life to the worship of god. This then is the duty yt
the one owes to the other, that the husband may declare unto the wife, how
miserable and unhappy they are, because they want the holy company and
fellowship of ye faithful because they are destitute of the sacraments and
sermons (which are most sure signs, pledges and testimonies and be fully
assured whereby we may know that god dwells amo^gs us) again he must exhort
her yt she do not despair nor distrust but trust in gods mercies. And if he
can not persuade her nor win her so sone as he would, let him never be weary
whiles he have gotten his purpose. And although his wife do resist his purpose
most earnestly, nevertheless let not the man cease importunately to attempt the
matter with her, and to prove her mind by all means, until she do show her lelfe
wylfull and abstinate in her wicked purpose. When he has assaied and attempted
all yt may be done by him, if he can tarry there no longar, then is he free,
and utterly delivered from all the law of marriage and necessity of tariyng:
because he has done all his duty and nothing wanted of his part but that his
wife might have followed him as her duty required. Although yet this departing
of the man from the wife is no divorce, but the housband goes before whither
God calls, that he may show the wai to his wife. And as touching the married
woman, she is yet bound with a more strait bond of marriage because she is the
inferior, and must worthily acknowledge her housband as her head and reverence
him.

Therefore must she by all means possible, bring her housbande in to the
mind and means that he will restore and set them both at liberty.

And when she has done all that ever she can, yet is she not at lyberty
and set fre, that she may forsake him to whom she is bound and subject, onles
some persecution be raised, wherein the danger is manifest, and specially if
her own husband be most ready to pursue her unto death: for then she
departs not from her husband, but she auoideth that evil that is prepared
for her and the furious rage of her enemies which god permits and allows.
Finally that great danger and violence which is intended toward her does
discharge her and deliver her from the bond of such a bitter and dangerous
life: notwithstanding when al things are well wayghed and considered no
worldly cause ought either to withdraw man or wife the one from the other, but
only that mutual benevolence, love and charity which the one owes of duty
to procure the salvation of the other.

For if it be necessary that a man should so forget himself that he should
have no regard of the things that pertayne to this earthly life and to the
body, he oght also likewise to forget and contemn those things which are
about him.

Therefore let us return to that acount which David makes that the face of
the Lord should be sought as also he says in the.lxxxiiii. Psalm, where
he says it is better to live one day in the courts of the Lord, then a
thousand being therefrom: whereby he declares that the life of the faithful
can not be to short so that God grant them this grace that whiles they live
in this world they may exercise them selves in his service and honor, and
establishe themselves with his promises celebratyng his name with all godly
confession and praise. If a man object that this may be done in some deserte
place or amongst the enemies of the faith. I answer that it is not without
cause that David does speak namely of the courts of the temple. For he does
consider how necessary the order of the church is unto mortal men, specially
because he knows their rude and weak nature, but if this oration and
admonicion were so altogether fired in all men's hearts that all men would
come at the least to some christian church where they might dye quietly, and
peaceably there would be none which would not easily and quicklye gather up
their burden and prepare them selves. But what do we seek? Every man will live,
and that with all ease and pleasure, every man in that kind of pleasure and
lust wherewith he is led and drawn. This is cause wherefore the church of god
so much is contemned and rejected to day. Yea and there are many witty and
subtell to invent and set before their eyes such lettes and hynderances as may
bring them from that study of godliness that was in David.

Moreover they bring this in, what shall we profit say they, if we do change
places? Whether soever we go we shall find the world no less then in our
country. There is at this time a wonderful corruption of manners and of al
things. All things ar full of offenses te^tations and such corruptions whereby
men's minds may easily fall from the true fear of god to ye love of the world. I
confess in deed that all things are as they both think and speak. But if
their body were in danger and they were admonished where they might find both
learned and mete physicions and also propre and healthefull remedies and other
helps either to restore or preserve their health then, I say, they would
not say that they cared not for it or set light by it because that in all
places dyseases may come unto men. I grant that in what place soever we be we
shall find infinite occasions to do euelle, corruptions, and intisemets of ye
world but there is great difference whether we have ayds? helps where with we
may other be kept in office or eles having erred from our office may be
restored or whether we be altogether deprived of them let it be agred that
vices now do reign and are of like force in the world so that by there
poison the air is infected no less the^ with a pestilence: are we not in
better condition the^ other in yt we have such remedies as are given of God to
his children, wherewt we may either drive away from us grievous deseases now
coming and assauting or else purge and put them away being now present.
Further more I think yt both the doctrine of the gospel when it is purely
preached and also the sacraments when their lawful use is kept and also
common prayers and other means besides, are alwaes very necessary to styre us
up and to admonish us that we be not infected with the corruptions and
tentations of the world as it werewith certain poisons. Now all men do know
that there is none of all these so great and so wholesome remedies and benefits
in the papistry but co^trarywise all wickedness and extreme danger of loss of
life and salvation. Wherefore let us take head that we do not refuse the help,
that god most mercifully offers, in this great necessity wherein we stand i^
nead of great help toward our salvation. yet there be some that vomet forth more
evidently the fylthe and dissease of their stomach. what say they, shall we go
to that church wherein with our great grife we shall see those motions and
offenses, which now being unknown unto us, do not offend our eyes and minds?
if there were soche regiment and order of ye church those places where the
gospel is preached which were to be required for our edification, if we were
sure to find none there but angels which might lead us into paradise we would
run thither with all haste and diligence. But when we shall come thither, we
shall hear many things that shall soore offend us and see many mo then were
necessary: There will be many men prone to al manner of wickedness and impudency,
which do diffame and sklander the gospel by their disolute life, vanities,
pomp pride and dronkenes wylbe more common then were convenient: Moreover
which is most grievous and intolerable of all, many shall show themselves
there so unruly and outrageous contemners of god, ye more wickedness shall
appear in their lives then emongs the papists, forthermore emongs the
magistrates and them that should execute judgment there will be found as much
corruption, disorder, unrighteousness as i^ other places. And also in the^ yt are
appointed to preach ye gospel many things shall appear which shall seem worthy of
reproach and rebuke. For some of the^ will be neglent in ye ministry, or so
occupied i^ their private and domestical business, yt the fidelity, diligence
and sincerity yt they should sew forth shall not be much regarded of the^. And
which is the worst of al, among this kind of me^, there be some so given to
pleasures, yt they are prone to al lusts of ye flesh and belly chere and care
for nothing else but to live at ease and to pamper the flesh, and that they may
do this at more liberty, they join themselves with wicked me^ and hau^t their
company in all mischief and vilany. Well, let us grant so yt there is ten times
more evil there, then there is in deed, or then men do pha^tasy: yet must this
excuse be vain alwais unto the^ which make them lets and impediments unto them
yt they should not com to the church of god. And that we may prove this matter,
let us mark the example of David yt we have in hand with more deep consideration
and diligence. Was there such justice and integrity observed in the days of
Saull, I beseech you, in ye judgment and other offices, as the state of the
commonwealth and the dignity of ye church required? Nay contrariwise we do
hear ye great complaints which david makes oftentimes of ye malice of ye
frauds and deceits of ye fearcenes and ye pride both of ye king and of others
yt were i^ authority, i^ judgment and in common offices. And for the priests
and Levites, did they ye office of the priesthod and ministry of holy things
so purely and godly ye they had just cause to rejoice for themselves and the
church? Or may we not rather gather, yt the most part of the^ did follow ye
common vices and corruptions yea and by their flattery fostred and nourished
wickedness? And as touching ye people and common multitude they were full of
hypocrisy and manifold sins and crimes most manifest. yet for all yt David
does not therefore abhor yt assembly, nether refuses to com and enter into
the church nether yet quensheth nor diminishes his desire yt he had to se it.
It is a very greiuous and sore tentation I do grant. For ye more earnestly that
a man is moved with the zele and desire of the honor of god ye more great cause
has he to sorrow and morn when in ye polutio^ of his church he does se him
most greatly to be dishonored: but ye means to ouercom all these inco^modities
and impediments is declared by David, to wit, yt we seek the face of ye lord
and that we set al our pleasur and felicity of life fully contented in the
sight and beholding thereof, and yt against al ye greues yt satan does raise
against us we determine and conclude yt nothing is more pleasant nor delectable
then to dwell in ye temple of god where his face may be seen: thus shall we
remember as often as such offe^cs ar offered unto us yt satan laboreth after his
usual manner to dazel our eyes and to troble us But herein let us be wise and
constant, ye we be never drawn away from the co^templation thereof, but that we
take our hole and full pleasure of the most comfortable beholding of the same.
The miserable ydolaters oght to make us ashamed. For if any of them after he
have consumed both his body in going a folish pilgrimage. when he comes unto
that place whither he purposed, do find an host which does ask money of him
out of all reason, or verlets and cruel knaves which does him injury, or
covetous priests that beguyle him, and to be short find nothing there but
confusion and disorder, yet are there no euyls nor disco^modities so great,
that can change his purpose from this religion or rather supersticion once
begone. For he will say that he is come thither for that cause that he may
worship the body of some blessed Saint, or some Image of our Lady as they
term her, or some manner of relics.

And shall in very deed the only sight of some carkas, or vile Idol, have
more force to cause the miscreants that have no faith, to continue obstinate in
their superstitions, then the face and presence of god himself to confirm us
and bring us such constancy as is necessary to follow after and attain so
great goodness? If we do se this or that which may grief or trouble our minds
God calls us again unto him and wylleth us in the beholding and lokyng upon
his face to receive that comfort and pleasure that we may bear patiently other
discommodities. Wherefore let this be the shylde and refuge to all godly and
faithful men that they cleave continually lokyng upon the face and countenance
of god himself, how so ever Satan labor and practice to carry them away. And
surely if we can verily and as we ought esteem the face of god, we shall never
account any hurt or damage in the loss of other things what soever we
suffer. Though to say the truth, the greatest part of them is not so much
hindered by doubtfulnes of mind as by the want and discommoditie of those
things that pertayne to the body: not but that the children of God have great
and soore battails in their conscience when they find these offencs whereof we
have spoken in those churches that are called reformed. Wherefore they that are
determined to go unto such places where the gospel is preached must be
admonished before of many and grievous offenses and must prepare themselves to
suffer and overcome them: and they that have already tasted and proved those
disco^modities and impediments oght to confirm themselves most of all, that in
despyte of Satan they may seek the face of god most constantly. But if al
things shall be tried and considered aright there shall be nothing found but very
distrust and unbelief which hinders the multitude and greatest part of men.
And as men are very witty to find out excuses, the rich men have theyrs of
one sort, and the poor bring theyrs also. How can it be says ye rich man
that I should leave all that I have? Should I thus spoil my self of all my
riches and possessions? I have a wife and children we have accustomed to live
at ease without any travail.

What shall we do in a strange country where we shall have no rentes nor
revenues? But the poor alleges of the contrary: I have in deed very little
but I am among my friends by whose liberality my pouertye and necessity is
relieved.

My labor is so well known and can not be wanted that I can hear live of my
labor. What shall I do among strange and unknown men, having neither
Halfepeny nor Farthyng, and shall be helped by the acquaintance, frendshyppe,
favor or relief of none? And it may be in deed that such excuses may be
partly true: And to reason no more about the matter that it is a thing very
grievous and unpleasant not only to leave the country wherein thou waste
borne, but also that place wherein by long and familiar conversation there
seems, to be now gotten a certain disposition of nature.

But all these yet imagine, how they may set before their eyes those
impedimentes whereby they may stop the way whereby they should come unto
GOD, that is to say: Though they do not find the matters so hard and
intricate as they make them: Yet will they cover them selves gladly with what
clokes they can. And when they have powered forth these grievous and miserable
complaints they think yt they have stopped Gods mouth, and that he does them
great injury if he still charge them as though he would compel them to those
things which were not possible to be done. Truly I have nothing to answer to
these things but that which is written in the psalm.lxxxiiii. that is yt the
faithful passing by the valleys and dry wilderness that want all water, will
dig themselves pits and cisterns. And I think this sufficient to overcome
the^ that will not resist God of obstinate malice. Wherefore they that see
themselves so besett with so great discommodities and dangers that they can see
no way nor pathe to go by, must remember that even the deserte places, wherein
there is no drop of water to be gotten oght not to let their iornay. And that
we may understand this sentence more sensibly and plainly, we must mark that
Gods purpose is to be soght of his children, not by the green meadows that may
delight them with variety of sweet flowers, neither by the sweet arbres and
pleasant shadoes: but by roughe and stiepe ways by hills and dailes by ditches
and sand pittes, by baren contreys and waste wilderness: and all this is done
for that purpose that their faith may be exercised and that their fervent zele
and desire to come unto him may be proved and tryde. Wherefore though we can
not come unto God, but yt we must pass by some wyldernes and waste and wild
desert by the way, let us know that this is not the first time that God deals
so with his faithful and let us prepare our minds and fully determi^e to
follow them who have gone a long time before us.

Besides these both the council of god and the notable example of the godly
that oght to be followed, there ought to be in the children of God such a zeal
and fervent ^inde, that nothing do draw them away from ye right worshipping and
serving of him. The which yet is seen in very few now a days: all are almost
so delicat and deintye, that if there be but a mote in the way it may hold the^
still that they will not go forward. We can go no further say they. Why so?
Because they will take no pain to wrestle out of a little impediment. Verily the
desire of the mind is very feeble that is weakened and ouercom with so small
matters. For we oght not only not to be discouraged and as it were standing in a
stay and uncertain for the doutfulnes of the way so to perish, but we oght to
be armed against all stays and impediments be they never so great or many. To
atteine hereunto we must alwaes keape this lesson in remembrance that God
knowledgeth none for his children, but those that seek him by dry and baren
places, and dig them cesterns where not one drop of water apeareth. By ye
which words is meant and signified unto us that no labor or grief oght to be so
great, which we oght not to undertake and to suffer that we may have the
fruition of the face of God. Must there needs be the^ a place soght out, wherein
we may have liberty to worship and serve God purely? what passage so ever be
offered, or how hard so ever the voyage be, yet notwithstanding the iournai
must be undertaken and accomplished. Shall we suffer hunger and thirst by the
way? yet may we not faint in courage in such want and necessity, but most
cheerfully go forward. But let no man look toward me, and find cauillations,
as though I I did speak of this matter in my great quietness fealing no grief my
self. For it is the holy ghost that teaches us, that we oght rather to delue
and dig in the earth then to decline or turn away from the voyage toward
the church of god that is most godly enterprised and begone. Now if they that
dwell in far contries and by worldly judgment are excluded from all these
means whereby they may come to that place where the Gospel is preached, have
none excuse, what must they look for, who have the gospel with in their gates
and yet will not move one foot forward to entry into the church of god?
Sermons are preached daily and public prayers are made also and they need not
pass only ye breadeth of a streat yet lo, every one will say that he has
some busynes at home. And to be short many set their felicity in this point
if they can withdraw themselves and hold them back altogether from god. For
they think themselves then to have gained all, if they have gotten some light
and vain excuse whereby they may fly away from the company of the godly and
the sight of god. Now because of nature we do so abhor god that we would fle
from him and be absent so far as were possible, yea and then would separate our
selves the furthest from him when he comes most near unto us: let us pray
unto god yt he would confirm us in that mind and desire that we may so long
continue and cherefully go forward in the journey begone whiles that we may
find there the lively fountaynes of salvation where before we cold find
nothing but extreme drought and want of waters. And though all this should want
yet let us dig cisterns and wayt for rain from heaven: If it be not gods
pleasure that we should feel his comfort so sone let us not yet cease to go
forward with all diligence. But I am sure that this thing will seem very dark
to many. But whence comes this darkness and difficulty but that it was never
exercised practiced nor put in experience? for we may be taught a.M. years and
yet not perceive one word of this doctrine, until we have learned by
experience what it is to make a iornei by a dry and thyrsty way when we
should come to god. Therefore this doctrine ought to be very familiar to all the
faithful: to wit yt they should prepare and arm themselves diligently against
al ye te^tacio^s which satan shall enterprise by any means to break of yt journey
by ye which they should be brought to god. For surely whosoever do bestow their
whole diligence faithfully in this alone to wit, to seek out god, although they
stir not out of the place in which they are, yet they shall find many
greiuous disco^modities which might turn them back and call them to the
contrary part, unless they had their minds stable and ready to resist: but
this is a thing to be lamented that the most part of the^ as I have said, are
weakened and overcome by these difficulties that are offered to them by the
way. They will confess forsooth that they oght thus to do. They shall seem to
be ready and well prepared for ye journey, but when they should go forward and
enter into ye iornei the^ their heart fails them, and those yt are well entered
and well forward also, often times fail and are utterly give over even in the
midwai. The more therefore oght this lesson to be committed to our memory that
we may dig pittes, that is, that we may seek aides and helps even hyd and
unknown unto us, that we may still continually proceed and go forward. Let us
labor (I say) and contend above all man's power. If things com not to pass
as we would, yet let us not cease to follow still ye good course wherein god
has set us. It is most certain that he if we call upon him in faith can
turn the dry wilderness into fountains. But in the mean ceason it is meet
according to our duty that we not ydled, nor lie still as though we wanted the
sense and mouyng of arms and legs. Yea verelye God commands us that we
should rather dig pittes. Let us then labor in this diggyng so long, whiles we
have finished our journey begone. Let us set before our eyes the miserable
condition of soudiours which every month set forth their life to the sale. If
they be in the camp no man is able sufficiently to express what incommodities
and miseries they suffer: If they be besieged in any place then they endure yet
much more greiuous things. If a voyage be undertaken that they should go to
any place, they can neither be let nor stayed by any cold or heat wind or
rain from the journey appointed and the enterprise begone. And some times they
are brought to such extremity that onles they dig the earth to get water,
they have not a drop of water to drink. There is no labor distress nor
misery so great, which they will not suffer to atteine to yt which they have
purposed and undertaken. And yet when they have done and suffered all whether
they escape or be slain they have lost all this their diligence and labor,
because in the suffering of all these so great miseries they only serve Satan.
The son of God has chosen us that we should fight under his standerd, and that
we should be faithful soudiors unto him and serve him diligently. And we know
what reward of all our labors and dangers he promises unto us. How much more
courageous then oght we to be to do our duty unto him the^ are these miserable
and desperate me^ to pursue there own destruction? Nether is this only hear
treated yt eueri man should compte ye nombre of the miles and measur al ye
space which is betwixt his his house and that place where he may freely worship
God and make confession of his faith, and hear the pure preaching of ye
doctrine of yt gospel. we must yet go farther and have a longer iornay to make,
wherein the whole course of our life must wholly be spent. Have we haunted ye
church of God one year or more? If we continue and remain we shall daily find
new cares. For sometimes we shall be visited with siknes, sometimes with
exstreme poverty and want of all things necessary, moreover our wives and
children shall dye, and also it may come to pass that we have not that
liberty and fredome to worship GOD as we had at the first. Finally there is no
kind of trobles or grief where from we may think our selves free that we should
not therewith be assailed, wherefore that constancy of mind and stabilitie and
patience is required of us, that unto the very end we have our hands ready to
dygge the pittes, and our nails also to skratte the earth if necessytye so
require. If a man say, how then? are we not in ye temple of GOD. I do answer
that we are so in it yt we must come more near and enter daily into it. Truth
it is that we daily behold the face of God, but we are not fully satyate nor
filled with his most beautiful countenance as we shall be when he shall take
us unto him. Therefore must we al generally apply this to ye practice of ye
life: and as satan is ever busy to let and trouble al the^ which would go unto
god, so let every man confirm himself, and give al diligence yt he continue
most constantly in doing and worki^g ye same to morrow yt he has done to day.
For if ye enemy without fainting or wearines is so dilligent to turn back our
journey and to drive us from our course begone toward god, much less ought we
to lose our courage, yt we must more go forward always and draw nere unto god
ever gatheri^g new strength continually without ceasing But to do this thing and
to continue in it, is required of necessity to be imprinted in our hearts yt
judgment and fervent desire which was in David most excellent. I had rather
says he, to dwell at the threshold of the house of god then in the tents and
tabernacles of ye wicked: wherein he plainly declares, yt he will be content to
be brought to a state most base most low and despised, to gain this benefit to
dwell in ye house of ye lord. I beseech you let us consider a little what was his
state. He was ye kings son in law, one of the chief princes of Judea in most
high honor: and authority: not withstanding he is content with all his heart to
lose that high honor and dignitye, and to be made as one of ye base common
people, so yt he may have some little corner in the church of god. If this desire
were so great and excellent in all, they would not spend so much time in devising
and preparing for thexchange yt they must make when they forsake their house
and their contrie to com to ye church of god. But there be found very few,
which can take in good part, and will bear quietly ye diminishing of their
substance and the abasing of their state and degree. Every man does greatly
desire dentily to be carried in a horseliter to ye place where he may worship
god at liberty: and also that al ye lands and possessions, al ye gain and
exchange yt he has had with merchants, the estimacion of men, the affinities and
frendshyp and such other commodities of life should also follow them. But
whiles they are only at this point, how smally I pray you do they esteem
Jesus Christ? For all that ever they will do for him is no further but as it
were at his desire, for pleasure and pastime to go to walk: which thing is
miserable and most unworthy and uncomely for a christian. For though we be
nothing worth in deed yet has he so greatly esteemed us of his infinite
goodness, that he has not spared his own self for our salvation, even he in
who^ the perfection of all good things is contened. And shall we grudge and
repine at the loss of tra^sitory things and count our condition worse if we be
not so well handled and entreated and have our pleasures as before? this is
very far from that which S. Paul sets forth by his example for us to
follow: that is, that we should count al things as filthe and donge that does
hinder us that we cannot attein unto Christ and possess him, and that we should
cast that away as damage and loss knowing that all that leads us away from
life, must needs bring us unto death. And this our desire of deintines and
wealth is far from embrasing that exhortation and from following yt admonicio^ yt
our savior Jesus christ has given, yt we should sell al yt we have in this
world and for sake it for the kingdom of heaven knowing yt this is such a
precious stone, as by his excellency passes far all those things that men so
much desire and esteem. If any man will object yt a man may come to the kingdom
of heaven without this forsaking of his house: I do answer yt it is not in vain
yt our savior does thus name the preaching of the gospel, because they that
want the doctrine of the Gospel and have no care nor regard to seek those
means and occasions, whereby they may enjoy this so great goodness, do declare
that they do cleave to the things of this world more couetously and greadily
then they should and are not yet prepared to that exchang which they oght to
make with the kingdom of heaven. Now if they might enjoy both surely I would not
envy their so great felicity. But if they ca^ not retain their possession
nor lie still in their nest, onles they defraude themselves of the most wholesome
and only food of ye children of god, nor remain in yt state wheri^ they now
ar, onles they cut of themselves from the church of god: it is their duty to
consider ye necessity that god lays upon the^. They may will bring what
excuses they will, but all such clokes and shifts will nothing auail the^
when ye most high judge shall thonder upon them all with his terible voice
which set more by yt earthly life yt is common unto us with the brute beasts
then the eternal heritage which he has oppointed for his children. And it is
a very folish thing and nothing to the purpose that many think to stopp our
mouths onles we do assign the^ some means and state wherbi they may live in
seriuing god. My co^ditio^ sai they is thus i^ may co^try, if I do forsake it
what will come upon me? What hope is there to nourish and sustain me? As though
god had appointed the^ yt preach ye gospel to be bailifs and stewards to
apoint to every man his stat and his ordinari, and to pay every man a certai^e
pensio^ and wages according to his worthiness or digi^tie. If we ca^ help any
by counsel or by our direction we are so bound in yt kind to our pour, yt we
oght by no means to deni our diligence and service but always to be ready
though none require it. But if we be not able to help or to do any pleasure
herein, shall therefore also ye liberty be taken from us, yt we may not teach
that thing to euerima^ which is commanded unto him of God. But if they had well
learned this doctrine of David and keep it well in memory, that they should more
desire a little corner at ye door of the temple, the^ any place of most high
dignitye wherein they might be placed emongs ye unfaithful, they should never
think it so hard and doutful what they oght to do in this matter. How be it
here is the mischief that they will keep their old state and trad of life and
can not suffer, that their riches and honors be diminished in any point,
neither yt they should be deprived of those commodities delites and pleasures,
wherein they now are settled yt is to say, they can not plye their necks nor
bend their backs to bear Christ Jesus. Let them contend and strive about
this as much as they lust, they must needs herein be condemned. As touching
them which have left their contrye that they might come to that place where
they might worship God at liberty and where the truth of the Gospel might be
faithfully preached unto the^, it is most necessary, that they call this
sentence very often to rememberance, and that they exercise the^ selves in
meditating and practsi^g the same that their minds may be hardened and
confirmed, by the continual use and long custom of the same. For many things
may come to pass and do so daily, which may feable and weake^ yea holly break
their mi^ds which have been before of singular zeal and love of religion They
that join themselves to ye church, are not always so handled and entreated as
their dignity requires. The order many times is so perverted and trobled yt
they which were most worthy to be promoted are most neglected or set i^ ye
lowest degree: this same tentation truly might turn, the^ back and call the^
away from their own salvation, onles they so rested in the bosom of ye
church yt they had rather to be yt least and most contemned in the house of
God, then to live in most great honor being separate therfro^. Thus ye men yt
are faithful in deed which have not al ye commodities yt they were accustomed
but co^trari wise feel those disco^meditis and grifs which are very many i^ ye
forsaking of there contry must learn to comfort and confirm themselves with
these few words: But we are in ye house of god. now let ye worldli^gs deride us
much as they list, yea and hurt us outraglously in their pride as abiects and
outcastes, yet this must suffice us, that God does vouchesaife to give us this
honor to keape us, in his palace and santuary. We see what labor and pains,
the ambicions and vain glorious of the world do take, that they may be
compted of the house and family of some prince. They think themselves most
happy if they may come into the kitchen or ye haule. Now where as we by ye
opinion of the world ar most abject and despised yet so yt we be of the church
of god, we are led by him to ye most high and merueylous secrets of his wisdom
with such familiarity as the father uses with his children. We are very churlish
and unthankful onles this recompense content our minds. Though ye faithful in
deed may be grievously tempted and moved also to a certain indignacio^ and
offense of mind, when their case seems worse and worse, and the wicked
flourish still in all prosperity. Yet if they contrary wise consider that they
are chosen of god to be of his house, and to be interteyned there as his
children, this comfort has little force, if it do not diminishe and mitigate all the grievous thoghts of the inco^modities and also wipe clean away al ye sorrow
of heart yt can come for the same. And certainly they yt murmur and grudge yt
they are not entreated of god as they desire, or such as now repent yt they
have begone to live godly, do easily declare that they did not follow the counsel
of our lord and master in any point, which is, that at what time a building is
begone the count must diligently be cast what all the costs and charges will
be which are required to acco^plishe ye building, lest it repent the^ after
they have bestowed more the^ they should and so leave ye work unfinished. But
this is yet worse and more shamfull that many of them that thus are we ried in
the mid way, do leave of without any cause. Wherein they show themselves most
impudent. For even they that nether had house nor lands and which had no
disco^moditie but might as well live in ye farthest part of ye world as in their
own contrie are not ashamed to vpbraid god yt they have left this and that for
his sake. But let us grant that they have thus lost I can not tell what of
their goods and substance: Yet is it a folyshe thing more to esteem a
dandiprat the^ a crown or a gold noble. In the mean season nothing is heard
but these murmurynges and complayntes. And would to God these careful
complayners were far away from us yt they might enjoy their commodities and
pleasures although nether pore nor rich have any just cause to depart from
that holy and godly purpose, neither any excuse for those afflictions which ye
vocation of god and his obedience does bring the^ unto. But because this is
most hard unto us, therefore ye remedy is declared in ye psalm. lxxxiiii. when
david after he had said yt man is blessed yt hops in god adioyneth straight
ways, and in whose heart are his ways, as though he should say, he yt has his
mind bent and holly converted to enter i^to yt wai to hold on and to finishe
it which god has commanded. Therefore are there two things that can not be
separate the one from the other that we have our hope on god, and that we walk
in ye straight way: therefore as our infirmity does let us yt we ca^ not go
forward or makes us so denty and slow yt we would turn aside from his most holy
vocation and calling and turn another way: let us confirm our self in faith
and hope besechi^g our god most liberal and merciful that he will turn our
eyes unto him that nothing may trouble us whiles we behold his face and trust
in these his promises, where by he has assured us yt he will be with us for
ever both in life and in death.

SO BE IT.

A short declaratiON OF M. IHON CALVIN upon the.87. Psalm.
WHen as al things go well with the children of this world, we see how greatly
their own state does please them, and how wonderfully with a proud contempt of
the church they do extol the same. Yea and although they be brought under with
ye plagues of god yet do they not forget their carnal confidence where with they
are droncken. But in the mean season they carelessly despice religion and the
true worship of god: for so much as they being content with delicate and pleasant
things as riches and the brightness of dignity and honor think themselves
blessed with out God. And it comes often to pass yt god does as it were make
such men fall with all kind of good things to the intent yt at the length he may
punish them justly and in due time for their unthankfulness: and that his
church may be oppressed or at the least kept under a law and humble degree to
the intent that it may seem miserable to it self and be subject to contempt.

Therefore least that this vain show deceive the faithful it is needful they
be called to another consideration to wit that they do conclude that that is
true which the.xxxiii. Psalm does teach. That blessed is the people to who^
the lord is God. Therefore let the effect of this Psalm be, that the church
of god though it be but one yet does it excel all the kingdoms and commen
welths of this world because god is chief ruler of this common walthe and it is
governed by his empire. First to the intent it may abide safe amongst ye
raging tumultes and fearful tempests where with the whole world is often
shaken. Secondly and chiefly that it being wonderfully kept by the help of the
same God may, at the length after this long warfare attain to the victorious
crown of the heavenly vocation. And this is a special benefit of God and also
a wonderful miracle that amongst so many changes of the kingdoms of the
earth he does spread his church from age to age and delyuereth it from
destruction to the intent it alone should continually remain. But because it
is evident that whilst the wicked abound in riches and florishe in wealth and
power that the pore church of god is tossed hither and thither amongst many
dangers yea and almost over whelmed with infinite shipwrackes, the blessedness
of ye same oght herein to be set especially that it has an everlasting state
laid up for it in the heavens. As for the circumstance of the time wherein it
was made it does not make a little to the understanding of ye Psalm. For
although the people of Israel were come again from the banishement of Babylon
and the church of God gathered were now made one body after that long
scattering and the temple and the altar did stand yea and gods worship was
restored: but because there was but a very little portyon of men left of a
great multitude the state of the church was low and without honor yea and
that little residue was daily made less and less by the enemies, the church
also their temple was nothing so beautiful as the former temple and fynallye
there was now almost no cause left, wherefore they could conceive any good
hope. And surely it seemed impossible yt they could ever have raised up them
selves to the former state from the which they were fallen. Wherefore it was
dangerous least they should be overcome either to the former miserye or else
for the present calamities should be oppressed and fall down and so at length
ye minds of the faithful should fall into despair. Wherefore least they
should faint and lie down under such calamites the Lord does promise that
they shall not only recover that which they had lost, but also lifts them up
into the hope of an incomparable glory according to that prophecy of Aggeus.
The glory of the second temple shall be greater then ye glory of the first.

Now last of al it remains that we learn to apply this psalm also to our
profit. And surely this comfort ought to have been of such force to the godly
men of that age, that they should in their afflictions not only have stand
upright but also yt they should have lift themselves up to heaven though they
were in the grave but unless at this present day our fathers experience joined
with ye words do confirm our faith so much the more we are more then ingrat
since we know that all is fulfilled that whatsoever the holy ghost has spoken
for it can not be enough expressed for the worthiness thereof how beautifully
she did deck the church at his coming. For then the true religion which before
was shut up in ye straits of Jury was spread abroad through all the world.
Then God which before was known but of one family began to be called upon of
diverse tongues of al nations. Then the world which before was torn in peecis
miserally with innumerable sects of superstitions and errors was united in
the holy unity of faith. Then all gathered them selves to ye Jews whom
before they abhorred. The kings of the earth and nations did willingly obey
Christ. The wolves and lions were changed into lambs. The gifts of the holy
ghost were powered upon the faithful which did excel all the glory of this
world al beautiful things and all riches. The body of the church being
wonderfully gathered out of countries far distant increased and preserved. The
spreading of the gospel in so short time was incredible specially being joined
with, ye fruit there of no less notable. Wherefore if the dignity of the
church had never been declared by this Prophet yet that notable and
incomparable condition of that Golden age does euidentlye declare that it is
truly ye heavenly kingdom of god.

But it was necessary that the faithful should have a hier taste then by the
judgment of the flesh in estemynge the dygnytye of the church for when it did
most florishe it did not shine with purple gold or pearls but with the blood
of martyrs. Rich she was with the holy Ghost nevertheless she was poor and
lacked the earthely goods: she was noble and honorable both before God and
angels by holiness but she was contemptible in the world. There were many
outward and open enemies which did either cruelly rage against: her or else did
by sutle crafts invent wicked things against her. And within there was nothing
but terrors and privy tranes: finially under the cross of Christ there lay yet
hid in honorable dignitye but it was spiritual. Wherefore the consolation
which is in this Psalm was then also in due time that the faithful might rise
up in their minds to a more perfect state of the church. But our cause is
diverse. Therefore it is come to pass by the faut of our fathers that that
fair form of the church has line under the feet of the wicked deformed and
fylthy. And at this time being ouerladed with our sins, does mourn under
miserable destruction under the derysyon and mockyng of the deuel and the
world under the crueltye of tyrauntes, under the unjust slander of her
enemies: so that there is nothing less desired of the children of the world
which would that all went well with them then to be counted the people of God.
Whereby the profit of this psalm is better perceived and also how necessary
the continual medytatyon thereof is. To the sons of Corah, The 1. verse.
a psalm or song. The foundacyons thereof are in the holy mountains

The inscription does not so much declare the authors as ye chief musicians
appointed to sing ye psalm. Howbeit it might come to pass ye some man of that
stock being a leuite did compose it.

The foundacions thereof.

Since therelatue is of ye masculine gendre me think they are deceived which
do understand it of Jerusalem as though he should say that it was founded in
the holy hills. Neither am I ignorant how eertaine learned men do excuse
this thing. To wit that the name of ye people must be understand though he
speak of the chief city. But how hard an exposition it were though I should
houlde my peace yet every one may see. Some of the Jews also thought nothing
more likely then to refer it to ye psalm. And so by a metapher they expound it
the foundacyons of the matter (of ye psalm) because he entreats of ye holy
city of Jerusalem which was set in the mountains. But me think the true and
right meaning is that God has chosen the holy mountains in the which he
should found his own city. For it follows a little after in the text The
most hiest shall establishe it.

He is also ye builder of other citys but we never read that he said of any
other city. This is mi resting place for ever, I will dwell here, because I
have chosen it, in the Psalm. cxxxii.

For we must always put this difference that though other cities as touching
the outward policy were made by the power and providence of god, yet
Jerusalem was his peculier holy place and kinglye seat. After the same
fashion does Isayas speak Chapter.xiiii. Yea, and though all Iewry was holy
unto God, yet it is said that he having cast all other aside has chosen this
to him self, in the which he might reign. Which is expressed in the second
verse.

The Lord loves the gates of Sion above all the dwellynges of Jacob. To the
which that answers which is written in the Psalm. lxxviii. That God has
forsaken Sylo, the Tribe of Ephraim, the tabernacle of Joseph, yt he might dwell
in Sion which he had loved. Furthermore the Prophet does declare the cause
wherefore God does prefer one place to another and he sets the cause not
in the worthiness of the place, but in the only love of God without merits.
Therefore if any ask why Jerusalem does excel the rest, let a brief answer
be enough, because it so pleased God. And this was the beginning of the love of
GOD: but the end was, that there might be a certain place in the which true
religion might remain unto the coming of Christ, to the intent that the
unity of faith might be norished, and from whence afterward true religion
should flow to all ye coasts of the world.

Wherefore the Prophet does praise Jerusalem with this title, that it has God
for a chief builder and chief governor. Secondly he ascribes all the
dignity which it has before other places to the grace and adoption of god. As
for that that he has put Sion for Jerusalem, and the gates for the whole
compass of the city, it is a double Synecdoche is a figure where in the part
is taken for the whole
Synecdoche.

Commonly they take the hills for Sion and Moriah: which I do not reject,
though it may be drawn further, because the country was full of mountains
round about, and the City was set in an hie place.

The 3. verse.
Wonderful things are spoken of thee (thou) city of the lord.

Word for word it is, that that is said in the are wonderful things.

But we must consider the council of the prophet or rather the purpose of the
holy ghost speaking by the mouth of his prophet. When as the stat of the people
was low and contemptible and many grieuouse adversaries did rise against them
on every side and but few had the courage to overcome the lettes, and day by
day some new alteration did arise unlooked for and it was dangerous lest
theynges waxyng worse and worse by little and little at the length should utterly
perish, and when there was almost no hope that the city could be restored,
least the hearts of the faithful being overcome with desperation, should faint.

Here is a mete prop set under it that is to say that God has spoken
otherwise of the state thereof which is to come. For it is not to be douted but
that they are called from the sight of things present unto the promises which
did minister hope of an incredible glory. Therefore though nothing apear whereof
one may much rejoice, yet the prophet bids the children of God to stand up
as it were in a watchtowre and patientlye wait for the things that are
promised. On this manner were the faithful admonished first that they might
give ear to the old oracles, and call them to mind specially those which are
written in Isay, from ye xl. chap. unto ye end of ye book, and secondlye that
they might barken to the servants of God which then did preach of the kingdom
of Christ: whereby it follows that we can not judge a right of the felicity
of the church unless we judge of it after the word of god.

I will rehearse Rahab and Babel amongst the^ that know me, behold the
Philistines, Titus and Ethiopia he was borne there. The 4. verse.


The name of Rahab is taken for Egypt i^ mani places of ye scripture the which
signification does well agree to this place: for the prophets mind is to
describe that wonderful greatness of the church which was as yet hid in it
self. Therefore he says that they which before were grievous enemies or
altogether strangers should not only be familier friends but also should be
grafted in one body so that they should be counted citisins of Jerusalem. And
in the first clause he says: I will rehearse Egypt and Babylon amongst them
of my household. In the second he adds the Philistines the Tirians and the
Ethiopians, who were hither to at such variaunce with the people of god shall now
agree as well as if they were inhabitants. It is a wonderful dignity of the
church that they shall gather them selves to it round about which did contemn
it and that they which did wish it utterly rased out and destroyed should count
it a chief honor to be ye citesins thereof, and so to be counted: and al shall
willyngly refuse the name of their country of ye which before they were so
proud. Therefore where soever they were borne, either in Palestina either in
Ethiopia or in Tirus, they shall profes themselves to be citesins of the holy
city. The Jews do expou^de this place thus that few should come out of other
nations which excelled ye others in wit and virtues but that there should be
great abundance in Israel.

Scantly (say they) shall there amongst the Tirians Ethipioans, Egiptians or
any other particular men worthy of praise so that if there be any such he may
be pointed out with the finger for the scarcity: but in Sion man and man shall
be borne that is to say there shall be great abundance. The Christians do
almost with one accord refer it to Christ and think that the prophet does
render the cause why they should be counted amongst the cytesens of Jerusalem
which hitherto were strangers and sore enemis: because Christ should be borne
there whose duty it is to gather me^ scatered as members torn a sonder into
the unity of faith and hope of everlasting life. As for the first
interpretation because it is altogether wasted it needs no refutation. As for
the second because it is more sutle then sound I do not receive.

The 5. verse.
And of Zion it shall be said, A man and a man is borne in it and the most
hiest shall establishe it.

He continues the same sentence that new citizens shall be gathered into the
church of god out of diverse parts of the world. Howbe it he uses another
figur that strangers shall be counted amongst the holy people as though they
had been borne of the father Abraham He said in the former verse. The
Chaldeans and Egiptians shall become of ye household of the church. The
Ethiopans Philistines and the men of Tire shall be counted amongst his
children. Now he does add in stead of a confirmation that there shall be an
infinite multitude of new seed so that the city shall be filled with a great
people which was desolate for a time and afterward was but half full with a
little number of men. And this which is here shortly promised is declared more
at large of Isay. Praise O thou barren which did bear children: for the
children of the desolate forsaken are mo then of her which is married. Make
large the place of thy tent stretche out the cords and strengthen thy stakes
etc. Likewise. Thy children shall come from far, lift up thine eyes round
about (for) all these shall be gathered to thee. And in the xliiii. Chapter
almost the same manner of speech is fained or at least one which draws near
to this which is here. This man shall say I am of the lord he shall be called by
the name of Jacob. This man shall write with his own hand I am the lords: and he
shall call himself after the name of Israel. Neither does the prophet
without cause signify by ye word of bearing that ye Egiptians Chaldeans and
such like should be of the flock of Gods people.

For although by nature they were not borne of Zion but ought to be grafted in
by adoptyon into the body of the holy people: yet because our entrye into the
church is the second birth, this manner of speaking does agree very well. For
Christ does take ye faith full to him in marriage with this condition, that
they forget their own people and their fathers house. Psalm.xlv. and being
fashioned and borne a new of incorruptible seed into new creatures may begin
to be the sons both of God and of the church, Gal. iiii. And surely we are
borne a new in to ye heavenly life none other way then by the ministry of the
church. But in the mean season we must mark the difference that the apostle
puts betwixt the earthly Jerusalem, which as it is a servant so engenders
children to subjection, and the heavenly which brings forth fre children by
the gospel. In the second part of the verse, the long during of the same is
declared: for often times it comes to pass yt the sooner yt cities do creep
up into a wonderful height ye shorter while does their prosperous state
endure. And least that the felicity of ye church should seem after this sort
to be unstable the prophet does pronounce that her stabilitie shall be of the
lord as though he should say that it were no merueil though other cities did
shake and were subject to diverse inclinations: because they are tossed with
the world and have not everlasting kepers. But new Jerusalem is of another sort
whose eternity being grounded in ye power of god shall stand though heaven and
earth fall

The 6. verse.
God shall count his people by writing: he was borne there. Selah. The prophet
means that the name of Zyon shall be so famous that all shall with most fervent
desire go about to be counted in the number and degree of the citezens thereof.
For he speaks of a most honorable degree: as though he should say, when god
shall make a count of the nations them whom he will chiefly honor he will
accounte rather to Zion then to Babylon or any other cities. For this shall be
a greater dignity to be in the lowest degree amongst the Citizens of Zyon then
any other where to be of the chief: yet in the mean season he admonishes us
from whence men yt are strangers get such honor so suddenly: to wit, of the
free gift of god. And surely they which are the servants of the devil and of
sin can never get by their own diligence the fredom of the heavenly city.
It is the lord alone who places the people in their several degrees as it
seemed good to him: and whereas the condition of men is a like he puts
difference betwixt one and another. As for the writing whereof he makes here
mention, pertayneth to the calling for although he has written his children
in the book of life before the creation of the world yet he then counts
them at length in ye number of his children when as he does seal them being
regenerate with the mark of the spirit of adoption. As Well the syngers as the
players on instruments, all my fountaynes are of thee. The 7. verse.


Partly the great shortness partly the doutfull signification of one word does
make ye sentence dark. As for the word fountains, there is no dout but that it
is translated from the right signification and used here by a Metapher. But for
all ye yt expounders do differ in the declaration of the Metapher. Some do
expound it hope, some affections, some the inward thoughts. How be it, I would
gladly agree to their sentence which interpret it songs if the propriety of the
tongue would suffer it. But because it may seem to far fetched I do receive yt
which is most agreeable to reason to wit, that the countenance is signified, for
the rote from the which it is derived does signify an eye. Now must we se
what that other membre signifies. As Well the syngers as the players on
instruments. It is an abrupt manner of speaking, but al men do agree of the
sense thereof, to wit, that there shall be such cause of joy that the praise of
God shall be set forth with singyng, both without instruments and also with
instruments of music. Therefore he does establishe that which he said before
of that great glorious restoration of Sion: for by ye greatness of the joy and
manifold singing of praise he declares how great the felicity thereof should
be. But in the mean season he describes the end of all the gifts which god
does so liberally power on his church: to wit that the faithful do witness
their thankful mind toward him with himnes and songs. More over that the
prophet declares yt he does embrase the church with a syngular love care and
study to the intent he might exhort and kindle all faithful by his example
to the same affection. According to this saying let my right hand be forgotten
if I do not remember thee Jerusalem in the begynyng of my joy. For then
finallye are all our affections in the church when as we gather our selves
from the wanderyng and vain destruction of the mind, and despise the
dignities, delicate things, riches, and pomp of this world, and are content
with that only spiritual glory of the kingdom of Christ.

FINES.
Prynted at London by Roulande Hall dvvellyng in Golding Lane at the sign of
the three arrows.

1561.


