Four SERMONS OF Master John Calvin, Entreating of matters very profitable
for our time, as may be seen by the Preface:

With a brief exposition of the LXXXVII. Psalm.

Translated out of French into English by John Field.

Jmprinted at London for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater Noster Rome, at the
Sign of the Talbot. 1579.

To the right Honorable and my very good Lord, Henry Earl of Huntington,
Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaux, Mullens and Moyles, of the most Honorable
order of the Garter Knight, and Lord President of the Queens Majesty's
Council established in the North parts, John Field wishes increase of true
faith and continuance in the zeal of his blessed religion for ever Amen.
IT may be (right honorable and my very good Lord) that men will maruayle,
why I should publishe these (...) excellent Sermons of Master John
Caluines, the Arguments whereof be not so fit and agreeable (as they
think) to these times: seeing GOD in mercy has given us peace, and set us at
liberty from that Romish yoke, suffering the beams of his glorious Gospel to
spread far and wide, to the great comfort of many, and his own everlasting
glory. These benefits, as they are acknowledged by me: so I beseech God to make
us all more thankful then we have been, that the little fruit they have
brought forth amongst us, the common ignorance that is yet upon the face of
the whole land, the small preparation to the cross and bending our backs too
bear it with Jesus Christ our head, do not provoke him too give us over too
follow our own ways, to have no conscience nor care of any religion: as I
fear me the world is too to full of such, the more is the pity. For who sees
not, that the common sort are so far from being instructed, having plaide the
Truantes in Gods Schole these twenty and odd years, that they have not yet
taken out this one lesson, to be of mind when God shall try them, too
separate them selves from the cursed fellowship of Antichriste. For they have
not yet learned too make any difference of religion, but bend them selves too
serve all times: come there falsehood or truth, light or darkness, religion or
superstition, the Gospel or the Mass, Turcisme or Christianisme, al is one
too them, so that they may live at ease, they are at a point: no Scripture so
strong, or testimony so evident, that can convince them, too make them stand
fast too Gods everlasting truth, the seal of ^^eir adoption. Though Christ
have pronounced that whosoever deny him before men, Matt. 10.33.38.
he will deny him before his father which is in heaven: though he say
plainly that he that will follow him must take up his cross and follow
him, and that he that is ashamed too confess him before men, Apoc. 18.4.
he will deny him before his heavenly father: yea although we be commanded too
come out of Babylon, Apoc. 13.3.11.
and it be plainly said that the red Dragon will power out his waters as a
river to overtake the woman with child, and that the victory of the lamb
must be by his own blood, and by the word of their testimony, who love not
their lives unto the death: yet can not all this move them to seek too be
grounded and prepared, calling upon God that they may stand resolute through
his grace, to bear testimony to his glorious name, who has bestowed so many
blessings upon them. If they may have Christ with case, wealth, honor, with
the peace of the world and favor of men, if they may enjoy him with their
pleasures and proceeding on in sin, they will be content with Pharisees a
little to entertain him, that they make a mock of him. But if in the
entertaining of him, he shall never so little touch their botch and pinch their
pleasure: if he shall come near their purse and endanger their least
commodity, if he shall require mortificatio^ with obedience and sanctification,
then either they will come by night like Nicodemus, or else they will pray him to
be packing with the Gergesites, or too conclude they will lay violent hands upon
him, John. 3.2. Mat. 8.34. Mat. 26.3. John. 11.47. Mark. 11.10. Mark. 14.64
15.12.
and nail him fast to the cross with the proud Scribes and Pharisees. As for
the common sort they that yesterday received him as a king, with osianna in
excelsis, they will to morrow cry out Crucifige, with the high Priests, that they
may live in security. These sermons therefore as for their worthiness they
have been translated long ago into other tongues, and (as I understood, when
I had almost finished them) out of the Latin into ours also: so my labor
being past, they being also by authority allowed: and I especially following
master Caluines own french copy, so what differing from the other: I thought
they could not but be very profitable, at the least too prepare us against
the time to come. For God has given us long peace, and our rest having bred
rust, grown up eue^ to the height of the contempt of his graces, must needs
provoke him to punish the wicked with wonted plagues and to correct us with the
fire of adversity, that we may be purged from our foul corruption. Our cold
starued Papists, I cannot tell what warmeth has drawn the^ out of their
holes, but now they begin a little to show themselves, they look big, and their
ha^ging looks show what malice lurketh in their ca^kred hearts: But our God
lives and therefore we will not fear, we know that all powers both in heaven
and in earth are subject to him: and we nothing doubt though our sins have
strengthened the hands of his adversaries, that they should be heavy upon us,
yet our God will in our punishments give them an everlasting overthrow and an
unrecoverable confusion. Though there be many Newters which have made a
covenant with their own hearts rather to be of all religions, and to serve al
times, then to endure the least danger, yet there are an infinite number of
true Christians, that by his grace to die for it, will never bow the Knee too
Baall, will never partake with the table of God and the table of deuilles, 1.
Kings. 19.
will never draw in that unequal yoke together with such Infidelles. These
shall neither the swoordes of Hazael, nor of Ichu, or of Elisha once touch, for
they are marked of the Lord. And if the word of God be sure as him self,
and he have joined himself as head too us his members, why should we fear?
If our head live we shall live, if he be ascended, we his members shall be drawn
up unto him. Our blood shall be of strength too break all their cheines. The
shame, slander and reproach that they lay upon us, shall be our greatest glory,
and our innocence laid to their cruelty, shall be strong enough to set the
seal of true happiness upon us for suffering for righteousness sake, and of
wretched confusion upon the^, that so rage against such as have done the^ no
harm, Matt. 5.10.
and who^ they ought too have most esteemed of, as for whose sakes they have
and possess al those temporal blessings that god in his mercy has given
the^. We will therefore in the name of our God, likewise Mariners, in this
calm time provide against storms and tempests. We are not ignorant what the
order of nature sets before us: there is no summer but brings a Winter, no
day but has a night: nor any professed truth that brings not a trial.
Health is always joined with sickness, and the bodily life is subject to
death: so the peace of the Church is seldom without adversity: and GOD forbid
that we should not prepare, even to the pouring forth of our blood, to strive
for the truth of our God, yea too death it self, if God so appointe. If they
be (as Chrysostom says) not only betraiers of the truth that speak lies in
steed of the truth, but also that do not freely utter the truth: God forbid
that we should not be ready in time and place when he wills, both to utter
it freely, and to stand too it valiauntly and constantly for the glory of his
name. And one thing I do assure the Papists of and all of Caynes progeny,
that the more they kill and persecute the children of God, the more will Christ
and his Gospel floorish. Our blood will be a fructifiyng and multipliyng seed,
they have seen it and known it true by long experience, and herein they be
but the instruments of hastening us too our happiness. Not when they will, for
we are not subject unto them. The Devil him self their Father and all hellishe
furyes are subject too our God, and cannot touch one hear of our heads, till
he have given them leave and that for our good and trial. Let the sons
therefore of servitude in the pride of bondage ieare never so much against the
sons of liberty, Gal. 4.
yet a day shall come when their righteousness shall break forth and appear
more glorious then the Sun and all the Stars: when as too them (what
pleasures soever they shall usurp in this world) shall belong nothing but
perpetual shame, joined with an evil name too all posterities, and an
everlasting death in the end world without end. Wherefore (good my Lord) I
am bold too offer up these sermons unto your honor, rudely translated by me,
beseeching your honor in the behalf of Gods Church to accept of them. I will
say nothing in their commendation, they are able and of sufficient age to
speak for themselves. Only I thought good to show this humble duty toward
you, by this public testimony. And I beseech God the father of all mercies
to strengthen you in that happy course of the Gospel, wherinto of his singular
goodness he has drawn you: that you may be as a bright star in his
Church comfortably shining forth in constancy and maintenance of the same
truth, too the stirring up of many: that not only it may be given you (as the
Apostle says) to believe in him, but also too suffer for him. For this is
true honor too suffer for righteousness: The cause is it that must comfort
all that are afflicted, and herein we have wonderfully to rejoice, when it is
for his name sake, hereunto also, we must (as I have said) prepare our selves.
For it is impossible that Christ and his Cross should be sundred. The
world must love her own, and in the world we shall be troubled. Christ in
his members must be crucified til he come again in his second and glorious
coming to subdue all his enemies. The remainder of his afflictions must be
borne in our bodies, not because he has not suffered fully, but because we
must be made conformable unto him, till we be fined from the dross that is
in us, too detest it and wholly too love his righteousness. Wherefore we must
detest all those Libertines, who count themselves the Family of Love, and the
Atheistes of the world, who overthrow all confession and profession of the
Faith of Christ, being indifferent for all religions: that tread under their
feet the blood of all Martyrs, and account them but for fools. Now the God
of all patience and comfort, bless your honor together with my good Lady,
that you may feel and possess that comfort that none can take from you. Amen.

Your Honors most bounden and Faithful ever to command, JOHN FIELD.

John Calvin to all true Christians, who desire the advancement of the kingdom
of our Lord Jesus Christ.
WHen you shall understand wherefore and to what end, I was desirous too
publishe these Sermons, and shall be advertised of the Argument which they
contain, you shall know the better how too make your profit of them, and to
apply them to such use as I have appointed them. Although that I have written
heretofore two Treatises large enough, to show that it is not lawful for a
Christian, knowing the pure doctrine of the Gospel, when he lives in the
Papacy, too dissemble howsoever it be, to consent or to cleave unto the
abuses, superstitions and Idolatries, which reign there: Notwithstanding there
are every day some people that demand my counsel thereof a freesh, as if I had
never spoken thereof. I understand also that there are others which never cease
to allege their replies, and have new starti^g holes against that which I have
written thereof. Therefore to cut of al occasions, as well from those which
iniquire of that which ought to be sufficiently known and understood of them,
as also from them which think to cover themselves under this wet sack from
the vengeance of God: I thought that it should be very expedient to reuiew
over again and to bring into order a Sermon that I had made as touching this
matter, the su^me whereof had been gathered. Wherefore this first Sermon
contains an admonition, what a slouthfulnes it is in them too whom God has
given to know the truth of his Gospel, too defile themselves with the
abominations of the Papists, the which are altogether contrary too Christian
religion, forasmuch as in so doing, they deny as much as lies in them, the
son of GOD who has redeemed them.

Now because that it is impossible for a Christian man dwelling under the
tyranny of Antichriste, too make a right and pure confession of his faith, but
that incontinent he must be in danger to be persecuted, I have adjoined
another second Sermon, for to exhort all the faithful, more too esteem the
honor and service of God then their own life, and to fortify themselves
against all temptations. And in deed whereas many think it strange that they
be not suffered to disguise themselves and to play the cou^terfaites, it is
not, for that they are not convinced, that the duty of the children of God is
too worship him only in all plainness and simplicity, withdrawing themselves
from all pollutions and Idolatry: but it is, because they see they cannot do
the duty of Christians, but they must kindle the rage of the wicked against
them. Now they would fly the cross as much as they could, I therefore
seeing that the doctrine of the pure worshipping God should be altogether
unprofitable, unless that men be settled to despise this brickle and tra^sitory
life, too seek the kingdom of God and to follow Jesus Christ to the Cross,
to come unto the glory of his resurrection: I have added the second sermon to
exhort them which at this day are over weak to courage and constancy.

The third Sermon is too declare what a treasure it is to have liberty not
only to serve God purely and too make public confession of his faith: but
also to be in a well ordered and governed Church, where the word of God is
preached and the Sacraments are administered as they ought: seeing that these
are the means by which the children of god may strengthen themselves in the
faith, and be stirred up too live and to die in his obedience. Now it seemed
unto me that this Argument was very necessary at this day, because there are
many Christians in immagination, which flout at them which take pain to go
into a strange country and far of to enjoy such liberty,

Now because there are many withholden and hindered from following of this
benefit which God so much esteems, for the too great regard that they have
to their ease and commodities: or rather for the fear and doubt which they
have, that any thing should be wanting unto them: and others are so delicate
that if all fall not out to their desire, they whine and murmr, or rather
fall to plain wickedness: I have added the fourth Sermon too show unto
Christians how they ought to be armed against al offenses, patie^tly too bear
all the troubles that may happen unto the^, so that God give them this grace to
maintain them in his house. So the sum of the fourth Sermon is, that when we
have this privilege to hear the word of God purely preached, to call upon
his name and too use the Sacraments, that this is a benefit recompensing all
the vexations, troubles and griefs, that Satan shall be able to stir up
against us.

I have set down in the end a brief exposition of the 87. Psalm, the which
seems unto me to serve fitly for the purpose: for there is handled the
restoring of the Church of God. Now we see many at this day that seeing the
Church so desolate as it is, they discourage themselves, as if shortly it
should altogether perish. Such kind of people, and generally all the
faithful shall find here wherewith too comfort themselves, seeing the hope
that God gives of setting up his Church again after that for a time it has
been cast down: and of making it to prosper and floorish again, after that
it shall have been miserable in respect of the world. I beseech our good God
that my labor be not in vain, but that you may be edified through my travail
according as I desire,

From Geneua, this 20. of September 1552.
A Sermon wherein all Christians are exhorted to fly from outward Idolatry,
upon the 4. verse of the 16. Psalm. I will not come with their sacrifices of
blood, and their n^^es shall not pass through my mouth.
WE have here to handle a doctrine clear and easy enough, were it not that
the most part of those which call them selves Christians, sought, I can not
tell what manner of subtilties, to cloak their evil withal. The sum is, that
after we know the living God to be our father, and Jesus Christ our redeemer,
we ought to dedicate both our body and soul unto him, who by his infinite
goodness has adopted us for his children, and endeuo^r to do homage unto this
so good a Savior, for that it has cost him so dear. And because we are bound
not only to renounce all infidelity, but also too separate our selves from all
superstitions, which are contrary as well to the service of God, as to the
honor of his Son, and which can not agree with the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, and the true confession of faith: I have said that this doctrine is
easy enough of it self, and that there remains nothing but to put the same
well in practice, saving that there are a sort of people that seek certain
starting holes and subtle shifts, to the end they may not seem culpable, in
that which is so greatly condemned by Gods own mouth. This cause constrains
us to dwell longer in the declaration of this matter, to the end that every one
may know what is his duty, and that no man deceive himself, imagining that
he is escaped by covering him self, as the common saying is, under a wette
sack.

But because that some may think that this is a superfluous argument in
respect of us, who have by the grace of God, our churches purged from the
infections and the Idolatryes of the Papacy: before we pass any farther, it
is good to show that such people are foulely deceived. For in the first place
when it is showed us, what an offense it is too defile our selves with
Idolatries, faigning to consent or to cleave too their impieties, we are put in
mind to mourn for our former faults, and to ask pardon of God for them with
all humility: and thereupon too acknowledge the inestimable benefit that he
has showed unto us, in pulling us out from such filth wherein we were
plunged. For we can not too much magnify such an excellent grace. And because
we know not what may happen unto us, nor to what end God does reserve us, it
is good that we be always armed aforehande and in a readiness, to the end
that in what so ever place we come, or with what temptation so ever we be
assaulted, we never swerve from the pure word of God. It may fall out that many
in this company which have to travel into the countries of Papists: they
being there in the combat have need to be armed aforehand. On the other
side, if GOD give us at this day liberty to serve him purely, we know not
how long it will endure. Let us therefore take the time wherein we be in rest,
not as though it should always last us: but as a truce in which god gi^eth us
leisure to fortify our selves to the end that being called to make confession
of our faith, we be not to seek for not having thought upon it in time
convenient. In the mean while, we have also to think upon our pore brethren,
which are kept under the tyranny of Antichrist, to the end to have pity upon
them, and to beseech God that he will fortify them with such constancy, as he
requires by his word. Further also we have to stir them up to the end that
they sleep not and flatter themselves, but rather that knowing their duty,
they enforce themselves to give glory to God. For it is not only for our selves
that we are taught: but to the end that every one according to the measure of
his faith, imparte to his neighbors of that which has bin showed him in the
schole of God. We see therefore that it is very profitable, yea necessary not
only for us, but for our brethren, that the memory of this doctrine be
oftentimes renewed unto us, especially seeing the text which we have to expound
leads us thereto. As in this place, David makes a great protestation, and as
it were a solemn vow that he will never be a partaker in the sacrifices of the
Idolaters especially to have the Idolles in such hatred and detestation, that
he will abstain (...) name them, as though he should defile his mouth in
naming them. This is not the particular fact of any mean man: but the example
of David a most excellent King and Prophet, which ought to be a general rule
to all the children of God.

Notwithstanding to the end that this may be known more clearly, and that we
also may be better touched therewith, let us mark the reason that he adds, the
which is, as it were the ground of the horror that he has to mingle him self
among the idolaters. The Lord (says he) is mine inheritance. And is not
this common to all the faithful? At the least there is not any one which
does not rejoice herein. And in deed it is very certain, that God being once
given unto us in the person of his Son, does daily inuit us, to the end
that we should possess him: but there are very few which are so affected in
this behalf as the matter deserves. For we cannot possess God but with this
condition, that we also be altogether his. It is therefore for good cause that
David groundeth him self upon this theme, seeing that God is his inheritance
that he will abstain from all pollutions of idols, the which do turn us away
and estraunge us from him.

Esaias. 57.
This is the cause why the Prophet Esaie when he had vpbraided the Jews, that
they had given themselves to false and strange gods, which they had made unto
them selves, he adds, Lo these, these (I say) are thy portion: signifying
by these words, that God denies all covenant and fellowship with idolaters,
and disheriteth and depriueth them of that so infinite a benefit, which he
would have bestowed upon them by giving him self unto them. Some man will
reply that he entreats there, of those which put their trust in idols, and
deceive them selves through unbelief. I confess it: but contrariwise I
answer, that if they which wholly attribute, the honor of God unto idolles,
are fully cut off from him: they also at the least straye in part from him, who
through fear and infirmity faigne themselves to consent unto superstitions.
For it cannot be, that any man in what sort soever it be, can draw nere unto
idols, either in heart, in gesture, in will, or in show, but be must recoyle
himself so much the farther from God. Wherefore let us hold this article for
resolute, that they which seek truly and in purity of heart to possess God
for their heritage, will have no fellowship with Idolles, with whom they have
such a divorce, that he will that all those that are his, should proclaim and
make continual and deadly war against them. And David expressly sets
forth in this place, that he will not be a partaker with their offringes, and
that their names shall not pass by his mouth. He might have said, I will not
abuse my self with the foolish devotions of unbelievers, I will not put my
confidence in such abuses, I will not leave the truth of God to follow such
lies. He speaks not so: but rather that he will have nothing to do with their
ceremonies. He protests then that he will abide continually in the purity
both of body and soul, concerning the service of God. In the first place we
have hereto see, if this be not idolatry, to show by outward signs that a
man agrees to superstitions, through which the service of God is corrupted and
perverted. They who swim (as they say) between two waters, allege, that
seeing God will be worshipped in spirit, that one can not woorship idolles,
without having his trust in them. But the answer is easy: That God will not
be woorshipped in spirit in such sort, that he forsakes the other part to
wit, the body, as though that pertayned not unto him. For he has spoken
enough thereof in other places, of bowing the knees before him, and of lifting
up the hands unto heaven: what then? The principal service that he
demands, is in deed spiritual: but the open declaration which the
faithful make, that it is he only whom they serve and honor, follows
immediately, and must straightwaye be joined unto it. But the objection which
they make, taking occasion of one word, one only place shall be sufficient
to reprove them. It is written in the second Chapter of the Prophet Daniel,
that Sidrach, Misach and Abednego, refusing too Nabuchodonosor once too seem
to consent to the superstition which he had erected, they plainly declare,
that they will not woorship his gods.

If these subtle Sophisters had been there, they would have laughed too
skorne the simplicity of these three servants of GOD. For they would have
said, Poor souls, This is not too woorshippe them, seeing you put no
affiance in them: theere is no idolatry but where there is devotion. But these
holy personages followed better counsel. And in deed, this answer proceeded
not from their own brain: but it was the holy Ghost that enforced their
tongues: against which if we will not resist, it is meet we take out of this
place a true rule and definition, that this is a true kind of Idolatry, when
any outward act is done that is contrary to the true service of God, although
that it be done colourably and through hypocrisy. These hypocrites cavil
gaily, This no Idolatry, seeing we have no trust in them: yet shall these men
continually remain condemned by this sentence, that the great judge has
pronounced thereof. But such kind of people strive about a word, pretending
only in part too lessen their fault, which they can not altogyther excuse.
They will easily grant and confess, that this is ill done: but they would
have men too esteem it as a venial sin.

But if a man should agree with them concerning the name and yield that which
they demand, yet they have gained nothing thereby. Let us put the case, that
it were not called Idolatry, too faigne too worship Idols: yet this cease
not too be a traiterous act against GOD, an act repugnaunt to the confession
of Faith, a pollution and a sacrilege. I pray you, when the honor of God is
violated, that we falsify the promise that we have made unto him, that through
cowardice and faintness of stomach we crookedly renounce our Christian
profession, that we are so double and defile our selves in things which GOD
has accursed: is this so light a matter, that after we have done it, we
should only wipe our mouth, and say that we have committed some little
fault? Let us therefore put away these shifts, seeing they serve to no other
purpose but to make us boulder in evil, without lessening our fault any whit.

There are yet some others which are more impudente: For not only they labor
too wreste the word, making men believe that it is not so great and enormious
a sin: but they most plainly and flatly maintain that it is no sin at
all. It is sufficient, say they, that GOD be served with the heart: very
well, if the heart were not double. For where there is an integrity and
soundness, there the body shall never be drawn into a contrary pa^^^. I would
know of them what it is that carries their feet too the Church, when they
go to hear Mass. Their legs would never stir of their own motion.

They must therefore needs confess that they have some manner of affection to
serve the idolles: yea in that they desire too behold them with the enemies of
the truth, and that their life is more precious unto them then the honor of
God. But albeit their impudency be too too shameful: in such sort, that I am
ashamed to dispute against it, as though they had some color of reason: yet
nevertheless it behooves to do it forasmuch as they please them selves so
much therein, and are as it were so drunken therewith. It is enough as they
think, if God be worshipped in spirit. But whereto then shall the body serve?
2. Cor. 6.20.
Saint Paul exhorts us to serve the Lord with both: because they belong unto
him. God has created the body, and shall it be permitted therewith to do homage
to the Devil? It were much better that they showed them selves to be flat
Manichees, denying that God were the creator of the whole man. If they had the
least taste in the world of the Gospel, they would never burst out into such
licentious liberty: For they show that they know not what it is to have bin
bought by the blood of the son of God. And if it be so, how should we hope
for the resurrection of the flesh, unless it were for that Jesus Christ is
the Redeemer both of our bodies and souls. Saint Paul in the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, and the 7. Chapter, gives us warning, that we ought not
too be the servants of men, seeing that we were bought so dearly. He
therefore that gives himself too the service of Idolles, treads he not the
blood of Jesus Christ under his feet, which is the price of the immortal
glory that we wait for in our bodies? And to what reason is it, that our bodies
should be defiled and profaned before Idols, seeing that the crown of life is
promised unto the^ in heaven? Is this the mean to enter into the heavenly
kingdom of God, to wallow our selves in Satan's stews? Moreover it is not
said in vain, that our bodies are the temples of the holy ghost. Wherefore they
who know not that they ought too keep them in all holiness, they sufficiently
declare that they never understood any thing of the Gospel: they show also
that they know not what belongs too Jesus Christ not to his grace. For when
it is said, that we are bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, this
plainly shows that we are joined to him, both in body and soul. And
therefore a man can no sooner defile his body with any superstition, but he
depriueth himself of that holy union through which we are made members of the
son of God: Let these subtle doctors answer me if they have received
baptism only in their souls, has not God ordained that this sign should be
engraven in our flesh? Should therefore the body in which the mark of Jesus
Christ is engraven, be defiled with contrary Abominations. Is the Supper
only received of the soul, and not also with the hands and with the mouth?
GOD has put the Arms and Badges of his Son upon our bodies, and should we
beray them with duty and dounge? It is not lawefull too imprinte two Coins
upon one piece of Gold: or to set two contrary seals one upon another to a
public instrument and writing: and shall a mortal man take upon him to
falsify baptism and the holy Supper of Jesus Christ and say, there is no
evil in it? Such men truly are worthy that their servants should make them
believe that they were well minded to serve them, in sleeping and sporting
themselves, and yet not moving a finger to do any thing. If they allege that
it is not all one, for as much as we have need of their service that are under
us: I answer, that seeing God without having any need, will employ us to his
honor, that it is a great shame for us, that in doing all things quite contrary
to his will, would be quite rid of him: and yet a greater shame that a worm of
the earth, and a stinking carrion would have more pre-eminence, then his
creator. It behooves a man yet too speak more grosely to such beasts. They say
that it is lawful for them to dissemble amongst Papists. Who is it then that
gives them the bread they eat there? And who is it that makes the earth to
bring forth fruit? If they cannot deny but that God nourishes them as
others,, wherefore do they homage to the devil with their bodies? If they were
Christians, I would use more weighty reasons, to wit, in demanding of them,
to what end we live here beneath: but it is pity, that they who will through
their subtleties so dally and jest with God, should become so brutish that they
must be handled as men void of common sense. It seems to them that they have
said sufficiently to the matter, when they say they do nonothing in this behalf
but for fear. But if this color may take place, then it must be said that
Joseph should have don no evil, to have committed whordom with his maistresse,
not seeking the fulfilling of his pleasure: but only to yield to the violence
which she offered him. This had then bin folishly don of him to suffer so much,
and to lay himself open to such infamy, seeing he had the mean to escape it.
But it rather becomes us to hold us to the testimony of the holy ghost, who
praises this constancy of his. If men do no evil in playing the idolaters,
to avoid the rage of Papists: He that shall be his masters band, shall not
offend. A man shall be excused when he poysoneth his neighbor, or when he
commits any treason for fear of offending him to whom he is subject. This
article is much stood upon, but as I have said, there is no hardness or doubt
in it: but it is good to see into what confusion they fall, who imagine by
their cunning sleights to escape the judgment of god. There are diverse which
at this day use another starting hole: for cofessing that it is a detestable
thing to mingle themselves with the Idolatries of the Painims, they will not
that this extend it self to the superstitions of the Papacy: as though all
the impieties of the Panims had not bin the corruptions of the true service of
God, From whence I pray you drew the Panims al their ceremonies, but from the
holy fathers? The mischief was that they corrupted that which was well
instituted of God. And yet all the abominations that ever were in the world,
had this goodly cloak of the name of God and of Religion: but this made them
not therefore justifiable, neither might the faithful communicate with them. Let
us proceed farther. Although that I agree he^ (...) with the^ that there was a
difference betwixt the ido^ ^^^eof Papists, and that of the Painims in times
past, yet they cannot deny but that God as straightly forbad his old people
the Idolatry of Bethel, as the Idolatry of strange contries. When the Calves
were set up in Dan and Bethel, it was done under the name of God: yea, of him
which brought his people out of Egypt. But, forasmuch as the Service there
established, was contrary too the doctrine of the Law, God condemned all
those that went thither to defile them selves. And truly these things, the
Supper of Jesus Christ, and the Popish Mass, are things no less repugnaunt
and contrary one to the other, then the sacrifices of Moses and Ieroboham.
Wherefore, whence came that dispensation to go to the Mass, under color,
that it is but an altering or disguising of the Supper of Jesus Christ?
Contrariwise I say, that they which truly fear God ought too have it in a
double detestation, for as much as it more manifestly prophaneth the holy
ordinance of the son of God, then if it had not been so contrary and
repugnant unto it. Let us then briefly hold this rule, that all the
inventions of men, which are set up to corrupt the simple purity of the word
of God, and to overthrow the service which he demands and allows, they
are very sacriledges, wherewith a Christian man may not communicate, without
blaspheming of God: that is to say, without treading his honor under his feet.
I know very well that this rigor will seem hard and intolerable to them that
would have a man to handle them according to their appetite. But what would
they that I should d^^ herein, knowing them to be so delicate? I would ^^^re
them if it were posible for me. But yet must bo^^ I and they suffer
condemnation, when God once speaks: They say they find no man more severe
herein then I am. But I would them to understand, that hitherto I have handled
them but too gentlely, which being so, they cannot be exempted from that which
the Prophet Jeremy requires of the Jews, Iere. 10.2.
who were Captives in Babylon. It was not only forbidden them to go to the
abominations of the Chaldeans, or to make show to consent unto them: but an
express commandment is given them, to show that they should count it a
most vile and filthy savor. His words are these: You shall say unto them.
The Gods which have not made Heaven and earth, shall perish from the earth,
and from under the Heaven. There is one circumstance worthy to be well
marked, that the Prophet having written his Book in Hebrewe coucheth this
verse in great Calda^y letters: as though he had pressed the Jews to change
their language, to the end to show more plainly the disagrement they had with
the idolaters.

Now let them hardly go and complain of me, as though I were too excessive.
And yet I never required half so much of them as the Prophet does. But whether
I speak of it, or hold my peace, we ceale not to be all bound to that Law
which GOD has laid upon us. And indeed it is not without cause, that God
speaking unto his faithful, he lays unto them. Ye are my witnesses, and m^
ser^^^ (...) chosen. Esaias. 44.2.
Whosoever will approve himself to be a member of Jesus Christ, must show
that this title agrees unto him, so that they that through their f^^se
dissembling and hypocrisy bury this testi^^ of the t^^th, can in no wise be
excused. And what (...) them, I pray you, who all their lif^ (...) ^^err it, a^
they do, who not only hid their chr^^^^^ profession, (...) the end they may
show no sign thereof before men: but do commit acts altogether contrary to it?
There remains nothing then to the Children of God, that are i^ the midst of
such pollutions, but to afflict their so^^^^ by the example of good Lot: yea
to speak against evil, according as GOD shall give them the mean and
opportunity. Now let us come too speak of those Idolaters which at this day
bear the sway. I have already somewhat touched the Mass. Now although this
be a blasphemy so foul and shameful, as nothing can be more, yet
notwithstanding there are yet found advocates of so ill a cause, who in this
behalf slinke back: and yet will they nill they, they are constrained to
confess that which I say: that is, that the Mass in it self is a renouncing
of the death of Jesus Christ, and a sacrilege forged by Satan, utterly to
abolish the Sacrament of the supper. They cannot likewise deny but that the
Prayers made unto Saints, and suffrages that are made for the dead, are
wicked abuses, whereby the invocation of the name of God (which above all
others is most holy) is profaned: notwithstanding meddling them selves
withsuch filthinesses amongst the Papists, they think that they are not
faulty. What should we do herein say they? It is not lawful for us to
reform these things which we know to be evil: For we are private men, and
they who have public authority maintain them: wherefore it behooves us to
go through that way: I grant them all that they say: but this is nothing to
the p^^^^^. It is not their parts, to reform the common (...) ^f the people:
and no man requires it of the^ (...) man may admonish them to reform them
se^^: the which belongs to their duty. It is not said unto them, that they
should purge the Churches or the streets: but that every one should keep
his own body and soul in purity, and labor by all means, that GOD may be
honored in his own house.

These two things are diverse enough, too abolish the mass out of any
Country, are not to be fou^^e there, when he cannot let the use of it. But
yet they eftsoons return to the foot of their song: that is that they
renounce not the death and passion of Jesus Christ, because they have no such
intent. But I ask of them what it is that a Christian man confesses, with his
mouth, but that same that he believes with his heart? That the act which
they commit is altogether contrary too Christian profession, is notorious
enoughe. So that, (as much as lies in them) they renounce and forsake that
which is of pure faith. I will speak yet more familiarly. The mass is a
sacrifice, wherein the Papists will offer up Christ, to be reconciled too
God. If this were true, Jesus Christ by his death and passion had not
purchased righteousness not everlasting salvation for us, let a man go about
the bushe as far as he will, yet he must come to this point. All they that
go to Mass under the title of devotion, protesse too consent herein. So
that, as much as lies in them, they show that they hold not their redemption
perfect by the death of Jesus Christ. A^^ there be some which bound them
selves a li^^^ (...) narrowlye: that is, that they reserve but (...) ^^ist or
high Mass, in which it seems to th^^ (...) ^^re is more conformity with
the supper of Ie^^^ Christ.

And in deed a man might say that the Masses which are said as well by those
hedge Preistes as which by those Chanons and Chaplaynes, and all those are
founded upon some particular devotion, which they set out every day to
sale, are as Harlotes of the Stews. The Parish Priests Mass is as a
stumpet, that shroudeth her self under the name of her husband, to keep her
self in the reputation of an honest woman. Although the similitude be not
altogether fit: For a married whore, will always yet have some shame from
giving over her self too all comers: but that same Parrishe Priests Mass,
is the most common idolatry of all others. So far is it off, that they that
paint her out with this color, keep here yet any trace of the supper of
Jesus Christ: yea as if a thief were ever the better, when he shall be
apparelled with the spoil of him, whose throat he has cut, and shall be
mounted up upon his Horse. We seek (say they) the supper of Jesus Christ.
Seeing we cannot have it pure, in the tyranny in which we live, we must content
our selves too take that which is left, waytinge when God will put to his
hand. Forsooth a goodly excuse. Forasmuch as they have no right and sound use
of the Supper, by way of provision, they protest, that they account not Jesus
Christ for their only everlasting Savior, and they seek every morning a new
sacrifice to blot out their sins. For all this is in the Parrish Priests
Mass, as well as in that of S. Nicholas, or in those that are said for the
dead. They faigne to worship an Idol, and yet boaste themselves to seek Jesus
Christ. And to the end, they may not fight against God without a swoorde and a
Buckler. they bring forth the authority of this man here, and of that man
there. As if the absolution of a man could exempt them, from being condemned
of God. I spare to say that they notably belie them, whom they bring for their
advocates. But admit it were so, that a holy man for a time thought it not so
great an evil too go to an high Mass: yet if afterward he knew the error
wherein he was, his latter judgment is so much the more to be believed, for
the condemnation thereof, forasmuch as men may see, that the power of God has
compelled him thereunto, and he is plainly found to be overcome in that thing,
which before he did hold and allow of. But what a blundering and stir keep
they here? Imagine they too restrain God by the opinion or saying of a
mortal man? We know that there is nothing but the only truth that shall
reign in his judgment, without acception of persons. Now the fact is this,
that the parish mass is instituted for to sacrifice Jesus Christ, and to make
an atonement with God, as well for the quick as the dead and that a piece of
bread is woorshipped there, as if it were the so^^e of God. I do not scanne
every thing by peecemeale: there are a thousand other infections: but I only
take the groffest. Let them which seem to agree h^^^^^^, wa^^ their hands, as
much as they will, in the end they shall be no more just then Pilate was. But
this is marvelous that these good parishioners, when Easter comes they go to
seek some Chapel in a corner, or some Friar neither hot nor cold, that he
may deliver unto them a counterfaite and bastard supper. If the parish Mass,
as they say, be so like the supper of Jesus Christ, why do they not observe it
and keep them selves to it? But now after they shall have been at high Mass
every Sunday throughout the year, that they may seem to communicate aright in
the sacrament of the Supper, they suddenly re^^^nce it: although we must not
greatly wonder at such inconstancy: For it is the (...) payment and just
punishmente of all those which are not grounded upon the truth of God: and God
reuengeth him self upon them, making them always to be shaken, and to
contrary themselves in that which they take in hand. Touching such a painted
Supper, I know that in their fantasy, a man shall do them great wrong to
reprove it. But how can we do otherwise, seeing it agrees not to the rule of
our master? I do not condemn them, because they do it in secret. For I
know that the holy Supper was never better Ministered, nor more holyly, then
when the disciples were withdrawn to do it in secret, because of the tyranny
of their enemies. But herein there are two intolerable faults: one is that
they which patch up such a Pageant of the Supper, faigne that they have their
mass there, and would that it should be so thought: the second, is, that their
goodly father of whom they receive it, gives it the^ not as a Christian
pastor, but in the condition of a popish priest. They think that they have
goodly bucklers and defenses, in saying, that the singer of their Mass has no
intention to make them worship the bread or the wine, that he omitteth the
Canon, wherein are the greatest impieties, and that he gives the sacrament to
all the company under both kinds. But when this shall come before the great
judge, they shall feel what they have gotten by such goodly glosing pretextes:
yea they ought already to feel the^, and I report me to the pricks and
stingings they have in their consciences: And this is the place where this
matter must be decided: For without making any longer enquiryes, they know
what they pretend to show, as well to the enemies of GOD, as to all the common
people. It must needs be that God deny himself, if he allow an act of such a
profession. When all the men of the world s^all have conspired together to
justify the^. yet shall not the hablest of them be ever so absolved, that he
shall not halt down right on both sides. Now God has declared by his prophet,
that no such halting shall ever be found good. Concerning the man whom they
take to be the minister of their Supper, it is a very mockery to go about to
make him capable of any such office, yea, but (say they) the woorthynesse of
the sacraments do not depend upon the worthynesse of the persons. I grant
it, and I say farther, that if a Devil should minister the Supper, it were not
the worse: and contrariwise, if an Angel should sing Mass, it were not a
point the better. But we are now in hand with another question: to wit,
whether the orders of the Pope given too a Munke or a Friar, make him fit to
execute the office of a Pastor. If they reply that they mean not that he
should do any thing therein, and that they choose him not in any such
condition: the thing shows the contrary. But let us put the case that
concerning them, they have no such regard, yet have I always to stand upon
the outward profession which they make. Now it is manifest that they cover
themselves under the vizard of a priest. For the dew celebratio^ of the Lords
supper, it were meet for them, to separate themselves from the rank of
Idolaters, because they have nothing herein common with them. In stead of
doing this they go as it were to be matriculated and incorporated amongst
them, and faigne themselves to be members of the same body. And heerevpon they
would make us to be like those ancient heretics who condemned the use of the
sacraments for the vices of men: as though we looked unto men's particular
vices, and not rather to their common state and condition. I pass over this
briefly, but as little as I have touched thereof is more then enough to convince
so villainous an impudency. Notwithstanding if they be so blockyshe, that they
will understand nothing thereof, the word of God ought to suffice us. As when
the Lord says by Jeremy, Iere. 4. 1.
O Israel if thou return, return unto me. The which words show in what
simplicity we ought to walk before God, without turnyng back again to any
thing not allowed of him. Acts. 14. 15
And this is the cause why saint Paul protests, that he was sent too
convert the unbelievers from their vanities to the living God: as if he
should have said, that it was nothing to make men to change an ill custom,
with other hypocrisies: but they must roundly abolish superstitions, to the
end that true religion may be established in her own purity and holiness:
For without this, men cannot come directly to God: but they stagger and reele,
not knowing which way to turn themselves. There are others who are come so
far to forsake the mass: but they would retain certain patches of that
which they call the service of God: to the end not to be accounted (as they
say) altogether for profane people. And it may be, that there are which go
that ways of a good affection: at the least I am content to believe so: but
whatsoever purpose they have, yet this may we not say, that they therefore keep
a straight rule, and a good mesure therein. Some will say, we can well go to their
baptismes: For therein there is no manifest Idolatry. As though the Sacrament
were not there defiled diverse ways, so that it should seem that Jesus Christ
were yet in Pilats house, to be boxed on the ear, and abused with all reproach
and villainy. To conclude, whereas they say, that it is to show that they are
a people not without religion, if they should be demanded upon their
consciences why they do it, they would answer that it were to please the
Papists, and to make a show to the end to shun persecution. Othersome spy out
their time not to come while mass is a saying: and yet they come to Church,
to the end men might think they were there. Others only for their part keep
themselves to euensong; but I would feign know of them, whether they think it
nothing to cense their Idolles, and that a solemn prayer be grounded upon
the intercession and merits of any Saint: when they sing Salueregine, a thing
so stuffed with execrable and diuilish blasphemies. I pass over that the
singing it self in an unknown tongue, is a manifest profanation of the holy
Scripture, and of the praises of God: as saint Paul does admonish in the 14.
of the first to the Corinthians. But admit, that this last fault be pardoned
them, if they come to even song to give some testimony of their Christianity,
this should especially be done at their great feasts They will make there a
solemn incensing of their chief Idols: which is a kind of Sacrifice as the
scripture shows: and likewise this was a common fashion that the Heathen had
too make those that were weak to renounce God. And this is the special
quarrel for which the greatest part of Martyrs have suffered death: to wit,
because they would not make perfumes and burn incense too Idolles. When these
men be come thus far that they receive in their noses the savor of the
Censours, they infecte them selves with the pollution which is there committed:
and they thought that this so great wickedness must be hid and covered. But
I pray these in the name of God, that they will mark well that which is said
here that the Idols ought to be in so great detestation to a faithful man,
that they should not be taken in his mouth for fear of defiling him. This
only word undoubtedly ought rather to pull us back from all that might
entangle us amiddest the pollutions of Idolaters.

But now to speak more freely of all those that would keep a mean betwixt
God and the Devil, they are double faced hypocrites: and I can find no better
comparison too painte them out lively in their colors, then that of Esau: For
when he saw that Isaac his father sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to take him a
wife, for as much as those of the Country of Canaan displeased both him and
Rebecca his wife, so far forth as they hated them deadly, to satisfy his
parents in part, he took him a new wife: but he forsook not her who^ he
had already. He kept the evil then whereof Isaac complained: but to botch up
the matter in some sort, he huddled up a new marriage. So, they who are so
wrapped in the world that they cannot follow that which GOD commands, they
make many medlayes, and hotchpotches of sundry sorts, that in some sort they
may conform themselves too Gods will: but they cease not for all that,
always too retain some corruption, so as all that they do, is neither pure
nor sincere. I know very well that there are many poor souls in great
perplexity, who without hypocrisy desire to walk the right way, and yet
notwithstanding they can not rid them selves from many doubts: whereat I do
not much wo^nder, considering the horrible confusion that is in the Papacy. In
very deed I much pity their case, who seek the means that they may to serve
GOD, keeping them selves if it were possible, amongst the enemies of the
faith. But what? I know not what else to do either to the one or to the other,
but to show them wherein they have faulted, to the end they may amend it.

If any will come and demand this or that particularly, I will send such
enquirers to that general rule of GOD which I hold. I speak this, because
there are some so importune, that a man shall never have done, if he would
answer all their doubts. Such people may rightly be compared to them who
after they have heard a Sermon, wherein they are exhorted without superfluity
and pomp soberly to hearken unto it, would rather have the preacher to make
their Hose and sewe their shoes. Well, what must we do then? we have in all
this a certain mark whereunto we must aim: that is, that the zeal of Gods
house do even eat up our heart, and so move us that we take upon our selves
all the dishonours and opprobries which are done unto us for his name.

When such zeal shall be well kindled in our hearts, and shall not be like
stubble set on fire, and quickly quenched, but shall burn continually
therewith: a man shall be so far of, from making show too approve the
abominations wherewith GOD is dishonored, that it shall be impossible for us
too hold our peace, and too dissemble when we see them.

And let us mark well that it is said: The zeal of Gods house: to the end
we should know that this is too be referred to the outward order which is in
the church, to the end we should exercise our selves in the confession of our
faith. I way not those mockers, who say that I can talk trimly of these
matters, living at mine own ease: for they have no great ado with me,
forasmuch as it is well known that I have no land here. And as much say I
of all these philosophers who give sentence thereof, without knowledge of the
cause. For seeing that they will not hearken unto God, who speaks unto them,
to teach them, I cite them too appear before his judgment seat, where they
shall hear their sentence, against which there shall be no more question of
reply. Seeing they will not now hear him as their master, they shall then
understand him too be their judge in spite of their teethe. The best able and
craftiest shall there find themselves ouerreached and deceived in their
account. Let the^ be as well exercised and trained as can be, to overthrow or
to darken the truth: yet their Miniuer hoodes and badges wherein they are wont
so proudly to vaunt them selves, and in highly esteeming them selves to deceive
them selves, shall not give them the victory. I speak this because my Lords
the Counselors, Judges, and Advocates not only enterprise too plead against
GOD too have a privilege to mock him: but in rejecting the holy Scripture
they spewe out their blaspemies, as Sovereign and vnreuocable determinations
and sentences. And such manner of Idolles will be so proud that when they
have once spoken a word, they cannot abide that reason or truth have any
place. But yet this I show them by the way that it were much better for them to
think what an horrible vengeance is prepared for all those that turn the
truth of God into a lie. Let not these chamber and carpet Doctors take here
any higher estate upon them then is fit for them. For this were to chatter
against our heavenly master, to whom it is meet that all we give audience.
These goodly titles avail nothing here too exempt any man from judgment:
except it be that the Lord Abbots, Pryors, Deanes, and Archdeacons be
constrained to lead the dance in this grievous condemnation that God shall
pronounce. Now although my Lords the Courtiers were wont too please men with
their holy Water, yet they shall not so please God. To conclude, let all these
trifling Spendthriftes Iesters and Praters hold their tongue, and not cast
forth their accustomed cauills, unless they will feel his mighty hand, at
whose word they ought too tremble. This is a foul error to make men
believe, that in taking me to be their adversary they shall not have God any
more to be their Judge. Let them then blot my name out of their papers in this
matter, I pretend therein nothing but that God may be heard and obayed, and
not to govern men's consciences according to my appetite, not to lay any
necessity or law upon them. Concerning others, that reject not Gods word in
such pride and outrage, and yet notwithstanding are so weak and sluggish, that
one cannot make them once to wag, I exhort them that they take better heed
unto themselves, not to flatter themselves, as they have done hitherto. But
that they open their eyes, and awaken, to see and to feel their wretchedne^
and misery. I know the difficulties and straight^ wherein they are, neither
do I speak unto them of serving GOD purely among Idolaters, as of an easy
matter: but if they want strength, let them fly unto GOD, too the end he
may fortify them, and they may learn to prefer his glory before all the
things in the world. I desire all the poor faithful ones that are in the
Papacy that they will mark this, as the Prophet Jeremy being in Jerusalem,
sent the same lesson too the people that were kept in captivity at Babylon.
If the tyrrannie of the Pope and of his be so hard and cruel, the Jews of
that time had their part thereof: And yet notwithstanding they were commanded
too detest and abhor the Idolatry of Chaldea, even in the very bosom of the
Country: For it is no reason that the tyrrannye of men should empayre or
diminish the due honor that we owe unto GOD. There is here no exception or
privilege, for great or small, rych or poor. Let all men therefore bow down
their necks, let the poor fear, least he saying for fear I know not what
to do, GOD aunsweare, neither know I what too make of thee. Let not the rich
be drunken with their ease, as it were lying upon their Bed? But rather let
them learn by the Apostle Saint Paul his example too accounte all but Dung
and loss, which may turn or hinder them from Christian life.

In the mean time, let not us forget for our part, that which I touched in
the beginning: that is, too apply this to our instruction, too be always
ready into what coast of the world so ever we shall be carried, or what thing
soever happen unto us, too continue steadfast in the sincere confession of our
faith, detestyng all superstitions, and Idolatries and abuses which are
contrary too the truth of GOD, darken his honor, and overthrow his service.

The second Sermon, containing an exhortation to suffer persecution too
follow Jesus Christ and his Gospel, upon that place which is in the
thriteenth Chapter too the Hebrews. Let us therefore g^^ (...) of (...) Christ
(...) his reproch^.
ALL the exhortatio^s that can be made unto us to suffer patiently for Christ
his name, and for the Gospels cause, shall have no place, if we be not well
assured of the cause for which we fight. For when the question is of forsaking
our life we must be well resolved and certain, wherefore it is. And such
constancy can not be in us, unless it be grounded in the certainty of
faith. It is true that certain will foolishly and rashly venture too die, too
uphold certain foolish opinions and dreams, that they have conceived in
their own brain. But such headiness deserves rather to be holden for
frenzy, then for Christian zeal. As also in very deed there is no
stayednesse not settled understanding in such people which so cast them selves
into peril with such headie rashness. Howsoever it be there is nothing but a
good cause, that makes god to auow us for his Martyrs: for death is common to
all. And the children of God shall be condemned withlike ignomie and torments as
Thieves are: But God makes a difference betwixt them, in so much as he can not
deny his own truth. Now it is requisite that on our part, we have a
certain and undoubted testimony of the doctrine, for which we suffer.
Therefore (as I have said) we cannot be moved nor earnestly touched by any
exhortations, which may be made unto us to suffer persecution for the Gospel,
if there be not a true certainty of faith imprinted in our hearts. For it is
not a natural thing too hazard our lives at adventure. And when we shall do
it, it shall be nothing but rashness, and not any Christian virtue. Finally, God
will allow nothing of all that we shall do, unless we be fully persuaded
that it is for him and for his quarrel that we are molested, and that the
world is enemy unto us. Now when I speak of such a certainty, I mean not
only that we must know to discern between true religion, and the abuses or
follyes of men: but also that we be well persuaded of everlasting life, and of
the crown which is promised unto us from above, after that we shall have
fought here beneth in this world. By the way let us note that these two
points are requisite, and ought not to be separated the one from the other. It
is meet for us therefore to begin at this point, thoroughly to know what our
Christianity is, what manner of faith it is, that we have to hold and to
follow, and what rule it is that God has given unto us: and that we be so
thoroughly armed with such insti^^^ (...) able, boldly to condemn, all the
fal^^^^^^es, error^ and superstitions, that Satan has brought in to corrupt
the pure simplicity of Gods doctrine. Wherefore a man ought not at this day
(...), if he see not many people which are disposed to suffer for the Gospel:
and that the most part of th^se which are named Christians know not what
christianity is. For all are, as it were ignorant, and they make no reckoning
too hear o^ to read but it (...) have some little taste of the Christian
faith. And this is the cause that there are very fe^^ settled, and if they be
assaulted they are found straightway to be scattered. This ought to stir
(...) to (...) diligently after (...) of God, to the (...) certain thereof. But
yet this is not al, that (...) thoroughly instr^^^ed and ^^^ght. For we may see
that those which (...) to be (as it were) altogether settled in good doctrine,
who^ (...) affection in them, (...) if they had never known any thing of GOD,
unless it be by some flying fantasy. And why is this, unless it be because
they never comprehended the majesty of the holy Scripture And in deed (...)
consider that it is go^ that had sp^ke^ (...) it is very certain that we
should be (...) att^^^^^ to hearken, and also do it with greater reverence.
When we should think that in reading the holy Scripture, we are in the
school of Angels: we should have another manner of care and desire, to exercise
our selves in that doctrine that is set forth unto us. We see now what manner
of mean it is, whereby we should prepare our selves to suffer for the Gospel
to wit, that we have profited thus far in the school of God, that we are
resolute concerning true religion, and concerning the doctrine that we ought to
hold, that we can despite all the subtilties and crafts of Satan, al men's
inuentio^s, as things not only frivolous, but also accursed, for as much as
they corrupt the christian purity, and that herein we differ as the true
Maryrs of Jesus Christ, from those frantic ones which suffer for their
foolish opinions. For the second, that being certain of a good cause, we be so
inflamed as it becomes us, to follow God thoroughly whither soever he calls
us: that his word have such authority with us as it deserves: and that being
withdrawn from this world, we be as it were rapt up and ravished to seek the
heavenly life. But this is a thing more then strange, that the light of god
shining at this day, as clearly as ever it did, that there is so small zeal as
it is pitiful to behold. If we be not confounded with shame, it is so much the
worse: For to be brief if we should come before that great judge: where the
evil that we have labored to cover, shall be brought to light, with such
rebukes and reproaches, we shall have wherewith to be altogether swalowed up. For
if, we be bound to bear witness to GOD according to the measure of knowledge
which he has given us from whence I pray you is it that we are so fearful and
so cold to enter into co^bat, seeing that he has in such sort manifested him
self in this time, that it may be said that he has opened and displaied the
great treasure of his secrets? Must it not heedes be said that we would not
have any thing too do with God? For if we had any regard of his majesty, we
durst never be so bold too turn the doctrine which proceeds from his mouth,
into a philosophy or I know not into what idle speculation, To be short there
is no excuse that we should not be greatly a^^^med, yea that we should not have
an horrible condemnation, having known so much of the truth of God, and
having so little courage to maintain it. Above al when we shall look unto the
Martyrs that have bin in times past, we shall find pass^ng great cause to
detest the villainy that is in us. For the greatest part were not so mightily
exercised in the holy scripture, to have through knowledge to dispute of al
things they knew that there was one God, who^ they ought to worship and to
serve. Also that they were redee^^^ by the blood of Jesus Christ, to the end
they might p^^ the confidence of their salvation in him and in his grace. And
f^^ther that all that which had ^in fo^^^ (...) was nothing but f^^th and (...)
whereby (...) condemn al Idolatry and superstitions. To (...) their divinity
was there is one God which has created all the world, and has declared unto us
his will by Moses, by the prophets, and ^^^^lly by Jesus Christ and his
apostles we have (...) who has bough^ us by his blood and through whose grace
we hope to be saved. All the Idolatries of the world are accursed and
execrable, having nothing but this they went stoutly and freely either to the
(...) or to some other kind of death. And this was not for (...) but in so
great troops that the number of those which went through the hands of tyrants,
was as it were infinite. We a^^ for our parts so great clerks as none can be
greater: (at the least we think for) and indeed concerning the understanding
of the holy scripture god has so liberally dealt with us as he has never done
with any age. Notwithstanding there is hardly found one drop of zeal. Now to
nourish such sloth there is no other way, unless we would willingly and
wittingly provoke the vengeance of God what then must we do too get a good
courage? We have to consider in the first place, that there ca^ be no more
precious a thing before God, the^ the confession of our faith: for we do little
know how god esteems it, when our life which is nothing, is more dear unto
us the^ it. And herein we show a marvelous beastlines. For we cannot spare our
life in this point, but we must confess that it is more esteemed of us then
the honor of God and the salvation of our souls. A certain Heathen, had the
knowledge to say, that it was a miserable thing, to forsake and betray the
cause why we live, for the conservation of our life: notwithstanding he and
such like never knew truly, to what end men were placed in this world, and
wherefore they lived therein. It is true that they k^^we well, that a man ought
to follow virtue, that he ought to maintain him self honestly and without
blame: but all their virtues were nothing else but colloures and shadows. We
know much better, whereto our life ought too be applied to wit, that we
glorify God, to the end that he may be our glory, without this woe upon us,
and we cannot prolong our life upon the earth one minute, but that we shall
always heap upon our heads, so much the more malediction. Notwithstanding
we are nothing ashamed, for the redeeming of a few days for this feeble life
to renounce that everlasting kingdom, and to separate our selves from him,
through whose power we are maintained in this life. If a man ask the veriest
idiots, yea the most brutishe people of the world, wherefore it is that they
live, they dare not simply say, that it is too eat, too drink, and to sleep.
For all men know that they are created to a more noble and excellent end. And
what other end shall we find out, unless it be to honor God, and to suffer
our selves to be governed by him, as children of a good father: to the end
that after we shall have finished the voyage of this coruptible life, we may
be received into his everlasting inheritance: And this is the most
principal thing, yea and all in all. When we make no account thereof, and that
we are so ill inclyned to a beastly life, which is worse then a thousand
deaths, what can we allege for our excuse? To live and not to know wherefore
this is even against nature. To reject the causes wherefore we live, for the
desire of prolonging our life, as it were for three days, too the end to live
in this deceitful world, and being separate from God, is such a bewitching
and madness, as I know not by what name to call it. But because that
persecutions cease not to be hard and bitter unto us, let us mark how and by
what means, christians may strengthen them selves to patience, even to the
laying down of their lives for Gods truth. The text which we have recyted,
when it shall be well understood, is sufficient enough for to lead us
hereunto. Heb. 13.13.
Let us go forth (says the Apostle) of the City, after our Lord Jesus
Christ, bearing his reproach. First of al he exhorts us, although that the
swoordes were not drawn against us, nor fyers kindled for to broile and burn
us, that yet we cannot be truly joined and knit to the son of God, so long
as we are rooted in this world. Wherefore a Christian although he be in quiet,
yet he must have one foot always lifted up, to match toward the battle:
and not only this, but he must have his affection withdrawn from the world,
although that his body dwell therein. Admit that this at the first fight seem
unto us very blunt, yet ought we well to content our selves with this word of
S. Paul: that is, That we are called and appointed to suffer persecution. 1.
These. 3.3.
As if he should say: that such is the condition of our Christianity: that we
must needs enter in and pass through this path, if we will follow Jesus
Christ. In the mean time, too ease our infirmity, too sweeten and mitigate
the trouble and heaviness that persecutions may bring unto us, we have this
great and sweet comfort, and that is, that in suffering for the Gospel, we
follow as it were step by step the son of God, and we have him for our
guide. If it had been simply said unto us, that to be Christians we have to
march through all the opprobryes of the world, to come freely to death as
often as it should please God, we should have had some coullor as it should
seem to replye, that this were a very strange thing and far from our nature,
to wander so without a guide. But seeing we are commanded to follow our Lord
Jesus, his leading is more right and honorable, then for us to refuse it. But
to the end that we may be better touched, it is not only said that Jesus
Christ goes before us as our Captain: but that we are conformed to his image:
as S. Paul has spoken in the 8. to the Romans, Romans 8.^9.
that God has ordained al those whom he has adopted to be his Children, that
they should be made conformable to him who is the head and pattern of all. Are
we so nice and dayntie that we will endure nothing? then must we renounce the
grace of God, whereby he has called us to the hope of salvation. For these are
two things, that can not be sundred, too be a member of Jesus Christ, and to be
exercised with many afflictions. Surely we ought a great deal more to esteem
such a conformity with the son of God the^ we do. It is true that in the
world, to suffer for the Gospel is a thing condemned: but seeing that we know
that Infidels are blind, ought not we to have clerer and better eyes the^
they? It is ashame to be afflicted of the^ which occupye the place of justice:
but S. Paul shows us by his example that we have greatly to rejoice our selves
in the wounds of Jesus christ, as it were in certain imprinted marks, by which
God acknowledges us, and auoweth us for his. And we know what S. Luke
reherseth of S. Peter and John: Act. 5.42.
to wit, that they rejoiced, that they were accounted worthy too suffer infamy
and reproach for the name of our Lord Jesus. Lo two things quite contrary,
ignomy and dignity: yea inasmuch as the world being mad and outrageous,
judges contrary to all reason: and by this means turns the glory of God
into dishonor. But for our part let us not refuse, concerning the world to be
defased and basely esteemed, that we may hereafter be honored before god and his
angels. We see what pain ambitious men take to obtain the order of some king,
and what triu^phes they make thereof. The son of god prese^teth his order unto
us, and every one despises it. I pray you in doing this are we worthy to have
any thing common with him? Our voluptuousness is here bitten and can perceive
nothing: for these are the true arms of heavenly nobility. Prisons,
banishme^ts cursed spekings, import nothing but altogether shame and reproach in
the fa^tasie of men: but what shall let us to look up unto that which God has
judged and pronounced thereof, unless it be our own infidelity? Wherefore let
the name of the son of god have such credit among us as it deserves, to the
end that we may learn to take it for a singular honor, that he sets his
marks upon us otherwise our unthankfulness is intolerable. If God handle us
according too our deserts, has he not just cause, too chastise us daily a
thousand kind of ways: yea which is more, a hundred thousand deaths, were
not sufficient for some little portion of our misdeedes. But by his infinite
goodness he puts all our faults under his feet and abolisheth them: and
whereas he might punish us as we have deserved, he finds a wonderful mean,
to cause our afflictions to be turned too our honor, and a special privilege:
forasmuch as through them, we are associated and knit into the fellowship of his
son. And must we not say that when we disdain such a blessed condition that
we have il profited in the Christian doctrine? 1. Pet. 4.15.
And this is the reason why S. Peter, after that he has exhorted us, to walk
holily in the fear of god, that we suffer not as thieves, Whoremaisters and
Murderers, he adds by and by, that if we suffer as Christians, therein we
glorify god with that benefit which he has bestowed upon us. It is not
without cause that he has spoken so. For who are we I pray you, that we
should be witnesses of the truth of GOD and procurers of the maintenance of
his cause? Lo we be poor worms of the earth, creatures full of vanities and
lies: and yet God will that his truth be defended by us: which is truly so
great honor that it apperteineth not, no not too the angels of Paradise.
Ought not this consideration alone sufficiently inflame us to offer up our
selves unto god, seeing that it pleases him to employ us to so honorable a
thing? Notwithstanding many cannot withold them selves from reasoning against
GOD: or at the least from making their complayntes for that GOD does not
better supporte their weakness. It is a merueilous matter (say they) seeing
that GOD has chosen us for his children, how he can suffer that we should
be so trodden underfoot and tormented of the wicked. I answer, although that
it appear not unto us wherefore he does it, yet that he ought by good right to
have this authority over us to bring us in to order according to his pleasure.
But when we see that Jesus Christ is our pattern, ought we not too esteem
it a great blessing to be made like unto him, without any further inquiry?
Notwithstanding god shows us most evident causes why he will have us to be
persecuted. When there shall be no other thing but this admonition which S. Peter
makes, 1. Pet. 1.7.
we are disdainful and sturdy enough, if we do not rest our selves upon
it, that is, that forasmuch as gold and silver which are but corruptible
me^alles, are pu^ged and tried by the fire, it is good reason that our faith,
which excels all the riches of the world, Psalm. 110.
should be proved. God could very well crown us at the first dashe, without
making us too endure any combats: but as he would that Jesus Christ should
reign in the midst of his enemies until the end of the world: so likewise he
would that we being mingled amongst them, we should suffer their wrongs and
oppressio^s until that he should deliver us from them. I know very well that
the flesh will spurn when it must be brought to this point, but yet must
the will of god have the maisterie. If we feel any contradiction in us, we must
not wonder at it. For this is very natural, too fly the cross:
Notwithstanding let us not cease to go forward knowing that god accepts our
obedience, so that we bring under and subdue all our senses and desires, to the
end to make them subject unto him: for the Prophets and the Apostles went not
so readily to death, but that they felt in them selves some desire of falling
back. John. 21.18.
Thou shall be led thither (says our Savior Jesus Christ unto Peter) whyther
thou would not. So when such fears of death shall prick us: let us labor
to have the upper hand, or rather let God overcome for us: and not withstanding
let us hold our selves assured, that this is an acceptable sacrifice unto him,
that we resist and fight against our affections, to the end we may be wholly at
his commandment. And this is the principal war, wherein God will have those
that are his to employ them selves: that is, that they enforce themselves, to
bring down all that which exalts it self in their minds and understandings,
too turn them away from the path that is showed, unto them. In the mean time
the consolations are so ample, that we may well say that we are more then
slothful, when we fail and wax faint hearted. In old time a great number
of people, for the desire of a silly Garland of leaves, refused no travail, no
pain nor trouble: yea they made no accounte to die: Notwithstanding there was
not any one of them, which fought not at adventure, being uncertain whether
he should win or loose the prise. God has set forth unto us an immortal
crown, through which we are made partakers of his glory. He means not that
we should fight at adventure: but he promises unto us all, such a reward as
we ought specially too desire. What occasion then have we, to seek any
farther: do we think that it is said in vain that if we die with Jesus Christ
we shall also live with him? The triumph is altogether like, ^ Tim. 2.
and we shun to fight as much as lies in us. This in the judgment of man is a
doctrine quite contrary. I confess it: and also when Jesus Christ pronou^ceth,
Mat. 5.10.
that they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake are blessed, he
propou^deth a sentence which is not easily received, in the world.
Contrariwise, he would that we should esteem that to be our chiefest happiness,
which our understanding would judge to be our greatest misery. It seems unto
us that we are miserable, when God leaves us to be troaden down by the
Tyranny and cruelty of our enemies: but the want is that we look not unto the
promises of GOD, the which certify us that all shall turn to our good. We are
thrown down, seeing the wicked stronger then we, and to set their feet upon
our throat: but such a confusion as S. Paul says, ought rather to lift us
upon high. Forasmuch as we are to to much given, too imbusie our selves, with
the present things of the world, God in suffering that the good are evil
entreated, and that the wicked have their sway, shows us by evident signs,
that a day shall come, wherein all that is now confused shall be reformed. If the
time seem long unto us, let us run to the remedy, and not flatter our selves
in our vice: for it is certain, that we have no faith at all, unless we lift
up the eyes of our souls to the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ. Now God
to the end he might leave no mean unattempted, which might be fyt to drive us
forward, he sets before us the promises on the one side, and his
threatninges on the other. Do we think that the promyses have not power
enough in us? let us join the threatenings for too strengthen them. It is very
true that we must be so much the more perverse and froward, not too adioyne
more faith then we do too the promyses of GOD, when the Lord Jesus says,
that he will auowe and acknowledge us before his father, Mat. 10.32.
so that we confess him before men. And what is there that ought to let us,
that we should not yield him that confession that he requires. Luke. 12.8.
When men shall have done their uttermost, they can do no worse but murder
us. And what shall eternal life be in comparison thereof? I heap not not up
here all the promises contained in the Scriptures, which tend to one and the
same end: yet (forasmuch as they are so often times repeated) we ought wholly
to stay upon them. But if when the plague hang over our heads, if three or
four be not enough, one whole hundred will not serve to make us to overcome all
adversity and contrary temptations. But if God can not draw us unto him self
through gentleness, must we not be more then beetle blockish heads, when
his severe threatninges can do no more therein? Luke. 9:26.
Jesus Christ cites all those before his father, who shall through fear of
bodyly death deny the truth: and says that both the body and soul, Mat. 10.3.
shall be thrown too perdition. And in an other place he says, that he will
deny all those that shall deny him before men, unless that we be too much
bereaved of all understanding, these words ought to make our hear to stand
upright upon our heads, Howsoever it be, when we shall not be moved
therewith as were meet, there remains nothing for us but an horrible
confusion: For in tha, tthat all the words of Jesus Christ do so little
profit us, we are convinced of too to great infidelity. We shall have
alleged too godly purpose that there is some pity in us, forasmuch as our
nature is so brittle: Heb. 11.25.
For it is said contrariwise that Moises lookyng unto GOD through faith, was
strengthened not to bow under any tentation. Wherefore when we are so soft and
flexible, yea, that there is no zeal and constancy in us, it is a sign that
we are utterly ignorant both of God and his kingdom. When it is showed us
that we ought to be joined to our head, we think that we have a goodly
color to exempte our selves from it, by saying that we are men. But they
which have gone before us, who were they? It is true, that when we shall not
have the pure doctrine, all the excuses that we can bring forth shall be vain:
but having so many examples which ought too serve for the greater approbation,
so much the more are we to be condemned. But here we have two points to be
considered. The first is, that all the body of the Church generally, was and
shall be always subject till the end, to be afflicted by the wicked: as it is
said in the Psalm. Psalm. 12^.1.2.
They have vexed me from my youth up, they have drawn the Plo^e upon me from
one end to another. The holy Ghost brings in the old Church speaking, to
the end that we, after we have known the afflictions thereof, we should not
find it strange or troublesome if the like at this day be done unto us. Saint
Paul also drawing this place from an other Psalm where it is said, We have
been as sheep that are led to the slaughter, Romans 8.36.
shows that this was not for one age alone: Psa. 44. 23
but that it is and shall be ordinary and usual in the Church. So seeing the
Church of God to beat this day troaden under, by the pride of worldelings, that
one barketh, another byteth, that men torment it, and always mischieuously
devise against it, that without ceasing it is assailed of mad Dogs and
savage beasts: let us remember that this was done unto it of old time. It is
true that God may well give it sometimes certain truses and releasements. And
this is it that is said in the Psalm before alleged, he cutteth asunder
the cords of the wicked. And in an other place, that he will break their
stuff, for fear that the good do not overmuch vex them selves, being too
much oppressed. But God would always that his Church should be tossed in
this world, and be as it were in a continual conflicte, reseruyng rest for it
above in the heavens. Notwithstanding that yet the issue of these aflictions
was always blessed, and at the least GOD brought to pass, that being
oppressed with many euyls, it was never utterly oppressed, as it is said that
the wicked with all their forces never attained to that, Psalm. 7.15.
which they immagined: Saint Paul also reioyseth him self of the like too
show, that this is a continual grace of God: 2. Cor. 4.12.
We (says he) endure tribulations, but we are not there with distressed, we
are poor but we are not destitute: we are persecuted but we are not forsaken:
we are cast down but we peryshe not, every where bearyng about in our bodies
the dying of our Lord Jesus, too the end that his life may be made manifest
in our mortal bodies. Such issue as we see that God has given in all times
in the persecutions of his Church, ought well too encourage us, knowing that
our Fathers, who were brickle men as we are, had always the victory over
their enemies: in as much as they remained steadfast in patience. But I do but
touch this point briefly, to the end I may come to the second, the which more
agrees to our purpose: that it is to make our profit of those particular
examples of the Martyrs, which have gone before us.

Now there are not only two or three of the^, (...) a thick and great
cloud, Heb. 12.1.
as the Apostle says in the Epistle to the Heb. Whereby he signifies th^^ the
number is so great, that it ought as it were even (...) ^p our eyes. And that I
be not too tedious, I (...) only the example of the Jews, which were
persecuted for true Religion, as well under the tyranny of Antiochus the King,
as also a little after his death. We cannot allege that it was a small number
of people: for there were then as it were a great army of Martyrs. W^^ cannot
say that it was of Prophets, whom God had separated from the common people for
the women and young infants were of this company. We cannot say that they were
let go for any prise: for they were tormented as cruelly as was possible. We
hear also that which the Apostle shows us thereof. Heb. 11.35.
Some (says he) were hanged up like belles and ^^ked making no account to be
delivered, to the end^ they might receive a better resurrecti^^ Others were
tried by ^^^kings and scou^ging^ y^^ by ban^^^ and prisonment others were (...)
or (...) ^sunder: other wandered up and down hither and thither, in
wildernesses by (...) and Caves. Let us now enter to make comparison of them
with us. If they suffered for the truth of God, which was yet so dark at that
time, what ought we to do in this great light that shines now? God has
spoken unto us as it were with full mouth: the great Gate of the kingdom of
Heaven is opened, Jesus Christ has called us unto him, being come down unto
us, to the end that we should have him, as it were present before our eyes.
And what a shame shall it be unto us too have less zeal to suffer for the
Gospel, then they had which only saluted and beheld the promises of GOD, as
it were a far off? Which had but a little Wicket open to come to the kingdom
of heaven? which had nothing but a certain remembrance and figure of Jesus
Christ? These t^ cannot be expressed with mouth as they are woo^^e: wherefore
I leave them to every one to meditate upon.

Now this doctrine as it is general, so ought it to be put in practice of
all Christians: But every one ought to apply it to his own use as necessity
shall require. I speak this to the end that they which see the^ selves in no
apparent danger, should not think that it is superfluous unto them. They are
not at this time in the hands of Tyrants: but what know they how God will
deal with them heareafter? Wherefore we ought to be so armed before hand, that
if any persecution, which we have not thought upon shall come upon us, we be not
taken at unawares and unprovided. But I fear me that there are a great sort of
deaf ears to hear this word. So far of is it that they which are nice and
live at their ease, prepare themselves to suffer death when need shall be, that
they have no care too serve God whiles they live. And yet nevertheless this
ought to be our ordinary and continual study, and specially in this time
wherein we live. In the mean time they whom God has called to suffer for
the testimony of his name, ought too show in very deed that they were
prepared long before, too stand thereto constantly. And then they ought to call
into their remembrance all the exhortations that they have heard in times
paste: as if a soldier should take arms when the Trumpet does sound. But
what? there is no question of seeking starting holes to escape: I speak in
respect of the greatest part: For persecution is a true touchstone whereby god
discovers and tries who are his. So far of is it, that he should many
times find who is faithful unto him, until that they franckely offer them
selves to death. But this is as it were an incredible thing, that people which
boast of some little knowledge of the Gospel, dare open their mouth to use
such cauilations: For one sort say, what shall we gain to confess our faith
to obstinate people, and to such who have determined to fight against God? Is
not this to cast precious stones before swine. Mat. 8.38.
As though Jesus Christ had not expressly declared that he will that men confess
him amongst the most perverse and wickedest men. If they be not thereby edified,
yet at the least they remain confounded: of such a sweet smelling favor is
that confession before God, how deadly soever it be too the reprobate. Others
also may be found who say, what shall our death profit? It rather falls
out to an offense. As if God had left too their choice too die when they
think good, and when they shall see a fit time. But contrariwise we approve
our obedience leaving the profit into his hand that shall come of our death.
Wherefore in the first place, it behooves that a christian man, in what
Country soever he be, notwithstanding dangers and threatninges, that he fully
determine to walk in simplicity, as God has commanded. Let him keep
himself as much as he can from the rage of the woolues: so that the same be
not done through the craft of the flesh. Above all let him resign his life
into Gods hands. Has he done this? If it fall out that he fall into the
hands of enemies, let him think that God has brought him into that place, and
will have him to be one of the witnesses of his son, and therefore that there
is no way to draw back, unless it be in denying our faith to him, to whom we
have promised al duty: both to live and to die, and to who^ we are and
belong, although we had promised nothing unto him. Hereby I do not bind all men
of necessiitie to make a full and entire confesslinn of all that they believe,
admit that they were thereto required, Saint Paul in this point has used a
good moderation, who was as ready as any other freely too maynteine the cause
of the Gospel, as he ought. And also it was not without cause that our Lord
Jesus promised that in such a case he will give us a mouth and wisdom: as if
he should say, that the office of the holy Ghost is not only to strengthen us
to be bold and valiant: but also to give unto us wisdom and discretion, to
know how it becomes us to rule and govern our selves in so great and hard a
matter. The sum is that they which are in such distress, should ask and
receive such wisdom from above, not following their carnal counsel to seek a
way to escape, (as they say) by any cross or by paths. There are also which
replye that our Savior Jesus Christ himself, answered not to them that asked
of him. But I say first of al, that this serves not to abolish the rule which
he has given us, to make confession of our faith, when we are thereto
required. Secondly I say, that he never dissembled too save his life. Thirdly
that he never gave answer so doubtful, that it did not import sufficient
witness of that which he had spoken: or rather, that he had not satified them
already which came to ask him further, as it were laying nets to catch him.
Wherefore let this point remain resolute amongst al christians: that is, that
they ought not to account their lives more dear then the testimony of the
truth, inasmuch as God will be glorified in it. Is it in vain that he calls
all those witnesses (for the word Martyrs signifies the same) that have
answered to the enemies of the faith? Is it not because he would have them
serve too such purpose? And here every one must not look to his fellow and
companion: For God does not show this honor to all to call them thereto. And
forasmuch as we are given to mark others, the more we ought to take heed
thereof. John. 21.18.
Peter having heard at the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he should be
led in his old age whether he would not, asks what should become of John his
companion. There is none of us but he would willingly make such a reply. For
this we imagine by and by: Why do I rather suffer then others? But contrariwise
Jesus Christ exhorts all in general, and every one in particular, always to
be ready, to the end that as he shall call either one or other, every man may
march forth in his rank and order. I have showed before that we shall be ill
appointed to suffer Martyrdom, unless that we be armed with Gods promises. It
remains now that we lay out a little more fully whereto they tend, not to
specify al by peecemeale and exactly: but to show the principal things, that
god would have us to hope for, to the end to comfort us in our afflictions. Now
these are briefly 3. things. The first is, that forasmuchas our life and death
are in his hand, that he will in such sort preserve us by his power, that not
one hear of our heads shall fall but by his license.

Wherefore the faithful ought to hold themselves assured into whose hands
soever they shall come, that GOD has not cast of the sauegard which he has
of their persons. If such a persuasion were well imprinted in our hearts, we
should be delivered from the most part of doubts and perplexities that
torment and hinder us from doing our duty. We see that Tyrants are let
loose: and hereuppon it seems to us that God has no further mean too save
us: For this cause we are tempted to provide for our selves, as though there
were no more waiting upon him. But contrariwise his providence which he has
declared unto us is such, as ought to be unto us an invincible fortress. Let
us therefore labor to learn this short sentence, that our bodies are in his
hands who has created them. For this cause he has sometimes delivered his
own after a miraculous manner, and beyond all hope of men, as Sidrach, Misach
and Abednago, from the fyery furnace, Daniel from the Lions den, Peter from
Herodes prison where he was enchained fettered, and kept so straightly. By
these examples he would testify unto us, that he holds our enemies
bridled, though it seem not so: and has power to draw us out, even from the
mouth and midst of death when he will. Not because he always does it: But by
keeping unto himself the authority of disposing of us both in life and death,
he would have us fully resolved that he has us in his keeping: in such sort
that whether soever Tyrants look, or with what fury soever they rushe upon
us, that it is from him only who is the orderer of our life. If he suffer
Tyrants to kill us, it is not because our lives are not dear unto him, and in
greater recommendation an hundred fold then it is worthy, seeing it is so,
that he has pronounced by the mouth of David, Psalm. 116.15. Esaias. 26.21.
That the death of his Saints is precious before him, and says also by the
mouth Esaias: That the earth shall disclose the blood which seemed to be hidden.
Let the enemies therefore of the gospel be as prodigal in shedding the blood of
his Martyrs, as they will, yet shall they render a terrible accounte even too
the last and uttermost drop. They do scornfully mock at this day when they
burn the faithful and after they have bathed themselves in their blood, they
are so drunken therewith, that they care nothing at all what murders they
commit. But if we have patience too wait, God will show in the end that it
is not in vain that he has set such an high prise upon our life. In the mean
time if he does us no evil, that it serves to ratify his Gospel, which in
worthiness surmounteth heaven and earth. And the better to assure us that God
leaves us not in the hands of Tyrants, as having forsaken us, let us call
too mind the sentence of Jesus Christ, where he says, Act. 9.4.
that it is he whom they persecute in his members.

God had well said before by Zachary: Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you touches the apple of mine eye. But this is yet more
plain, that if we suffer for the Gospel, it is as if the son of GOD were
there in his own person. Wherefore let us know that Jesus Christ must forget
him self, if he should not think of us when we are in prison, or in
danger of death for his cause: And let us know that God takes to his own
heart all the outrages that Tyrauntes do unto us, as if they were fastened to
his own son.

Let us come too the second point that GOD in his promises has set forth
unto us for our consolation: that is, that he will so sustain us by the power
of his holy Spirit, that our enemies whatsoever they do, or Satan their head,
yet shall they not get the upper hand over us. And in deed we see how he
displayeth his graces in such a need. For such invincible constancy as is
in the true martyrs, is a sufficient show that GOD works mightily in them.
There are two grievous things to the flesh in persecutions: too wit, the one
the rebukes and shame of men, and the other the torments that the body
endures. But GOD promises us, such assistaunce that through patience we shall
overcome both the one and the other. And he perfourmeth indeed that which he
has promised unto us. Let us therefore take this buckler, too repulse and put
back all fears, wherewith we are assailed, and let us not restrain the
power of Gods spirit too so narrow a scantling, that we think not, but that
he will easily ouercom al men's cruelties. And hereof amongst others we had an
notable example in our time not too be forgotten.

This is called also Dornick.
A certain young man who dwelt here with us being taken in the City of Tournay
was condemned to be but beheaded if he recanted: and too be burned alive, if
he continued in his opinion. When he was asked what he would do, he answered
simply: He that shall give me grace too dye patiently for his name, he will
give me grace to endure the fire. We ought too esteem this sentence not as
the sentence of a mortal man: but as a sentence of the holy Ghost, to the end
too assure our selves that GOD is as able to strengthen us, and too make us too
overcome all torments as too move us too take any other kind of meeker death
in good part. Which is more, we see often times, what constancy he gives to
poor malefactors who suffer for their offenses. I speak not of the
obstinate: but of those which comfort themselves in the grace of Jesus Christ,
and by this mean receive with peaceable heart the most grievous punishment
that can de done unto them: As we may see a notable example thereof in the
Thief who was conuered at the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. GOD who so
mightily assisteth poor offenders, being worthily punished for their
misdeedes, will he fail his who fight for his cause, that he will not give them
an invincible power? The third point concerning the promises that GOD has made
to his Martyrs, is of the fruit that they ought too hope for of their
sufferinges: and in the end if need be of death it self. Now this fruit is
after that he has glorified his name, and edified his Church through their
constancy, when they shall be gathered with the Lord Jesus Christ into his
immortal glory. But because that we have spoken more fully of it before, it is
enough now too bring it in our remembrance. Wherefore let the faithful learn
too lift up their heads on high too this crown of immortality and glory,
whereunto God does call them: to the end that he do them no hurt in making them
to forsake their present life for such a reward: and to be assured of this
inestimable benefit, let them always have before their eyes this conformity
which they have with our Lord Jesus, too behold life in the midst of death,
as he by the opprobrye and shame of the cross, came too that glorious
resurrection in which consists al our felicity joy and triumph.

The third Sermon showing how the Faithful ought too esteem the being in the
Church of GOD, where they have free liberty purely to woorship God, gathered
upon the theme of the 27. Psalm. I have required one thing of the Lord, Ver.
4.
and that I will require: it is, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life, too the end I may he hold the beauty of the Lord and may
visit his holy Temple.
I is wonderful what a diversity a man shall find in men's desires: and yet
notwithstanding there is one thing wherein all agree and iumpe together, and
that is to be occupied here beneth in the world. Every man may well have his
mark and mean by himself: but this vanity reigns over all, not to seek
their good, and felicity any where else but in this corruptible life. The
which shows that men are wonderful brutish: For we are created too an end
altogether contrary and that is that having our conversation in this world
we should aspyre to that heavenly kingdom of GOD. And this is the cause, why
this present life is called a pilgrimage or away. Wherefore whosoever will not
deprive him self wittingly and willingly of the everlasting inheritance of
the kingdom of God, he must begin at this point too cut of all foolyshe
desires and light thoughts, whereby he may be occupied and witholden in this
world: so as his principal desire be to draw near unto God, and that nothing
at the least hinder us from making haste thither. I say at the least, forasmuch
as it were very requisite that all our earthly affections which do nothing but
cause us to draw back from God, were fully rooted out of our hearts, to the
end we may run through swiftly in this voyage we have too perform. But
because we are so far of from having a mind that is pure and void from all
affections, it remains in the second place, that we overcome all the lettes
that may hinder us, and follow our course howsoever it be: so as in the
midst of our infirmities, we do nevertheless prefer the heavenly life
before all that is in this world. It remains now, that we see by what means
we may attain theereto.

Now this is not in us to devise, but we must take these which God has
ordained: of which the most principal are named hereby David: to wit, the
order and policy, that God has established in his Church that we be taught
by his word, that we woorship him all with one accord, and call upon him,
and have the use of the Sacraments to aid us hereunto. And thus must we be
exercised, too the end we way be better and better confirmed in the faith, in
the fear of God, in holiness, in the contempt of this world and in the love
of the heavenly life. And to this purpose and none other, tends this that
David protests, that he has a desire above all to dwell in the temple of God.
For under this word of the Temple he comprehends the liberty of having
freedom purely to worship God with the faithful, to make confession of his
faith, to pray and to be a partaker in the sacraments. For God for this time
had chosen a certain place, in which he would that men should sacrifice
unto him, should do him homage, protesting that they accounted him for their
alone God, were instructed in his law, and had the testimonies of his
presence. And indeed he sufficiently expresses what regard he had, in
desiring to dwell in the Temple, when he adds, that he was in the beauty of
God. Wherein he shows that the Temple of it self was nothing: but that he
rested him self in the use whereto it was consecrated and appointed. If we
think that he was occupied with a material building of wood and stone we
should do him great injury and wrong: For this were to charge him with
superstition, and not too attribute it to his virtue. We ought therefore to be
resolved, that he sets forth how honorably he esteemed the outward
order and regiment whereby the faithful are governed in the Church. To be
short he signifies that this is an inestimable benefit, and a espeiall
privilege to be in the Church of God, to be a partaker of those means, that
that good father has given to his children thereby too draw them to him. Let
us mark well who it is that speaks. It is not a poor Idiote without
knowledge and experience: but a Prophet, as excellent and as greatly
enlightened by the holy Ghost as ever was any. He speaks not of a thing
profitable and good in the populare opinion: but he protests for his own
part, that he desired nothing more then that he might be found in the
assembly of the people of GOD, too the end that declaring his faith he might
always be more edified therein, through the doctrine of salvation which is
there preached, and through the sacraments: neither only in this place makes
he this protestation, but in many other places, as in the Psalm before going,
when he says, Psalm. 26.8.
O Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house and the place where thy
glory has his dwelling. Also in the 42. ps. As the Heart br^^^^ he refreshed
with the rivers of Water, so pa^teth my soul after thee O Lord: My soul
burns with thyrst in seeking after God: Psalm. 42. 1.2
When shall it be that I shall come and appear before the face of the li^yng
God? It had been enough to have spoken this: but his vehemente affection
carries him higher: for he adds immediately that tears were his (...) d^^yng
the time that he was deprived from coming too the Temple. Yea he says yet
further that his heart was powered out like water, when he remembered the time
wherein he went to the Temple praising GOD with the multitude of the faithful.
Afterward having mourned his fill and powered forth his complaints and
griefs, he finds no better consolation, then in the hope that he had
conceived that God would restore that benefit again which he had lost. My
soul (says he) why art thou vexed and unquiet within me? Psalm. 84.12.
yet shall I find again the presence of the Lord As also in the 43. Psalm he
repeateth again the same matter. And especially in the 84. Psalm, he
declares how he was affected toward it. For after that he has cried out,
O God of hosts how amiable are thy tabernacles! he says that his heart and
his body d^e leap for the fervent desire that he has to enter into the
countes of the Lord. And he sets down the reason, that they which dwell in
the house of God are blessed because they praise him that is to say, they
acknowledge his graces with one accord, and they rejoice in him, making
confession of their faith. Seeing the^ that david who was so much adua^ced in all holiness, yea and was as an angel of heaven dwelling in the world
acknowledged that he had so great need to be aided and stirred up by the
means that god had given to his people. I pray you what is too be supposed of
us, who are so rude and earthly, whose faith is so weak, and whose religion is
so cold and barraine? We must needs conclude, albeit that David for the
perfection that was in him might well have let slip such base helps, yet they
are more then necessary for us: considering the infirmity that is in us. But
what? They who are the perfectest know much better what they lack them selves,
then those which have no perfection at all. What is David so endued and adorned
with angelical virtues? Why, this is to make him better too understand, how
meet it was for him to be more enflamed by the preaching of the law, by the
Sacraments, and other like exercises. Contrariwise these glorious villains
that at this day make no reckoning of all these things, show evidently
thereby, that they have not so much as a drop of of Christianity in them: I
speak of our corner creeping and caskate Philosophers, that live in Papistrie.
O it is a goodly matter (say they) and much to the purpose, that a man cannot
be a Christian unless he not to Geneua, to have his ears filled with Sermons,
and to use such Ceremonies as are observed in that City. Can not we our
selves alone both read and pray? Must men yet go to Church to be taught,
seeing that every one has the Scripture in his house? I answer hereto, that
we bind no man to depart from that place where he dwells: yea when a man
lives purely and serves God as he ought amiddest the Popes tyrranny we
esteem an hundred times better of him, then of our selves who are in liberty
and rest. But the question is here of two poinctes, to wit, whether they that
feeling their own infirmity, and coming to seek in a Christian Church,
such a confirmation as David did at that time when the Temple was at Jerusalem,
do not well: Also whether all generally, and especially those that are
witholden by force ought not too sigh, seeing them selves destitute of the
ordinary means, which were to bring them to GOD? The very beasts who have no
understanding nor reason, they will bray after their pasture, and those who are
called the children of God, shall not they care for that which serves to
nourysh and maintain their faith? And yet they are not contended thus proudly
too tread under foot the most precious graces of God, but they also scorn
them which fly into strange countries to seek them, and to rejoice in them.
As touching their haughtiness, whereby they bear themselves in hand, that
Sermons, Common prayers, and the Sacraments are things superfluous and vain,
there need no other testimony to excommunicate, and banish them out of the
Church of God. And that it is even so, Saint Paul, says not that the order
which God has set in his Church, is only for the rude and ignorant: but he
makes it Common for all, exempting none. He has ordained (says he)
Apostles, Fa^^^^^, and Doctour^, Ephe. 4.11.
for the establishing of the Sain^^^, for the building up of the body of
Christ, until we (...) of f^^th, a^^ a perfect m^n, into the measure of a
^^^fecte age in Christ. Let us mark well that he says not that God has
left the Scripture to the end that every one should read it alone: But he
has instituted a policy wherein certain are appointed to teach and under
this he comprehends all other things which does, as it were depend
thereupon. Wherefore though every one may read it privately, this leueth not
but that they should hear it also publicly. And to who^ directs ^e but
that they should hear it publicly. And to whom directs he himself? to great
and small indifferently. And does he say that this is for one day? No surely he
commands that this course be kept even until death: for this was the time of
our perfection. They therefore which disdain to keep themselves in this range
to profit in faith and al virtue by the common order of the Church, they can
by nothing so much cut themselves of from the fellowship of the children of God
as by this. Let them excuse the matter as finely and as craftily as they list:
yet the sentence of S. Paul is most clear, that none is neither aught to be
accounted of the body of christ, unless that he submit himself to this general
rule. Wherefore my brethren let us humble our selves and let us not te^pt god,
Ephesians. 4.4.
thinking our selves able to fly without wings. But some man will say, it is
possible that David spoke for the time of those figures: because that the^ god
governed his people as it were little children, as also S. Paul says: Gal.
4.3.
and therefore that those fervent lame^tatio^s and hearty requests that he
makes concerning the temple are not so fit for us, seeing that we are compared
to those, who being past our enfancie are come to a more full age. To whom I
answer first of al, that the necessity of being taught by sermons, of being
confirmed by the Sacraments, of being exercised in public prayers and the
confession of our faith, is common to us with the ancient fathers. And
hereunto te^d as well the promises especially those that are in the Prophet Esaias,
where God says that his Church shall have infinite children: and that after she
has conceived and brought them forth, she shall nurish the^ up. It cannot be
denied that this belongs also to the kingdom of christ and to this our time
especially. Now God expressly fendeth his children into the bosom and lap of
his Church. And wherefore is this, but that an order and rule might be kept,
which he has appointed, to the end to gather his own together as it were by
flocks? The which is notably expressed by an apt similitude, which the Prophet
himself uses in the 60. Chapter, Esaias. 60.^.
saying that the children of God shall be at Donet who retire themselves by
flight into their Do^^cetes: And what I pray you is that same Douecote there,
but every place where the word of God is preached, where the sacraments are
administered, and where the name of Godis called upon and praised? Indeed they
which ween too be so strong that they have no further need of this same
outward order and government, they il consider their own state and condition.
For wherefore has God ordained his sacraments. unless because that we being
clothed with our bodies, we are too vile to lay hold upon spiritual things,
unless we be aided by these visible signs? The angels indeed have that
truth of the Sacraments, and this suffiseth them but God must come down lower
unto us, by reason of our rudeness and ignorance. Let these fantastical
Christians strip themselves hardly of their bodies, and make themselves angels
of heaven, and then they may exempt themselves from those small helps whereof
they make so little account. But it behooves al those which acknowledge
themselves to be me^ that they pass this way, to submit themselves to the
ordinary policy, that god has commanded to all those that are his. It is
true that the grace of God is not bound, nor the power of the holy ghost is not
enclosed either in the sacraments or in any other outward thing, that he should
not be able to work whensoever it pleases him without any mean: but here we
entreat of the perpetual order that he has set in his church: and not of that
which he works extraordinaryly, as it wereby miracle. Nevertheless this is
most true that they which are deprived of the use of the sacraments, and of
liberty to call upon his name, and yet feel not their wretched and miserable
condition, to the end to bewail it they are more blockish then brute beasts.
I say farther that if David had just occasion in his time, to say. O Lord how
amiable is thy temple! Psalm. 84.
blessed are they that dwell in thy house. My soul burns for very desire,
that it has to enter into the Courts of the Lord that we ought to be twice
as much moved and inflamed unto this, at this day. For what were the benefits
of the Temple, which David so much lamenteth, even that he is weary of his
life, seeing him self to be deprived of them? It is true that in substance
they were the same that we have at this day: howbeit we know that these were
but as dark shadows, wherein GOD displaied not his grace so largely as we
have it at this present. For God has declared himself so familiarly to us in
the order of the Church, that as a man would say, the very heavens are opened
unto us. The Sacraments do not show Jesus Christ so far of as under the law:
but sets him lively before our eyes. Wherefore we must needs be very
unthankful, if we prefer not these blessings far before all that which
David might ever find in the temple of Syon. We are not any more in the utter
Courts, as David has spoken. There is no more any veil drawn, which might
separate us from the sanctuary. To be short, this is an evil honoring of the
infinite greatness of the benefits which God has bestowed upon us, when our
desire is not equal at the least with that of David's. I speak this by a
simple form of doctrine. For the exhortation shall follow after in his place.
It remains then that we see next of all, what manner of desire this was, to
the end that we may conform our selves unto it, as unto our rule. I have
asked; says he, a thing of the Lord. By speaking of one thing alone, he
signifies that he was so mightily given unto it, that he cast al other things
behind his back as if he had quite forgotten the^. Was it so that he inioyed
all his other desires, in such sort that there was nothing but this thing that
failed him? Contrariwise he was a fugitive from the land of his birth, yea
banished from the house of his father, and from the company of his Parents and
friends: he was spoiled of al his goods, and deprived of all his dignities and
honors which were very great, his wife was ravished: to be short, lo a man
altogether desolate and quite forsaken. Nevertheless he lamenteth nothing but
this one thing, that is to say, to have access to the Temple, as also on the
contrary part, when he gives thanks unto God, for all the benefits which he
had bestowed upon him, after he had made mention of drinking and eating, of
rest and other commodyties of the body: he sets down for conclusion that
he will dwell in the church of God: whereby he protests that being at his
ease and in all pleasure, notwithstanding he accounts nothing more precious
then to be in the company of the faithful, Psalm. 23.
to be lead unto that same sovereign happiness. Let us then diligently mark
that David as well in his afflictions as in his prosperities, had always this
same courage to rejoice himself in this liberty that God had given unto the
children of Israel: which cannot be accounted any small virtue. We shall find
many who being oppressed with adversities and afflictions, do remember God
gladly: but as soon as they are delivered from them, and that they find their
ease, then they cast of all remembrance of him: yea, and which is most shameful
they kick and fling against him, as resty Iades that are to well ^ed. Others so
vex themselves and rage against god in their adversity, that they cannot abide
to hear any speech of him. Was not David throwe^ down with such an heap of
miseries, that he seemed the most miserable creature in the world? And yet is
he so far of from being wounded with the grief of his mind to vex himself,
and disdain when god speaks unto him, that contrariwise it is the only way
whereby he is comforted: yea although he could not so soon think of God, but he
lamenteth that he is banished from his temple, and shut out from the use of his
sacraments and other exercises of faith, yet has heno greater pleasure then to
lament such an evil. Now on the other side was not this his chiefest labor? Had
he overcome his enemies to be peaceable in his realm and renowned amongst al?
had he the mean to plu^dge himself in all pleasures? yet for all that he
remained firm in this, that his true felicity is to have access to the
temple, to the end he might co^municat with the order of the church. Wherefore
we see that he protests not in vain too have asked this one thing: for it
was so dear unto him, that he did always let go the rest for it. Let us see
now who it is amongst us which has such a judgment as David had. They who
co^te^t themselves with felicity in those goods which they have in their
hands, do they esteem the liberty of calling upon the name of god purely,
hearing his word preached, or using his Sacraments, more then their domestical
rest? There are very few that do so: but rather their fatnes makes them so
sluggish that they care for nothing but for their pau^ch and to make good
cheer. To be short, the world is such that it sets more store by a trough
well stuffed with meat the^ for the church of God. If a man speak of the
troubles which may come, every man greatly fears to be spoiled by wars, to
suffer losses, griefs and hatreds: but they never make any reckni^g of losing
the prechi^g of the doctrine of their salvation, of the pure use of the
Sacraments, and such like helps which serve to draw the^ near unto god: and
also one shall perceive that they that are deprived thereof are not greatly
touched with it. If the reuenew come not in, at the end of the year or at the
quarter day, to the end they may keep such a train as their ambition drives
the^ to desire: if their gain and trades decay, if their credit be lost,
they continually torment themselves: notwithstanding the ordinary pasture of
the children of god (after which they ought greatly to hunger) is nothing unto
the^. And yet this is it that God shows very well by that threatening that he
makes, that there cannot a greater evil come unto us. I will send (says he) a
famine, not of bread nor of water: Amos. 8.12.
(as if he should say this is a small matter:) but of hearing my word.
Wherefore my brethren let us take good heed that we suffer not our selves, to
be made brutish by the Devil and by the world, to the end that we have not
always this benefit in estimation above al others: that is to say, to be
maintained in the flock of god, under the outward order and government which he
has placed amongst his own. And this is yet better expressed unto us by that
which David adds: that is, that he will require again the thing which he
before had asked. Whereby he signifies that he had not some sudden devotion,
which was quickly cooled, but that he was co^sta^t and still remained searching
after this benefit, we shall see some which will be so well affected for a
little time, that it seems the next day, they would forsak all that ever they
have: but this co^sta^cie whereof David speaks is a very rare thing. yea the
most part in steed of blowing the fire to kindle the good zeal that God has
put in them, do wittingly quench it. We have the like testimony concerning
David in the Psalm which I have already rehearsed: for because that it might
have been laid before him that being driven out of the Counrrey of Judea, he
might have gone here or there too some other place: He cries out Thy Altars O
Lord of Hosts, my God and my King. As if he should have said that he could
not find a delectable place, although that he possessed all the palaces in the
world, when he had no entrance into the Temple of GOD. He complains that
the Sparrowes and the Swallows found a place there to make their Nestes, and
that his condition was worse. And why was this? Was it because he had neither
chamber nor Kitchen? He says not so but because he found no good nor meet
place, forasmuch as he was shut out and driven away from the Aultars of GOD. It
is very certain that if this doctrine were entered into our hearts, we should
not be so, neither one sort so hindered, nor the other so quite turned away
from exercising our selves in the means that God has put into our hand, to
help us forward in the path of everlasting life. But what is the cause
thereof? Ambition holds back the one sort with dignities or high promotions,
and entiseth others to purchase and to seek them. Covetousness enflameth and
carries away others: many have nothing in their heart but their vain
pleasures and wanton delights. Yea, all languishe and wallowe in their lusts?
so as none cry out. Thy Aulters O Lord, where are thy Aultars my God my king?
And indeed the vanities of the world reign to much in them, to suffer God
too be obeyed. This This word also is of great importance, when David
says, that he has demanded of God the thing whereof he speaks: for it
shall be an easy matter to make such a goodly show before men, that me^ would
deem all fire in us. But lo, a man might say that this was in good earnest,
that he desired to be in that flock: though he have none but God alone to be
witness thereof, he has nevertheless this affection. For when we come before
such a Judge, al hypocrisy must cease, and there must be nothing but plain
dealing and truth. Would we then follow the example of David? Let every one
enter into his own conscience, and in directing his prayer unto God, Let him
say: Lord thou know how I esteem to be in thy Church above all the goods
in the world. Moreover we are here as well put in mind, not to gnawe out
bitte, to lament and grudge at our estate: but we ought directly too send our
sighs to him, who can remedy our evil. In deed we ought to know that this
horrible dissipation, which is at this day in the world, in that the whole
service and worship of God is corrupted, the word of god falsified, the
sacraments adulterated and defiled, to be a just vengeance upon our sins.
To whom is it then, that we should have recourse to enjoy the pure doctrine,
the Sacraments, and liberty to call upon the name of God, and to make
confession of our faith, but to him who chastises us, in depriving us there,
of these benefits? And it must not be that the rigor of Gods chastisements
turn us away from coming unto him: and much less must we kick against the
prick, thereby grudging and disdayning with our selves, in not seeking the
medicine at his hand who has given us the wound. Certainly David understood
very well, that he was not banished from the la^d of Judea, without the
providence of God, notwithstanding he leaves not to come unto him and to make
his complaints too him. Not for that it was not a great grief and hard
temptation unto him, to see himself in apparaunce chased and cast out from
God: but the faith that he had in the promise which was made unto him lifted
him up to pray unto god, that he would always restore the fruition of that
thing unto him, which he had for a time taken from him I have (as I think)
sufficiently enough applied this doctrine to us, and to the state of this time,
were it not that they were so many dull wits that can swallowe down nothing,
unless the matter propounded be minced and chewed unto them again and
again. Although (too say the very truth) the slendernes of their capacity
does not hinder them, nor the obscurity of doctrine: but that of their own
wicked wills, they so entangle themselves seeking all the starting holes, that
they can imagine too darken that which of it self is so plain and evident.
Nevertheless such kind of resistaunce, constrains us the more diligently too
search out, how this doctrine which we have before set forth, may be applied
to our time. I confess that there is no more any such material temple, whether
we should go on pilgrimage to sacrifice unto god: but that we are at this day
spiritual temples, and that we ought in all places to lift up pure hands unto
heaven: notwithstanding the order of calling upon the name of god in the
company of the faithful, is always one and lasts for ever: for it is not to
be counted amongst the figures of the old Testament: but it is the rule that
our Lord Jesus Christ has given until the end of the world. Wherefore albeit
we differ from David concerning that Temple of Sion and in Sacrifices, yet
herein we agree and are like, that we pray unto God in common, and do assemble
our selves together to make confession of our faith. It is very true that we
are no more as little children, holden under the tuition and scholing of the
law of Moses: but yet we are men, and shall be till God take us away out of the
world. So though the shadows and figures which were in David's time, belong not
any more unto us, yet have we need to be stirred up and drawn by the
preaching of the Gospel and administration of the Sacraments. If any man will
strive against this order, why, very experience will convince him: For they
that be most able do show evidently what necessity they have of this help
of God to relieve their weakness. We dispute not here: to wit, whether God
can lead those that are his without any inferior mean: but to declare how
his will is, to govern and to lead them. For this is certain that seeing our
weakness, he has given unto us as it were croutches and staves for us to stay
upon. What folly were it I pray you, when we feel that our legs fail us, to
make no reckoning of our props and croutches, as though they should stand us in
no steed at all? Let us know then, that whatsoever difference there is betwixt
us and the Jews, yet that the doctrine which David sets down here is
common to all: only we have to change the name of the Temple, because we are
no longer tied too any one certain place: Notwithstanding the thing which
David chiefly regarded, touches us no less the^ himself. It is very true that
hawtie and proud men make no great matter, that men assemble themselves to
hear Sermons, to make public prayers and too administer the Sacraments: but
this is the want that they do not examine their conscience. For our parts
seeing it is none other but Gods ordinance, let us content our selves, in that
it has pleased him by such means, too cheryshe and sustain our faith in
such weakness: But yet (as we have before declared) we feel the profit
which comes thereof. Howsoever it be, seeing Saint Paul has declared that
the way to perfection, is to keep the order of the church which Christ has
instituted, when he gave Pastors accursed be the arrogance of them, that will
fly up into the air, and pretend to mount up into heaven by their
speculations, in despising both preaching and the use of the Sacraments: as
though these were outward things and not so much requisite. Mark well my
brethren of what manner of people I speak. I confess that GOD keeps those
that are his under the captivity of Antichriste, albeit that they be destitute
of those helps which we enjoy with great liberty. The word of god is not
preached unto them, neither have they any place wherein it is lawful for them
too make confession of their faith, yea, the Sacraments are taken from them:
but forasmuch as in separating themselves from the abhominatio^s of Antichrist,
they sigh and lament for not having that which were more profitable for them,
God works in them by the power of his holy spirit, and supplieth that which
is wanting unto the^, But there are others who for the most part being in such
desolatio^, do yet nevertheless please themselves: and being hunger bitten and
starued, have no lust at all too eat. These are they which counterfayte them
selves to be great Philosophers, contenting them selves too have read over a
leaf or two, as a man would say, and then they think they know what soever is
necessary for them. These men think they have no need of any preaching. And
as concerning the Supper they make no accounte whether ever they come too it or
no. And as concerning the outward order of the Church they leave that unto
little children, as though it were too base for them. I pray you may we not
think such people too be more then blind? Notwithstanding they can accuse us
because that we exhort them too whom our Lord Jesus Christ has declared
his truth, to use the means that God has ordained for the increasing
preservation and continuance of our faith. And wherefore is this, unless it be
because they starckle, and can not abide to be awakened by us, to the end too
make them feel their evil? I put the case that they did not commit Idolatry
with the Papists: yet can they not deny but that this is a miserable and
cursed bondage, that they cannot be suffered too call upon the name of God and
too confess Jesus Christ. The holy Ghost when thee would peerce the hearts
of the faithful who were captive in Babylon, puts this sentence into their
mouth, Psalm. 137.4.
How shall we sing the praises of the Lord in a strange land? I confess
that the kingdom of God is at this day throughout all the world, and that
there is now no difference between Judea and other Countries: But I say
notwithstanding that the Country where the service of God is abolished, and
true religion cast of, it well deserves to be accounted for a strange and
profane Country. It must needs be then, that they which have no remorse,
not too dare to make protestation of their faith: nor to celebrate or set
forth the name of God, that they be altogether blockishe: Now let the
children of God take heed by this admonition not to become blockish with them.
Concerning those which babble, scorning and deriding us in this, asking whether
no man can go to heaven, but by Geneua: would to GOD that they had the heart
and care to assemble themselves together in the name of Jesus Christ, in what
part soever they become, and that they would erect some form of a Church, as well
in their own houses as in their neighbors, to do for their part that which
we do here in our Churches. But what? in disdaining to use the means that
GOD has given unto them, they will be counted religious and so be saved. This
were even as much as if they should ask whether they might not ariue at the
Haven going quite contrary: and whether they might not by tempting God boast of
his favor. But let them be as bold and brag as they list too break the
yoke: yet let all the faithful take heed how they lift up themselves with
them: and who soever has not the mean to be in a Christian Church, where god
is purely worshipped, at the least let them mourn day and night, with David,
Thine Altars O Lord, there is nothing that I desire but thine Altars my god
and my king. And let this fire remain always kindled in all good hearts, too
the end that whatsoever may fall out, that they think it not paineful to endure
any thing, that the length of time cool them not from seeking always to
purchase to be gathered into a flock, and to come to Christ's fold. Moreover
that every one advise well with him self how he may most speedily get him
self too the standarde: so soon as our Lord shall give him the means. For
this is the way too witness, that a man does not faintlye make this request
too dwell in the house of God.

Now too conclude, it remains that we mark well that which David adds:
that is, That he shall find the beauty of the Lord, and will consider his
Temple: For this is not all to exercise our selves with the faithful in all
the outward order of the Church, unless we have our eyes bente to this end,
to know GOD better and better. Here there are two things requisite: one is
that we be diligent to frequent sermons, and public prayers. The second is,
that we know wherefore we frequente them. For many come thither with a
foolish devotion, imagining that they have well acquitted themselves, when
they have showed themselves at Church.

Let us therefore my brethren take good heed, For it is to be feared, lest
the most part find themselves condemned either in the one or in the other.
How many be there that flee Sermons, and think themselves best at ease if they
never hear any speaking thereof? But I leave them there, as those that fully
show them selves too be contemners of God. Only I speak of the contempt or
coldenes that is in many, who never remember to come to the Sermon, unless
that the Sunday put them in mind thereof: and yet they imagine they have done
well, as though they would make up a number together of many running too
God. The Bell may well ringe daily, but it is enoughe if they show them
selves at the end of the week. They are called four times every sunday: but
they come very notably, if they be found there once. For there are that can
sufficiently dispense, with themselves for coming once in xv. days. To be
short the greatest sort of the multitude verify the old Proverb: The nearer
the Church the further from God. Yea and some be of the number of those who
have forsaken their country to come here to serve God, there are who yet in
this behalf behave themselves negligently enough. What is too be done then?
forasmuch as God has showed himself unto us, let us behold his beauty. But
we must not cast behind our back the manner of beholding it: and that is,
that we be ravished in the love thereof, and changed into his likeness, as
S. Paul says. 4. Cor. 3. 18.
And that we may the better do this, it is meet that we be more attentive
then we are, or have been accustomed too be, too mark that which God sets
forth unto us in his Temple: For what is the cause that we reap so little
fruit, but that we do not more diligently apply our study to that which is
there said and done? Thus we have our ears beaten with continual doctrine,
whereas our hearts are no whit touched. Moreover there are a great many which
never hear and understand a whole sermon through, but here and there a word
or half a word rather with out regard. Wherefore it is not without cause
that David speaks of visiting the temple of the Lord so diligently. And in
very deed the great treasures of the wisdom of God which are there fet out
unto us, worthily deserve that a man should settle himself carefully to
mark them. But as I have already touched, God would not that we should so
mark them that we should return empty and without profit from them. Let us
know therefore that the doctrine has profited and showed her fruit in us,
when we are dewly reformed to serve God: and this is it that David means in
the 84. Psalm, which we have alleged before, That they that dwell in the
house of GOD shall praise him. To what end therefore do we assemble our
selves? Wherefore is the Gospel preached unto us? Wherefore have we Baptism
and the Lords Supper: unless it be that God may be magnified in us? Now this
praise consists not only in the tip of the tongue or the lips, but it
stretches out it self through our whole life. And therefore it is said in
another place. I will wash my hands o Lord in innocence, and then I will
enter into thy Altar. Psalm. 26.6.
We see now what the true use of the whole order of the Church is, to wit,
that we should serve God purely. In the time of the law they which came to
worship in the temple, especially the Priests entering into it to do their
office washed themselves. This ceremony is paste, but we ought too keep the
truth of it: that is, forasmuch as we have the means to lead us to the
service of God, we ought to walk in greater integrity then the other: For in
as much as God has given us the means, so much the less are we to be excused,
if we make them of no effect. If we stumble, it is not because we see not the
path before our feet. If it fall out, that we go out of the way it is not
because god has not more shined unto us the^ unto the^. If we be forgetful to
do our duty, it is not for want of being provoked and stirred up unto it. To
be short God has omitted no mean to further advance our salvation. Let us
fear then that rebuke and reproach that he makes by his Prophet Esaias, in the
65. Chapter. I have stretched out my hand all the day long, Esaias. 65.^
to a rebellious and stifnecked people. If they which stay in the wildernesses
of the Papacy shall not be spared, when they go not right, what shall become
of us I pray you, who are nourished in the house as it were in the sight of our
heavenly father? Some have left their Country where they were borne, to
gather themselves here into a Christian Church: Others have had a greater
privilege, seeing it pleased GOD too visit them at home, as it were in their
own nest: now if they which are naturally borne in that place, acknowledge
not such a singular benefit, that they may wholly dedicate themselves to god,
who is so nearely approached unto them, shall such an unthankfulness remain
unpunished? Rather let them say, O Lord thou haste builte thy Temple, and
erected thine Altar amongst us: give us grace therefore too purify our
selves too the end we do not though our filthiness defile the holiness of
thy gifts, and that we turn not the glory of thy benefits intoo shame.
Concerning those that are come from a far, let them take heed that they
behave and order themselves holyly as in the house of God. They may live in
other places in wickedness: and they should not come from the Papacy to
lead a dissolute life not comely for the Gospel. And indeed there are some,
it had bin much better they had broken their necks than ever to have set foot
in this Church, too behave themselves so ill in it: Some link in themselves
with scoffers, to harden and confirm them in their malice. Others become
gluttons and drunkardes, others are make-bates and troublesome. There are
housholdes where husbands and wives agree like Dogs and Cattes. And certain
will seem young princes, and play the counter faite Lords without measure,
and are wholly given too their pomp, and worldly superfluity. Others become so
idle, so delicate, and so nice, that they cannot tell what it is too labor,
and yet no living can content them. There are backbiters and slaunderers who
would find fault with the very Angels of Paradise: and in as much as they
burste with vices, they apply all their holiness to control their
neighbors: notwithstanding they think that God is bound and much in their
debt that come to Geneua: as though it had not been much better for them too
have remained still in their own Dung, then too have come and given such
offenses in the church of God. But if there have been such mischief
heretofore, let every one amend one, and if there be any yet which are
altogether incorrigible, let the children of God arm themselves with this
doctrine, that they be not infected through their wicked life. In deed it
must needs greatly grieve us, when we see the church of God so profaned: but
forasmuch as we must be as corn amongst the chafe, let us learn patience
till God shall separate us from the company of the wicked. There is no doubt
but that this Church shall be as a touchstone to prove many. Howsoever it be,
let us strive, that forasmuch as God has gathered us together into his
household, we may give our selves to all purity, in renouncing all the
pollution of the world, too the end that our Lord Jesus Christ may allow and
account us in the number of those which have called upon his name without all
hypocrisy in that great day.

The fourth Sermon showing what pain we ought to take, too purchase liberty
to serve GOD purely in a Christian Church, upon a Theme out of the 27.
Psalm. My heart has said of thee, Verse. 8.
seek my face: I will seek thy face O Lord.
AS men throw themselves into a woondetful confusion, in letting the bridle
loose to their appetites and desires: so also is it a great wisdom in them
that seek after that that God has commanded them, to the end to follow it.
And of this thing we have here a goodly example. David was a man much subject
to the same passions, which torment and toss us hither and thither: and there
is no doubt but that he was provoked with many temptations which might well
have shaken his mind, and have caused him to stray from God. Howbeit to remedy
all occasions of falling and to have a certain and sure path, he only
regards that which God showed him: he meditateth and continually thinks up
it. The su^me is that God bids and exhorteh all the faithful to seek his
face. David protests to have applied al his study to this commandment: in
such sort that there was as it were a goodly melody, and agreement between god
who speaks saying, seek me and him who answers, yea my god I will seek
thee. But here we must consider wherefore God expressly mentions this word
face, For if he have not some face, wherein he shows himself, he should
deceive us in commanding us too seek it. I know that many men who are full of
subtilties make no more of it, then if he had said seek me: but they which
are well exercised in the Scripture, know very well that God would specify,
that manner of showing and declaring himself familiarly too men, which he has
kept in all times. And indeed this is an often and usual speech in the
Scripture, to call the sanctuary and the arc of the covenant the face of God.
And wherefore is this It is because God who is incomprehensible in his Essence
and Majesty, uses such means as he knows to be meet for men's rudeness
and infirmity, too the end to draw them unto himself. It is true that the
world forgeth always false and vain shapes of God: but all that we imagine of
our own brain, are nothing else but false visors whereby GOD is disguised: or
too speak more plainly, when men forge some form or remembrance to have GOD
visible with them, they have nothing but an Idol. But when GOD represents
himself according too his own pleasure, and gives us evident signs and
tokens to be known of us, then he takes as it were a face. And hereupon it
is, that he commands that every one of us do turn our sight thither, and
that we be diligent to behold it. For it is also one sovereign good, and
wherewith we ought to be fully satisfied, to rejoice in the countenance of our
God as it is said in the 16. Psalm. Pal. 16.11
Now because we cannot climb up so high without a Ladder, the second benefit
that he can bestow upon us, is too give us the mean to attain too that
principal and chief goodness. Wherefore let us note that this sentence where God
says: seek my face, is as much as if he should open the gate to make us to
enter into everlasting life. It seems that it was not so great a matter in
the time of David too come to the Temple, to see such a heap of Ceremonies as
they observed there: but if we consider well that spiritual pattern which was
showed to Moses in the mountain, we shall not think it strange that God
says it is his face. And indeed seeing that Jesus Christ was there revealed,
what shall we say else but that God was showed there? Now let us see if God
has ordained any outward mean unto us, to be seen of us. It is true that he
has appeared unto us by his son, who is his lively image, and in whose
person he would be known in all perfection: but Saint Paul declares
forthwith, in the 4. of the 2. to the Corinthians, that the Gospel is that
looking glass wherein Jesus Christ must be seen and considered. ^. Cor. 4. 4
The Sacraments have one and the same nature: and to be short, the order of
the church, I mean such as God has established in it, does show the same
unto us. Therefore let these proud gallantes of the world mock as much as
they list: but forasmuch as God has showed this benefit too stoop so low
unto us, let us not be ashamed to give this honor unto his word and to his
Sacraments: in them to behold as it were his face: not to the end to be
holden here beneth in the corruptible Elements of the world as the Papists
who make Idols of all the signs that God has given us too lead us too Jesus
Christ: but nevertheless too the end we may fully rejoice in the presence of
GOD, we must go unto him by these inferior means. It is true that this
which I say must not be to stricktly taken, as though the faithful never drew
near to God, but when they come to Church: For this should be a foul
superstition. But I mean that we must not place God so high above the clouds:
as some fantastical heads do, and imagine of his high majesty as seems good
unto us, neglecting and casting behind out backs as well the preaching of the
gospel, as other such like means and helps: as though men could see when
they shut their eyes. For in very truth they who despise as I say, not only
the use of the sacraments as also all the order of the church they disdain to
look upon God when he appears unto them. Let us mark now how necessary it
is for us, that God stir us up to come unto him. We have already said what
favor and honor he shows unto us, when he calls us so gently unto him to
set forward our salvation, and too lead us too the true perfect felicity
from which we are far enough of in respect of our selves. But we have also too
note that it is not without great necessity, that God pricketh and provoke
us too take heed that we fall not into misery.

And first of all, we have so wanton and wandering eyes, that it seems a very
miserable case. For nothing occupy all ourselves but the vanities of this
world, and Satan has infinite illusions to deceive us. It is true that all
his subtilties are nothing else but certain mu^meries and trifling shows to
occupy fools: but experience shows what fools or rather madbraines we are,
in suffering ourselves to be too too easily deluded and deceived. Wherefore if
we were wise and well advised this voice of god would always sound in our
ears, Seek my face. But what? Forasmuch as god is careful for his part, we
are the more careless and slow. And would to God we were not like kicking and
resty Iades that in steed of going forwards draw backwardes. Nevertheless
this example is not set forth unto us in vain: For the protestation which
David makes, of meditating this doctrine in his heart, that he and all the
faithful ought too seek the face of God, shows us whereto we ought to employ
our study, that God loose not his labor in calling us too himself. Now he
joins here two points, which are worthy too be marked. The first is that
when God has spoken seek my face: that he answers too this voice with an
earnest affection of the heart, The second is, that after he has consented
and said, yea: he says that he will employ him self indeed, to seek the face
of God. And in deed this is the order according too which we have to proceed:
that is, to give entrance and access to that which God says unto us, and
according to which he has also showed us in the Psalm: Psalm. 95.8.
This day if you hear his voice harden not your hearts: but there are found
very few that do it. A great number will say well to discharge themselves, yea,
it is reason: It is not lawful too reply against him: but they should suffer
that too enter into their heart, that they confess with their mouth. Therefore
let us learn to begin at this point, that we answer GOD truly and
unfeignedly, that we do fully understand the benefit that he has bestowed
upon us, in bidding us to behold his face. If this once be done, it cannot
be but the rest shall follow: that is too say, strength too perform that
which we know to be justly commanded us, and for our singular benefit. For
David showed that he had not a cold or dead meditation without stirring
either arms or legs: but having concluded that he must seek God, he sets
himself in the path, and protests that he will pursue it. Now it is a great
shame too them who call themselves Christians, so ill too put in practice both
the one and the other. Some will allege that it is not lawful for them too
forsake the Country where they were borne, albeit they be destitute there of
the food of life, and that they have nothing but desolation, concerning the
order of the Church: Why so? Because of the duty they bear to their natural
prince. To which I will make no long reply, only I ask of them, if they had
nothing to eat and too drink in their own house, whether they would be so
scrupulous to tarry there still. There is none that would not boldly adventure
too forsake his Country, that he might not starve for hunger. I put a case
which is not yet so privileged: that is, if a man should give them six times
as much substance as they have, in a strange country, whether they would make
any great courtesy, too go quickly and take possession? To what purpose
serves it them to pretend these colors, seeing that may appear to be far
from their heart which they speak? There is no question here of going into
their enemies land, where they shall be constrained to bear arms against
their prince, to make war with their natural Country: but only of seeking
a place peaceably to serve God, where nothing shall let but they may pray for
their Prince and for all his subjects. Too be short such a journey is none
other, but such as they make daily for some earthly commodities, which is
deuoyde of all crime and offense. But yet let us see whether necessity do not
sufficiently excuse them that go, Lo God who says, Seek my face: The
princes of the would, butte against him, and turn their backs toward him: or
rather they rob the poor souls of their common food: and in steed of Gods
face, they set before their eyes the maskes of superstitions. Must they be
preferred before the living God? If GOD be to be heard, we must go rather a
thousand miles of to see his face, where it is showed, the^ to lie nestling in
our nests. So then as often as Princes will attempt any thing, in prejudice of
him who has all sovereign authority above them, men do them no wrong in
obeiyng him. Albeit, besides that which I have said, such kind of men show
sufficiently, that they never greatly wayed nor considered their own state and
condition. And what a miserable captivity is it, in which they are holden?
Unless their conscience were too too sluggishe, it were impossible but that
they should be in continual anguishe and distress, as though they were
tormented in Hell. And how is it permitted unto them, too honor GOD in their
houses? We need not go far for an example, If any of them have a child
borne unto him, his duty is too offer him up too GOD with prayers and giving
of thanks, requiring the Seal of salvation through Baptism to be imprinted
into his body.

Now we know that Baptism is so corrupted in the Popedom, and so defiled
with superstitions and filthinesses, that a child cannot receive it, but he
must out of hand be defiled with it. So a father cannot baptize his child
without sinning. And if he abstain, yet he is in the same transgression, if
there were no more but the offense which he gives too men, in refusing the
Sacrament, that the son of God has instituted. And what a perplexity is
this, that a man can neither do not leave undone such a thing, but he must
geeuously offend GOD? I omit the rest, because that this one example alone is
more then enough. But when a man shall so miserably languish all the days of
his life, not knowing which way too turn him, yet in death great assaults
shall assail him and then will the Devil have his whole army in a redynesse
against him. If the miserable Captive were in time too fore let from serving of
GOD, in respect of his wife and family, then he shall be in worse case then
ever before.

They therefore who doubt whether it be lawful for the^ to rid themselves
forth of such filthiemud, or rather from such an hellish gulf, under the
color of subjection they owe to their earthly Princes, certainly they
overthrow the whole order of nature. It is very certain that the prayer that
God would have us too make to him for our princes, is agreeable too the
authority that he has given them over us, and also to that duty, wherewith
he has bound us unto them. 1. Tim. 2.2
Now Saint Paul exhorts us, that men should pray unto God for Kings and
Magistrates, too the end that we might lead a peaceable and quiet life, with all honesty and fear of God. This subjection and obedience therefore, which
we owe unto our earthly Princes, is overmuch stretched out, when they would
have the service and honor of the king of heaven to give place unto it. It is
very true that those poor Jews must tarry in bondage at Babylon, until that
time was fulfilled that god had appoi^ted unto the^. But these me^ with who^ I
contend, let the^ show that we are bound too deprive our selves of our own
accord of those same spiritual benefits which God has bountifully bestowed
upon his children. They feel the necessity wherewith they are grievously
oppressed, their infirmity provoke them, and God shows them the remedy?
What reason then is there, that they should not dare too help themselves to
the end to complain of those, who snatch the bread out of their hands? There
is also another reason of the husband toward the wife, and of the wife
toward the husband. Forasmuch as God has knit them together as it were into
one flesh, the one should not do well too forsake the other under color of
seeking God. Not for that they should depart from him to maintain themselves
together: but because that each one ought diligently to labor that he might
also draw his companion with him. Lo then what they ought to do: that is,
that the husband do show the wife, how miserable and unhappy they are, that
are separated from the Communion and fellowship of the Faithful, that are
destitute of the word and Sacraments, which are the undoubted pledges, too
make us assured that God dwells with us: And that therefore he exhort her not
to distrust, but too be of good comfort, and if so be that he cannot win her,
so soon as he would, that he therefore leave not of until he have obtained
his purpose. Although that the wife be utterly against it, yet that he leave
not of to deal importunatly with her, until that she show herself altogether
obstinat and wilful. If after he have done all that which he shall be able and can
no longer remain there, he is altogether free and at liberty: for he has
performed his duty to the uttermost, and for any thing that was in him, his
wife might have followed him as she was bound and ought to have done, Although
that such a kind of departure from the wife is no deuorse: but the husband
goes before to lead his wife the way. Now concerning the wife in as much as
she is not the head, she is bound with a more straight bond. Therefore she is
bound too labor by all manner of means (as much as shall be possible for her)
too persuade her husband, to the setting of both them two at liberty. When
she shall have diligently performed all this as much as she shall be able, yet is
she not therefore at liberty, to leave her husband too whom she is subject,
unless that some persecution be raised, and that her manifest danger be in
it: and specially if her husband be as it were a prouoker too persecute her to
death. Now then she forsakes not her husband, but she flies the evil which
is prepared for her, and the rage of her enemies as it is permitted and
granted unto her of god. To be short, the constraint and force which is done
unto her, freeth and sets her at liberty: notwithstanding no respect of
the world ought to witholde the husband or the wife one from the other, but
only the mutual love which they owe one to the other in God, for the
procuring of each others salvation. For if the husband must forget him self
concerning that which belonggeth to this earthly life and to the body, he must
have no regard too any thing that any whit belongs to him self. Let us
return therefore too this estimation which David makes of seeking the face of
God, as also he speaks thereof in the 84. Psalm, Psalm. 84.11.
saying. that it is better to live one day in the courts of the Lord then a
thousand too be far from it. Wherein he signifies that the life of the
faithful cannot be too short, so that GOD show them this grace, that living
in this world, they exercise themselves in scruing and honoryng him,
confirming them selves in his promises, and making confession of his name. If
any man obiecte that this might well be done in some wilderness, or amongst
the enemies of the faith: I answer that it is not without cause, that David
expressly mentions: the courts of the Temple: For he considered how
necessary the order of the Church is too all mortal men especially knowing
the bluntness and infirmity that is in them. If this admonition were well
imprinted in the hearts of all, all at the least would come into some
Christian Church where they might dye quietly and peaceably, and there would
not be any one that would not quickly trusse up his pack and be trudging. But
what seek we? All desire too live, and that at their ease, and every one
according to the lust wherewith he is led. And this is the cause why the temple
of GOD at this day is neglected and contemned. Yea which is more, there are
very many subtle ones, too set before men's eyes evil allurementes and
stumbling blocks too turn us away from that study of godliness that was in
David. They allege what shall it profit us to change the place: whether
soever we go, we shall find the world there as well as in our Country: all
at this day is corrupted, there are like offenses in all places, and
temptations too make men fall from God. I grant them all this. But if the
question were of their bodies, and that they were admonished that in some place
they might find good physicians, fit remedies and other helps for their
health, would they say, that they cared not for them, because that men might
be sick in any place of the world? I confess that where soever we become,
that we shall find many occasions to do evil, and many occasions of falling
away: but there is a great difference, whether we have those helps which GOD
has given unto us to keep us in doing our dewtie and reforming us, or to be
quite destitute thereof. Let us put the case that all vices do equally reign
in the world, so that the very air is infected therewith, as it were with a
Pestilence: Is it not a great advantage to have the preservatives that God
has ordained for his Children? to have those purgations and medicines, whereby
he would heal us? Now I mean always the doctrine of the Gospel when it
is purely preached: as also the Sacraments when they are rightly ministered as
it becomes: then also public prayers and other means which serve too the
stirring of us up, and awakening of us, that we should not be poisoned with
the temptations of the world. Now every man knows that nothing of all this is
found in the papacy, but rather altogether contrary. Let us therefore take
good heed, least that in such necessity, wherein we have need to be
succored, we reject not the helps that GOD in mercy has offered unto us.
There are others, which yet more plainly, vomit out the filth and disease of
their stomach. Shall we go (say they) to a Church, wherein to our great
offense, we shall see troubles and stumblinge blocks which are altogether
unknown unto us? If in those places where the Gospel is preached, there were
such government and polycie, as were most requisite too edyfye us, if we were
sure that we should find none but angels there that should lead us into
Paradise, we would run thither most speedily. But when we shall come
thither we shall hear many things, and peradventure more then were meet that
shall do nothing but offend us: Yea and there shall be people given too all
kind of iniquity, who through their lewd and dissolute life defame the
Gospel. Besides that, vanities, pompes, drunkenness and such like things shall
there bear to much sway. And which is worse to be borne, many shall show them
selves such obstinate and unruly contemners of God, that more ungodliness
shall be found amongst them, then amongst the Papists. Furthermore amongst
the Magistrates and those that sit at the helue of justice, there shall be found
no less abuse and corruption then in other places: yea men shall find many
amongst the preachers that might be amended. Some will be found negligent in
their ministry, or rather they will be so given to seek their own profit,
that they will have no great care of their office. And which is worst of all,
there are amongst these some iesters and belly Gods which desire nothing but
too make good cheer, and too make them selves companions of the wickeddest
sort, that they may have liberty too live as they list. But let us put the
case thar it were ten times as ill as they say: yet notwithstanding their
excuse is always frivolous who set such bars unto them selves, least they
should draw near and come too the Church of God.

But let us indeed fix our eyes upon the example of David. I beseech you, was
there such vprightnes in the estate of justice in Saules time, as had been too
be wished? Nay contrariwise we hear the complaints which they often times made
as well of the malice deceiptes, cruelty, and pride of the king, as of his
officers. Furthermore the Priests and the Levites, did they behave them selves
so holyly as men had occasion to be contented therewith? Nay rather we may
gather that the greatest part of them cleaued unto evil and nourished their
iniquities flattering them selves in them. And as concerning the common people,
there was amongst them great hypocrisy, and many manifest vices and
wickednesses. Lo then the Church of God full of many corruptions, and yet
notwithstanding David lotheth not to enter therein, and the desire that he had
waxed not cold. This is a merueilous hard temptation: I confess it: For the
more that any is touched with the zeal and honor of God, so much the more
just cause he has of greeuing and vexing himself, when by the corruption of
the Church he sees the shameful things which are done unto him. But the
remedy to overcome all this, is showed us by David: that is to say, that we
seek the face of God and so content our selves in the only beholding of him,
that in despite of all the troubles which Satan rayseth up against us, we on the
contrary part set down this conclusion, that there is nothing more pleasant
and beautiful, then to dwell in the Temple of God, where we may behold his
presence. So, as often as such offenses shall be set before us, let us remember
that it is Satan that woorketh, according to his accustomed craft, that he may
trouble our sight: and therefore let us be wise and wary that we be never led
away from beholding the face of God, too the end we may more fully rejoice our
selves, in the beholding thereof. Let us be ashamed of those miserable
Idolaters: for if any of them, after he has ill spent his money, and wasted
his body with travail, too go on some foolyshe pilgrimage, when he is come
unto that same place whither he determined, he find some Host which deals
hardly with him, or some boisteous knaves, which offer him violence, or some
priests which deceive him, to be short, he finds nothing there but
confusion: yet for all this he desisteth not from his devotion: For he will
say, that he went thither for this cause, that he might see and woorship,
either the body of some blessed Saint, or some image of our Lady, or else some
such relic: shall the only beholding of some dead carrion or some apish Idol
have more power to harden the unbelievers in their superstitions, then the face
and presence of God shall have toward us, in giving us constancy too follow
that which is good? We see this thing and that thing which does vex us: God
calls us unto himself and would have us, in beholding his face and
countenance too take such pleasure and delight, as we might patiently bear
all the rest. Wherefore let this be the buckler and only refuge of all the
faithful and godly to hold themselves fast, in the continual contemplation of
the face of God, howsoever Satan craftily go about to turn us from it. And in
very deed when we shall so esteem it as it deserves, we shall suffer no damage
in the loss of any other things whatsoever: albeit to say the truth the
greatest part of the^, be let and hindered not so much in the difficulty and
discommoditie of those things which concern the body. Not but that the
children of God have very great and hard combats in their consciences when
they find in the Churches which are said to be reformed, those offenses
whereof we have spoken before. And therefore they that advise with themselves to
withdraw themselves, into those places where the Gospel is preached, must be
warned too resist greeuouse assaults and too prepare them selves to withstand
them. And they also which have had experience already, must fortify
themselves, and in despite of the Devil, constantly continue too seek the
face of God. But when all shall be well wayed, there is nothing but very distrust,
which slacketh and holds back the greatest multitude: and as men are very
cunning to devise excuses, so the rich have theirs on the one side, and the
pore have theirs on the other. But how can it be, will some great rich landed
man say, that I should spoil my self of all that I have? Shall I so go and
strip my self of al my goods and possessions? I have wife and children: and
we have been brought up and nourished without any travail: and what shall we
do in a strange country where we shall neither have rents nor revenues? And
again the poor man he will allege, indeed I have but a little here: but I
have friends who relieve me through their liberality, I am called to live by
my labor: what shall I do in a strange country without penny or halpeny being
altogether unknown, having no favor nor maintenance? And it may be that
these excuses may be in part true: and without any further inquiry I grant
unto all, that it is a very bitter and troublesome thing, not only to forsake
the country where we were borne, but any place wherein we have dwelt.
Notwithstanding, al these devise how they may set lets and stops before
themselves that they come not too GOD: that is to say, although they find, not
only things so hard as they make them: yet they willingly shroude them selves
under any pretext or color whatsoever. Which is more, when they have made
their goodly complaynts, they think that they have stopped Gods mouth, and if
that he would press them any farther, that he does them great wrong, as
though he compelled them to an impossible matter. To this I have no other
answer, but that which is written in the 84. Psalm. 84.7.
Psalm, to wit, That the faithful gooing by the dry valleys and deserts, to
go unto the Temple of God, shall dig unto them selves pittes or cesternes. And
I believe that this is sufficient enough to tame al those, who will not through
obstinate malice resist God.

Wherefore let those which see them seles to be so beset with difficulties,
that they can see no way to escape out, remember that even the desert places in
which there is not to be found one drop of water, ought not to stop their
passage. And too the end that we may more fully understand this matter, let
us mark that God causes his children to seek him, not in the goodly meadows,
or in those same pleasant and beautiful shadows, but even by sharp and roughe
paths, by rocky and stony places, through waste and hidious regions, and all
this he does too exercise their faith, and to try their zeal and desire which
they have too come unto him. Although then that we cannot come unto God, but we
must pass by some desert and waste way, yet let us know, that this is not the
first time that God has so dealt with his faithful ones, and let us be of
good courage to follow those which have gone long time before us.

The second point is, that there ought to be such a great and fervent desire
in the Children of God, that nothing should let them from coming to woorship
him. The which thing at this day is to be seen in very few, al in a manner
are as it were become so delicate and so nice, that there needs not (as a man
would say) but the wagging of a straw too stop them and altogether to stay
them. They will say we can go no farther. And why so? Because they will not
vouchsafe too take the pain, to leap over the least block. It must needs be
said, that that zeal is very weak that is discouraged for so small a thing.
But we must not only be astonished so easily, but we must be armed against
the greatest lets and hindrances in the world. And that this may be brought
about, let us remember this lesson that God acknowledges none for his
children, but they that seek by dry and barren places, and which dig
cesternes where there was not any drop of water. Now under this word he
signifies unto us, that there is no labor or troubleso great that is not
meet for us to endure, to the end we may enjoy the face of God. Is the
question therefore of seeking a place, where a man may have liberty of serving
of God and worshipping him purely? how evil soever the passage be, be it as
they say betwixt fire or water, let not a man leave of to go on forewarde. Is
any man in gooing, pinched with famine or thirst? yet therefore must he not
faint. Neither let any man so think as though I spoke thereof at mine own
ease for it is the spirit of God, which teaches us, that rather the earth is
too be scratched with our nails, then we too be turned, or driven back from
coming too the Temple of God. Now if they which dwell in far countries, and
in the judgment of men are destitute and shut from al those means, of drawing
themselves intoo the Country where the Gospel is preached have no excuse, what
condemnation I pray you, ought they too look for, which have the gospel at
their door, and yet vouchsafe not to move one foot that they may enter intoo
the temple of God? There are sermons had every day, public prayers are
conceived, that they might come too Church, and there is but the stepping over
of one little brook, to come thither, and yet every one prete^deth that he
has some business in his house. To be short it seems that men place their
felicity in this too turn away from God. For it seems unto them that they
have gotten al, when they have found but one shifte, though it be the most
frivolous and lightest in the world. But seeing that it is so that we are so
inclined by nature to run from God, yea to part our selves from him when he
draws nearest unto us, let us pray that he will so stre^gthen us that we may
go courageously foreward, until that we have found lively fountains where
there was nothing but drought before. And although that that should fail us,
yet let us dig cesterns, waiting for rain from Heaven. And if it please God
that we feel not his help so quickly, that yet we give not over too go on
forewarde. I doubt not but that this will be found dark too many people: but
wherefore is it, but even for want of practice? we may preach a hundred
thousand years and never understand a word thereof, until that we learn by
experience, what it is too go by a dry and thirsty way, when we must come
unto God. But yet ought this doctrine too be familiar too all the faithful,
too wit, that they prepare and arm themselves against all the temptations that
Satan can devise against them, too break of this path whereby they are
brought unto God. And in very deed al they which faithfully employ them
selves too seek God, although they go not out of their place, yet they find
many lettes and incombraunces, which might easily turn them away if they had
not a settled courage too resist them. But it is great pity, that the greatest
patte of them (as I have already said) lie down under those difficulties
which offer themselves unto them. They will grant that they ought too do so,
and will seem too be very well appointed, but when need is their heart
fails them: and they which are well entered, for the most part lie down for
weariness in the midst of the way. This lesson therefore of digging pittes,
is so much the more to be remembered of us: that is to say, that we seek the
means which are yet hidden from us, that we may go on forwards. Let us I say
enforce our selves and strive above all humane strength, If things fall not
out to our desire, let us not therefore give over, to follow with patience, that
happy course wherein God has set us. It is certain that when we shall call
upon the name of God in true faith, that he can easily turn these dry
deserts, intoo running waters: but in the mean time it is meet that we
according to our duty, put our hands as they say too the work. For God
would not that we should remain blockishe and slouthful, without remoouing
either hand or foot, Rather he commands us too dig pittes. Let us
therefore travail too dig until that we have accomplished our journey. Let
us set before our eyes the poor miserable Soldiers, who every month sell
their life for a certain price as for their wages. If they be in the camp what
poverty do they endure? If they be besieged in any place, they yet endure much
more grievous things: If they undertake any voyage, there is neither cold nor
heat, wind nor rain, that may let them of, from the enterprise they have taken
in hand. And sometimes they are brought to such exremitie, that unless they
dig too find water, they have not a drop to drink. There is no labor
distress or misery, which they will not suffer for the perfourmaunce of that
which they have undertaken. And yet when they have done all, whether they
escape or no, they have but lost their labor, because they have but served
Satan. This is to be understood of evil and wicked soldiers, that have not
the fear of GOD before their eyes.
The son of God through his infinite grace has chosen us to be his
soldiers: and we know what reward he has prepared for us. How much more
courageous then ought we to be in his service? the^ those miserable and
desperate men, that do but purchase their own destruction? Neither is this
mentioned here that any man should reckon how many miles there is from his
house to the place where he may freely worship God, make confession of his
faith, and hear the pure doctrine of the Gospel: We have yet to go a far
longer journey which lasts all our life long. Have we haunted the Church of
GOD a year or more? If we continue, we shall daily find new cares. For
sometimes we shall be visited with sickness, sometimes with poverty, either our
wives or children, shall die, or else the means we have too serve God shall be
taken away as before time, and we shall be tossed with disquietnesse and sundry
troubles. Wherefore it is very requisite that even unto the end we have our
hands ready too dig Pittes, and our nails too scratch the earth, if
necessity so require. If any man allege, how then? are we not in the Temple
of God? I aunsweare that we are so in it, as we must come every day nearer and
nearer unto it, and enter into it. True it is that we daily behold the face
of God, but we are not yet so fully satisfied therewith, as we shall be when
we shall be gathered unto him. Wherefore it behooves that all generally apply this
to their use, and because Satan cease not to hinder al those that go unto
God, let every one enforce himself, too continue constantly too do that too
morrow which he has done to day. For if the enemy cease not too endeavor to
drive us back from our course toward GOD, much less ought we too loose our
courage to set our selves forward, and continually without ceasing gather new
strength. But to the end we may do this thing, it behooves that we have such an
affection well printed in our hearts as David had: I had rather (says he)
dwell at the thresholde of Gods house, then in the Tents and Tabernacles of
the wicked: Wherein he plainly declares that to purchase this benefit, to
dwell in the house of God, he will accounte it no evil too be abased and made
the most despised in the world. Let us consider I beseech you, what his
estate was. He was the kings son in law and one of the chief Princes in
the Country, and yet notwithstanding he is content too be set behind, and
put among the basest sort of the common people, upon condition too have some
little corner in the Church of God. If this desire reigned in all, they would
not make so much ado too rid them selves and spend so long time in
bargening for exchange they have too make, in forsaking their houses and
Country to come to the Church of God. But there are very few found, which
can take in hand and willingly bear the diminishing of their substance,
every man does greatly desire, nicely to be carried in a horselitter where he
may worship god at liberty, and he would have both lands and possessions,
trading of merchandise, credit, kindred and friendeship, and all other
commodities of this life, by and by to follow. But whiles they are at this
point, I pray you how esteem they Jesus Christ? For all that ever they will do,
at his desire is but as it were by way of pastime: which is but a very poor
and seely consideration. For albeit we be nothing worth indeed, yet has he
of his infinite goodness so greatly esteemed us, that he has not spared him for
our salvation: yea I say him in whom consists the perfection of all our
felicity. And shall we in the mean time grudge and repine to forgo some
tra^sitorie things, and to account our estate and condition worse, if we be not
so well handled and entreated and have our pleasures as before? This is very
far from following that which S. Paul has showed us by his example: that is,
that we should count all things as filth and dung that does hinder us from
possessing of Jesus Christ, and that we should forsake it as a hurtful thing,
knowing that whatsoever separateth us from the true life must needs draw us
unto death. This also is far of from following that exhortation which is made
unto us by Jesus Christ, that we should sell and forsake all that we have in this
world for the kingdom of heaven, knowing that this is that precious stone,
that is a hundred thousand times more worth then al those things that men so
much desire and so greatly esteem. If any man will object that a man may come
to the kingdom of heaven, without forsaking of his house: I answer that it is
not without cause that our Savior Christ does thus name the preaching of the
gospel. They therefore that are destitute thereof and make not account as much as
is possible to sell e those means whereby they may enjoy it, sufficiently
declare that they are too carnally affected to the pelf of this world, and are
not yet disposed to exchange them with the kingdom of heaven. But if they might
possess both together, I would not envy the^: but if they cannot hold their
possession, and nestle still in their neastes, unless they will defraude
themselves of the fode of the children of God: yea if they cannot maintain
themselves in the state wherein they are, without cutting themselves of from the
church, it is meet for them to regard that necessity which god has laid upon
the^. They may easily bring forth such excuses as these, but al these shall
stand the^ in no steed, when that great Judge shall thunder upon those with his
terrible voice that set more store by that earthly life that is common unto us
with brute beasts, then by the everlasting inheritance which he has
appointed for his children. And it is a very strange thing that many imagine to
stop our mouth, unless we do assign the^ some means and state whereby they
may live in serving god. My condition, (they will say) is thus in my country:
if I forsake it, what shall become of me, or how shall I live? As though god had
appointed the^ that preach the Gospel to be stewardes and overseers, to appoint
every man his state and his ordinary, and to give every one according to his
worthiness and dignity his certain pencio^ and wages? If we can help them by
counsel or direction we are bound to do it, yea though they do not request it:
but if we be not able, shall our liberty therefore be lost to teach every man
that which God has commanded him? But if they had well learned and remembered
this doctrine of David, too love better a little corner in the porch of the
temple of god then the highest and most honorable places that they might
choose amongst the unfaithful, they would never think so hard, and stand
so doubtful what way were best too be taken. But this is the mischief that
they would hold all, and sleep in whole skins not suffering their riches or
honors too be diminished in any point, nor forgoing their ease and delights,
that is too say, they cannot bow their necks nor bend their backs too bear
Jesus Christ. Let the^ plead and contend about the matter, as much as they
list, yet must they needs in the end be condemned. Concerning such as have
already forsaken their country, that they might come too a place, where they
might freely serve God, and where the truth of the Gospel might be faithfully
preached unto them, it is very necessary that they oftentimes call this
sentence to their remembrance, to the end they may from day too day exercise
them selves in the practice thereof, that they may be hartened in the continual
use and custo^e of it. For many things may come to pass with the time, and
daily do, which may discourage the^ that had a great zeal. They that join
themselves to the churches of God, are not always so received as they are
worthy. Order many times is so perverted, that the worthiest too be set
forward, are set behind. Such temptation might indeed turn them back from
their salvation, causing them too leave of the good course whereunto they were
entered, were it not that they rested contented rather too be in the last, and
most despised in the house of GOD then too be quite shut out.

Thus the good faithful men indeed, not having all that they might well
desire, but contrariwise feeling a great many troubles in forsaking their
country learn to comfort themselves with this only word, yet are we in the
house of God. Now let the worldlings deride as much as they list, and blase us
out in their pride as abiectes and outcastes: it is enough that God does us
this honor, too account us of his Palace and of his sanctuary. We see what
pain ambitious fools take that they may be counted and reckoned of the
family and house of some Prince: and how happy they reckon themselves, if
they may but come into the kitchen or Hall. Now when we shall be the veriest
abiectes in the world, yet so that we be of the church of God, he leads us
too the most high and merueilous secrets of his wisdom with such
familiarity as if a father should communicate and open himself too his
children. And sure we were very unthankful if this recompense should not
satisfy us. It is very true that the faithful may well be tempted and
provoked when their affairs shall go backwarde, and that the wicked shall
triumph in all prosperity. But when they shall consider on the other side,
that God has chosen them too be of his house, and that he entertaineth them
there as his children, this consolation shall be worth little, if it be not
sufficient to appease all the griefs and enimities wherewith they may be
troubled. And certainly they that murmr and vex them selves, because they
are not entreated of God as they desire, or repent themselves for having begun
well, show plainly that they have not followed the counsel of our lord Jesus,
which is, that they should have made their through accounte, when they begin
their building, what it will cost them to make an end of it: to the end: they
vex not themselves for having spent too much, and so by this means leave the
work imperfect. Which is worst the most part of those which so faint in the
midst of the way, do leave of without any cause: wherein they show themselves
most impudent. For they which had neither house nor land, and with whom it was
all one, either to dwell in their own Country, or in the farthest part of the
world, yet they are not ashamed to vpbraid God, that they have left this and
that for his sake. But yet let us put the case that they had lost much of their
substance for the Gospelles sake: yet notwithstanding it is a very mockery,
more to esteem a dandiprat them a gold noble. In the mean season nothing is
heard but these murmurings and complaints: and would to God that such people
were far away from us, at their own case. And yet notwithstanding there are
neither poor nor rich that have any just excuse too fall away for the
afflictions which happen unto them, by following God. But because this is a
very hard thing, the remedy is showed unto us in the 84. Psalm, where David,
after he had said, Psalm. 84. b.
that the man is blessed that hops in God, adds by and by, in whose heart
are his ways. As if he would say, he that has his mind wholly bent too walk
as God has commanded him. Lo therefore two things which cannot be separated
the one from the other: that we have our hope in god, and that we walk in the
right path. Wherefore as our infirmity does let us, or makes us so lasie,
that we could be content at al assaies to turn another way, let us fortify
our selves in faith, and hope, praying our good God, that he will make us so
to look unto him, that nothing trouble us, whilst we trust in his promises,
whereby he has assured us that he will be with us for ever both in life and
in death.

An exposition upon the 87. Psalm.
The Argument.
We see that when all things go well with the Children of this world, how
they please themselves in their own state and condition, and how proudly they
advance themselves in despising the Church of GOD: and although they be often
times tamed by afflictions: yet can they not forgette this so foolish
ouerweening arrogance, so to please themselves in the transitory trumperie of
the earth. In the mean season, they care not greatly for religion, nor for the
service of God: for so much as delighting themselves with their vain delights,
riches, commodities, pompes and honors they think themselves happy without the
help of God.

Now it falls out oftentimes, that God handles such people according too
their desires, as if he would even fat them up, until the due time of
punishing them be come: and contrariwise he afflicts his Church with many
adversities, and handles it wonderful roughly: or rather leaves it too
languish in a poor and miserable condition: in such sort that it might think
it self most unhappy: at the least it is subject too the scoffing and biting
slanders of worldlinges. To the end therefore that the faithful be not
deceived, with such an outward show, it is needful for them too be drawn too
a more high consideration: too the end they may hold that for undoubted, which
is said in the 33. Psalm. ver. 12. that that people is blessed, which has the
Lord for their God. And this is the sum of this present Psalm, too show
that there is but one only Church of God, which excels in dignity and
excellency all the kingdoms and common wealths of the earth, because that it
has God, for the Tutor and Keeper of the salvation thereof. And because it is
under his hand and leading, yea too the end that amongst the horrible
tempests, troubles and chaunges wherewith the world is continually shaken, it
may remain constant and stand fast, and principally I that being so
miraculously saved through the grace of God, it may courageously go on too the
battle; until that it attain too that crown of glory which is laid up for
it on high. And this undoubtedly is a singular benefit of GOD, and a miracle
worthy never too be forgotten, that amongst so many alterations and
chaunges of the kingdoms of the world, he continues his church from age
too age, and never suffers it too be abolished. But because that oftentimes,
whiles the unbelievers abound in riches, and floorishe in credit and
authority, the poor Church of God is tossed hither and thither, with many
dangers and infinite shipwrackes, yea which is more, is oftentimes seen as it
were swalowed up: altogether like as a Boat which is even ready too be
drowned: the felicity thereof consists principally in that everlasting
estate which God has laid up for it in his kingdom.

The circumstance of the time wherein this Psalm was made serves us very
much, the better too make us too understand it. For although the people were
then returned from Babylon, where it had been long time holden Captive,
although that the Church were gathered as it were into one body, too be no
more so scattered as it had been: although that the temple were builded and
the Altar set up, thereupon to offer up sacrifices, and all the worship of God
restored: Nevertheless because there was but one handful of people returned
into the holy land, in respect of the great multitude that went out of it: and
of that that remained, was daily diminished through the violences and outrages
of the enimi-mies: in such sort that the state of the people was very
conte^ptible: and also because the temple had no such majesty as it had
before: All this makes that the faithful could have no great hope, for the
time is come. And surely it seems impossible that ever they should be
restored too their former state from whence they were fallen. Wherefore it was
very dangerous, least in calling too remembrance their discomfiture and
overthrow, and thinking also of so many euilles wherewith they ceased not too
be oppressed, that they had not been shaken, and in the end had not fallen
too utter despair. The end therefore of this Psalm is too comfort them, that
they might not be discouraged in their miseries. And the better to bring this
to pass, God promises the^, that they shall not only recover that which they
had lost, but also lifts the^ up into a better hope, too wit, of an
incomparable glory, as also it had been promised unto them by their Prophet
Aggeus, Agge. 2.10
that the majesty of the second Temple should be greater then that of the
first.

It remains now that we apply this Psalm to our use, God would that this
consolation, should be of such power and importance toward the faithful of
that time, that not only it might reform them, to the end they might not be
oppressed with so many euilles: but that it should as a man would say have
drawn them out of the grave, to have lifted them up, even to Heaven. Now
forasmuch as we know, that the things which were foretold of that time were
accomplished, we are more then unthankful, if the experience which our
ancient Fathers had, being joined with the promises of God, do not suffice to
confirm our faith so much the more. For it cannot be sufficiently expressed in
words, how Jesus Christ with his coming has adorned and magnified his
Church. For then the true religion, which was shut up, til that time in the
country of Iewrie, was spread abroad througheout the whole world: and God
which before was only known of one only race, began now to be called upon
in all tongues and thorowout all nations. Then the world which before had
been so miserably distracted and as it were torn in pieces with so many
sects, errors, and superstitions, was united and knit into one holy concord of
faith. Then all people acquainted them selves of very fervent desire, with the
Jews, whom before they greatly abhorred and detested. Also kings and people,
of their own accord, willingly yielded themselves too be subject to Jesus
Christ. Wolves and Lions were changed into lambs. God powered out upon the
faithful the gifts of the holy Ghost, which excelled all the glory of the
world. And this was a thing so much the more wonderful, that the body of the
Church which was gathered together and compounded of so many diverse members,
and which were separated the one from the other, by far distaunt Countries
that yet notwithstanding that he so increased and maintained the^. Wherefore
it must needs be also that God wrought mightily, in multiplying the preaching
of the Gospel in so short a time, and in making it so wonderfully to fructify
and to profit. Wherefore although that the nobility and dignity of the
Church, had never bin set forth in this present Psalm, yet notwithstanding
the incomparable graces which GOD displayed forth at the coming of his Son,
shows that the Church is truly, an heavenly, and not an earthly kingdom.
Moreover it must needs be that this be that present time, wherein God so
magnified and made the state of his Church too shine, that the faithful, the
better to esteem the worthiness of it, look more high then man's reason and
understanding can attayn unto. For from the time that it so floorished as we
have said, it had no pomp neither of Gold, nor silver, nor precious stones:
but rather her triumphs were in the blood of Martyrs: and as she was rich in
spirit, so she was naked and poor concerning the mucke of the world: as
she was precious and beautiful in holiness, before God and his Angels, so
she was contemptible in the world. She had many outward and open enemies who
cruelly persecuted her: or rather did mischeuously devise to cast her headlodg
under the earth. There were many traynes and platformes laid: as the Devil
will never cease to molest to entrappe her by Hypocrites. To be short the
dignity thereof was evermore hidden under the Cross of Christ. On the other
side a man might easily judge, that all the woorthines which she has, is
spiritual, so as she cannot be seen with carnal eye. Wherefore the
consolation which is contained here cease not to be very meet and seasonable
for this time: to the end the faithful may be warned, to think upon a more
perfect state of the Church, then that which is apparaunt unto them. But this
is very necessary for us at this day. It is long since that for the sins
of our Fathers, GOD suffered this noble and excellent state which he had
erected in his Church, too be disfigured, and placed in stead thereof an
horrible desolation. And yet even at this time, the poor Church is
woonderfully oppressed by our transgressions, and mourns under the cruel
Tyranny of the adversaries of his truth, under the slanders and reproaches of
her enemies, and under the mockeries of the Devil, and of wicked men: in such
sort that there is nothing that the worldlinges, who desire to be at their
case do more shun, then to be holden and accounted of the number and
company of the Faithful: whereof it comes that the most part separate
themselves from the Church, as though men could not be of it unless they
were most unhappy and accursed. Whereupon it is easy for us too gather how
profitable the doctrine of this present Psalm is unto us to the end we
might without ceassing meditate upon it.

Psalm 87. Ver. 1. To the sons of Chorah, a Psalm and a Songue: The
fou^dations thereof are laid amongst the Mountains of his holiness.
THE naming of the sons of Chorah, do not so much show that they were the
authors of this Psalm, as that they were special Musitions appointed too
sing in the Temple. Howbeit it might be said also; that some of this family,
was the Author thereof. Concerning the Text where it is said, that the
foundations thereof are laid amongst the holy hills: this must be applied
unto God. For it is a common manner of speech amongst the Hebrews too put
the Relative before the Name of him of who^ mention is made. The meaning
therefore is this. That he has laid his fu^dation among those holy hills. Many
have understood this of the Temple: but this agrees not. Others understand it
of the Psalm as-though it were said that the argument or matter of this
Psalm is too entreat of those holy mountains where the Temple was builded:
but this is no more agreeable then the former. But as I have already said the
purpose of the Prophet is to show that God has chosen the holy mountains, to
the end he may there build his royal City Jerusalem and his Temple. For it
follows a little after in the text that the most highest shall establish it.
It is very certain that God is the true and principal founder of all the
Cities in the world: but this so excellent a title is not attributed too any
other City but to Jerusalem, that it should be the everlasting resting place
of God, and that he will dwell there, because that he has chosen it. Psalm. 132.3.
We must always note this difference, that other Cities were not builded by
the power and authority of God, unless it were for their earthly policy:
but that Jerusalem was his sanctuary, and that he had specially chosen it as it
were the seat of his majesty. And so also does the Prophet Esaias speak
thereof: What shall the messengers of the people say? it is, Esaias. 14.32.
that the Lord has founded Syon. Which is more, although that all the Country
of Judea was dedicated unto him, yet it is said that casting al other aside,
he has reserved this City of Jerusalem to himself that he may reign there:
and this is that which follows in the second verse.

Verse. 2. The Lord loves the gates of Syon above all the tabernacles of Jacob.
Too which agrees that which is said in the 78. Psalm, Psalm. 78.60.
that God has rejected Siloh the trybe of Ephraim, the tabernacle, of Joseph
that he might dwell in Syon which he had loved, Let us mark well also the
cause which the Prophet mentions here, why God has preferred one certain
place, before all others: to wit, not for the worthiness of the place, but
for the mere love which he bare unto it, wherefore if any man ask, whence
this excellent privilege that Jerusalem had came, that it should be called
the holy City of God, and his royal Palace: the answer is easy and short,
and that is because it has so pleased God. This pleasure is as it were, the
fountain and root of his love. The end as he shows was, because he would
have there some place, wherein his religion should have dwelling to norish an
assured unity of faith amongst the Jews, until the coming of our Lord
Jesus: and that in the end the Gospel should spring from thence, too be
published throughout the whole world. And thus the Prophet to magnify the
City of Jerusalem says, that God is the founder thereof, and that he there
rules as the governor. But to the end that men should not take occasion too
be proud of such an honor, he adds and shows, that all the excellency
which Jerusalem has, must be attributed too the mere grace and adoption of
God. In that he puts Syon for the whole City, and the gates for the whole
wall and compass of the City, it is by taking a part for the whole. By the
mountains, whereof he speaks in the plural number, they understand commonly
Syon, and Moriah, which butted either upon other. Now although I do not
utterly reject this exposition, yet me thinks one might extend this word
further: too wit, to the whole region. For Jerusalem was situated among
mountains.

Ver. 3. Wonderful things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. Selah.
Word for word it is, that that which is said in thee, are wonderful
things. But we have to mark the purpose of the Prophet, or rather that which
the holy Ghost would here speak by the Prophet. The condition of the people of
the Jews, was at this time very conte^ptible, so as there was small account
made of the^. They had many great and grievous enemies on every side which
vexed them, and but few had the courage to put back offenses. Every day there
fell out, new alterations beyond all hope of men: in such sort that it
seemed, that after things went so to wrack and waxed worse and worse, that
all in the end should come to utter ruin, in such sort that any man could
hardly hope that ever the City of Jerusalem should be restored again. Now to
the end that the hearts of the faithful should not be utterly swalowed up
with heaviness and despair, they are here by the Prophet, set to lean upon
that word which God had pronounced of the estate of his Church to come: for
there is no doubt but that the holy Ghost withdraws the faithful in this
place from the beholding of things present, to the end he might bring them
unto the promises, which did assure them of an incredible glory that God
would shortly give too his Church. So then howsoever the thing that appears,
serve not to make the children of God rejoice, yet notwithstanding the Prophet
commands the^ to lift up their senses on high, by the virtue of that word
the which is given unto them: too the end they might patiently wait until
those things which had been promised unto them should be executed and
performed. On this manner they were admonished and exhorted too read
diligently and to meditate day and night, those ancient prophesies which
concerned the restoring of the Church: and specially those which were contained
in the book of Esaias from the 40. chap. unto the end of the book. Further
that they should reach out their care and diligently hearken, giving faith and
credit to the Prophets, which were sent at that time to comfort them and to
preach unto them the kingdom of Jesus Christ which was near: whereupon it
follows that we can not judge aright of the felicity of the Church, unless
we judge of it by the word of God.

Ver. 4. I will rehearse Rahab and Babylon amongst them that know me:
behold Palestine and Tyrus, with Aethiopia, he was borne there.
The name of Rahab is put as well in other places of the Scripture for Egypt:
and here it very well agrees to this sentence: For the Prophets mind is too
describe the excellent and glorious estate of the Church which then was hid.
He says therefore that they who before had been deadly enemies, or were
altogether strangers unto it, should not only be her familiar friends but
as it were engraffed into one body, too the end too be accounted for Citizens
of Jerusalem. I will put (says he) intoo mine accounte, or I will enrowle
Egypt and Babylon, amongst my famyliars or household ones. Further he adds
that the Philistines they of Tire and Ethiopia, who hithertoo had had great
discord with the people of God, should be unto him as good friends, as if
they were the natural borne of Iewry. Now in speaking so thereof he specifieth
a singular dignity of the Church of GOD: and that is that they which did
despise it, and did wish it too be utterly rased and destroyed, should
gather themselves round about unto it, yea, and should account it for a great
honor too be enrouled and acknowledged amongst his people. For the Prophet
signifies that all of their own accord, should renounce their own natural
Countries, wherein tofore they put all their glory. This is therefore as much
as if he should say, that from what quarter soever men were borne, were it in
Palestine, in Tire or Ethiopia, they should be glad and well a paid too be
numbered with the people of God and acknowledged for Citizens of Jerusalem. The
Rabbines of the Jews, make a crooked gloss of this place, that is, that from
other nations of the world, there shall come very few excellent men, in wit
or virtue: but that in their race there shall be a great number. As though it
were said that there will be hardly found a man worthy of praise in any
country. So as they may be pointed at which are such with the finger: But
that in Sion there shall be great abundaunce. The Christian Doctors with one
consent apply this to our Lord Jesus, and they think that the reason is here
rendered, why the strangers yea the enemies of the Church shall desire too be
ingraffed and inrowled therein, too wit, because the son of God shall be borne
there, whose office it is too gather men which were dispersed into an holy
unity of faith, and to heap the scattered members together too make one
whole body thereof. Now this sentence indeed is very true in it self: but
it agrees not unto the place. And we must always diligently take heed that
the Scripture under color of subtlety be not racked too any other sense then
it ought. Let it suffice us therefore too have the plain and simple exposition
thereof, that every one may desire it for a great benefit, to be received a
Citizen of the Church. The which is yet more fully confirmed by that which
follows.

Ver 5. And of Syon it shall be said, this and that man is borne in it: and the
most highest shall establish it.
As I have said already the Prophet continues his sentence minding to
signify, that God shall gather people together af all Countries of the world,
too incorporate them into his Church, as new burgesses and Citizens. Albeit
that he use an other manner of speaking, it is because strangers shall be reputed
among the holy people of GOD, as if they were descended of the stock of
Abraham. He had said in the former verse, that the Chaldeans and Egyptians
should yield themselves to become of the household of the church-that the
Ethyopians, Philistines, and the men of Tire, should desire too be enrowled
in the number of his Children: now he adds for confirmation of his sentence
that the troop shall be great and infinite, too replenish the City of
Herusalem, which for a time was desolate, and to make it most populous: or
rather which had been inhabited but even of an handful of men in comparison of
the people which should arrive there. That which is here briefly promised is
declared more at large in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 54..1
when he says, Rejoice o barren that did not bear, for the widow shall
have more children then she who has a husband. Enlarge the place of thy
tents, Esaias. 60.4
and let them spread out the cords etc. Also thy children shall come from all
far countries: lift up thine eyes round about thee, all those shall be
gathered together unto thee. And in the 44. Chapter he uses the same manner of
speech that we read here, Esaias. 44.5.
or at the least which draws very near unto it. One shall say, I am of the
Lord: another shall be called by the name of Israel: and another shall subscribe
with his hand, I am the Lords: and others shall call themselves by the name
of Israel.

Neither is it without cause that the Prophet uses this word of birth,
signifying thereby that the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, and such like should be
joined to the flock of God. For albeit they were not by birth, of Syon, and
the natural children, but only through adoption must be incorporated into
the body of the holy people: Yet because our entry into the Church is as a
second birth, this similitude is very apt and agreeable, And indeed Jesus
Christ plighteth and marries himself with the Faithful upon this condition,
Psalm. 45.11. Gal. 4.5.16.
that they should forgette, their own people, and the house of their Father.
And this is the cause why Saint Paul says that we begin too be the
Children of GOD and of the Church, when we are borne anewe, of incorruptible
Seed, and are made new Creatures. And surely we are not otherwise regenerate
into the heavenly life then by the Ministry of the Church. In the mean time
let us call too remembrance the difference that Saint Paul puts here
betwixt the earthly Jerusalem, which as it is a servant, cannot but bring
forth children into bondage: and the heavenly, which conceaueth and brings
forth children into liberty through the Gospel. In the end of the verse,
there is a promise of the long continuance of the Church: for oftentimes it
comes to pass that Cities, the sooner they creep up, into sudden riches
and greatness, the shorter while they continue in their prosperity. To the
end therefore that men think not the felicity of the Church too be so
transitory, the Prophet declares that she shall have her stabilitie in GOD,
and that therefore she shall continue. As though he should say, it is no
marvel though other Cities be always shaken, and subject to many
alterations: because they are tossed with the world, and have not everlasting
keepers. But the condition of this new Jerusalem shall be otherwise: for her
perpetuity being founded in God, shall stand sure, though Heaven and Earth
should fall.

Ver. 6. The Lord shall enrowle his people by writing: he was borne there.
Selah.
The Prophet means that the name of Syon, shall be so Noble and Honorable,
that every one shall desire too be received there for a Citizen. For he
speaks of the principal benefit, and of a thing the most too be wished
for that ever could happen. The meaning therefore is thus: when God shall take
accounte of his people, or shall enrowle them, the greatest benefit and honor
that he can do unto his best beloved, shall be too accounte them for Citizens of
Syon, rather then of any other City. For this shall be a greater dignity, to
have some corner among the common people of the Church, then to be greatly
esteemed or too rule in any other place. Notwithstanding the Prophet
admonishes us, from whence it is that such a benefit proceeds, that they
which were strangers should so suddenly be brought into the Church: to wit of
the free gift of God. And in deed they which are the slaves of Satan and of
sin can never get by their own diligence any such title and right to be
Citizens of heaven. It is therefore God only which distributeth according to
his own good pleasure, peoples in their orders, and seuereth them one from the
other, as it seems good unto him: forasmuch as the condition is equal and
alike in all by nature. The enroulement whereof he speaks here, is too be
understood of the calling whereby God declares who are those that he has
chosen. For although that he has written his children in the book of life,
before the creation of the world, yet notwithstanding he solempnly sets
them down in his register, when he gives them the mark of his adoption,
calling them to his truth and renewing them by his spirit.

verse. 7. As well the fingers as the Players on instruments, all my springes
are in thee.
Partly the shortness of this sentence, causes it to be doubtful, and partly
the doubtful signification of the word. All expositors agree very well in
this, that the word spring or fountain is taken hereby a Metaphor or
similitude. But one sort apply it to the affection of the heart, other some to
the inward thoughts. There are also which translate it Veins or Melodies,
whose opinion I would well allow of, if the propriety of the Hebrwe tongue
would suffer it: but because that this is somewhat wrested, I tie my self to
that which is more proper and natural: and that is, that the Prophet by this
word signifies the eyes or the look. As if he should say, I have always my
sight fixed and fastened upon thee. For the root of the Hebrew word signifies
an eye. It remains therefore to see, what that other member signifies as well
the fingers as the players on instruments. This is a very abrupt sentence, but
this lets not but that men may easily gather the meaning thereof: to wit,
that there shall be so large an argument of joy in the church, after that it
shall be restored, that the praises of God, shall sound forth, there without
ceasing, as well of the voice as of the instruments of music. He confirms
therefore that which he had said before of that glorious repayring of Sion and
of Jerusalem: thereby showing that for the great felicity which shall be there,
men shall have occasion to rejoice, too sing, and too praise God for ever. In
the mean season he shows also to what end and purpose God so liberally
enricheth his Church with his gifts and graces: to wit, that the faithful
might show forth by hymns and praises and songs, that they are not
unthankful toward him: On the other side we have to note the zeal, the
love, and carfulness, and affection of the Prophet toward^^ the Ch^^che. For
he gives testimony thereof, too the end to exhort us al too follow hi^
example, as it is said in an other place, let my right hand be forgotten if
Jerusalem be not the chief of my joy. Now then all our senses and affections
rest them selves in the Church, Psa^^. ^.
when as we labor too withdraw them from the vanities of this world, which
cause them to wander and stray. The which thing is done, when in despising of
the honors, delights, riches, and pompes of this world, we learn too
content our selves with that spiritual glory of the kingdom of Christ.

FINIS
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Man. 1579.


