A Commentary of M. John Calvin upon the Epistle to the Philippians, wherein
is set out the necessity and profit of affliction unto the faithful, the
benefit of God his word, the fruits, of unity and humility, free
justification by faith in Jesus Christ without our own merits, the assurance,
joy, and contented minds of the godly, and their perseueraunce in godliness
unto the end. With many other comfortable and profitable points of Religion.

Translated out of Latin by W. B.

Imprinted at London for Nicolas Lyng, and are to be sold at the West door of
S. Paul's Church. Anno. 1584.

To the Right honorable, Sir Frances Walsingham, Knight, chief secretary
unto her Majesty, chancellor of the order, and one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy counsel, William Becket wishes increase of honor, and all
heavenly happiness.
DIomedes a prince of the Grecians (Right honorable) as Homer in his Iliades
records, emboldened by Pallas, feared no whit at all the force of the
Troianes, nor the strength and multitude of their confederates: but valiantly
for his Countries safety, hazarded his life amids his enemies. And my self
hoping of your honors favorable protection, not regarding the curious carping
of a great sort in these days: for the benefit of many have yielded my self
to be censured of all. For as to encourage and animate a Captain there can be
none fitter tha^ Pallas, to whom the ancient writers have ascribed both wisdom
in giving counsel, and couragiousnes in fight: so for your great love of
godliness, and singular zeal in furthering of religion, there is none more fit
than your honor to whom this godly commentary of master Calvin, discoursing
of many excellent points of our religion, might be presented. For here is set
out the condition of the godly, how the Lord in this life hu^bleth them by
afflictions, and after receives them to eternal glory. Here is set out their
assurance of Gods favor, their joy in greatest dangers, and their contented
minds in all estates. Here is set out the benefit that comes by preaching of
the gospel, and the malice, practices, and confusion of false teachers. Here
is set out the fruit of humility, the necessity of unity and agreement among
the faithful, free justification by Jesus Christ, the heavenly conversation of
Christians, and how they must continue steadfast in godliness unto the end. And
although I offer these being another man's labors, under my own name: yet
neither enuiously to derogate any thing from the due commendation of so worthy
a person (as Homeromastix did) nor presumptuously by another man's travels to
seek my own praise as that vainglorious Poet, who presented Virgils verses,
as if they had been his own, unto Augustus the Emperor. But considering that
a good thing the more common it is, the more comme^dable and better it is
(especially being requested thereunto) for the comfort and profit of all true
English christians, I have made that common to all, which before was private,
but to a few. We say in our common proverb that good wine need no Iuie bush,
and a naked truth barely uttered without any filed phrases of fine eloquence,
is of it self sufficiently commendable. And this work (how simply soever I
have translated it, yet notwithstanding faithfully) being written by the holy
Apostle inspired with Gods spirit, and expounded by so notable a father of the
Church, cannot but carry with it amongst all good men sufficient credit. I
have therefore presumed, not only to present it unto your honorable view, but
also under your name, as a sufficient shield against al injuries to publish it
unto al. Most humbly beseeching your honor with your accustomed favor to
accept these first fruits of my travels* and not to measure the simplenes of
the gift with the worthiness of your own person: but rather to respect the good
will and willing desire I had in most humble manner by all duty possible to
gratify your honor. So shall I not only be encouraged, to the uttermost of my
simple skill to employ my self to the profit of others: but also as before by
general duty, so now by particular benefit I shall be bound to pray for the
preservation of your honor in health, and increase of dignity, godliness,
virtue, and all heavenly happiness. The Almighty mulply his graces upon you, and
grant you as many prosperous years, as virtuous and godly properties (and both
infinite) that here you may live long to his glory, and hereafter live for
ever, to your own everlasting comfort.

Your Honors in all humble duty, WILLLIAM BECKET.

THE ARGUMENT OF the epistle of S, Paul written unto the Philippians.
IT is manifest, that Philippos is a city of Macedonia, situate in the borders
of Thracia: in whose fields Pompeius was vanquished by Caesar, and afterward
Brutus and Cassius overcome by Antonius and Octauius. Thus the dissension of
the Romans, by two notable battles, made the place famous. When Paul by a
vision was come into Macedonia, he laid the foundation of the Church first in
that city, as Luke records in the 16. of the Acts, and 12. verse: the which,
how it did not only continue constantly in the faith, but also by continuance
of time, numbers of men, and going forward in virtue, it was increased, this
epistle does testify. Furthermore this was the cause, why Paul did write unto
the Philippians, when they by Epaphroditus their Pastor, had sent unto him
those things that were needful for him in bonds, to preserve life, and for
other extraordinary charges: it is no doubt but Epaphroditus as well opened
unto him the estate of the Church, as was a perswader to supply those things,
whereof they were to be admonished. For it appears that they were tempted of
false prophets, which at that time wandered all abroad to corrupt sound
doctrine: but because they persisted in the truth, Paul commends their
constancy, yet being mindful of the frailty that is in men, and admonished
perhaps by Epaphroditus, that they were speedily to be confirmed: lest they
should again fall, he joins such admonitions, as he knew were convenient for
them. And first of all having testified the kind affection of his mind toward
them, whereby he might procure credit: he speaks of him self, and of his
own bonds, that they should not faint, because they saw him taken prisoner,
and in danger of his life. Therefore he shows that it is so far of, that
thereby the glory of the Gospel should be diminished, that it was rather an
argument to confirm it: and together with his own example, he exhorts them
to be ready to endure all things: at length with an exhortation unto unity
and patience, he concludes the first chapter. But because ambition is for the
most part a continual mother of dissension, whereof it comes to pass, that
there is a door open to new and strange doctrines: in the beginning of the
second chapter, he earnestly beseeches them, that they would prefer nothing
before humility and modesty: and unto that he uses many arguments. And that
he might the better keep them in their duty, he promises that he will send
Timotheus unto them shortly: yea he puts them also in hope of his own
coming: afterward he excuses the tarying of Epaphroditus. In the third
chapter, he inueigheth against the false prophets, and refuteth as well their
vain boastings, as the doctrine of circumcision, which they urged: against all
their inventions, he opposes only Christ: against their arrogancy, he
opposes as well his own former life, as his present purpose, wherein did
shine the image of Christian godliness. And this he aduertiseth us to be the
scope of our perfection, (whether thorough out all our life we must strive to
come) to communicate with Christ in his death, and in his resurrection: and he
proves it by his own example. The fourth chapter he begins with particular
admonitions, and forthwith descends into general. And he concludes the
epistle with a testimony of his thankefulnes toward the Philippians, lest they
should think that ill bestowed, which they had employed to the releeuing of
his necessity.

A COMMENTARY OF JOHN CALVINE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVLE unto the Philippians.
1 Paul and Timotheus, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ
Jesus, which are at Philippos, with Bishops and Deacons.

2 Grace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ.

3 I thank my God in all remembrance of you.

4 Always in all my prayers, praying for you all with joy.

5 For your fellowship in the Gospel, from the first day until now.

6 Being thus persuaded that he that has begun a good work in you, will
finish it unto the day of Jesus Christ.


Cap. 1.
Paul, etc. Seeing that it was Paul his custom to write his title, to
procure more credit unto him self and his ministry: he needed no farther
words of commendation unto the Philippians, who had tried him to be the true
Apostle of Christ, and did yet acknowledge it without controversy: for
constantly and in an even course they had gone forward in the calling of God.
Bishops. He names the Pastors severally for honors sake. Moreover, hereof we
may gather, that the name of a Bishop is common to all the ministers of the
word, since that he does attribute mo Bishops unto one Church. A Bishop and a
Pastor therefore signify one thing. And this place among the rest is one,
which Hierom does cite to prove the same thing, in his epistle to Euagrius, and
in his exposition upon the epistle to Titus. Afterward it grew to a custom,
that whom the Elders in their several Churches had set over their
congregation, he alone should be called a Bishop, notwithstanding that
proceeded from the custom of men, and depends not upon the authority of the
Scripture. Yet I confess, as the wits and manners of men are now, there can
no order stand among the ministers of the word, except one be set over the
rest. I speak of the several bodies of the Church, not of whole provinces,
much less of the whole world: notwithstanding although we must not contend
about words, yet it were far better, in speaking to follow the Holy Ghost,
being the Author of tongues, than to change the forms of speaking set down by
him, for worse. For of the corrupt signification of the word, this evil have
ensued: that, as though all Elders were not fellows called to the same office,
one under the color of this new name, have challenged unto him self a
dominion over the rest. Deacons. This name may be taken two manner of ways,
either for the collectors and prouiders for the poor, or for the Elders that
were appointed Censors of their manners: but because it is more used by Paul
in the former sense, I rather understand householders, who were chief in
receiving and distributing of the alms.

2 Grace be with you and peace. Nothing is more to be wished for, than that God
should be favorable unto us, which is signified by Grace: then that from him
prosperity, and good success in all things should proceed, which is
signified under the word Peace. For howbeit all things seem to please us: if
God be angry, even the very blessing is turned into a curse. Therefore the good
will of God, is the only foundation of our happiness, whereby it comes to
pass, that we enjoy true and perfect prosperity: and even by adversity also,
our salvation grows forward. Moreover, whereas he prays Peace from God, we
understand that whatsoever goodness happen unto us, it is the fruit of God his
liberality. Neither must we omit, that he also prays for these good things,
from our Lord Jesus Christ. For worthily is this honor given unto him, who is
not only the minister and disposer of his fathers bounty toward us, but also
works all things jointly together with him. Yet the Apostle would note
properly, that all the benefits of God do come unto us thorough him. There are
some that by the word Peace, had rather understand the peace of conscience, in
the which signification, I deny not, but it is sometimes used. But since it is
certain, that the Apostle would here knit up the sum of all good things, the
former interpretation which is given by Bucere, is more convenient. Therefore
willing to wish the sum of all happiness unto the godly, he comes unto the
fountain it self, namely unto the grace of God: which alone does not only
bring us eternal blessedness, but is the cause of all good things in this life.

3 I thank God. He begins with a gratulation for two causes, that by this
reason he might prove his love to the Philippians, and by praising those
things that are past, might exhort them hereafter to go forward. The other
argument of his love, he sets down to be ye carefulnes, which he expressed
in his prayers. Here we must note, that as often as he makes mention of joyful
things, forthwith he bursteth forth into a thanksgiving, which custom should
also be familiar unto us. It is also to be noted for what cause he gives
thanks unto God, namely for the fellowship of the Philippians in the Gospel of
Christ: for thereof follows that it must be acknowledged to have been
received of the grace of God. Where he says, In all remembrance of you, that
signify, as often as I remember you. Always in all my prayers. Join the words
thus, Praying always for you all in all my prayers. For as before he said the
remembrance of them was ye cause of his joy: so now he adds, that they are in
his mind when he prays. After he adds, that he makes his prayer for them
with joy. Joy is referred to the time past, prayer to the time future: for he
did rejoice in their happy beginnings, but wished their perfection. So it
behooves us always to rejoice for the benefits of God, which we have received,
that we might remember to desire of him those things which as yet we want. 5
For your fellowship. Now omitting the other clause, he shows what his joy
is: namely, because they were come into the fellowship of the Gospel, that is,
they were made partakers of the Gospel, which is well known to be done by
faith: for the gospel does nothing pertain unto us, that we should enjoy it,
until it be received of us by faith: although the name of fellowship may be
referred unto the common society of the saints: as if he should say, they
were gathered unto all the sons of God, into the faith of the Gospel. Further
when he says, from the first day, he commends their readiness, because they
showed them selves easy to be taught, so soon as the doctrine was propounded
unto them: this word until now, does note their perseverance. We know what a
rare virtue it is, by and by to follow God when he calls, and constantly to
go forward unto ye end. For many men are slow, and hard to obey, and more do
faint by lightness and inconstancy. 6 Being thus persuaded. To the argument of
his joy, he adds the trust he had conceived for ye time of their life
afterward: but some will say: how dare men be so bold in such weakness of
nature, among so many hindrances, slidings and downefals, as to promise unto
them selves any thing touching to morrow? Truly Paul did not gather this trust
from the constancy and virtue of men, but only of this, that God had declared
his love toward the Philippians. And this is altogether the true acknowledging
of God his benefits, when of them we conceive a matter to hope well for the time
afterward: for since they are testimonies both of his bounty, and of his
fatherly good will toward us, what ingratitude were it, from thence to receive
no confirmation of hope, and of his good will toward us? Add hereunto that God
is not like men, who can be weary with doing good, or drawn dry, that he can
not. Therefore let ye faithful exercise them selves in continual meditation of
God his benefits, that they may cherish and confirm the hope of ye time to
come: and always let them repeat this syllogism with them selves. God never
forsakes ye works of his own hands which he has begun, as ye Prophet
witnesses. We are ye work of his hands, therefore he will finish that he has
begun in us. Isai. 64.8. When I say we are ye work of his hands, I do not take
it only of his creation, but by his vocation whereby we are adopted to be his
sons. For this is unto us a sign of our election, that ye lord by his spirit
has effectually called us unto him self. But here a question is asked, whether
any man can be certain of an other man's salvation? For Paul speaks not here
of him self, but of ye Philippians, I answer, that every man have a far
other certaintye of his own salvation, than of other men's: for ye spirit of
God is unto me a witness of my calling, as also to every one of the elect:
touching others we have no testimony, but from ye outward effect of the spirit,
yt is so far as the grace of God do show it self forth in them, unto our
knowledge. There is therefore a great difference: for the certeinty of faith
remains close wtin, and disperse not it self to others: but whersoeuer we
behold, what tokens of God his election may be apprehended by us, forthwith we
must be stirred up to conceive a good hope, as well lest we should be envious
toward our neighbors, and deprive them of ye equal and gentle judgment of
love: as also that they should be thankful unto God. But this is a general
rule, as well in us as in others, that distrusting our own strength, we should
altogether depend upon God only. Until the day of Jesus Christ. This is
especially to be understood unto the end of their striving, and that striving
is ended by death: but because the spirit is so wont to speak in ye
scriptures, of ye last coming of Christ: it shall be better to extend the
proceeding of grace, unto the resurrection of the flesh: for although they that
are delivered out of this mortal body, fight no more with the lusts of the
flesh, and are without danger of the weapon (as they say) yet it shall be no
absurdity, if they be said to be in the way going forward: for as yet they are
not come whether they desire, as yet they do not enjoy that happiness and
glory which they have hoped for: finally, that day has not yet shined, which
should reveal the treasures hidden in hope. So when we speak of hope, we must
always turn our eyes unto the blessed resurrection, as unto a mark.

7 As it becomes me so to judge of you all, because I have you in my heart,
that you all were partakers of my grace, both in my bands, and in my defense,
and confirmation of the Gospel.

8 For God is my witness how I desire you all, in the bowels of Jesus Christ.

9 And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all judgment.

10 That ye may allow those things that are excellent, that ye may be pure and
without offense, until the day of Christ.

11 Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God.

7 As it becomes me For we are malicious interpreters of the gifts of God: we
account none for the sons of God, but them in whom the true signs of
godliness appear, to whom the spirit of adoption shows forth him self by
his fruits. Therefore Paul says: that equity it self does teach him this,
that he should for ever hope well of the Philippians, whom he saw to be
joined into the participation of grace with him self. I have not rashly
translated this place otherwise than Erasmus, which the wise reader shall
easily perceive: for he rehearses what judgment he had of the Philippians,
which was the cause why he did hope well of them. Therefore he says, that they
were partakers with him of the same grace in his bands, and in his defense of
the Gospel. To have them in his heart, is to account them such in the inward
affection of his heart: for the Philippians to their power, were always present
with Paul, that so much as they could, they might be companions with him, to
maintain the cause of the Gospel. So though they were far of in body, yet
for their kind affection, which they had testified unto him by all possible
duties, he acknowledges them to be in bands with him. I have you therefore in
my heart, that is sincerely, and without dissembling. Truly, not with a light
and doubtful opinion. Whom? The partakers of my grace. In what thing? In
bands, whereby the Gospel is defended. Since he acknowledged them to be such
men, it was meet to hope well of them. Of my grace, and in my bands. Before
the world this were ridiculous, to account imprisonment for a benefit of God,
but if we truly esteem it, it is no common honor, wherewith God vouchsafes
us, when we suffer persecution for his truth: neither in vain was it said:
Blessed shall you be when men shall all manner of ways revile and trouble you
for my names sake. Matthew. 5.11. Let us therefore remember that the fellowship of
ye cross of Christ, as a singular grace of God, is with a cherefull and
thankful mind to be embraced of us. To his bands he adds, The defense and
confirmation of the Gospel, that he might the better express how honorable a
duty the Lord enioineth us, when he opposes us against his enemies, to give
testimony unto his Gospel. For it is as if he should command unto us the
patronage of his Gospel. With this cogitation Martyrs being armed, have been
able to contemn all the rage of the wicked, and to overcome all their
torments: And I would to God this were in the minds of all them, that are
called to confess the faith, that they are Patrons chosen by Christ to plead
his cause. For being stayed upon such a comfort, they would be more courageous
than easily to be turned unfaithfully to fall from God. But some man will ask
here, whether the confirmation of the Gospel depend upon the constancy of
men? I answer, that the truth of God is stronger of it self, than that it
needs any other way to be vpholden. For we all are liers, yet God remains
true: yet it is not absurd, that weak consciences by such helps should be
confirmed. Therefore this kind of confirmation which Paul remembers, has
relation unto men, as we learn by our own experience: this at the least is
come to pass by the slaughters of so many Martyrs, that the Gospel is sealed
in our hearts as it were by so many seals. Whereof comes that of Tertullian:
that their blood is the seed of the Church, whom I also have imitated in a
verse.

The holy blood of martyrd Saints
which God his honor defend,
Is like the seed cast into earth
which great increase forth send.
8 For God is my witness. Now he declares more plainly his love toward them:
for proof whereof he adds an oath: and that justly, because we know how
dear the building up of the Church is unto God. It was very necessary, that
the love of Paul should sufficiently be testified unto the Philippians:
neither is this of small force to procure credit unto the doctrine, when the
people is persuaded that they are beloved of their teacher. He calls God to
be a witness of the truth, who alone is truth, and to be a witness of his
affection, who alone is the searcher of the hearts. In this word Desire, the
special word is put for the general: it is a sign of love, because we
desire the things we love. In our bowels. He opposes the bowels of Christ
unto carnal affection, that he might signify his love to be holy and godly:
for he that loves according to the flesh, has respect of his own profit,
and may thereafter according to the alteration of things and time change his
mind: in the mean season he admonishes by what rule the affections of the
faithful should be examined: namely, that forsaking their own will, they
should suffer Christ to govern them. And certainly true love can not proceed
from any other thing, than from the bowels of Christ: and this prick should
not lightly touch us: that Christ does after a sort open his bowels, whereby
he might chearish mutual love amongst us.

9 This I pray, that your love, etc. He comes again unto his prayer, which
by the way he had in one word touched before. He shows them therefore the
sum of those things which he beseeched of God for them, that they them
selves also by his example, might learn to pray, and aspire to the increase
of these gifts. Whereas some do take the love of the Philippians, for the
Philippians them selves, as commonly barbarous men are wont to speak: saving
your reverence, your worship, it is absurd: for neither is there any such
example extant in Paul, neither had such foolishnes as yet come into custom,
beside the sentence should not be full, and otherwise the simple and natural
meaning of the words does very well agree: for the true increase of
Christians, is when they go forward in knowledge and understanding, and
afterward in love: therefore this word In, according to the phrase of the
Hebrewe tongue, is taken here for with, as I have also translated it: except
some had rather expound it, By, that it should signify the instrument, or the
formal cause: for the greater increase we make in knowledge, the more should
love increase in us. Then the sense were: that your love should increase
according to the measure of your understanding. All understanding, is taken for
full and sound understanding, not for the understanding of all things.

10 That ye may allow. The definition of Christian wisdom, is to know that
that is to the purpose, or profitable, not to disquiet the wit in vain
subtilties and speculations, for the Lord will not employe his servants
unprofitably, least they should learn that which should nothing avail them.
Hereof you may gather, in what estimation the divinity of the Sorbonicall
Sophisters is to be had, wherein if thou spendest thy whole life, thou shall no
more be edified touching the hope of everlasting life, nor reap any more
spiritual profit, than out of the demonstrations of Euclides. Truly,
although it did teach no false thing: yet for this cause it should worthily
be accursed, because the profaning of spiritual doctrine, is very dangerous:
for the Scripture as Paul says, is profitable. 2. Tim. 3.16. There we can
find nothing but cold disputations about trifles. That ye may be pure. This
is the profit which we reap by knowledge, not that every man should craftilye
provide for his own estate, but that we should live with a pure conscience
before God. It follows: And without offense. The Greek word (...), is of
doubtful signification. Ghrysostome does expound it actiuely: that like as
before God he would have us pure and innocent: so now before men he would have
us lead an honest life: lest by any evil examples they should hurt their
neighbors. This I reject not: yet in my judgment, the passive signification
agrees better with the text: for to this end did he wish them wisdom, that
with blameles steps they should go forward in their vocation, until the day
of Christ: as contrariwise by ignorance it comes to pass, that oftentimes we
fall, stumble, and go astray. And how many offenses Satan obiecteth unto us,
which might either break of our course, or hinder it, every one of us for him
self have experience. 11 Filled with the fruits of righteousness. This now
pertains unto the outward life: for a good conscience brings forth her
fruit by her works: therefore he desires that they should be fruitful in
good works, unto the glory of God. Such fruits he says are thorough Christ,
because they proceed from the grace of Christ: for this is unto us the
beginning of well doing, when we are sanctified by his spirit: for it rested
upon him, that of his fulness we all might receive. And because Paul here
takes a similitude from trees: we are wild olives and unprofitable, until we
are ingraffed into Christ, who by his living root does make us fruitful
trees, according to that in John. 15.1. I am the vine, you are the branches. He
shows also the end, that we should serve to the glory of God: for no life
is so excellent in show, which is not polluted, and stinketh before God,
except it be directed unto this mark. Whereas Paul here names righteousness of
works, it makes nothing against the free righteousness of faith: for it does
not follow by and by that there is righteousness, where there are the fruits
of righteousness, because that righteousness before God is no other thing, than a
full and sound obedience of the law, which is found in none of the Saints:
who notwithstanding according to their measure of grace, do bring forth good
and sweet fruits of righteousness: that is to say, because God begins in us
righteousness by the regeneration of his spirit: so that which wants, he
supplieth by the remission of sins, that righteousness nevertheless should
altogether depend upon faith.

12 I would have you know brethren, that the things which have come unto me,
are turned rather to the furtherance of the Gospel.

13 So that my bands in Christ are famous in all the judgment hall, and in all
other places.

14 And many of the brethren in the Lord, boldened by my bands, dare more
frankely speak the word without fear.

15 Some thorough envy and contention, and some also of good will preach
Christ.

16 Some I say of contention preach Christ, not purely, supposing to add more
affliction to my bands.

17 But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel.

12 I would have you know. We all have experience in our selves, how much the
flesh is wont to be offended by the humility of the cross We suffer Christ to
be preached unto us crucified, but when he appears with his cross, as if we
were amassed with some new sight, either we run away, or are afraid, and not
only in our own persons, but also in the persons of them which deliver the
Gospel unto us. It might have happened unto the Philippians, that by the
persecution of their Apostle, they might somewhat have been cast down: and it
is credible, that evil laborers which gaped for every little occasion to hurt,
did not cease to rejoice at the calamity of the good man, and thereof did make
his Gospel to be despised. And if by this means they could not profit, they
were ready to revile him, because he was hated of the whole world, and also to
put a fear into the Philippians, least by his unlucky fellowship, they should
procure unto them selves great envy without cause amongst all men: for these
are the usual subtilties of satan. The Apostle meets with this danger,
whilst he rehearses that the gospel is furthered by his bands. The end
therefore of this narration, is to encourage the Philippians, that they should
not be afraid by his persecution. 13 So that my bands. He put In Christ: for,
in the business or in the cause of Christ: for he does signify, that his bands
were famous to extol the honor of Christ. Whereas some do expound it by
Christ, it seems to be strained, and I had rather have it famous than
manifest, because the report of them brought honor to the Gospel: as if he
should say, Satan went about this thing, and the ungodly thought it should so
come to pass, that the Gospel should be destroyed: but God has made
frustrate, as well his endeavors, as their hope, and that two manner of ways:
for when before the Gospel was obscure and unknown unto many, it is come to
pass, that it is made manifest: and not that only, but also, that it is made
famous, as well in the judgment hall, as in the rest of the city. The
judgment hall, In castrum Praetorum, I take for the Court and Pallaice of
Nero, which Fabius, and the writers of that age, call Augustale. For when the
name of Praetor was in the beginning general, and did signify all Magistrates
that had chief government, (whereof it came to pass, that the Dictator was
called the chief Praetor) the custom afterward remained: that in war the
tent either of the Consul, or of him that was General, was called Praetorium:
but in the city, the pallaice of Caesar, of whom the Emperors took their
Monarchy: otherwise Praetorium is also called the Session of the Praetor. Many
of the brethren. By this example we are taught, that the vexations of the
Saints which they suffer for the Gospel, is unto us a cause of confidence.
It were in deed a terrible spectacle, and which would rather tend to
exanimate us, if we should only behold the cruelty and rage of the
persecutors: but whilst the hand of the Lord appears, which under the
infirmitye of the cross, does make his servants invincible, and to triumph:
trusting hereunto we must be more bold than we are wont, having already in
the person of our brethren, the pledge of our victory. The acknowledging
hereof, ought to overcome our fear, that in the mids of dangers we should
speak without trembling. 15 Some truly. An other fruit of the bands of Paul,
because not only the brethren were encouraged to stand steadfast in their
faith, by his example, and others to stand in their estate, others were made
more cheerful to teach: but also they that wished him ill, by an other
counsel were provoked to publish the Gospel.

16 Some I say of contention. An explanation, whereby he declares more fully
the former sentence: for he repeateth two kinds of men, who by his bands were
provoked to preach Christ. Some were stirred up by contention, that is by en
evil affection: some other by a godly desire, because they together would take
upon them the defense of the Gospel. They, he says, did not preach Christ
purely, because their zeal was not aright. Neither do this pertain unto
doctrine, because it may be, that he that teaches most sincerely, is not of a
sincere mind, but that this was a corruption of the mind, and did not appear
in doctrine, we may gather out of the text. Paul truly would not willingly
have seen the Gospel dissembled with: yet he testifies that he rejoices in
the preaching of these men, the which was neither simple nor sincere. But a
question may be asked, how such preaching could hurt him? I answer, that
there are many occasions unknown unto us, who do not consider the
circumstances of times. Another question is asked, that since the Gospel can
not be preached but of them that understand it, what cause moved them to
persecute that doctrine which they allowed. I answer that ambition is blind,
yea a furious beast: therefore it is no marvel, if false brethren do take
occasion cut of the Gospel, to disquiet the good and faithful Pastors. And
truly Paul has said nothing here, which my self have not tried: for as yet
there live some at this day, who have preached the Gospel with none other
intent, than, that by persecuting godly Pastors, they might yield to the fury
of the wicked. Touching Paul his enemies, it is not amiss to mark, if they
were Jews, how mad their hatred was, that even they forgot for what cause they
hated him: for whilst they were carried away by hatred to destroy him, they
labored in promoting the Gospel, for whose cause they were angry with him:
but they thought verily that the cause of Christ should either stand, or fall
in the life of one man. But if they that were so seduced by ambition, were
emulous among them selves: we must acknowledge the marvelous goodness of God,
who notwithstanding gave such success to their perverse endeavors. 17 That I am
set for the defense. They that loved Christ truly, thought it a shame for them
selves, if they did not join with Paul as companions, pleading his cause, and
so we must do: we must succor the servants of Christ being in distress, as
much as we may. Mark again this manner of speech, of the defense of the
Gospel: for since Christ vouchsafes us such honor, what excuse can we have,
if we be faint hearted in his cause? or what must we look for, if we betray it
by our silence, but that in like manner he should forsake our cause, who alone
is our Advocate and Patron with God his father.

18 What then? yet all manner of ways, whether under pretense, or truly Christ
is preached: and in this I rejoice, and will rejoice.

19 For I know, that this shall turn to my salvation, thorough your prayer,
and by the help of the spirit of Jesus Christ.

20 According to my expectation, and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed:
but with all confidence, as always, so now, Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or death.

21 For Christ is to me both in life and in death advantages

18 Yet all manner of ways. Because the wicked mind of them, of whom he
spoke, might slander the grace of the doctrine, he says, that this is greatly
to be esteemed, because that they promoted the Gospel notwithstanding,
whatsoever their intent was: for God by evil and wicked instruments sometime
brings to pass an excellent work. Therefore he says, he rejoices for such
success, because he was contented with this only, to see the kingdom of
Christ increase. As when we did hear that the unclean dog Charles, at
Auenion and in other places, did sow the seeds of pure doctrine in many men's
hearts, we gave thanks unto God, who used this naughty and desperate varlet
unto his own glory. And at this day, we rejoice that the course of the
Gospel is promoted by many, who have a far other purpose. But although Paul
did rejoice for the increase of the Gospel, yet would he never have ordained
such ministers, if it had been in his power. We must therefore rejoice, if by
the ungodly God works any good: yet we must neither place such in the
ministry, nor account them for the lawful ministers of Christ. 19 For I
know. Because some did publish the Gospel, to procure envy unto Paul, that
they might the more incense the cruelty of his enemies against him: he
answers by a Praeocupation, that their wicked purposes shall not hurt him,
because God will turn them to a contrary end, as if he should say: Although
they imagine my destruction, yet I trust that all their practices shall do
nothing else, but that Christ in me may be glorified, which turns unto my
salvation. For that he speaks not of the safety of his body, it is evident
by that which follow. But from whence had Paul this confidence? truly from
that which he teaches Romans 8, 28. Unto the true worshippers of God all things
help to their good, although the whole world with their Prince the Devil
conspire their destruction. By your prayer. That he might the more earnestly
provoke them to pray, he affirms, that he trusts the Lord will grant it
by their prayers. Neither does he dissemble: for he that reposeth succor in
the prayers of the Saints, stays upon the promise of God: and yet nothing
is derogated from ye free goodness of God, whereby our prayers and supplications
are made. And by the help of the Spirit. Lest we should think that because
he joins these two things in the text, therefore they are equal: the
sentence must therefore thus be resolved: I know that all this shall turn to
my salvation by the furtherance of the spirit, you helping by your prayers: so
that the furtherance of the spirit is the efficient cause, and prayer an
inferior helper. The property also of the Greek word is to be noted: for it
is called (...), that is, when that is supplied which is wanting, according to
which signification, the spirit of God powers upon us all things whereof we
are destitute. He names The spirit of Jesus Christ, to signify that he is
common unto us all, if we be Christians, because the spirit was powered upon
him in all fulness, that he might distribute to every one of his members,
according to the measure of his grace, so much as is expedient.

20 According to my expectation. If any should object, whence have you this
knowledge? he answers from hope: for since it is certain that God will not
suffer our hope to be frustrate, our hope must in no case be doubtful.
Therefore let the godly reader mark diligently this aduerb, According, that he
may so certainly be resolved with him self, that it can not be, but the Lord
must answer our expectation, which is grounded in his word: for he promises
that he will never forsake us, no not in the midst of all torments, if at
any time we be called to the confession of his name: therefore let all the
godly hope by the example of Paul, and they shall not be ashamed. With all
confidence. We see that by hoping, he does not yield to the desires of the
flesh, but submits his hope to the promise of God. Christ, he says, shall
be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or death. Although expressing
his body namely, he signifies that among the combats of this present life,
he is not doubtful of the success: for of this thing God has assured us:
therefore if we be framed to the will of God, and have the same purpose in our
life, that Paul had, we hope for an happy end howsoever: we need no more to
fear lest any evil should happen unto us: for if we live and dye to him, in
life and death we are his. Romans 14.8. He shows a manner how to magnify
Christ, namely in a perfect confidence: whereof it follows, that he is cast
down by our fault, and extenuated as much as is in us, when we faint thorough
fear. Are not they therefore ashamed, who think it a light fault to be
afraid in the confession of the truth? but how should they be ashamed, when
they are so impudent, that they dare also excuse the denial of Christ. He
adds, As always, that by the experiments of the grace of God already past,
they might confirm their faith. So in the Romans 5.4. Trial brings hope.

21 For in life. Hitherto in my judgment, the Interpreters have ill translated
and expounded this place: for thus they distinguish, that Christ was unto Paul
life, and death was to him advantage. But I make Christ the subject in both the
members of the sentence, that as well in life as in death, he is said to be
advantage: for it is common with the Grecians to understand this preposition
(...), which signify to. But beside, that this sense is not strained, it
agrees also better with the next sentence, and contains more plentiful
doctrine. He affirms that he is indifferent, whether he live or dye, because
that having Christ, he accompteth gain in both: and truly it is only Christ
that in death and life makes us blessed: otherwise, if the death be miserable,
the life is no whit the happier. So that it is hard to define whether it be
better for a man to live, or to dye without Christ. Again, let Christ be
present, and he will bless both our life and our death, that both of them
shall be happy and good for us.

22 But if to live in the flesh were more profitable for me: even what to
choose I know not:

23 For I am distressed between both, desiring to be loosed and to be with
Christ which is far better.

34 But to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

25 And this am I sure of, that I shall abide and continue with you all for
your furtherance and joy of your faith.

26 That your rejoicing may be abundant in Christ Jesus for me, by my coming
unto you again.

22 But if to live. Even as desperate men are in a perplexity whether they
should still prolong their life in misery, or finish their sorrows by death:
so contrariwise, Paul with an equal mind says, that he is prepared as well
for death as for life, because the estate of both is blessed unto the
faithful, so that he is doubtful whether to choose. If it be profitable, that
is to say, if I know that the profit of my life is greater than the profit
of my death, I see not whether I should rather desire. He puts, To live in
the flesh. by a contempt, in comparison of a better life. 23 For I am
distressed. Paul did not desire to live for any other reward, then to serve
to the glory of Christ, and to profit his brethren. Therefore he esteems
no other profit in this life, than the salvation of his brethren: but for
himself privately he acknowledges that it is better to dye quickly, because
he should be with Christ. In his desire he shows with how great love he
is enflamed. He does not speak here of earthly commodities, but of the
spiritual good, which especially of the godly is carefully to be wished
for. Notwithstanding Paul, as it were forgetting himself, does not only
contain himself in the midst, least he should more decline to his own
benefit, than the benefit of the Philippians: but at length concludes, that
he weighs their estate in his heart. And this is truly to live and dye unto
Christ, when neglecting our selves, we are carried whether Christ calls us.
Desiring to be losed and to be with Christ. These two things are jointly to be
read together, for death of it self will never be wished for, because the
desire thereof fights with the sense of nature: but it is desired for some
cause, or for some other end. Desperate men fly unto it thorough wearines of
their life, but the faithful hasten unto it willingly, because it delivers
them from the bondage of sin, and is a passage unto the kingdom of heaven.
This is it that Paul now says: I desire to dye, because by this means I
shall come to be joined with Christ: yet the faithful cease not to be afraid
of death, but when they turn their eyes unto that life that follows after
death, by this consolation they easily overcome that fear. Truly whosoever
believes in Christ, should be so courageous, that at the mention of death he
should lift up his head, being joyful for the tidings of his redemption:
whereby it appears how many are Christians only in name, when the greater
part hearing the mention of death, as if they never had heard any word of
Christ: they do not only wax fearful, but become almost dead. O a good
conscience? how much do thou excel? and how much do thou prevail? but
faith is the foundation of a good conscience: yea (...) of the conscience. To
be dissolved. This manner of speaking is to (...) men call death the
destruction of man, as though the whole man perished. Paul here warns us,
that death is dissolution of the soul from the body: and this straight after
he expresses better, showing what the estate of the faithful is after death:
namely that they abide and dwell with Christ. We are also with Christ in this
life, so far as his kingdom is within us, and Christ dwells in us by
faith, and he has promised that he will be with us even unto the end of the
world: but that presence we only perceive by hope: therefore according to our
feeling, we are said to be strangers from him. 2. Cor. 5.6. This place is of
force to refute the dotage of them, who dream that the souls divided from the
bodies are asleep: for Paul witnesses openly, that we enjoy the presence of
Christ, when we are dissolved.

25 And this am I sure of. Some because it seemed absurd, that the Apostle
should confess him self to be frustrate of his expectation, think that he
was afterward delivered out of bands, and that he passed thorough many regions
of the world: but in vain do they fear that. For the Saints are wont to
moderate their hope by the word of God, that in their minds they presume no
more than the Lord has promised. So, where they have a sure testimony of God
his will, there they stay them selves with a certain persuasion, which
admits no doubt. Such is the persuasion of the continual remission of
sins, of the help of the Spirit unto the grace of final perseverance (as
they call it) of the resurrection of the flesh. Such also was the certainty
of the Prophets, touching their prophesies: in other things they hope nothing
but with a condition, and therefore they submit all the success unto the
providence of God, to whom they grant to have a sharper sight in things, than
them selves. To abide, signify here for a little while. To continue, signify
for a long time.

26 That your rejoicing. Whereas he says (...), I have tran^ (...) twice in a
^^erie ^ence. No body will deny, but ye faithfully I have expressed the mind of
Paul. But whereas some do say, By Christ: I like it not: for In Christ, is put
for after Christ, or Christianlike, that he might show the kind of rejoicing to
be holy: for otherwise we are commanded to rejoice only in God: therefore
might it be objected to Paul by the malicious, how is it lawful for the
Philippians to rejoice for thee? he preuenteth this slander, when he says,
that they shall do it thorough Christ: that is to say, rejoicing for the
servant of Christ, unto the glory of the Lord: and that rather in respect of
the doctrine, than of the man, and against the false Apostles, as David in
comparing himself with hypocrites, boasts of his own righteousness.

27 Only walk you worthy of the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and
see you, or else be absent, I may hear of you, that ye abide in one spirit,
in one mind, fighting together thorough the faith of the Gospel.

28 And in nothing fear your adversaries, which is to them a declaration of
their destruction, but to you of salvation, and that from God.

29 Because it is given you for Christ, that not only ye should believe in
him, but also suffer for his sake.

30 Having the same strife, which ye saw to be in me, and now hear of me.

27 Only walk worthy. We use this phrase, when we would pass over unto a
new speech, and it is as much as if he would have said, for my self the Lord
will provide, but you, etc. whatsoever become of me, yet notwithstanding go you
forward in a right course. Where he calls a pure and honest conversation
worthy the Gospel: he argues that contrariwise they do injury to the
Gospel, that live otherwise. That whether I come. Because this sentence of
Paul in the Greek is hard by the participle seeing, I have made it by the
verb, And see. If this like you not, understand the principal verb, That I
may understand: in this sense, whether I come and see you, or being absent
shall hear of your estate, I may understand both ways, as well by sight, as by
message, that you continue in one spirit, but we must little care for words,
where the meaning is evident. That ye abide in one spirit This truly is one
of the chief virtues of the Church, and therefore this is the only reason to
chearish soundnes, because it falls to ruin by dissension. Although Paul by
this, as it were by a receipt against poison, would meet with new and strange
doctrines: yet he requires a double unity, of the spirit, and of the mind:
for this is the chiefest thing we should agree among our selves, than that we
should be at concord. For where these two words are joined together, the spirit
signify understanding, and the mind do signify will. Consent goes before in
order, then conjunction of wills proceeds from that Fighting together thorough
faith. This is the strong bond of concord, whilst we must fight together
under one banner: for this occasion many times have reconciled greatest
enemies. Therefore that he might the more confirm the unity among ye
Philippians, he warns them that they are fellow souldies: that their enemy
and their war is common to them all, and that they must join their minds in
an holy unity. The speech that Paul uses in the Greek is doubtful:
wherefore an old Interpreter has turned it: Laboring together thorough
faith. Erasmus has, Helping forward your faith. As if they should help faith
so much as they might. But since the dative case among the Grecians, is put for
the ablative case of the instrument, because that tongue wants an ablative
case: I doubt not but this is the meaning of the Apostle. Let the faith of the
Gospel join you together in unity, especially since that is your common
armor against that same enemy. By this means I refer the preposition (...)
unto the Philippians, which other refer unto faith, and better, except I be
deceived: first of all no man is ignorant, how forcible the provocation unto
concord is, when as like fellows we must fight together: besides we know in
the spiritual war, that we are armed with the shield of faith, to beat
back our enemy: yea faith is our complete armor and our victory: therefore
he adds also this part, that he might show the end of godly unity: the
wicked also conspire together unto mischief, but their consent is accursed:
let us therefore with one mind war together under the banner of faith. And
in nothing fear. The second thing that he commends to the Philippians, is
courage of mind, that they should not be troubled for the rage of their
adversaries. At that time cruel persecutions were hot almost in every place,
because Satan was carried forth with all violence to hinder the beginnings of
the Gospel: but he did rage so much the more weakly, by how much the more
strongly Christ did show forth the grace of his spirit. Therefore he bids
the Philippians to stand without fear, and not to be troubled. Which unto them
is a declaration This is the proper signification of the Greek word, and no
reason compelled others to translate it, a Cause: for the ungodly whilst they
war against the Lord, they declare, as it were by a preamble, the argument of
their own destruction: and the more fiercely they insult upon the godly, so
much the more they prepare them selves to their own fall. The Scripture in no
place does teach, that the afflictions which the Saints do suffer of the
wicked, is a cause of their salvation, but a Declaration or an argument. Paul
also calls it in an other place, 2. These. 1.5. and in stead of the word
(...), which we have here, he uses there (...). This therefore is a singular
consolation, that whilst we are iniuried or vexed by our adversaries, we have
a document of our own salvation: for persecutions are unto the sons of God
certain seals of their adoption, if they bear them valiantly and with equal
minds: the ungodly now show forth a token of their damnation, because they
stumble against that stone which shall grind them to powder. And that from
God. This is restrained unto the latter part: that the taste of God his grace
might mittigate the bitterness of the cross. Naturally no man will take a sign
or declaration of his salvation to be in ye cross, for they are things in a
manner contrary. Therefore Paul calls back the Philippians, unto an other
consideration: namely, that God by his blessing turns those things into an
occasion of salvation, which otherwise seem to make us miserable. He proves
this: because suffering of the cross is the gift of God: but it is certain,
that all the gifts of God turn to our salvation. To you he says it is given,
not only that ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake:
therefore your very sufferings are testimonies unto you of the grace of God.
Since it is so, from hence you have an argument of your salvation. Oh that this
persuasion were thoroughly settled in our minds, that persecutions are to be
reckoned among ye benefits of God, how then would we grow forward in the
doctrine of godliness? notwithstanding what is more certain, than that it is a
great glory of the grace of God, that we suffer for his name, either reproach,
or inprisonment, or sorrows, or torments, or lastly death it self: for then
the Lord does bewtifie us with his own ensigns. But there shall more be found
that will rather bid God depart with such gifts, than would thankfully embrace
the cross being offered: woe worth our dulnes.

29 That ye should believe. He has wisely converted faith with the cross, by
an inseparable knot, that the Philippians might know, that they were called,
upon this condition, unto the faith of Christ, that they should suffer
persecutions for his name: as if he should say, their adoption can no more be
separated from the cross, than Christ him self can be pulled from them. Here
Paul does manifestly witness, that both faith and constancy in suffering
persecutions, is the free gift of God. And truly the knowledge of God is an
higher wisdom, than that we can attain unto it by our own wit: and our
weakness do show it self by daily experience, when God a little withdraws
his hand from us. And that he might the better express, that both these are
the free gifts of God, he speaks, namely that they are given us for Christ
his sake, or by the grace of Christ* whereby he excludes all respect of
merit. This place also make against the opinion of the Schoolmen, wherein
they teach, that the latter graces are the rewards of our merit, because we
have used the first aright. Truly I do not deny, but the Lord does reward in
us the right use of his graces, with more ample graces, so that thou do not
oppose thine own merit against his free liberality, and against the merit
of Christ, which they do.

30 Having the same strife. By his own example also, he confirms that which
he said, which adds no little authority unto his doctrine. And he admonishes
them, that those works are no cause why they should be troubled at his bonds,
looking for the end of their strife.

Chap. 2.
1 IF therefore there be any consolation in Christ: if any comfort of love: if
any fellowship of the spirit: if any bowels, and mercy.

2 Fulfill my joy, that ye may think the same thing, having love, being of one
mind, and of one judgment.

3 That nothing be done thorough contention or vain glory: but that thorough
humility every man esteem others better than him self.

4 Be not careful every man for his own, but every man also for the things of
other men.


1 IF therefore. This exhortation is very pathetical, wherein by all means he
entreats the Philippians, that they would embrace mutual concord among them
selves, lest that if they should be divided by contentions, they should be
laid open to the illusions of the false Apostles: for always in dissentions
there is a gate open unto satan, to spread ungodly doctrines, to repel the
which, consent is the best defense. Because ye word (...), is often times taken
for exhortation, the beginning of the chapter might thus be expounded. If my
exhortation, which is done in the name and by the commandment of Christ, does
any thing preuail with you. Yet the other sense do better agree with the text:
if there be in you Any consolation of Christ, whereby you might mittigate my
sorrows: and if you will any way comfort and ease me, which truly you should
do thorough love: if you think upon that fellowship of the spirit, which
should make us all one: if any feeling of humanity and mercy remains in
you, which might move you to succor my misery, fulfill my joy, etc. Hereby we
gather how great a good unity is in the Church, and with how great care it is
by the Pastors to be procured. We must also mark how he humbles him self,
humbly entreating their mercy, who might by the duty of a father have exacted
reverence from them as from his sons. He knew how to use commanding when
need required: now he had rather use prayers, because he knew them more fit
to pearce their affections, and because he knew that he spoke unto them that
were obedient, and easy to be taught. So the Pastor must not refuse to take
upon him any person for the Churches sake.

2 Fulfill my joy. And here we may perceive how little careful he was for him
self, so that the Church of Christ were in good case. He was kept close in
prison, and bound with chains, he was condemned to loose his head: torments
were before him, and the executioner at hand to dispatch him: notwithstanding
all these did not hinder him, but that he did soundly rejoice to see the
Churches flourish: furthermore he esteems this an especial thing in the
happy state of the Church, if there reign mutual consent and brotherly
concord among them. So the 137. Psalm teaches us, that the chief point of
our joy is the remembrance of Jerusalem. And if that were the fulness of Paul
his joy, the Philippians had been more than cruel, if by dissentions among
them selves, they should have tormented the heart of the holy man with a double
sorrow. That ye may think the same thing. The sum is this, that in their
opinions and their wills they should consent. For he sets down consent in
doctrine and mutual love: then repeating the same thing (in my judgment) he
bids them be of one mind, and to think the same thing: these words, (...)
are of this force, that they should apply them selves one to another: therefore
the beginning of love is to agree in opinions: but that is not sufficient,
except the hearts do increase together into a mutual love. Although it were
not absurd to translate it thus: that you should be of the same cogitation, to
have mutual love, to be of one mind, and to think the same thing: for the
participles are many times used for the Infinitive moodes: yet I have followed
that sense which seemed to be less strained.

3 That nothing be done thorough contention These two are most hurtful plagues
to trouble ye peace of the Church. Contention arises whilst every man will
stiffely defend his own opinion, and when it is once hot, it is carried
headlong into that way where it entered: but vain glory tickleth the minds, so
that every man flattereth himself in his own inventions. Therefore this is the
only reason to meet with dissentions if we avoid strife, by counselling and
dispatching matters quietly, and especially if we be not carried by ambition,
for ambition is as it were the bellows of discord. Vain glory signifies all
the glory of the flesh: for what have men wherein to rejoice, but in vanity?
But thorough humility. Against both these diseases he sets one remedy,
submission, and that not without cause, for it is the mother of modesty,
whereby it commes to pass, that yielding as it were somewhat of our own
right, we grant it unto others, and rage not easily thorough dissension. He
defines what true humility is, namely, when every man prefers others
before himself: and if any thing be hard in our whole life, this is
especially, therefore it is no marvel if humility be so rare a virtue, for
(as he says) every man has a kings mind in himself, in challenging all
things unto himself: behold the pride of nature. Then of the foolish
admiration of our selves springs contempt of our brethren, and we are so
far from that which Paul here commands, that scarce any man can suffer
others to be equal with him, for there is no man that desires not to be
aloft. But here a question arises, how can it be that he, who in deed
excels others, should esteem them better than himself, whom he know do
come nothing near him? I answer, that all this depends upon the right
estimation of the gifts of God, and of our own infirmities. For howsoever
any man excels in excellent gifts, he must think that they are not
bestowed upon him to this end to please himself, to exalt himself, or to
account of them, but he must exercise himself in examining and acknowledging
his own vices, and so he shall have large matter of humility. Contrariwise,
he shall honor what virtues he sees in other men, and shall bury their vices
by love: he that shall observe this rule, shall easily prefer others before
him self. And this is that which Paul would, when he added: that every man
should not be careful for them selves, but for their neighbors: or that they
should not only be addicted to them selves. Therefore it may be that a godly
man will have more care of ye things of other men, although he knows him
self more excellent than they.

5 Let this mind be in you, that was even in Christ Jesus.

6 Who, when he was in the form of God, would have thought it no robbery to be
equal with God.

7 But he made him self of no reputation, taking the form of a servant, being
made in the likeness of men, and in shape found as a man.

8 He humbled him self, I say, being made obedient to the death, even the
death of the cross.

9 Wherefore God also has exalted him on high, and given him a name which is
above all names.

10 That in the name of Jesus all knees should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.

11 And all tongues should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the
glory of God the father.

5 Let this mind be in you. He commends now humility, by the example of
Christ, unto the which he had exhorted them before in words. There are two
parts of the sentence: in the former whereof, he inuiteth us unto the
imitation of Christ, because it is the rule of our life: in the second he
allureth us, because this is the way whereby we come unto true glory.
Therefore he commands every one to have the same affection that was in
Christ. Afterward he declares, what manner of example of humility is
propounded unto us in Christ. I have kept still the passive kind of the verb,
although I mislike not the translation of others, because nothing is changed
concerning the sense: only I would that the Readers should hold that form of
speaking, which Paul used.

6 Who being in the form of God. It is no comparison of things like, but of
the greater and the less. The humility of Christ was to abase him self from
the highest top of glory, unto the vilest reproach: our humility is, not to
exalt our selves with a false opinion of our selves. He yielded of his right:
of us this only is required, that we take no more to our selves, than it
behooves us. Therefore hence it arises, that when he was in the form of God,
he thought it not unlawful for him, to behave him self in that form, but
made him self of no account. Therefore how absurd is it that the Son of God
should descend from so high a top of dignity, and we that are nothing, should
be lifted up with pride? the form of God here signifies his majesty: for as
a man is known by the sight of his form: so the majesty that shines in God,
is the figure of him: or if thou had rather have a fitter similitude, the
form of a King is the apparel and excellency that shows a King, as his
scepter, his crown, his robes, his Officers, his judgment seat, and such
other ensigns of a kingdom: the form of a Consul, is his gown, his noble
apparel, his chair of Iuorie, his Serieants with rods, and axes. Christ
therefore before the world was made, was in the form of God, because he had
his glory from the beginning with his father: as he says, John. 17.5. for in
the wisdom of God, before he put upon him our flesh, there was nothing base or
abject, but beseeming the magnificence of God. When he was such an one, he
might without injury bear him self equal with God: but he did not show what
he was, neither did he openly in the sight of men, take that which by right was
his own. He would have thought it no robbery. It had been no injury if he
had appeared equal to God: for whereas he says, He would have thought it no
robbery. It is as much as if he had said, he did know that it was lawful for
him that we might know that his submission was voluntary, not of necessity.
Hitherto they have translated it in the Indicative mood, He thought, but the
text requires a Subiunctiue mood. And this is Paul his use to take the
preterperfectence of the Indicative mood for the subiunctiue, understanding
the potentiall adiection (as they call it.) So Romans 9, 3. I did wish, for I
would wish, and 1. Cor. 2, 8. if they did know, for if they had known. There
is no man that does not see that Paul hitherto does handle the glory of
Christ, which belongs to the amplifying of his submission: he does not
therefore rehearse what Christ did, but what it was lawful for him to have
done. Furthermore, whosoever does not see his eternal divinity to be clearly
affirmed in these words, he is altogether blind. Neither does Erasmus deal
shamefastly enough, who goes about with his cauilles to make a jest as well of
this place as of others like it. Indeed he confesses every where, that
Christ is God, but what do his true confession avail me, if my faith be
strengthened by no authority of the Scripture. I confess that Paul makes no
mention of the divine essence of Christ, but therefore it follows not that
this place is not sufficient to confute the impiety of the Arrians, who fained
Christ to be a created God, and less than the father: to be of the same
substance with his father, they denied him: for where is there equality with
God, without robbery, but in the only essence of God? for he remains always
the same God, who cries by Esaias. 48, 11. I live, and I will not give my glory
unto another, the form signifies the figure, or the appearance as they speak
commonly, that also I confess, but without God shall any such form be found
which is true and not counterfaite? As God therefore is known by his virtues,
and his works are testimonies of his eternal Godhead Romans 1, 20. so the
divine essence of Christ is rightly proved by the majesty of Christ, which he
had equal with his father, before he humbled himself. Truly from me all the
Devils in hell can not wrest this place, because in God it is a strong argument
from his glory to his essence, which two things are inseparable. He made him
self of no reputation: This making of himself of no reputation, is all one
with his humility, whereof we shall see afterward. But this is spoken more
emphatically, for he was brought unto as nothing. Christ could not discharge
himself of his Divinity: but he kept it hidden for a time, least it should
appear in the infirmity of the flesh. Therefore he laid away his glory, not
by diminishing it, but by beeping it under in the sight of men. But it is
demanded whether he did that in respect as he was man: Erasmus affirms it:
but where was the form of God before he was man? Therefore we must answer
that Paul speaks of whole Christ, as he is God manifested in the flesh: yet
this making himself of no reputation agrees not but only with his humanity:
As if I should thus speak of a man. A man, seeing he is mortal, is to be
blockish, because he thinks on nothing but ye world: I understand the whole
man, but I attribute mortality but unto part of him that is to his body. Since
therefore the person of Christ is one, consisting of two natures: Paul says
well, that he that was the son of God, indeed equal with God, did
notwithstanding abstain from his glory, when in the flesh he carried the
form of a servant. It is secondly demanded also, how he is said to be of no
reputation, who by his miracles and by his virtues proved himself always to
be the son of God, and in whom John testifies 1.14. that glory beseeming
the son of God was always to be seen: I answer that the humility of the
flesh, was notwithstanding like a veil wherewith his divine majesty was
covered: In which respect, he would neither have his transfiguration published,
until he were risen again, and when he perceives the hour of death to be at
hand, then he says: Father glorify thy son. John. 17.1. Therefore Paul
also teaches, Romans 1.4. that he was declared the Son of God by his
resurrection. And again, 2. Cor. 13.4. He suffered through the infirmity of
the flesh. Finally, the Image of God did so shine forth in Christ, that
notwithstanding he was cast away in outward sight, and in the opinion of men
brought to nothing. For he did bear the form of a servant, and for that cause
did he take upon him our nature, that in it he might be the servant of his
father, yea even the servant of men. For Paul calls him the minister of the
Circumcision. Romans 15.8. and he himself testifies of him self, yt he came to
minister. Mat. 20.28. and long before, the same thing was foretold by Esaie.
42.1. Behold my servant, etc. In the likeness of men. The greek word (...) in
this place is as much as placed: for Paul does signify that he was brought
into the order of men, that even in his shape he might nothing differ from the
common sort of men. The Marcionites have abused this testimony, to prove
their fantastical spirit which they dreamed on: but they may easily be
refuted, because Paul disputes here of no other thing, but in what manner
Christ behaved himself, or in what condition he was busied in the world. He
that is a true man, shall notwithstanding be thought unlike to others, if he so
behave himself as if he were exempt from the law of others. Paul denies
that this was in Christ, but that he lived so, that he appeared unto every man
to be of the number of men, and yet was he far other than man, although he
were a true man. Therefore the Marcionites deal too chyldishly, who from the
like condition of men, draw their argument to deny the truth of his nature. He
was found It signifies here, known or seen: for he handles here his
estimation, as was said, that is (as before he affirmed, that in very deed he
was God equal to the Father: so here he remembers that he was accounted as an
abject, and as one of the common sort of men: but we must always repeat that
which he said even now, that such submission was voluntary. 9 He was made
obedient. This was great humility, that of a master he made himself a
servant: but he says he went farther, that when he was not only immortal, but
the Lord of life and death, yet he obeyed his Father even unto the sufferyng
of death: this was his lowest abasing of himself, especially considering the
kind of his death, which he adds forthwyth to exaggerate the matter more:
for in so dyyng he was not only reproachful before men, but also accursed
before GOD. Such is the example of his humilitye, that it should even swallowe
up the minds of all men: It is so far of that it can be expressed in words
according to the worthiness thereof. 9 Wherefore God has exalted him on high.
By addyng a comfort, he teaches that humilitye is carefully to be desired,
which the wit of man does abhor from. No man will deny, but that a just
thing is required of us, when we are commanded to imitate Christ, but this
reason moves us that we should more willinglye imitate him, when we hear
that there is nothing better for us, than to be framed to his Image. That they
are blessed whosoever are humbled wyllyngly with Christ, he proves by his
example: for from a most despised estate, he was exalted unto the highest
dignity: whosoever therefore humbles himself, shall likewise be exalted: he
that refuses submission now, how shall he come to the glory of the heavenly
kingdom? This place have given occasion to the Sophisters, or rather they
themselves have taken occasion that they say that Christ first merited for
himself, and then for others. First, although they spoke no untruth, yet
such profane cogitations must be avoided, which do darken the grace of
Christ, when we imagyne that he came for any other cause, than for our
salvation: who does not see that it is suggested by Satan, that Christ
suffered on the cross, to get unto himself by the merit of his work, that
which he had not? For the holy ghost will have us in the death of Christ to
behold, to taste, to repute, to feel, to acknowledge none other thing than
the mere bountye of GOD and of Christ himself only, and such an inestimable
love toward us, that forgettyng himself, he bestowed himself and his life
upon us. As often as the scripture speaks of the death of Christ, it sets
down the fruit and price thereof to be in us, because by it we are redeemed,
reconciled unto God, restored unto righteousness, cleansed from our filthiness,
life procured for us, and the gate of life opened: who can therefore deny,
that these men by the instinct of Satan, declaime against it, saying that the
especial fruit is in Christ himself that he had first regard of him self
than of us, that he deserved glory, first for himself before salvation for us?
Furthermore I deny that to be true which they affirm, and I say they have
wickedly wrested Paul's words, to prove they lie, for that the Illatiue word
signifies here rather a consequence than a cause. It is evident hereby,
because otherwise it follow that man may merit divine honor, and obtain the
very throne of God, which is not only absurd, but horrible to be spoken: For
what exaltation of Christ does the Apostle here declare? namely that in him is
fulfilled whatsoever God only challe^geth to him self in Esaie. Therefore the
glory of God, and the majesty which is so proper unto him, that it can be
translated to none other, shall be the reward of man's works. Besides if they
urge the word in no respect of absurdity, the answer is easy: he was so
given unto us by his father, that al his life was appointed a glass for us to
look in: therefore as a glass although it has brightness, yet has it not for
itself, but to that end that the use and commodity thereof should be for
others: so, neither has Christ either gotten or taken any thing for himself,
but all for us. For what new exaltation did he need I pray, who was equal
with his father? Let therefore the godly readers learn to abhore the
Sorbonicall sophisters with their wrested speculations. He has given him a
name. The name is here taken for dignity, which in all tongues is sufficiently
known: like a block he lies without name, that is without honor, especially
it is a familiar speaking in the scripture. It signifies therefore that
greatest power is given unto Christ, and that he is placed in the highest
degree of honor, that no dignity, neither in heaven, nor in earth, can be
found like unto his: whereof it fol- (...) shows that it is a divine name,
and that he also expounds, bringing in the words of Esaie 45.23. where the
prophet disputing of the worship of God to be spread abroad through out the
whole world, brings in god speaking after this manner. I live, and all knees
shall bow unto me, and all tongues shall swear unto me. It is certain that
that worship is there noted which does peculiarly belong unto God. I know that
some do subtelly dispute of the name of Jesus, as though it were derived from
the ineffable word Iehoua: but I find no substance in the reasons they allege,
and I am not delighted with vain subtelties, and it is dangerous to jest in so
great a matter. Moreover, who does not see that the exposition is strained and
nothing proper, when Paul speaks of the whole majesty of Christ to
restrain his sentence unto 2. sillables: as if a man would examine the
syllables in the word Alexander, to find the greatness of the name that
Alexander got to himself: therefore their subteltie being so slender, is a
very gloss far from the meaning of Paul. But the Sorbonicall sophisters are
more than ridiculous, which gather out of this present place, that the knee
must bow so often as the name Jesus is pronounced, as though it were a magical
word, which had all the force enclosed in the sound. But Paul speaks of the
honor which is to be given to the son of God, and not to syllables. Al knees
should bow. Although men after this manner be reverenced: yet it is not to be
doubted that that worship is here noted, which is proper unto god, a sign
whereof is the bowing of the knee, wherein it is meet to observe, that God is
not only to be worshipped with inward affection of the heart, but also with
outward profession, if we will give him that which is his own. Therefore
when he will set out his lawful worshippers, he says they have not bowed
their knee before the Image of Baal, 2 Reg. 19.18. But here arises a question
whether this does belong to the divinity or to the humanity of Christ? for
both of them are absurd, for unto his divinity no new thing could be given:
with his humanity either by it self, or severally great exaltation agrees
not, that he should be worshihped as God: I answer that this is spoken of the
whole person of Christ, as many other things, in respect that he is God
manifested in the flesh: for neither did he humble himself touching his
humanity only, or touching his godhead only: but because he having put upon
him our flesh, lay hid under the infirmitye thereof. So again God has
exalted his son in the same flesh, wherein he lived as an abject, and without
honor in the world, unto the highest degree of honor, that he sits at his
right hand. But Paul seems not to agree with himself, who to the Romans
14.11. cites the same testimony when he goes about to prove that Christ
shall once be the Judge of the quick and the dead: but it were not fit for
that purpose, if it were already fulfilled as here he witnesses. I answer
that it is so with the kingdom of Christ, that it increases daily, and is
augmented to the better: but the perfection thereof is not evident, nor shall be
evident until the latter day of Judgment. So both is true, that all things
are now subject unto Christ, and yet this subjection shall not be absolute
before the day of the resurrection, because then that shall be finished, which
now is but begun: therefore this prophecy not without cause, is diversely
applied unto diverse times, as all other things do not define ye kingdom of
Christ in one moment of time, but do describe it in their whole course. But
hereof we gather that Christ is that everlasting God that speaks by Esaie*
Of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. When
Paul from the heavens, unto them under the earth submits all things unto
Christ: the papists trifle very childishly in gatheryng Purgatory out of his
words. Their argument is after this sort: it is so far of, that the devils
bow their knees unto Christ, that by all means they are rebels against him,
and authors of rebellion unto others (as though it were not written, that they
do tremble at the only mention of god.) James 2.19. What therefore when they
shall come in presence before the tribunal seat of Christ his judgment? truly I
confess yt they will never willingly, or with a ready obedience be subject: neither
does Paul speak here of voluntary obedience, but rather we return such a
conversion against themselves: the fire of Purgatory according to their own
saying is temporal, and shall be abolished at the day of judgment: therefore
this place cannot be understood of Purgatory, because Paul in another place
denies that this prophecy shall be accomplished, until Christ shall appear
unto judgment. Who does not see that in these filthy quiddities they are twice
children. 11. Unto the glory of God the father. It might also be read in the
glory because the word (...) is often times used in the place of (...). Yet I had
rather retain the proper signification in the sense, that the majesty of god
as it was by Christ made manifest unto men: so it should shine again in
Christ, and the father should be glorified in the son. Look John 5 and 17.
and you shall have the exposition of this place.

12 Wherefore my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence
only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling.

13 For it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure,

14. Do al things without murmurings and reasonings.

15 That ye may be such of whom no man can complain, and the sincere so^s of
god without rebuke in the mids of a naughty and crooked generation, among
whom, shine ye as lyghtes in the world.

16 Holding forth the word of life, unto my glory, until the day of christ*
that I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.

12. Wherefore. He shuts up all that last exhortation with a general
sentence, that they should humble themselves under the hand of the Lord: for
that will easily bring to pass ye laying away al fiercenes they shall be gentle
and courteous among themselves. This only is a fit reason whereby the wit of man
may learn to wax gentle, when by comparing with god, he searches into
himself, who pleased himself seuerallye in his own devises. As ye have
always obeyed He prayseth their former obedience, that he might the more
encourage them to go forward. But because it is the property of hipocrites to
approve themselves to the eye, but when they are out of sight, to favor them
selves with more liberty, as it were the cause of their reverence and fear
being removed. He admonishes them that they would not only show themselves
obedient to the eye, but also that they obey him being absent, and that so much
the more: for if he were present, he might prick them forward, and enforce
them with daily admonitions. Now therefore it is needful that while their
cou^sailour is away, they would be careful for them selves with fear and
trembling. In this he would have the Philippians to testify and approve their
obedience, that they might be lowly and humble. This moreover is the fountain
of humility to acknowledge how miserable we are, and needy of al goodness unto
the which he calls them in this sentence: for whence comes pride but from
security, which blind confidence brings forth, whiles we please our selves,
and are rather puffed up with a confidence of our own virtue, than stay up on
the grace of God? The contrary unto vice is fear, to the which he exhorts
them: but although in the text exhortation be before doctrine: yet in order it
is after, because from thence it is drawn, I will therefore begin with
doctrine. It is God that works in us. This is the true engine to destroy all
loftines: this is the sword to kill all pride when we hear that we are
nothing at all, and can do nothing, but by the alone grace of God (I
understand supernatural grace) which proceeds from the spirit of
regeneration: For in as much as we are men, in God we are, we live and are
moved: but here Paul rather disputes of another kind of moving, than of that
universal. Let us see now what he attributes unto god, what he leaves unto
us. There be two principally to be considered in doing any thing: The will, and
the power of the effect: both of them he affirms for certainety to be in God,
what more does remain for us wherein we may boast? It is no doubt but this
division is as much as if Paul had said the whole in one word: for the will
is the foundation, the effect is the outward show of the building. And he has
expressed a great deal more than if he had said God were the author of the
beginning and ending. For then the Sophisters might cavil that there were some
middle thing left unto me^: but now what shall they find at all proper unto
us? They sweat much in their schools, that they might reconcile free will
with the grace of god: I say such a free will as they feign, which is both
flexible by his proper motion, and has a proper and several power, whereby it
works with the grace of god. I do not contend about the word: but the thing
itself. That therefore free will may agree with grace, thus they divide, that
god truly does repair in us his free election, whereby we are able to will that
is good: so they acknowledge the ability to will that is good to come from
God: but the good will it self they attribute unto men: but Paul does
pronounce this (without exception) to be the work of God: for he does not say
that our hearts only are bowed or stirred up by God, or that the weakness of
our good will is helped: but that our good will is altogether made by God.
Whereas they sclander us, that we make men like unto stones, when we teach
that they have no goodness but of mere grace, they do impudently, for we
confess that we have a will by nature, but because it is evil by the
corruption of sin, then it begins to to be good when it is reformed by God.
Neither do we say that a man do any good willinglye, but then when the will
is ruled by the spirit of God. Therefore touching this part, we see that the
whole praise is given to God: and that it is frivolous which the Sophisters
teach, that grace is offered unto us, and placed as it were in the mids,
that we may embrace it if we list. For except God should work effectually
in us, he could not be said to work a good will. Concerning the second part
we must think the same thing. god, he says, is (...), that is the worker
whereby we work: therefore he brings unto an end those godly affections
which he has inspired into us, least they should be in vain, as he
promises by Ezechiell. 11.20. I will make them to walk in my precepts,
whereby we gather, that perseverance also is his mere gift. Of his good
pleasure. Some do interpret this for good intent of the mind: but I rather
refer it unto God, and I understand it for his willing affection which
commonly they call his good pleasure. For in this signification also the use of
the greek word is more common, and the text does require it. For this is
Paul's drift, to give all unto God, and to take all from us Therefore not being
contented to have given unto God the effect, both of the good will and of the
work, he ascribes both unto his free mercy, whereby he excludes the feigned
opinion of the sophisters touching grace following, which they imagine to be
the reward of merit. Therefore he teaches that all the course of our life, if
we live aright, is directed by god, and that of his free goodness. With fear
and trembling. Hereof Paul infers an exhortation, that they should work
out their salvation with fear: he joins fear and trembling together, for a
serious and careful fear, according to his manner, to increase the matter
more. Therefore he shakes off as well drousines, as confidence. By the word
work he chastises slothfulnes, which is always witty to seek a going
forward: but it seems to have a sweet smell in the grace of God, because if
GOD works in us, why should not we wax slothful? But the holy ghost
admonishes us that he will work in liuelye Instruments: but straight way he
beats back pride, commending fear and trembling. We must also diligently
consider that which he infers: from God, he says, you have all things,
therefore be careful and humble: for there is nothing which should more
instruct us unto modestye and fear, than when we hear that we stand by the
only grace of GOD, ready forthwyth to fall, if he withdraw his hand but a
little. The confidence of our selves breeds Securitye and fiercenes. This is
expressed: whosoever trust unto their own strength, they wax insolente
through pride, and sleep in Securitye. The remedy therefore against both
these evils is, if distrusting our selves we depend all together upon God
only. And verilye that man has truly profited as well in the knowledge of the
grace of god, as of his own infirmity, who being wakened from security,
earnestly requires help of god: but they that are puffed up with a trust of
their own strength it is necessary that they should become drunken in
security. Wherefore the sclander, wherewith the Papists burden us, is
impudent, namelye, that by extollyng the grace of God, and by beatyng down
free will, we make men slothful, we shake off the fear of God, and take away
all carefulnes. But the Readers do see that Paul here does not gather matter
of exhortation from the doctrine of the Papists: but from our doctrine. God,
he says, does all things in you. Therefore submytte your selves unto him with
fear. Truly, I do not deny but many men hearing that there is no goodness in
us, will with more liberty flatter them selves in their faults. But I deny
that this is the fault of the doctrine which being received as it ought
brings forth a carefulnes in our hearts. Moreover the Papists abuse this
place to overthrow the certaynetye of Faith: for he that trembles, is
uncertain. Thus therefore they take Paul his words, as though in all our
life we should stacker in the trust of our salvation: but if we will confer
Paul with himself, he does not here exhort us unto doubtyng, because every
where he commends confidence and a full assurance of God his mercyes: but the
Solution is easy, if any man seek the true sense without contention. There
are two kinds of fear: the one engenders carefulnes with humility: the other
doubtyng. The first is opposed as well to the security and slothfulnes of the
flesh, as unto pride: the other is opposed unto the certainetye of faith.
Moreover we must mark, that as the faithful do certainly rest upon the grace
of God, so whiles they cast back their eyes unto their own frailety, they do
not sleep securely: but for fear of danger, stir up themselves unto
prayers: notwithstanding it is so far of, that this fear should trouble the
quiet state of their constancy, and shake their faith, that it rather
confirms the^: for the distrust of our selves makes us rest more strongly
upon the mercy of God, and to that end tend Paul's words: for he requires
nothing of the Philippians, but that they should submit themselves unto god,
with a true denying of themselves. Work out your own salvation. As the
Pelagians in old time: so the papists at this day do proudely boaste of this
place, to extol the virtue of man: for whiles the former sentence is objected
unto them: It is GOD that works: they straight way beat it back again (as
it were with this buckler.) Work out your own Salvation. Since therefore the
work is given in common both unto god and unto man, they attribute half unto
either. In sum, from the word work they gather free will, and from the word
salvation, they gather meat of eternal life. I answer yt salvation is taken
for the whole course of our vocation, and under this word are comprehended al
things whereby God does accomplish that perfection, unto the which he has
appointed us in his free election. No man except he be obstinate and impudent
will deny this: we are said to finish it, when being governed by the holy
ghost, we attain unto a blessed life. It is God which calls, who offreth
salvation. It is our duty by faith to embrace that which he gives, and by our
obedience to answer to his calling: but neither of these can we have from our
selves. Then therefore do we any thing, when he has prepared us to do it? The
word which he uses signifies properly to finish: but we must remember that
which I said, that Paul does not dispute how far our ability does extend,
but does teach simply, that god does so work in us, that yet he suffers us
not to wax slothful, but exercises us being strongly driven forward by his
secret motion. 14. without murmurings. These are the fruits of that humility
unto the which he exhorted. For whosoever attributing nothing to himself, has
learned to submit himself carefully unto God, he will behave himself also
quietly among men. For where every man please himself there reigns two
vices: that one speak against another, and that they strive among themselves
by contention. First therefore he forbids maliciousnes and secret grudgings:
Then open contentions. He adds also a third thing that they should not give
others occasion of complaining, which is wont to proceed of too much
testines. Hatred is not always to be feared, but we must endeavor that by our
own fault we make not our selves odious, that it may be fulfilled in us, They
hated me without a cause. Psalm. 35.19. Although if any would extend it
further, I am not against him: for thence come murmurings and disputings,
whilst every man beyond measure caring for himself, gives unto others
occasion to complain: yea this word may be taken actiuely, that it may
signify not troublesome men, nor complainers. And this signification agrees
not ill with the text, because the seed of all brawlings and backbitings, for
the most part is complaining He joins Sinoere, because such filthiness will
never come forth from purged minds. The sons of God without reprehension It
must thus be resolved, without reprehension: because ye are the sons of God:
for the adoption of GOD must be the cause of a blameless life, that by some
similitude we may resemble our father. Although there was never such perfection
in the world, that nothing should be found worthy reprehension: yet they are
called irreprehensible, who with all their care strive to come thither, as it is
said in another place. In the mids of a perverse generation. The faithful
live in the earth mingled with the ungodly, they draw together the common
air, they enjoy the common land. And at that time also they were more
dispersed, because there could scarce be found one godly house, which was not
every way compassed with unbelievers. So much the more Paul pricketh forward
the Philippians, that they should carefully take heed to themselves from all
corruptions. The sense is therefore: you are enclosed among the wicked: but in
the mean while remember that by the adoption of God you are separated from
them. Therefore let there be evident signs in your life, which may make you
differ. Moreover, this reason must more provoke you unto a care of a godly and
holy life: least being entangled by their vices and contagion, you be part
also of a crooked generation. Whereas he calls the unbelievers A perverse and
crooked generation. That belongs unto the circumstance of the place: for he
warns them, that they should so much the more diligently take heed,
because many offenses would be thruste in by the unfaithful, which might
hinder their right course: and the whole life of the unfaithful would be as
a Laborinthe of diverse turnings, which would lead us out of the way: yet
nevertheless they are Epithetes which agree with the unbelievers of all
nations, and of all times. For if the heart of man be perverse and
unsearchable, what shall be the fruits of such a root? We are taught
therefore in these words, that there is nothing pure in the life of man,
until he be reformed by the Spirit of GOD. Among whom shine ye. The
termination of the Greek verb is doubtful: for it might be read in the
Indicative mood: Ye shine. But the Imperative mood better agrees with the
the exhortation He will have the faithful like lamps, which do shine in the
darkness of the world. As if he should say, the unfaithful are the children
of the night, and in the world there is nothing but darkness: but GOD has
illuminated you unto this end, that the pureness of your life might shine in
this darkness, whereby his grace might appear most evident. So it is also
said by the prophet. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen in thee. Esaie. 60.2. By and by it follows. The gentiles shall walk in
the light, and Kings in the brightness of thy countenance. Although Esaie there
preaches rather of doctrine. And Paul here of the example of life (In
respect also of doctrine) Christ calls his Apostles peculiarlye in another
place, the light of the world. Math. 5.14.16. Holding forth the word of life.
The reason why they should be lights, is because they bear the word of
life, whereby they are lightened, that they also may shine unto others. He
alludeth unto candels, wherein are set weeks to burn, and he makes us like
unto the candels. He compares the word of God unto the week of the candle,
whence the light is. If you had rather have another similitude: we are the
candlesticks, the doctrine of Christ is the candle, which being set in us
gives light round about: And it signify that we offer injury unto the word
of God, except it shine in us by the pureness of our life. Hither appertains
the saying of Christ: No man lights a candle and puts it under a bushel,
etc. Mat. 5.15 So we are said to bear the word, that in the mean while we
are borne by it, because we are founded in it. But the manner of bearing which
Paul here handles is this: that god upon this condition has committed his
doctrine unto us, not that we should keep the light thereof suppressed and
idle, but that we should bring it forth unto others. The sum is this,
whosoever are illuminated by the heavenly doctrine, do bear about that
doctrine which may bewray and uncover their shame, except they walk holily and
purely: but this light is therefore kindled, that they themselves should not
only be directed in the right way, but that they should also show it forth
unto others. Unto my glory. To increase their courage, he witnesses that which
shall be glorious unto him, if he have not labored in vain among them: not
because they do lose the price and the reward of their travel, who have
labored faithfully, yet without effect: but since the success of our ministry
is the singular blessing of God, let us not marvel if God also crown that
among his other gifts. As therefore so many churches gotten by Paul unto
Christ, do now make his Apostleship honorable: so it is no doubt, but these
victories shall have place in the kingdom of Christ, as he says a little
after, you are my crown. And it is no doubt but the triumph shall be so much
the more excellent, as the deeds shall be more glorious. If any man would ask
how Paul do now rejoice in his labors, who in the 2. Cor. 11.11. forbids
to rejoice in any thing but in ye Lord: the answer is easy, when as we have
cast down our selves and al things that are ours before the Lord, and have
reposed our whole glory in Christ: It is lawful also through Christ to rejoice
in the benefits of god, as it appears in the first epistle to the
Corinthians: this part Until the day of the Lord is a prick unto the
Philippians, for to persevere, since that the tribunal seat of Christ is set
before them, from whence they must look for the reward of their faith.

17 And though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I
rejoice, and rejoice with you all.

18 For the same cause also rejoice ye, and rejoice together with me.

19 And I hope in the Lord that I shall also send Timotheus unto you shortly,
that I also may be quiet when I know your estate.

20 For I have no man like minded, who will faithfully care for your matters.

21 For all seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

22 But ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the father, he has
served with me in the gospel.

23. Him therefore I hope to send, as soon as I know how it will go with me.

24 And I trust in the Lord that I also my self shall come shortly.

17 If I be offered. In greek it is (...). Wherefore he seems unto me to
allude unto those sacrifices, by the killing whereof, among the men of old time
covenants and bargains were ratified: for the greeks properly call (...) a
sacrifice offered to confirm a covenant. After this sort he calls his death
a confirmation of their faith, as certainly it should be. But that the whole
place might be more clear, he says that he sacrificed unto god, when he
consecrated them through the gospel. The like saying is to the Romans. 15.16.
for there he he brings in himself as a priest, which offreth the gentiles
unto God through the gospel. And as the gospel is the Spiritual sword to
kill sacrifices, so faith is as it were the offering: for there is no faith
without mortification, by the which we are consecrated unto God. He puts
two words (...) and (...) sacrifice and service, whereof the former is referred
unto the Philippians, who were offered unto God: the other unto Paul: for he is
the act of the sacrifice. It is as much as administration and so it
comprehends the functions and duties of either kinds: but here it belongs
properly unto the worship of God, as the Latins say, operari sacris, to
sacrifice. Now Paul says that he shall be joyful if he should be offered
upon such a sacrifice, that it might be more ratified and strong. This is to
teach the gospel from the heart, when we are ready to confirm with our own
blood that which we teach. Besides, here is a profitable doctrine to be
gathered touching the nature of faith: namely, that it is not a vain thing:
but such a thing as consecrateth a man unto God: and also the ministers of the
gospel have here an excellent comfort, who are said to be the priests of
God, to offer sacrifices unto him: for with what earnestnes would he bend him
self to be careful in preaching, which knows that this is a sacrifice
acceptable unto God? Touching this kind of sacrifice, whilst the miserable
papists know nothing, they feign another kind which is extreme sacrilege. He
says, I rejoice together with you: that if it should happen that he should
dye, they might know it should be for their profit, and they might reap
fruit by his death. 18. Rejoice ye. By this cheerefulnes he animateth the
Philippians, and enflameth them to suffer death valiantly, in which the
faithful suffer no evil. For before he taught that death should be to him
advantage, yet here he especially bewareth that his death trouble not the
Philippians. Therefore he denies that it shall be any cause of sorrow: yea
they must rather rejoice, because they should find it fruiteful: for although
of it self it were a grievous loss to be deprived of such a teacher, yet the
recompense should not be lighter, because the gospel should be confirmed by
his blood. In the mean while he admonishes the^ that death privately to
himself shall be joyful, whereas Erasmus translateth it in the present tense,
You do rejoice. It is altogether far off. 19. And I hope. He promises unto
them the coming of Timotheus, that by looking for him, they might stay
themselves more manfully, and not yield to the deceivers: for as in war the
hope of succor keeps still the minds of soldiers that they faint not: so
this cogitation also might give much courage unto the Philippians. He shall
come shortly that shall oppose himself against the attempts of our enemies,
and if the only expectation of him did so much prevail, his presence should be
much more forcible. The condition is to be noted, wherein he submits
himself to the providence of god, determining nothing without yt going before:
as truly it is lawful to appoint nothing for the time to come, but under the
hand of God the Lord (as I may so say) Where he adds That I also may be
quiet, he declares his love toward them (as much to say) as he was so careful
for their dangers, that except he knew their prosperous estate, he could not be
well. 20 I have no man like minded. Although many gather a diverse sense, I
thus interpret it, I have no man so well minded to be careful for your matters:
for in my judgment Paul rather compares Timotheus with others, than with him
self: and truly for that purpose he gives him a singular praise, that for his
rarenes he might be in greater estimation. 21. For all men seek their own. He
speaks not of the^ who had altogether cast away the care of godliness, but of
the^ whom he accounted for brethren, yea whom he suffered in his own
company: yet he says that they are so cunning in caring for their own
matters, that they are more cold in the work of the Lord. In show it seems to
be no grievous fault to seek ones own: but how intolerable it is in the
servants of Christ it appears thereof, that it makes them altogyther
unprofitable, whom it possesses: for it cannot be that he should employ him
self for the Church, that is addicted unto himself. Therefore thou will
say: did Paul cheryshe with himself men of no goodness and dissemblers? I
answer that it is not so to be taken, as though being altogyther bent to
their own profitte, they had no care at all of the Church: but because they
being entangled with their own private commodities, they were more negligent
to promote the public benefit of the Church: for it is necessary that one
of these affections must raygne in us: that either neglecting our selves, we
should be carried unto Christ, and unto those things that are Christ's: or
else being too much addicted to our own profit, we should serve Christ for
fashion sake. Hereof appears how great an hinderance it is unto the ministers
of the Church, to seek their own. Neither are these excuses of any force: I
am injurious to no man, I must have regard of my self: I am not so hard
hearted: but I am carefullye moved with respect of mine own commodity: for
thou must depart from thine own right, that thou may perform thy duty:
thy reason is neither to be preferred before the glory of Christ, nor to be
made equal with it: whether soever Christ calls thee, thou must go
speedily, leaving all other things. So thou must look back unto thy
vocation, that thou must turn away thy senses from all things that may call
thee backward. Thou may live in another place more wealthily: but God has
bound thee to a Church which mainetaine thee but sclenderly. In another
place there is more honor: but God has given thee that place, in which thou
must live humbly. In another place the air is more healthful, or the country
more pleasant: but here thy standing is appointed. Thou would wish that thou
had rather to do with a more gentle people: either their unthankfulness, or
their fiercenes, or their pride offends thee. Finally thou do not agree
with the wit and manners of the co^try: yet thou must strive with thy self, and
after a sort offer violence to thy contrary desires, yt thou may increase
that good which thou have gotten: for thou art not free, or at thy own liberty.
To conclude thou must forget thy self, if thou will serve GOD. And if Paul
does reprove them so severely, who had greater care of them selves than of the
Church, what judgment do they look for, who being altogether carried
away by their own business, do nothing esteem the edifyng of the Church?
although they now flatter themselves: yet God will not spare them. So far it
is to be granted to the ministers of the Church, to seek their own, that
they be not hindered from seeking the kingdom of Christ: but by this mean
they shall not now be said to seek their own, because the life of man is
esteemed, according unto the special mark whereat it aymeth. Whereas he
says, All: you must not urge ye universal sign, that you admit no exception:
for there were others also, as Epaphroditus, but a very few: but he
attributes that unto all, which was every where common When we hear Paul
complaining in that golden age, wherein all virtues flourished that true hearted
brethren were so hard to find: let not us discourage our selves, if at this
day our estate be alike: only let every man take heed to himself yt he be not
worthyly numbered in this catalog. I would the Papists would answer me, where
Peter was at that time, who ought to have been at Rome (if they say truth. Oh
heavy and shameful dispraise which Paul should give him: they fable therefore
when they feign that he was then Bishop of the Church of Rome. Mark that the
edifiyng of the Church is called the things of Christ, because the^ truly we
do his business, when we labor in trimming his vineyard. But ye know the
experience of him. According to the word it is, you know the proof of him,
except you had rather have it in the Imperative mood know ye. (for they
could scarce take any trial of him in the time) but there is little matter of
weight in that. This is especially to be marked, yt he gives testimony unto
Timothy of his faith and modesty. It appertains to his faith, in that he
testifies, that he served with him in the gospel, and it is a sign of his
modesty, that he submitted himself to him, as unto his Father. That Paul
commends this virtue namely, it is no marvel, for it has been rare in all
ages. At this day what young man can be found, who will yield even a little
unto his elders? such insolency springs and boyleth forth in that age. In
this place (as in many other) we see what an earnest care Paul has to
beautify godly ministers, not so much for their cause, as that it belongs to
the whole Church, that such should be loved and reverenced, and be in great
authority. And I trust L my self. This also he adds, least they should
think that any thing had happened, which might change the purpose of his
coming, whereof before he had made mention: yet always he speaks with a
condition. If it please the Lord: for although he hoped of deliverance from the
Lord: because we said, there was no certain promise that his hope was firmly
settled, but hanging as it were upon the secret counsel of God.

25 But I have thought it necessary to send unto you Epaphroditus my brother
and companion in labor, and fellow soldier: but your Apostle, and the
minister of my necessity.

26 Because he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because ye had
heard that he had been sick.

27 And truly he was sick, very near unto death: but god had mercy on him,
and not on him only, but on me also, that I should not have sorrow upon sorrow.

28 I sent him therefore the more diligently, that when ye see him, ye might
again rejoice, and I might be the less sorrowful

29 Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and make much of such.

30 Because that for the work of Christ, he was near unto death, offering
his life unto danger, that he might fulfill that service which was wanting on
your part toward me.

25 Epaphroditus. After he had comforted them by promising his own coming,
and the coming of Timotheus, presently also he strengthens them, sending
Ehaphroditus before: least in the mean time while he were certain what would
become of himself (for this was the cause of his tarying) they should want
their pastor, who might defend their well ordered estate. He commends
Epaphroditus by many names: that he is a brother, and an helper in the business
of the Gospel: that he is his fellow soldier: by which word he expresses
what the condition of the ministers of the gospel is: namely that they must be
in continual warfare: for Satan will not suffer them to promote the gospel
without fighting. Therefore let them know who prepare them selves to edify
the Church, that there is war proclaimed and ready against them. This truly
is common unto all Christians to serve as soldiers in the tents of Christ,
because Satan is the enemy of us al: but especially it appertains to ye
ministers of the word, who lead the armies, and carry the standarde: yet more
properly, it was lawful for Paul to boast of his warfare, who was exercised
in all kind of battles, yea even miraculously. Therefore Paul commends
Epaphroditus, because he was partaker with him of his striuings: the name of
Apostle is here generally (as in many other places) taken for every Evangelist:
except any had rather take it for a messenger sent from the Philippians, yt
these two may ioyntlye be read together: a messenger sent to minister unto
Paul, but the former sense in my judgment agrees better. He puts this
also among his praises, ye he ministered unto him in prison: of which thing we
shall speak more amply afterward. 26. Longed after you. A sign of a true
pastor, that when he was far of, and willingly witholden from his godly duty:
yet he was moved with care and desire of his flock, and when he understood
that his sheep were sad for his sake, he was heavy for their grief. In like
manner the godly care of the Philippians for their pastor is declared. 27. But
God had mercy on him. He expressed the grieuousnes of the disease, because
Epaphroditus was sick without hope of life, that the goodness of God in
restoring his health might appear more evidently. But it is a marvel that the
Apostle does account the prolonging of Epaphroditus his life, in the number of
Gods mercies: when before he testified that he rather desired death. And what
is better for us, than being delivered out of so many miseries of the world, to
pass into the kingdom of god: especially being delivered from the bondage of
sin, in the which he cries out. Romans 7.24. that he was miserable to enjoy
more fully the liberty of the spirit, whereby we may cleave fast unto ye son of
God? It were a long thing to reckon up all things, which cause that death is
better tha^ life unto the faithful, and more to be wished for Therefore what
mercy is that of god, when it does nothing but prolong our miseries? I answer
that al things make not, but these yt this life esteemed in it self, is an
excellent benefit of God: especially they yt live unto Christ are here happily
exercised unto the hope of heavenly glory: and therefore we saw a little
before, that life was to them advantage. Furthermore there is another thing to
be considered, that GOD vouchsafes us no small thing, when he glorifieth him
self in us: for we must not so much respect our life, as the end wherefore
we do live. And of me also that I should not have sorrow upon sorrow. Paul
confesses that the death of Epaphroditus would have been bitter unto him, and
herein he acknowledges that God spared him, in that he was again restored
unto his health. Therefore he bosteth not of the senselessenes of the Stoickes,
as though he were made of iron, and free from the affection of men. What
therefore, some will say: where is the unconquered courage of his mind? where
is his vnwearyed constancy? I answer that Christian patience do dyffer far
from the peruersenes of Philosophers: much more from that crooked and cruel
hardenes of the Stoickes: for what virtue were it patiently to bear the
cross, if there were no feeling of grief and of bitterness in it? but whilst
the comfort of God does overcome this feeling, that we resist not but rather
willingly give our backs to be beaten, then we offer a sacrifice of our
obedience acceptable unto GOD. So Paul confesses that he did feel some
sorrow and grief in his bands, notwythstandyng he did ioyfullye suffer those
bands for Christ. He confesses that he should grievously have taken the death
of Epaphroditus: yet at length he would have framed his affection unto the will
of god: although all the hardenes of the matter is not yet wholly answered: for
then we prove our obedience, when we bridle our naughtye affections, and give
not place to the infirmity of the flesh. Two things therefore are to be
considered, first that the affections which god at the beginning put into our
nature, are not evil of themselves, because they proceed not from the
viciousnes of our corrupted nature, but flow from god, who is ye author of
them, of which sort is sorrow, which is taken for the death of our friends.
Again there were many other causes why Paul should lament the death of
Epaphroditus, and those not only blameless, but altogether necessary. This
first of al is a continual thing with the faithful, that in the death of any,
they are admonished of the wrath of God against sin: but Paul was more
moved with the loss of the church which he saw should be destitute of an
excellent pastor, in so great a scarsitie of good men. They that would have
such affections altogether taken away and extinguished, do not only feign men
as senseless as stones, but cruel and hardharted. But in this corruption of
nature, all things are so perverse in us, that whatsoever our minds be moved
to, they always exceed measure. Hereof it comes, that nothing of it self is
so pure and right, which draws not unto it some contagion. Moreover yt Paul
(as he was a man) suffered somewhat in his grief beseeming the nature of man. I
deny not, for both he labored under his infirmity, and also it was necessary
that he should be tempted, that by striving and resisting he might have matter
to overcome. 28. I have sent him more diligently. The presence of Epaphroditus
was no small comfort unto him: yet he so much preferred the salvation of the
Philippians before his own commodity, that he says he reioiceth for his
departure, because he was sorrowful by his own occasion to be drawn from
the flock committed unto him, and from the duties of him, though pleasant,
which he inioyed with the loss of them. Therefore he says, that he shall be
more glad for the joy of the Philippians. 29. Receive him with all joy. He
takes all joy for sincere and surpassing joy. And again he commends him to
the Philippians: he laboreth altogether in this point, that they should be much
esteemed, that prove themselves good and faithful pastors. Neither does he
speak only of one, but he commands all such to be had in estimation, for
they are precious stones taken out of the treasure of God, and the rarer they
are, the more worthier they are of greater value. And it is without doubt that
God oftentimes does punish our ingratitude, and our disdainefull lothing of his
word, by depriving us of good pastors, whilst he sees all good men for the
most part which he gives us, to be despised. He therefore that desires to
have the Church defended against the lying in wait, and the assaults of
wolves: let him by the example of Paul have care, that the authority of good
pastors may be established, as contrariwise, the instruments of the devil
labor in nothing more than to overthrow it by all means possible. Because
for the work of Christ. I refer it unto that infirmity which he had gotten by
his continual diligence, therefore he reckons the disease of Epaphroditus
among his virtues, as truly it was an evident sign of his fervent zeal. It
is no virtue to be sick, but this is a virtue, that thou serve Christ, not to
spare thy self. Epaphroditus did perceive that it would be dangerous for his
health, if beyond measure he were instant upon him, yet he had rather neglect
his health, than to be behind in his duty. And that he might the more commend
this deed unto the Philippians, he says, it was a supplying of their wants,
because they being far asunder, could not bestow their travel upon Paul
being at Rome. Therefore Epaphroditus being sent for this purpose, did fulfill
their duty. He calls the obedience unto himself the work of the Lord, as
truly there is nothing wherein we can better bestow our travel upon God,
than whilst we succor his servant being distressed for the truth of the
Gospel.

Chapter. 3.
Moreover my brethren rejoice in the Lord. It greeueth me not to write the same
things unto you, and for you it is a sure thing.

2 Beware of dogs, beware of evil laborers, beware of concision.

3 For we are the circumcision which worship God in spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

4 Although I also have confidence in the flesh: if any other man thinks, he
has whereof he might trust in the flesh, more I.

5 Circumcised the eight day, of the kindred of Israel, of the tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, according to the law a Pharisee.

6 Concerning zeal I persecuted the Church: touching righteousness which is in
the law I was unrebukable.


Rejoice in the Lord. This is a conclusion of the things that went before: for
because Satan did not cease to buffet them with daily reports, he bids them
be secure and of a good courage. By this reason he exhorts them unto
constancy, least they should fall away from the doctrine which they had once
received. And the word Moreover does note a continual tenor, least thorough
many hindrances they should cease to extend their holy joy. It is a rare
virtue when Satan goes about to provoke us thorough the bitterness of the
cross, that the name of God might be unpleasant unto us, to rest in the only
taste of God his grace, that all our troubles, greeues, cares, and sorrows
might be made sweet. To write the same things unto you Here he begins to
speak of the false Apostles, with whom notwithstanding he fights not hand
to hand, as in the Epistle to the Galathians, but in a few words he bitterly
refuteth them as much as was sufficient: for because they had only tempted the
Philippians, and had not vanquished them, a just disputation was not so
necessary to refute their errors, whereunto they had never yielded their ears.
Simply therefore he admonishes them, yt they should be diligent and attentive
in discerning and avoiding of deceivers. First, he calls them dogs, by a
metaphore taken from hence, because for filling their bellies sake, they
assaulted true doctrine by their impure barking. It is as much as if he should
say, they were unclean and profane. Neither do I agree unto them, who think
they were so called, because they did envy others, or did bite them. Secondly,
he calls them Evil laborers, signifying that under the color of edifying
the Church, they did nothing but overthrow and destroy all. For many labor
much, whom it were better to be idle, as that common crier being asked of
Gracchus iestingly, because he sat idle, what he did, had his answer in a
readiness, yea what do thou? for he was captain of a pernicious tumult.
Paul therefore would have a difference among laborers, that the faithful might
beware of those that are evil. In the third name there is an elegant (...).
They did boast that they were circumcision, he derideth this boasting by
calling it concision, because they did rent asunder the unity of the Church,
wherein we have an example, that the holy Ghost in his instruments did not
always shun pleasantness and jesting, from whom notwithstanding scoffing must
be far off, which beseems not his majesty. There are infinite examples in
the Prophets, and especially in Esaias, so that there is no profane Author who
abounds more with pleasant allusions of words and with figures. But we must
more mark the vehemency whereby Paul inueigheth against the false Apostles,
which truly will burst forth, wheresoever there is the heat of a godly
zeal. But we must take heed that no intemperance or immoderate bitterness
proceed under the color of zeal. Further, where he says, that it is not
troublesome to him to write the same things unto them, he seems to infer
that he has otherwise written unto ye Philippians, but it shall not be absurd
so to take it, yt they are now admonished of the same things by writing, which
they had often times heard when he was present. And it is no doubt but often times
he disputed by words, how much such plagues were to be taken heed of, yet it
greeueth him not to repeat the same thing, because thorough silence there was
danger imminent unto the Philippians. And truly it is the duty of a good
pastor, not only to minister food unto his flock, and to govern them by his
direction, but also to drive away the wolves that come near the foldes, and
that not once, but continually to stand upon his watch, and never to be weary,
for seeing that thieves and robbers do always watch to the destruction of the
Church, what excuse shall it be for the pastor, if after he has sometimes
valiantly repelled them, at the ninth or tenth assault he then faints? he
shows that such a repetition is profitable to the Philippians, least (as
sometimes it comes to pass) they should be too proud, and contemn it as a
thing superfluous. For the most part of men are so wayward, that they can not
abide the same thing to be twice spoken, neither in the mean while do they
think that, that which is daily beaten into them, do scarce at length after
ten years stick in their memory. And if it were profitable for the
Philippians to hear this exhortation of Paul, that they may discern wolves,
what mean the Papists, that they can abide no judgment to be given of their
doctrine? for whom I pray did Paul speak unto, when he said Beware? did he
not speak unto them, to whom they permit no right to discern? and of them
also Christ speaks in like manner: My sheep hear my voice and follow me, a
stranger they fly from, and they do not hear his voice. John. 10.5.27. 3.
For we are the Circumcision. That is, we are the true seed of Abraham, and
heirs of the covenant, which was confirmed by the sign of circumcision: for
the true circumcision is of the spirit, not of the letter, placed within in the
head, not visible concerning the flesh. Romans 2, 29. By spiritual worship he
understands that worship which is commended unto us in the Gospel, and
consists of faith and calling upon God, of the denying of our selves, and of
a pure conscience. We must understand an antithesis or contrariety, because by
ye contrary he touches the worship prescribed in the law, which the false
Apostles only urged, as if he should say: they teach that God is worshipped by
outward observations, and because they observe the ceremonies of the law, they
falsely boast that they are the people of God. We are truly circumcised who
worship God in spirit and truth. But here some man will ask whether the truth
excludes Sacraments, for the same thing may be said of Baptism and of the
Lord his supper. I answer, that that principle is always to be marked, that
figures are abrogated by the coming of Christ, and circumcision is changed
into Baptism. From this principle it follows, that pure and lawful
worshipping of God is now free from the ceremonies of the law, and true
circumcision unto the faithful consist without a figure. And we rejoice in
Christ. The antithesis must be continued: we cleave to the matter it self,
whilst they stick in signs: we abide in the body, whilst they have respect
unto shadows. Neither do the contrary member of the sentence which he set
opposite agree ill with this: we have no trust in the flesh, for under the name
of flesh he comprehends whatsoever is outward in a man from whence glory is
sought, as it shall appear out of the text, or that I may speak more
briefly, he calls flesh whatsoever is without Christ, wherein he does not
lightly gaul these perverse followers of the law, because not contented with
Christ, they fly unto the glory of others. He put, To rejoice, and to have
trust for the same, for thorough confidence he exalts a man that he may also
have boldness to rejoice, therefore they are things joined together. 4
Although I also. He speaks not of the affection, but he shows that he also
has occasion to rejoice, if that he would imitate the foolishness of others.
The sense therefore is thus: my glory is placed in Christ: but if I must needs
rejoice in the flesh, I want not matter whereof to rejoice. And hereof we
learn how their arrogancy is to be refuted, that are proud without Christ.
If we also have the same things, wherein they exalt themselves, let us not
suffer them by their foolish boasting to insult upon Christ, but let us refuse
our own glory, that they may understand, that it is not for envy that we do
not esteem, yea rather, that we willingly cast away those things which they
make most account of. Let this notwithstanding be always a clause, that all
trust of the flesh is vain and ridiculous. If any man has whereof to trust
in the flesh, more I. Not contented to make himself equal with any of them,
he does prefer himself before them, wherefore he can not be suspected in
this cause as if he envied their excellency: and that he extolleth Christ to
humble that which was wanting in himself. He says therefore, if it should
come into a contention, that he shall be more excellent than the others: for
they had nothing (as we shall see by and by) which he had not in like manner
common with them, and in some things he did far surpass them. He said
improperly that he had trust, who without trust was endued with carnal glory,
wherewith others were puffed up. 5 Circumcised the eight day: word for word, it
is the circumcision of the eight day, but touching the sense, there is no
difference, for it signifies that according to the lawful custom, and
according to the prescript of the law, that he was circumcised. Touching that
ordinary circumcision, it was had in great estimation, and beside, it was a
token of their kindred, whereof he adds afterward. For in strangers there was
not the like reason, for after they were become Proselites, they were
circumcised being young men, or men grown to perfection, and sometimes also
being old men. He says therefore that by kindred he is an Israelite. He
shows the tribe, not (in my judgment) that the tribe of Benjamin had more
excellency than the rest, but to confirm the credit of his kindred. Hither
also appertain that which he adds again that he is An Hebrewe of the
Hebrews: for this was an old name wherewith Abraham is adorned by Moses in
Genesis. 14, 13. The sum therefore is, that Paul from his very original was
borne of the seed of Jacob, so that from thence he might reckon his
graundfathers and great graundfathers. According to the law a Pharisee. After
that he had disputed of the nobility of his stock, he descends now unto
peculiar gifts of his person (as they call them.) Commonly it is sufficiently
known, that the sect of the Pharisees in opinion of holiness and doctrine, was
famous above the rest, of that sect he shows that he was. It is a common
opinion that they were called Pharisees of division: but I rather allow that
which I heard sometime of Capito, a man of holy memory, that they had their
name from hence, because they boasted that they excelled in the gift of
interpreting the Scripture, for Phares among the Hebrews is Interpretation.
When others professed themselves to be learned, these men had rather be called
Pharisees, who were skillful in the interpretation of old writers. And truly it
is manifest, that under the color of antiquity, they corrupted the whole
Scripture by their gloses, yet because they kept still certain interpretations
delivered by the hands of their fathers, the greatest honor was given unto
them. But what mean this clause, According to the law: for truly, there is
nothing more contrary to the law of God, than sects, for there one truth of
God is delivered, which is the bond of unity. Moreover, that all sects
sproong up when Ionathas was high Priest, Josephus witnesses in his first
book of Antiquities, and 13. Chapter. Paul uses improperlie the name of the
law, for the doctrine of religion, because it was very corrupt at that time,
as at this day is the Christianity in the Papacy. But because there were
many of the order of the Doctors less skillful and exercised, he makes
mention of his own zeal. This was an heinous offense in Paul to persecute
the Church: but because he had to do with varlets, who by mingling Christ
with Moses, did pretend the zeal of the law. He shows of the contrary
side, that he was so earnestly zealous for the law, that for this cause he was
a persecutor of the Church. According to the righteousness which is in the law.
It is no doubt but here he understands the whole righteousness of the law,
for it is too barren to take it for the ceremonies only. The sense therefore is
more general, that he embraced integrity of life, so much as could be
required of a professor of the law. Again it is objected, that the
righteousness of the law is perfect before God: for the sum is, that men
altogether should cleave unto God, and what can be more desired unto
perfection? I answer, that Paul here speaks of righteousness, which
might satisfy the common estimation of men, for he separateth the law from
Christ, and what is the law without Christ, but a dead letter? that the matter
may appear more plainly, I say there is a double righteousness of the law,
one is spiritual, namely, the perfect love of God and of our neighbors, that
is contained in doctrine, and was never in the life of any man, the other is
liberal, which appears in the sight of men, when in the mean time
hypocrisy reigns in the heart, and there is nothing before God but
iniquity. So the law has two respects, the one of God, and the other of men,
Paul therefore was holy in the judgment of men, and free from all
reprehension: a rare praise truly, and almost singular, yet let us consider how
much he esteemed it.

7 But the things that were advantage unto me, the same I counted loss for
Christ his sake.

8 Yea, I think all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have made loss of all things, and I think
them to be dong that I might win Christ.

9 And might find in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is thorough faith of Christ, which I say is the
righteousness in faith.

10 That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship
of his afflictions, while I am made conformable unto his death.

11 If by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead.

7 The things that were advantage unto me: he says they were advantage unto
him before he knew Christ: for the only ignorance of Christ does cause that we
are puffed up with a vain confidence of our selves. Therefore wheresoever we
see in any a false opinion of their own virtue, whersoeuer we see arrogancy,
wheresoever we see pride, let us know that Christ is not there known.
Contrariwise, so soon as Christ shines unto us, in a moment those things
vanishe or wax vile, whatsoever did before dazzle our eyes with a false
brightness. Therefore those things that were advantage unto Paul yet being
blind, or rather those things that had deceived him under the color of
advantage, he acknowledges being illuminated, that they were loss unto him:
why did he think them losses? because they were hindera^ces unto him, that he
could not come unto Christ: And what is more hurtful than that which drives
us from access unto Christ? But he speaks especially of his own
righteousness: for we are not admitted unto Christ, except we be empty and void
of our own proper virtue: Therefore Paul did acknowledge that there was
nothing more hurtful unto him than his own righteousness, as whereby he was
excluded from Christ. 8. Yea I think all things but loss. This does signify
that he did abide steadfast in his opinion, because oftentimes it come to pass,
that being carried away with a delight of novelties, we forget all other
things, and afterward it repents us. Wherefore Paul after he had said that
he had renounced all impediments, that he might possess Christ: he now adds
that he is still of that mind. For the excellency of the knowledge. Be
extolleth the gospel against all persuasions which do deceive us: for many
things seem to be excellent, but the knowledge of Christ so far exceeds
all things in excellency, that in respect of that only there is nothing but
contemptible: hereof therefore let us learn, how much the knowledge of Christ
only is to be esteemed. Whereas he calls him his Lord, he does that to
express the vehemency of his affection For whom I have made loss of all
things. He says more tha^ before, at least he speaks more significantly: the
similitude is taken from sailers, who when they are in danger of shipwreck,
cast forth al things, yt when the ship is unladen, they may come safe into the
haven. Therefore Paul had rather be spoiled of all things which he had, than
to be deprived of Christ only. But a question may he asked: whither it be
necessary that we renounce riches, and honors, and nobility of kindred, and also
our outward righteousness yt we may be made partakers of Christ, for all those
are gifts of god of themselves not to be despised. I answer that the Apostle
does not here speak so much of the things themselves, as of the quality of
them. Indeed it is true that the kingdom of heaven is like to a precious
pearl, for the obtaining whereof no man should doubt to sell all that he has:
but in things the substance is one, and the quality another. It was not
necessary for Paul to renounce his tribe and the stock of Abraham and to be
of another nation, that he might become a christian: but to cast away the
confidence of his kindred. He should not of a chaste man become unshamefast, of
a sober man intemperate, of a grave and honest man become dissolute: but to put
off the false persuasion of his own righteousness, and to abhor it. We also do
not dispute against the substance of works when we handle the righteousness of
faith: but against that quality which the Sophisters give them, because they
maintain, that by them men are justified. Paul therefore spoiled himself, not
of his works, but of the perverse confidence in his works, wherewith he was
puffed. Concerning riches and honors, when we have laid away the affection of
them, we shall also be ready to cast away the things themselves, as often as god
shall require it, and it so behooves us. It is not simply necessary, that thou
should be poor, that thou myghtest be a Christian: but if it shall so
please the Lord, it is meet that thou should be ready to abide poverty. To
conclude it is not lawful for christians to have any thing without Christ That
I say is without Christ whatsoever hinder us that we glory not in Christ only,
and that he rule not altogether in us. And I think them to be dongue. Here not
only in words, but in matter also he much amplifieth that which before he
said: for they that cast away their wares and other things into the sea, that
they may escape safely, they do not therefore contemn riches: but because
they had rather live in misery and poverty, than to be drowned with their own
substance: yet they lose them very hardly and with groaning, and when they have
escaped, they bewail the loss of them. Paul contrariwise affirms that he
had not only forsaken whatsoever before he accounted precious: but that they
did smell unto him like dongue, or become vile like those things which are
contempteously cast forth. Chrysostom interprets it chafe: but the
grammarians think that it is called (...) as it were (...) that which is cast
unto dogs: and truly whatsoever thing is strange from Christ, it should
stink unto us, because it is abomination before god, and it ought also to be
vile unto us, because it is nothing but a false imagination. That I might gain
Christ. By this word he notes that Christ cannot otherwise be gained, except
we lose al things that are our own: for he will have us to be rich by his grace
only: he alone will be our happiness. What manner of losing he here speak of, it
was said before: namely yt nothing should withdraw us from the trust in Christ
only. And if Paul in that innocency and integrity of life, doubted not to
account his righteousness for loss and dongue, what mean ye pharisees of these
days, who being beraied with all kind of wickedness are not yet ashamed to
extol their own merits against Christ. And might find in him. It is a verb
passive, which he here uses: and therefore al other have translated it And I
might be found: but they pass over the text very coldly, as though there were
no emphasis in it. If you read it passiuely, a contrariety must be
understood: that Paul was lost before he was found in Christ: as a rich
merchant is like unto one yt is lost, so long as he has his ship laden with
wealth, and after all is cast away he is found: for here that saying is of
value. I had perished if I had not perished. But because the verb (...) in the
passive termination has an active signification, and then it signify to
recover that which thou have willingly parted from (as Budeus shows by many
examples) I have not doubted to alter from the opinion of others: for by this
means the sense shall be more full, and the doctrine more plentiful: namely,
that Paul renounced all things which he had, that he might recover them in
Christ: and ye answers better to the word gain, because it signify, that it
is no small or common gain, seeing that Christ contains all things in him
self. And truly we lose nothing when we come unto Christ naked and empty,
because we the^ begin to obtain those things, which before we falsely thought
that we had. Therefore he declares better how great the riches of Christ
are, because in him we obtain and find all things. Not having mine own
righteousness. A notable place if any desire to have a certain definition of
the righteousness of faith, and to hold the true nature thereof: for Paul here
compares two righteousnesses together: The one he says is proper unto man,
the which he calls the righteousness of ye law: the other he teaches to be
from GOD, and to be obtained through faith, and to be reposed in the faith of
Christ, these he makes so contrary between them selves, that they can not
stand together. Two things therefore are here to be noted, that thou must give
over, and resign the righteousness of the law, that thou may be righteous
by faith: then that ye righteousness of faith proceed from God, and is not
proper unto man. Touching both of these, there is great contention at this day
betwixt us and the Papists: for neither do they grant that the righteousness of
faith is altogether from GOD: but they attribute part unto man: and they mingle
them together as though the one did not take away the other. Therefore we must
diligently weigh all the words of Paul, because there is none of them wherein
there is not great moment: he denies that the faithful have any righteousness
of their own: but it can not be denied, but if there were any righteousness of
works, it might worthily be called ours: therefore he leaves no place at al
for the righteousness of works. Why he calls it the righteousness of the law
he shows. Romans 10.5. namely because this is the edict of the law: he that
does these things shall live in them, therefore the law does pronounce a man
to be just by his works, neither can the papists cauil that all this must be
restrained unto ceremonies: for first it is a frivolous triflyng that Paul was
only righteous by ceremonies: then by this reason he opposes these two
righteousnesses, ye one is proper unto man, the other is from God: therefore
the one does signify the reward of works: the other the free gift of God. So
generally he opposes the merit of man unto the grace of Christ: for when the
law brings works, faith offers a naked man unto God, that he may be
clothed with the righteousness of Christ. Whereas therefore he affirms yt the
righteousness of faith is from God, it is not only because faith is the gift of
God, but because God of his goodness do justify us, or else because by faith
we receive the righteousness which he has given us. 10. That I may know him.
He describes the force and nature of faith, namely that it is ye knowledge of
Christ, and that not naked or co^fused: but whilst the virtue of his
resurrection is perceived, he put resurrection for the accomplishment of
redemption: so that it contains death under it: but because it is little to
know Christ crucified, and raised from the dead, except thou do apprehende
the fruit thereof, he speaks namely of the efficacy. Then therefore Christ
is known aryght, when we feel what his death and resurrection do prevail in
us, and how effectual he is in us: for there all things are set out unto us:
the taking away of sin, delivery from guiltines, satisfaction, the victory of
death, the obtaining of righteousness, and the hope of blessed immortality. And
the fellowship of his passions. After he had spoken of free righteousness, which
being gotten by the resurrection of Christ, we obtain through faith: he
joins the exercises of the godly, and that least it should seem that he
bring in an idle faith which brings forth no effects in their life, and he
shows that these are the studies wherein the Lord would have his children
exercised: though the false Apostles thrust upon them the bare elements of
ceremonies. He therefore that by faith is made partaker of all ye goods of
Christ, let him know that this condition is propounded unto him, that all his
life must be made conformable to his death. But there is a double fellowship
and communicating of the death of Christ, the one is within, which the
scripture is wont to call the mortification of the flesh, or the crucifiyng of
the old man: whereof Paul entreats Romans 6. The other is without which is
called the mortifiyng of the outward man, that is the bearing of the cross,
whereof he entreats in the 8. chapter of the same epistle, and here also,
except I be deceived: for after we have comprehended the virtue of his
resurrection, Christ is propounded unto us crucified, that by tribulations and
sorrows we should follow him, and therefore the resurrection of the dead is
fitly expressed, that we may know that we must dye before we live. This is the
continual meditation of the faithful, so long as they are strangers in the
earth: but this is an excellent consolation, that in all our miseries we are
partakers of the cross of Christ, if we be his members, that by afflictions
the way is made open for us unto eternal blessedness, as it is said. 2. Tim.
2.11. If we die with him we shall also live with him, if we suffer with him, we
shall also raygne with him. It is meet therefore that we al should be brought
unto this, yt our whole life should represent unto us nothiyng but an image of
death, until it bring forth death it self. As the life of Christ was nothing
else but a forerunner of death: but in the mean while we have this comfort,
that the end is everlasting blessedness: for the death of Christ is joined with
his resurrection. Therefore Paul says, that he is made conformable unto his
death, that he may come to ye glory of his resurrection. This part If by any
means proceed not of doubting, but it notes the hardness of it to stir up our
desire: for it is not a light combat, when we strive with so many and so great
hindrances.

12 Not as though I had already obtained it, or were already perfect, but I
follow that I also may comprehend, even as I am comprehended of Christ Jesus.

13 Brethren, I think that I have not yet comprehended it, but one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and endeavoring my self unto
those things which are before.

14. I follow toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

15 Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded: and if ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this thing unto you

16 Nevertheless whither we are come, that we may mind one thing: let us
proceed by the same rule.

17 And together brethren be followers of me, and consider the^ which walk so,
even as ye have us for an example.

12 Not as though I had already obtained it. Paul laboreth in this that he
might persuade the philippians, that he think on nothing but Christ, that he is
wise in no other thing, that he desire no other thing, that he is occupied in
no other meditation: hereunto it avails much which he now adds, that he
which had renounced al hindrances, had not yet attaind to the mark: and
therefore he did labor and endeavor to come further: how much more should the
Philippians strive, who as yet were far from him? But a question may be asked
what it is yt Paul says, he have not yet obtained: for truly from ye time yt
we are engraffed by faith into the body of Christ we are already entered into
the kingdom of God, and as it is said Ephesians. 2.6. we sit already by hope in
heavenly places. I answer that our salvation is in the mean time placed in
hope, that our inheritance may be certain, notwithstanding as yet we do not
enjoy the possession of it. Although Paul here respects the increase of
faith, and mortification, whereof he spoke before. He said that he did strive
and labor unto the resurrection of the dead, by the fellowship of the cross of
Christ: he adds that as yet he has not attained to this: to what? namely
that he might certainly communicate with the passions of Christ, that he might
have a perfect taste of the power of his resurrection, that he might know him
plainly. Therefore by his own example, he admonishes them that they must go
forward, and that the knowledge of Christ is a thing of such hardenes, that
they which labor in that only, are notwithstanding never perfect so long as
they live. Moreover this does nothing derogate from the doctrine of Paul,
because he had comprehended so much as was sufficient to execute the charge
committed unto him. In the mean time it behooved him to go forward that the
divine teacher of all men might be instructed unto humility. Even as he is
comprehended. He put in this clause by the way of correction, that he might
attribute all his endeavor unto the grace of God. It skilleth not much
whither you read it Even as, or So far as: for the sense remains all on,
that Paul was comprehended of Christ, that he might comprehend Christ, that
is, that he did nothing, but by the motion and the direction of Christ:: yet I
have chosen that which was more manifest, since that his wish seemed to be
free. I think that I have not yet comprehended it. He does not here call the
faith of his salvation into doubt, as though he were yet in suspense, but he
repeateth that which he had said, that he did yet strive to go forward,
because he had not yet come to the end of his calling. And that he declares
continually, saying, that he was only busied in that, leaving all other
things. He compares our life unto a race, the space whereof that we have to
run, God have limited unto us: for as it nothing profits a runner if he set
forth, except he come to the end of the race: so we also must finish the
course of our vocation even unto death, neither must we cease before we have
obtained that which we desire. Besides, as the way is limited for the runner,
least by straying hither and thither, he should weary him self in vain, in
coming nothing at all forward unto the goal: so there is also a mark
propounded unto us, whither we must rightly direct our course: neither does God
suffer us rashly to straie abroad. Thirdly, as a runner must be swift, and to
stay his pace at no delays, but neglecting all, to continue on his course: so
we must beware that we yield not our mind unto any thing that might call us
away, but we must rather endeavor, that being free from all hindrances, we may
apply our whole study only unto the calling of God. These three things Paul
comprehends in one similitude, where he says, that he does this one thing,
and that he forget all former things, he expresses his courage, and excludes
all impediments. When he says that he follow hard toward the mark, it
signifies that he does not wander out of the way. Forgetting the things that
are behind. He alludeth unto runners, who never turn back their eyes, least
they should slacken the swiftness of their course, especially they look not
backward, how much ground they have gone, but they haste right on unto the
goal. So Paul teaches, that he does not consider who he is, nor what he has
done, but only that he endeavor unto the appointed mark, and that with such
earnestness, as if with stretched arms he were carried thither, for there is
such a metaphore in the participle which he uses. If any would object that
the remembrance of our life past, is available to stir us up, as well
because the graces already bestowed upon us do encourage us to hope well, as
also because we are admonished by our sins, that our life is to be amended
for better: I answer, that such cogitations do not turn our eyes backward,
but rather help the sharpenes of our sight, that more clearly we may behold
the mark. But Paul here condemns those respects, which do either break
off, or diminish our cheerefulnes, even as if any man, being persuaded that he
has gone forward enough, because he seems to himself to have done his
duty, will wax slothful, and will deliver his lamp unto others: or if any
man be moved with the desire of the condition which he have left, he can not
apply his whole study unto that which he does. Such were the cogitations from
the which it was necessary that Paul his mind should be withdrawn, if he
would earnestly follow the vocation of Christ. But because mention was here
made of endeavor, of study, of running, and of perseverance, least any should
think that salvation is placed in them, or should ascribe unto the diligence
of men that which proceeds from another. Willing to note out ye cause of all,
he added in Christ Jesus. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect. Least
any should take this to be spoken of the common sort of men, as though he
prescribed rudiments unto them that are children in Christ: he testifies, that
it is a rule which all they that are perfect should observe. And this rule is,
that we must renounce confidence in all things, that we may rejoice in the
only righteousness of Christ, and neglecting all things, may attain unto the
fellowship of his passions, which may lead us unto a blessed resurrection.
Where now shall be the state of perfection which the Monks feign? where shall
be their confused fardell of so many inventions? to conclude, where shall all
Papistrie become, which is nothing else but an imagined perfection, and which
agrees not with this rule of Paul? truly, whosoever shall understand this
one word, shall clearly perceive that those things are filthy dong whatsoever
the Papists teach touching righteousness and obteining of salvation. If ye
be otherwise minded. He humbles their works and them, and lifts them up
unto a good hope. For he admonishes them, that they should not be proud in
their ignorance, and yet he bids them be of good cheer, when he says,
that they must look for the revelation of God, for we know how great an
hinderance of the truth obstinacy is. This therefore is an excellent
preparation unto teaching, if we do not please our selves in our error.
Therefore Paul covertly does show, that we must give place unto the
revelation of God, if as yet we have not obtained that which we seek. And
when he teaches that we must proceed by degrees, he encourages them, that
they should not faint in the middle of their course, although he also affirms
that it is without controversy which he had taught, saying, that unto them
which disagree from him, that shall be revealed which as yet they know not:
for it is as much as if he had said, the Lord will at sometime show unto you
the same thing which I have said is the perfect rule to be rightly wise, and to
live well. No man could lawfully speak so, but he that were certaynelie
persuaded of the reason and truth of his doctrine. In the mean time also let
us learn out of this place, that ignorance for a time in our weak breethren
must be suffered, and we must pardon them if it be not forthwith granted
unto them altogether to subscribe unto us. Paul was certain of his doctrine,
notwithstanding he gives unto them a space to profit, that as yet could not
receive it, neither does he therefore cease to account them as breethren, only
he takes heed that they should not flatter themselves in their error. Whereas
the Latin books have, He has revealed in the Pretertense, I easily reject
it, as being unfit, and not agreeing with the matter. 16 Nevertheless whether
we are come. In the distinction the Greek examples also differ, for in some
there are two whole sentences, if the division rather please you, the sense
shall be that which Erasmus has given, but I rather embrace a diverse reading,
that Paul exhorts them to the imitation of himself, that at length they may
come to the same mark, namely, that they may think one thing, and may
proceed by the same rule: for where sincere affection flourishes, such as
ruled in Paul, there is an easy way unto holy and godly concord. Therefore
because as yet they had not perceived what true perfection was, that they might
come thither, he would have them followers of himself, that is, with a pure
conscience to seek God, to arrogate nothing to themselves, quietly to submit
their senses unto Christ. For in the imitation of Paul all these virtues are
contained, a right zeal, the fear of the Lord, modesty, denying of himself,
readiness to teaching, love, and a desire of concord. He bids them together
be followers of him, that is, all with one consent and with one mind. Note,
that the mark of perfection, unto the which he inuiteth the Philippians by his
own example, is, that they should think the same thing, and proceed by the
same rule, but before he put the doctrine, wherein they should agree, and the
rule whereunto they should frame themselves. 17 Consider them. By this word he
signifies, that they had others as well whom they might choose to imitate, so
that they framed themselves unto that purity whereof he was an example,
whereby all suspicion of ambition is taken away: for whosoever is addicted to
himself, refuses companions. And he also admonishes them, that all
indifferently are not to be followed, as he adds more playnelie.

18 For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping:
that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.

19 Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and glory to their
shame, minding earthly things.

20 But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ.

21 Who shall transform our humble body, that it may be conformable to his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself.

18 For many. This in my judgment is a simple proposition: many walk minding
earthly things: whereby he signifies that there are many which creep upon the
ground, not feeling the power of the kingdom of God. He has inserted marks,
whereby such may be known, which we will examine in their place. Some by
earthly things understand ceremonies, and the outward elements of the world
which bring in the forgetfulness of true godliness, but I had rather refer
it unto the carnal affection, namely, because they not being regenerate by the
spirit of God, do savor in nothing but the world, which shall appear more
plainly out of that which follows. For hereby he brings them into envy,
because they being only desirous of their own honor, ease, and gain, did
neglect the edifying of the Church. Of whom I have told you often. He shows
how, that touching this matter he has often admonished the Philippians, because
he now goes about by his letters to reduce the same things into their
memories, which he had before told them being present. And his tears are an
argument that he was not moved with emulation, or hatred of the men, nor with a
desire of railing, or with the sharpness of his wit, but with a godly zeal,
because he saw that the Church was miserably destroyed by such plagues. So
in like manner it behooves us to be affected, that when we see the pastors
place occupied by wicked men, and men of no account, we should groan, and at
least by tears testify, that we are grieved for the calamity of the Church.
It is also worth the noting, to consider of whom Paul speaks, not of open
enemies, who by profession desired the destruction of the doctrine, but of
drones and varlets, who for ambition, or for their bellies sake, did destroy
the virtue of the Gospel. Truly sometime they shall know such, who by
seeking themselves, do more weaken the strength of the ministry, than if
they did openly resist Christ: therefore we must not spare them, but point
them out with our finger so often as it is expedient, let them complain
afterward as they list of our severity, so that they object nothing against
us, which we may not defend by the example of Paul. Enemies of the cross.
Some expound the cross for the whole mystery of our redemption, and this
they interpret to be said, that by preaching the law, they did make the
benefit of Christ his death to be of none effect. But others expound it, that
they fled from the cross, and would not put themselves in danger for Christ.
I take it more generally, that faigning themselves to be friends, they were the
worst enemies of the Gospel. Neither is it a rare thing with Paul, to set out
the whole preaching of the Gospel under the name of the cross: for as he
says in another place, if any be in Christ, he is a new creature. 19 Whose
end is destruction. He adds this, that the Philippians being terrified by
the danger, might more diligently take heed, and not entangle themselves in
their destruction, and because such knaves by bragging and diverse arts do
oftentimes for a while blind the eyes of the simple, that they are preferred
even before the good servants of Christ: the Apostle with great boldness
pronounces, that their glory wherewith they are now puffed, shall be turned
into shame. Whose God is their belly. Whereas they urged Circumcision and the
Ceremonies, he denies that they do it for a zeal of the law, but for the
favor of men, that they might live quiet and without trouble, for they did see
the Jews to be marvelous fierce against Paul and such like, neither could
they preach Christ truly with any other condition, but they must stir up
the same rage against themselves, therefore providing for their ease and
commodity, they mingled those corruptions which might extinguishe the heat
of others. But our conversation is in heaven. This sentence beats down all
vain pompes, wherewith the counterfaite ministers of the Gospel were wont to
boast themselves: and hatefully he inueigheth against all their attempts,
because that flying above the earth, they can not aspire unto heaven, for he
teaches that all things are nothing to be esteemed besides the spiritual
kingdom of God. Moreover, that the faithful must live an heavenly life in
this world, as if he should say, they mind earthly things, therefore it is
meet that we should be estraunged from them, whose conversation is in
heaven. We are here mingled with infidels and hypocrites, yea, the chafe
appear in the Lord his floor above the wheat. Besides, we are subject unto
the common miseries of this earthly life, we want meat and drink, and other
necessaries, notwithstanding in mind and affection we must be conversant in
heaven: for we must pass swiftly thorough this life, and we must be dead to
the world, that Christ may live in us, and we in like manner live unto him.
This place is a most plentiful fountain of many exhortations, which any man
may easily gather out. From whence also. By the conjunction that we have in
Christ, he proves that our government is in heaven. For it is not meet that
the members should be divided from their head, therefore seeing that Christ is
in heaven, that we may cleave unto him, it is necessary that in our minds
we dwell out of the world. Besides, where our treasure is, there our heart is
also. Christ our blessedness and glory is in the heavens, therefore let our
souls dwell alofte with him, therefore by name he calls him a Savior.
From whence have we salvation? namely, Christ our Savior shall come unto us
from heaven, therefore it is absurd that we should be busied in the earth.
This epithete of a Savior serves the circumstance of the place, for
therefore we are said in our minds to be in heaven, because from thence
only the hope of salvation shines unto us. The coming of Christ as it shall
be terrible unto the ungodly, so it rather turns away their minds from
heaven, than stirs them up thither. For they know that there shall come a
Judge for them, and as much as is in them, they flee from him. Out of these
words of Paul the godly souls gather a sweet consolation, when they hear
that they must desire the coming of Christ, because it shall be healthful
for them. Contrariwise, it is a certain sign of incredulity, at every
mention thereof to tremble, look the eight Chapter to the Romans, but whilst
others are carried about with vain desires, Paul will have the faithful
contented with Christ only. Moreover, we learn out of this place, that we
must imagine no base or earthly thing of Christ, because Paul byddeth us look
up into heaven, that we may seek him. But they that subtelly dispute that
Christ is not enclosed or thrust into one corner of heaven, that thence they
might prove his body to be every where, and that he fills heaven and
earth, they neither say any thing, nor all: for as it were rash and foolish
to ascend beyond the heavens, and in this or that country to assign unto
Christ a standing, sitting, or walking: so in like manner, to draw him out of
heaven by any carnal cogitation that we might seek him in earth, it is a
foolish and pernicious doting, therefore let our hearts be aloft, that they may
be with the Lord. 21 Who shall transform. By this argument he pricketh yet
more the Philippians forward, that their minds being lift up into heaven, they
may cleave altogether unto Christ. Because this body which we bear about is
no continual dwelling, but a ruinous tabernacle, which shall soon be brought
to nothing: besides, it is subject to so many miseries, and so many shameful
infirmities, that it may rightly be called abject and full of shame, but from
whence must we hope for the restoring thereof? from heaven, at the coming of
Christ, therefore there is no part of us, which with our whole desire should
not aspire into heaven. We see the present baseness of our bodies in life, but
especially in death. The glory which they shall have conformable to the body
of Christ, is incomprehensible: for if the disciples could not abide the small
taste he gave them in the Transfiguration, which of us can attain unto the
fullness thereof? let us now be content with the testimony of our adoption,
we shall know the riches of our inheritance, when we shall enioie them.
According to the working. Because there is nothing more incredible, nor more
disagreeing from the sense of the flesh, that the resurrection, for this cause
Paul sets the infinite power of God before our eyes, the which should
swallow up all doubting: for thereof arises distrust, because we measure the
thing by the narrownes of our own wit. Neither did he say only Power, but
Effectual working, which is the effect, or such a power that brings it self
into act (as I may so speak) when it comes into our minds that God, who
has created all things of nothing, can command the sea and the land and the
other elements, to restore that which has been put in them: forthwith our
minds are erected into a strong hope, and as it were into a spiritual sight
of the resurrection. And it is not amiss also to mark, that the right and
power to raise the dead, yea to do all things according to his own will is
bestowed on the person of Christ: by which praise, his divine majesty is
excellently beautified. Moreover hereof we gather yt the world was created by
him: because to submit al things to himself, belongs not but only to ye
creator.

Chapter.4.
Therefore my Brethren beloved and longed for, my joy, and my crown so stand in
the Lord my beloved

2 I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntiche, that they be of one accord in the
Lord.

3 Yea I beseech thee also faithful yokefellowe, help those women which
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement and with my other helpers, whose
names are in the book of life.


Therefore Brethren. He shuts up his exhortation with more vehement words
than he was accustomed, yt he might the more deeply imprint it in men's minds.
And he insinuates into their affections with sweet appellations, which
notwithstanding proceed not of flattery, but of a sincere love. He calls them
his joy, and his crown, because he being glad that they gotten by his travel
did continue in ye faith, hoped for that triumph, whereof we spoke, when the
Lord shall crown our deeds with his own happiness. Where he bids them so
stand in the Lord, he signifies that he allows their estate, although this
word So might be referred to the former doctrine: but that is more fit, that by
praising their present state, he might exhort them to perseverance: indeed they
had already showed some token of their constancy: yet Paul being privy unto
man's weakness, think that they have need to be confirmed for the time
afterward 2. I exhort Euodia and Syntiche. It is a common opinion received for
the most part, that Paul would quiet (I know not what grudge) between these
two women, touching which matter, although I would not contend: yet the
conjecture in the words of Paul is lighter than that it can persuade me that
it was so: It appears by the testimony which he give the^, that they were
very wise women, for he attributes so much unto them, that he calls them
fellow laborers in the gospel, therefore because in their agreement there was
much moment, and in their discord great danger, he encourages them peculiarly
unto concord. We must mark also, that so often as he speaks of consent he
adds this band In the Lord. For without the Lord al agreement shall be
accursed, and there is nothing so disseuered, which must not in Christ
again be gathered together. Yea and I beseech thee also faithful yokefellow.
I will not dispute of the sex. Therefore whither he speaks to a man or to a
woman I leave it indifferent, although the argument of Erasmus be too weak,
who gathers thereof that it was a woman, because mention is here made of
women, as though he does not immediately add the name of Clement in the same
cause: but I cease from that disputation, only I deem that the wife of Paul
is signified under this name. They that affirm this, do cite Clement and
Ignatius for the authors of it, if they did cite them truly, I would not
despise such men especially. But seeing that counterfaite writings are brought
forth by Eusebius: and added by the unlearned munkes, they deserve but little
credit with readers of sound judgment. Therefore let us enquire of the matter
without the prejudice of me^. When Paul writ the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, he reports that he then was unmarried. 1. Cor. 7.8. To them (he
says) that are unmarried and to widows I speak: it is good if they continue
even as I am. He wrote that epistle at Ephesus when he was ready to depart. Not
long after he came to Jerusalem, where he was cast into prison, and brought
unto Rome. How unfit a time was this to marrye a wife, which he spente
partelye in his journey, and partelye in bonds, who sees not? Add hereunto
that he was then ready to endure bonds and persecutions, as he witnesses in
Luke, Act. 21.13. Neither am I ignorant what is wont to be objected on the
contrary part: namely that Paul being marriried, did abstain from the
company of his wife. But the words sound otherwise: for he wishes that they
which are unmarried, might continue in his estate. And what is his estate but
the state of singlenes? Whereas they bring in that: Is it not lawful for me to
lead about a wife? 1. Cor. 9.5. to prove that he had a wife, it is too
frivolous, so that it need no answer. But now that we may grante that Paul
was married, whence had he a wife, at Philippos? the which City it is not read
that he entered into above twice, and where it is credible that he never abode
two whole months. To conclude, there is nothing less agreeyng to the matter,
than to speak here of a wife, no nor of any woman (in my judgment) it is
probable, notwithstanding I leave it to the readers judgment. The word (...),
which Paul here uses, is in helping wise to apprehende and embrace the same
thing, Whose names are in the book of life. The book of life is the catalogue
of the just which are predestinate unto life, as in Moses. Exodus, 33.32. This
catalogue the Lord keeps with himself. Therefore the book is nothing else
but his eternal counsel determined in his breast. For that says Ezechiell the
writing of the house of Israel. cap. 13.9. In the like respect it is said.
Psalm. 69.29. Let them be wiped out of ye book of the living, and not be
written among the righteous: that is let them not be accounted among the elect
of GOD, whom he ascrybeth to his Church, and to the borders of his kingdom.
If any will object that Paul therefore does rashly, who challenge unto himself
power to pronounce the secrets of God: I answer that after a sort we may judge
by signs, whereby God does make his election manifest: yet so much as our
capacity can bear. Therefore in whomsoever we see ye notes of adoption to
appear, let us in the mean time account them for the sons of God, until
the books shall be opened, which shall altogether reveal al things. It
belongs only unto god to know now those that are his, and at length to
separate the sheep from the goats. But it is our duty, charitably to judge al
the^ to be sheep, that obediently submit themselves unto their pastor Christ,
who gather them selves into his sheepefold, and there abide constantly. It is
our duty so much to esteem the gifts of the holy ghost, which peculiarly he
bestows upon his elect, yt they may be to us as it were seals of his hidden
election

4 Rejoice in the Lord alwaie: again I say rejoice.

5 Let your pacient mind be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.

6 Be careful for nothing: but in all things let your requests be known
unto God in prayer and supplication with giving of thanks.

7 And the peace of God which passes al understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds in Christ Jesus.

8 Furthermore Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
grave, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are amiable, whatsoever things are honest: if there be any virtue, and
if there be any praise think on these things.

9 Which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do
those things, and the God of peace shall be with you.

4 Rejoice in the Lord. This is an exhortation applied to the time. For because
the state of the godly was much troubled, every where dangers imminent, it
might so fall out, that they being overcome with sorrow and impatience, might
faint. Therefore he bids them, howsoever their estate were hated and
troubled, nevertheless to rejoice in the Lord: for then especially the
spiritual consolations wherewith ye Lord do recreate and cheer us, must
show forth their strength, when the whole world do provoke us to desperation:
but we must consider by the circumstance of the time, how forcible this voice
would have been from Paul's mouth, who might be the especial cause of their
heaviness. For if they be afraid of persecutions, of bonds, of banishment, or
of death: here the Apostle comes forth, who amidest his bonds, in the midst
of hoate persecutions, and in fear of death, is not only joyful but also
cheereth up others. The sum therefore is this, whatsoever shall happen, yet the
faithful who have God on their side, have sufficient matter to rejoice. The
repetition serves to the amplification, as if he should say: let this be a
strong and steadfast ground unto you, to rejoice in the Lord, and that not for a
moment, but that your joy may be continued in him. For truly in this it
differs from the joy of the world, because we have experience that that is
deceitful, momentanie and soon vanishes away, and Christ also does pronounce
it accursed, Luke. 6.25. Therefore that is joy fixed in God which is never taken
from us. 5. Let your patient mind. This may 2 ways be expounded, either that
he bids the^ rather to lose their right than that any should complain of
their cruelty and rigor. As if he had said: let all men with whom you deal,
perceceiue your equity and courtesy, that their knowledge may signify their
experience. Or else, that he exhorts them to bear all things patiently,
which latter sense does rather please me: for the Grecians also call (...), the
moderation of the mind, when as we are not easily moved with injuries, when we
are not easily troubled with adversity, but we keep still an equal condition,
to which purpose Cicero has said, my mind is quiet, which takes all things
well and equally. Such an equity, which is as it were the mother of of patience,
Paul here requires of the Philippians, and which might appear unto al men by
showing forth her effects as occasion requires. It seems not to agree with
the name of modesty, because Paul in this place does not forbid them to wax
insolent, but quietly to behave themselves in all their affairs, and to
temperate themselves in susteinyng either injuries or discommodities. The Lord
is at hand Here is a Prolepsis whereby he preuenteth an objection: for the
sense of the flesh reclaimeth against the former sentence: for since that by
our gentleness the desire of the wicked wax more insolent, and the more ready
they see us to bear, the more bold they are to offer injuries, we are hardly
brought in this patience to possess our souls: thereupon came these proverbs.
We must howl among wolves, that we shall soon be devoured of wolves, which
have behaved themselves like sheep. Therefore we conclude that the fiercenes
of the wicked is with like violence to be beaten back, least that safely they
triumph over us. Against these cogitations Paul here opposes the trust in
God his providence. He answers I say, that ye Lord is at hand, whose virtue
shall overcome their boldness, and whose goodness shall vanquish their malice: him
he promises to be present with us, if we obey his commandment. And who had
not rather be protected only by the hand of God, than to have all the aid of
the world in a readiness? An excellent sentence, whereby first we learn, that
the cause of all impatience is the ignorance of the providence of God: hereof
it come that we rage so quickly, and for so light a cause, and often also we
despair because we know not that the Lord has care of us. Contrariwise, this
is an only remedy to pacify our minds, if knowing that we are neither
subject to the rashness of fortune, nor to the lust of the wicked, but that we
are governed by the fatherly care of god, we rest altogether upon his
providence. To conclude, whosoever holds this, that god is present with him,
he has wherein to rejoice without fear. Moreover the Lord is said to be at
hand, two manner of ways, either because his judgment is at hand, or else
because he is ready to succor his servants: in the which signification it is
taken in this place, as also in the Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is near unto al
them that call upon him: the sense therefore is, the condition of the godly
should be most miserable, if the Lord were far off: but because the Lord
has received them into his tuition, and by his power which is present every
where does defend them: let them stay themselves upon this cogitation, that
they be not dismayed at the rage of the wicked. It is known and common that
carefulnes is here taken for impiety, which springs from the distrust of gods
power or of his help. 6. But in all things. Paul uses the singular number,
but the neuter gender therefore in (...) is as much as in all your business:
because (...) and (...) are of the feminine gender. In these words he
exhorts the Philippians as David does all the godly. Psalm. 55.23. and Peter 1.
epistle. 5.7. that they should cast al their care upon the Lord: for we are not
made of iron, but we may be shaken with temptations: but this is the comfort.
Here is our ease to lay down (or to speak more properly) to empty out into
gods bosom whatsoever greeueth us. Confidence brings quietness unto our
minds, but so that we be exercised by prayers. Therefore so often as we are
assalted with any te^ptatio^, let us fly straight unto prayer, as unto an holy
sa^ctuary. He takes prayers here for desires or vows. He would have them
opened unto god through prayer: as if the faithful should pour out their hearts
before the Lord, when they commend themselves and al their affairs unto him.
They seem to be somewhat lifted up, which look hither and thither unto ye vain
solace of the world: but there is one sure haven to rest upon, the Lord. With
giving of thanks. Because many pray unto God, amiss either chiding or
murmuring as though they had just cause to accuse him of, others if he do not
straight way grant their request, can abide no delay. Therefore Paul joins
thanksgiving with prayers, as if he should say, we must so wish of god those
things which are necessary for us, that notwithstanding we submit our
affections unto his will, and that in praying we give him thanks. And truly
thankfulness will work this in us, that the will of god shall be the chief sum of
our desires. 7. And the peace of God. Some turning the future tense into the
optatiue mood, do make a prayer of this sentence, but falsely: for it is a
promise wherein he shows the fruit of firm trusting in god, and of
Invocation. If you do yt he says: The peace of god shall keep your minds and
your hearts. The scripture is wont to divide the soul of man according to the
powers thereof into 2. parts: the mind and the heart: the mind signify the
understanding, and the heart the affections or wills: therefore these 2 words
comprehend ye whole soul, in this sense, the peace of God shall keep you,
that you fall not from god by evil cogitatio^s or desires. And he calls it
truly the peace of god, which depends not upon the present sight of things,
neither does it change according to ye inclinatio^s of the world, but is
founded on the constant and immutable word of God. And he says truly, that it
passes al understanding or sense, because there is nothing more contrary unto
man's wit, than in greatest despair, nevertheless to hope, in greatest poverty
to behold wealth, in greatest weakness not to faint, finally, to promise that
we shall want nothing, when we are destitute of all things. And that altogether
is in the alone grace of god, the which is not known but by the word, and the
inward earnest of the spirit. 8. Furthermore. General exhortations follow,
which appertain unto the whole life. In the first place he commends truth,
which is nothing else than the integrity of a good conscience, with ye fruit
thereof. In the second place he commends gravity or holiness (for the word
(...) signify both) the which virtue is placed in this, that we walk worthy
of our vocation, free from al profane uncleanness. In the third place he
commends justice, which pertains unto mutual communication among men yt we
hurt no man, or defraud no man. In the fourth place he comme^deth purity, which
signifies chastity throughout our whole life But all these things are not
sufficient unto Paul, except we study to make our selves amiable unto all men,
as much as it is lawful in the Lord, and that we have regard of our good
report: for so I interpret (...). If any praise for that which is praise
worthy: for both in the manners of men, which are so corrupt, there is such
peruersenes of judgment, that oftentimes that thing is commended, which is
vicious: and it is not lawful for christians to seek true praise among men,
who are forbidden to rejoice any other where than in God only. Therefore Paul
does not bid them seek praise or commendatio^ of their good deeds, nor to
frame their life according to the judgment of the people: but only to study
good works which deserve praise, that the ungodly and the enemies of the
gospel, whiles they deride and dispraise the christians, yet they may be
compelled to commend their manners. Moreover the word (...) is spoken of the
Greeks as Latins do Cogitare for Meditari, that is to think for to
meditate. Meditation goes before, and then the work follows. 9 Which ye
have learned, received, and heard. By this repetition of words he signifies,
that he was diligent in preaching these things, as if he should say, this was
my doctrine, this was my tradition, this was my speech among you. Contrariwise,
the hypocrites did urge nothing but ceremonies. And it were a shameful thing
to forsake that holy institution which they had thoroughly learned, and
wherewith they were almost endued. Ye have seen in me. This is the chiefest
thing in a preacher, that he speak not only with his mouth, but with his life,
and that he bring credit to his doctrine by his virtuous living. Therefore
Paul worthily from thence procures authority unto his exhortation, because
he was no less in his life than in his mouth a captain and master of
virtues. And the God of peace. He had spoken of the peace of God, now he
confirms it more expressly, when he promises that God himself the author
of peace shall be with them. For the presence of God brings unto us all
goodness whatsoever, as if he should say, they shall perceive that God is
present with them, who will turn all things to their good and prosperity, so
that they apply themselves to godly and holy works.

10 I rejoiced also in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care for me
springs afresh, of whom also ye were mindful, but ye wanted opportunity.

11 I speak not because of want, for I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content.

12 I know both to be humble, and I know to excel: every where and in all
things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, to abound and to
suffer poverty.

13 I am able to do all things in Christ who strengthens me.

14 Notwithstanding ye have done well in communicating unto mine afflictions.

10 I rejoiced also. Now he declares the thankefulnes of his mind to the
Philippians, that they should not repent of their beneficence, as it is wont to
come to pass, when we think that our duties are contemned, or nothing
esteemed. They had sent unto him by Epaphroditus succor in time of his
necessity, he testifies that it was a benefit very acceptable unto him, and
he says, that he reioiced, because afresh they were in a new readiness to
provide for him, it is a metaphore taken from trees, whose sap lies close
hidden in the winter, and in the spring begins to flourishe, but straightway
adding a correction, he also does temperate this saying, least he should seem
to accuse their negligence of the former time, therefore he says, that before
they were also careful of him, but the opportunity of the time suffered not
that he was sooner relieved by their liberality, so he lays the fault upon
an unfit time. I have referred this part (...) unto Paul, and that is the
proper signification, and more agreeable to Paul his text. 11. I speak not
because of want. A second correction, whereby he preuenteth the suspicion of a
base mind and brought low by adversity: for he did report, that his
constancy and moderation was known unto the Philippians, unto whom he was an
example of good life, therefore he pronounces that he was so cheered by their
liberality, that he could yet patiently endure want. Poverty is here
referred to the affection, for he is never poor in mind who is contented with
his estate given him of God. He says, In whatsoever state I am. That is,
whatsoever my estate is, it is sufficient unto me: wherefore? for the Saints
know that they so please God, therefore they do not measure sufficiency by
the plenty of things, but by the will of God, the which they esteem aright,
because they are persuaded that their affairs are governed by his will and
providence. 12 I know both to be humble. Here follows a distributio^, that
his mind is capable of either fortune: prosperity is wont to puff up men's
minds above measure, and adversity to cast them down, from both these vices
he says he is free. I know, he says, to be humble, that is, patiently to
suffer humility, the Greek word (...) is here twice put down, but in the
first place it is taken for to excel, and in the second, for to abound, that
they might have relation to their contraries. He that knows to use his
present abundance of things soberly and temperately with thanksgiving, being
ready to resign all when it shall please the Lord, and communicating with his
brethren, according to the measure of his ability, and is not puffed up with
pride, that man has learned to excel and to be satisfied: an excellent and
rare virtue, and far greater than the enduring of poverty. In learning this
knowledge of Paul, let all be exercised that will be the disciples of Christ,
and in the mean season let them so accustom themselves to endure poverty,
that it be not hard and grievous unto them, when it shall happen that they are
deprived of their substance. 13 I am able to do all things in Christ. Because
he had boasted of great matters, least it should be objected unto him as an
argument of pride, or least he should give others occasion of foolish boasting,
he adds, that he is endued with this strength from Christ: I can, he says,
do all things, but in Christ, not by mine own virtue, whereby we gather that
Christ shall be no whit at all less strong and forcible in us, if being privy
to our own weakness, we stay our selves only upon his virtue. Whereas he
says All things, he understands only those things which belong to his
vocation. 14 Notwithstanding ye have done well. How wisely and warely he
deals on either side, being circumspect yt he incline not too much either to
this or to that side. By setting out his constancy, magnifically he would
beware that ye Philippians should not think that he had fainted under his
poverty. Now he takes heed, least by speaking boldly he might seem to have
contemned their benefits, which were not only a point of discurtesie and
contumacy, but even of pride, and together he adds, that if any other of the
servants of Christ should need their help, that they should not be slothful
to succor them.

15 And ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the Gospel, when
I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me concerning the matter
of giving and receiving but ye only.

16 For when I was at Thessalonica, ye sent once and again that which was
needful for me.

17 Not that I desire a gift, but I desire the fruit which may further your
reckoning.

18 Now I have received all, and have plenty: I was even filled after that I
had received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odor that smells
sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God.

19 And my God shall fulfill whatsoever is wanting unto you, according to his
riches in glory thorough Christ Jesus.

20 Unto God and father be praise for evermore, amen.

21 Salute all the Saints in Christ Jesus: the brethren which are with me
greet you.

22 All the Saints salute you, and especially they which are of Caesar's
household.

23 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

24 Written from Rome by Epaphroditus.

15 Ye know. I interpret that this was added to excuse himself, because he
had so often received from them, for if the other Churches had performed their
duties, he might have seemed too covetous in taking, thus therefore by purging
himself, he commends them, and in commending them, he modestly spares
others. We also must take heed by the example of Paul, least the godly,
whilst they see us too ready to take, do worthily judge us insatiable: you,
he says, do know, as if he should say, it is not necessary that I should
cite other witnesses, for you your selves also know it, for it often times come
to pass that he which thinks others to cease in their duty, is more
liberal to succor, so the one is ignorant of the others liberality.
Concerning giving and receiving, he alludeth unto the accounts of money,
whereof there are two parts, the one of receipt, the other of expense, it is
meet that these two by a mutual compensation should be referred unto an
equality. Such an account was agreed upon between Paul and the Churches:
when Paul ministered unto them the Gospel, there was a mutual obligation that
they should minister unto him things necessary for this life, as he says 1.
Corin. 9, 11. If we bestow upon you spiritual things, what great thing is it
if you give us again carnal things: therefore if the other Churches had
relieved the necessity of Paul, they had given him nothing of their own, but
paid their debt. For they must acknowledge that they had received the Gospel
of him, yet he denies that they did not that, because they spent nothing for
his sake. How shameful an ingratitude is it, and full of how great
unworthiness, to neglect such an Apostle, to whom they knew they were more
bound, than they were able to pay? Again, how great was the gentleness of the
holy man, to bear their discurtesie so mildly and so meekely, that he does not
accuse them with any bitter words. 17 Not that I desire a gift. He rejects
again from himself the sinister opinion of an immoderate desire, least they
should think that it were a wrong insinuation, as though they only should do
the duty of all, and he should abuse their gentleness, therefore he
testifies that he is more careful for their commodity, than for his own.
While I receive any thing, he says of you, so much grows unto you. For there
are many names which ye bear in the tables of your accounts, that have
bestowed any thing upon me. The meaning of this word depends upon that
similitude of exchange, or of paying of debts in the affairs of money. 18 Now
I have received all and have plenty. He affirms more expressly that he has
so much as is sufficient, and he adorneth their liberality with an excellent
testimony when he says, that he abounds. Without doubt it was a mean sum
which they had sent, but with that mediocritie he says, he abounds unto
satietie: but that is a more excellent commendation of their reward which
follows, when he calls it a sacrifice acceptable unto God, and an offering
of a sweet smelling savor. For what better thing can we wish for, then that
our benefits should be holy offerings, which God does receive at our hands,
and with whose smell he is delighted? In like manner speaks Christ,
Whatsoever ye have done unto one of the least of these in my name, ye have
done it unto me. Matthew. 25, 40. But the metaphore of sacrifices adds much
moment, whereby we are taught that that same duty of love which God
commands, is not only bestowed upon men, but a spiritual and holy worship
is performed, even to God himself, as it is said in the Epistle to the Hebr.
13, 16. with such sacrifices God is pleased: woe worth our slothfulness, that
when God does so gently inuit us unto the honor of this priesthood, and does
put the sacrifice into our hands: we neither sacrifice unto him, and those
things which were appointed for holy offerings, we do not only consume them on
profane uses, but wickedly waste them on most filthy corruptions. For the
aulters whereupon the sacrifices of our wealth ought to be laid, are the poor
and the servants of Christ, but they being neglected, some spend it on all kind
of riot, some on gluttony, some on lechery, and some on building fair
houses. 19. And my God shall fulfill. Some read, I beseech my God to fulfill
in the optatiue mood, which although I reject not, yet I more allow the other
reading. He calls God by name his God, because he does impute and acknowledge
that it is done to himself whatsoever is performed unto his servants,
therefore they had truly sowed in the field of the Lord, from whence they
should hope for a certain and plentiful harvest: neither does he only promise
them a reward in the life to come, but also concerning the use of this present
life, as if he should say, think not that touching your substance you are
impouerished, for God whom I serve, will abundantly supply unto you whatsoever
shall be necessary. This part In glory, must be resolved into the aduerbe
gloriously, magnifically, or famouslie, but he adds, Thorough Christ, in
whose name every thing is acceptable unto God which we do. 20 Unto God and our
father. It may be a general thanksgiving, wherewith he concludes the
Epistle, or it may specially be referred unto the next sentence, concerning the
liberality bestowed on Paul, for that the Philippians succored him, he ought
so to thank them, that he should notwithstanding acknowledge that he was
relieved by the mercy of God. 22 All the Saints salute you. In his salutations
he first names his fellows, afterward all the Saints in general, that is,
the whole Church of Rome, but especially them of Nero his household, the which
is worthy to be marked, for it is not a common token of God his mercy, that the
Gospel had pierced into that bottomless pit of all wickedness and
ungodliness: and it is so much the more marvelous, as the example is rare,
that holiness should reign in Princes courts: whereas some have coniectured,
that Seneca is here noted among the rest, it has no show of truth, for neither
did he ever at any time by any token prove himself a Christian neither was he
of Caesar his house, but a Senator and a Magistrate.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol. 7. line 22. for they should be thankful, read we should be thankful.

Fol. 10. line 19. for in our bowels, read in the bowels.

Fol. 14. line 20. for in Castrum Praetorum, read in Latin Praetorium.

Fol. eod. lin 11. for to prove they lie, read to prove their lie.

Fol. 37. lin 36. for great exaltation, read so great exaltation.

Fol. 39. line. 11. for in the sense, read in this sense.

Fo. 44. li. 13. for they gather meat, read they gather merit.

Fol. 47. line 21. for that which shall be glorious, read that that shall be
glorious.

Fol. 53. line. 9. for because we said, read yet we said because.

Fol. 60. line. 36. for head, read heart.

Fol. 64. line. 20. for liberal, read literal.


