Pronostycacyon of Erra Pater, Doctor in Astronomye, and Phesyke, Profitable
for to keep the body in health, and Ptholome says the same.

Ptholomeus.

crowned Ptolomy (or Ptolemaeus) and a woman with astronomical instruments

AS I find in the science of Astronomye / There ben four manner of Coolers in
a man's body of the.iiii. Complexyons. The first is blood, the second black
Cooler, the third fleumes, and the fourth yelowe Cooler. And if one of
the.iiii. lack, all the body should be anon forthwith deed, for as much
susteyneth one of them the body, as the other. And eueryche of them ought to
be at a certain, for and one of them sermount the other, all the body shall
have damage thereby, and all.iiii. be right peryllous, for and the blood
surmount the other, he might esteygner distroye and overcome the body, and
make him to dye, for he gadreth and congeleth even right on the heart and
takes away the flat, spyrte, and the brethe, and in that manner (lesteygne)
and is overcome and dead. But at that time when ye great course takes him, he
may soon be aswaged to less him a little to take away a little blod from him
and anon all will aswage of this peril.

Also the black Cooler be right peryllous and they surmounte all ye other,
they may damage greatly the body, and by many diverse manners, for they may
cause and make the body to fall on the evil syckenesse, and lose his wit
and knowledge, and become a fool, and cause also the body to be full of evil
scabbes, and often times to be mesell, and makes a man to be fearful, and a
cowarde, and of many evil manners. And when they surmounte the other: they be
right grievous and domageous. And by herbs, flowers, fasting, abstynence,
drynkes, and medycynes they may be aswaged.

The fleumes yt be white be peryllous when they surmounte the other Coolers of
ye body, they do great damage and hurt, for they engendre gowtes and many
other evil syckenesses that be cold, and they hurt also the feet and the
hands, and the raynes, and the knees, the legs, and the tethe, and make the
mouth and the breath stynkyng, and the nose, and ye ears, and causes many
other dyseases and syckenesses, but they may be aswaged by herbs, flowers,
rotes, drynkes, medycynes, and also by vomysshynge.

Also the yelowe Coolers, be peryllous, for when they surmount ye other
Coolers, in a man's body, they (assorbent) the heart and traueyll the brain,
and makes all the members feeble and soft, and takes away the will and the
appetyte from the body, that he may not eat nor drink. And also they change
a manes color, and makes him to lose his sight and become blind, and they
may be also aswaged as the other fleumes be, by herbs, flowers, roots, and by
vomyssynge.

These.iiii. humors be of the.iiii. Complexions, and they have the domynacyon
of the body.iiii. times in the year, and each of them a quarter of a year.

The year is.xii. months, that is to say.lii. wekes and one day, And this is
to understand.CCC.lx. days, and.vi. hours.

The dysposycyon of the first season of the year.
Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces.
THe first season of the year that has domynacyon of the body of man,
is.iii. Months, and they be named these three signs, Capricorn, Aquario, and
Pisces. And these three signs have power of all Fleumes of the body of man and
woman, and they be cold and moist, and they begin to reygne the.xxiiii. day
of Decembre, and dureth unto the.xxiiii. day of March.

The dysposycyon of the second part of the year.
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini.
THe second part of the year, is other.iii. Months, and these be the signs,
Aries Taurus, and Gemini. And they have power in the body of man of the blood,
and they be hot and mostye, and they begin to reygne the.xxiiii. day of
March, and dureth unto the.xxiiii. day of June.

The dysposycyon of the third season of the year.
Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.
THe third season of the year, be other.iii. Months, and these be the signs,
Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, and they have power within the body of man of the
yelowe Coolers, and they be hot and dyre, and they begin to reygne the.xxiiii.
day of June, and dureth unto the.xxiiii. day of Septembre.

The dysposycyon of the fourth part of the year.
Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius.
THe fourth part of the year, be other.iii. Months, and these be the fygnes
Libra Scorpio, and Sagittarius, and they be cold and dry, and they begin to
reygne the.xxiiii. day of Septembre, and dureth unto the.xxiiii. day of
Decembre. And by the manner of these.iiii. seasons, every man may keep him from
all contraryes of metes and drynkes, and clothing, and from other contrary.
And if a man will keep him after the manner that is rehearsed in this book, he
shalll never have Infyrmytyes of body, by ye grace of god, Take pelater of
spain and chawe it in thy mouth, for it is good to spourge the heed and the
body. Also eat fenell sede, common sede, for each of these seeds dystroye the
fleumes, that all the euylles in man's body come of.

Eest.
Ignis Inuentus et Estas.
The water red and thynne, ye gross male red and hard, the spetyll thycke and
clammye. The synges Aries, Leo, and Sagittary, is ge^dred of coloryke, hot,
and dry, and Oriental, and the syckenes be take in these signs, it is great
peril: but he have his medycyne cold and moist, and the dyete of the same
complexcion, then he may be healed by the grace of god.

West.
Aer Adolescentia Ver.
The water red and thycke, the gross matter reed and thynne, the spetyll thynne
and sweet, the extremytyues out of course, The signs Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarie, is engendered of sanguyne, hot, and moist, and Occydentall, the cure
is cold and dry, with dyete of the complexyon, cascia fistula in aqua vite.

North.
Terra Senectus Autumpnus.
The water white and theynne, the gross male black and thycke, the spetyll
thycke and sour, the extremytyues uneath feled, The signs Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricornus: he is engendered of Malencoly cold and dry, Septemtyrnall, the
cure hot and moist with the dyete of the same complexyon.

Sowthe.
Aqua Senium et Hyems.
The water, white and thycke, the gross matter white and thycke, the spetyll
thynne and sweet, the extremytiues feeble. The signs Cancer, Scorpio, and
Pisces, he is engendered of fleume cold and moist, Meridionall, the cure hot
and dyre of the same, purgatio trauit aqua vite, or in potage.

The dysposyon of the.xii. Months, upon blood lettynge.
January.
IN the monthe of Ianuarye, let the no blood on ye first day for it is
peryllous, ne on the.ii. day, ne the.v. day, ne ye.x. day, ne the.xv. day, ne
the.xix. day, ne the.xx. day, ne the.xxv. day, but as often as thou wylt drink
good white wine fasting. And always take good head of the days that be above
written, for they be peryllous for to be let blood on, but the sign be right
good for blood lettynge.

February.
In the monthe of February, eat no potage of hokkes or maloys, for that is
venym. And if thou have need to blede, on the wrest on the vain of thy thombe,
blede not on the.iii. day, ne on the.vi. day, ne on the.viii. day. But on
the.xiiii. day is right good, ne blede not on the. xvii. day, ne on the.xxvi.
day, ne on the.xxviii. day, but that the sign be very good and thou may
chose.

March.
In the monthe of March, eat fygges, reysyns, and sweet meats and drynkes
and hot meats. And let the blood on ye right arm on the.v. day, or on
the.vii. day, or on the.xvii. day, for that is good against all manner of
Febres, but beware blede not the first day, ne the.xv. day, ne on the xvi.
day, ne on the.xix. day, ne on the. xxviii. day, and thou may chose. And if
thou do look that the sign be right very good.

Apryll.
In the monthe of Apryll, blede on the left arm on the.iii. day, or on
the.xi. day, or on the. xv. day, and thou shall have no great head ache, ne
lose thy sight that year. And use fresshe and hot meats, but blede not on
the.vii. day, ne on the.viii. day, ne on the.x. day, ne on the.xx. day, for
these days be not right good for bledynge.

May.
In the month of May, rise erely, and eat and drink by time, use hot metes
and drynkes, but eat neither of head nor foot while ye May last. And let the
blood on the first day, or on the. xviii. day, on which arm thou wylt, or
on the.xxvii. day, or on the. xxviii. day, and it shall much help the
against all manner of euylles. But beware that thou blede not on the.iii. day,
ne the.vi. day, ne the.xxv. day.

June.
In the month of June, some Physycyens say, yt it is good every day to
drink a quantyte of cold water fasting. And rule the of thy mete and thy
drink mesurably, and eat letuse and sawge, and if thou have need to blede,
blede on the.xxviii. day for yt is right good. But beware that thou blede not
on the.vii. day, ne on the.x. day, ne on the.xv. day, ne on the.xvi. day,
ne on the.xxii. day.

July.
In the month of July, keep the from Lecherye, for than thy brain and thy
humors ben always open. And blede not in this monthe, but if thou have great
need. And than beware always that thou blede not upon thr.xiii. day, ne on
the.xv. day, ne on the.xix. day, ne on the xxii. day, for it is very
dangerous.

August.
In the month of August, eat no manner of wortes, nor of no manner of hot
meats nor drynkes of spycerye, nor blede not on the first day, ne on the.xx.
day ne on the.xxix. day, ne on the.xxx. day. The other days thou may blede
for great need if the sign be good for blood lettynge, but not else and thou
love thy self in good health.

Septembre.
In ye month of Septembre, al manner fruit that is ripe and not infected is
good for to eat. And bled on the.xvii. day, or on the.xxvii. day, and of the
dropsy, frense, and palsye, ne of the falling evil dread the not of all ye
year. And if thou have need to blede more. Beware that thou blede not on
the.iii. day, ne on the.iiii. day, ne on the.xvi. day, ne on the.xxi. day,
ne on the.xxii. day.

Octobre.
In the month of Octobre, drink good and wholesome wine, and blede not, but
that great need make the, and look that the sign be very good. But yet beware
that thou blede not on the.iii. day, ne on the.vi. day, ne on the.xvi. day ne
on the.xxiiii. day, and thou wylt do well.

Nouembre.
In the month of Nouembre, blede not but for need, for all thy blood is gadred
that time upon thy heed vain. Bathe the^ not but vent the a little of
grasynge, for than ben all thine humors over quycke for to blede, and if case
be yt thou have great need for to blede, beware of the.v. day, and the.vi. day,
and ye.xv. day, and the.xix day, and the.xxviii. day, and the.xxix. day.

Decembre.
In the monthe of Decembre, blede not but if thou have great need for the case.
And blede than on ye.xxvi. day, for it is right good. And in case thou have
more need for to blede, beware of the.vii. day, and the.xv. day, and of
the.xvi. day, and of the.xvii. day, and of the.xxii. day, and in this monthe
come nyghe no fire with thy shankes.

Thus ends these.xii. Months.
For to understand and know the years that shall be plentuous and in great
habundaunce of goods.
In die dominica, That is Sunday.
IN the year that Ianyuere shall enter on the Sunday, the winter shall be
cold and moist, and the Summer shall be hot, and the time of Harvest shall be
wyndy and rayny with great habundau^ce of corn, of wynes, and of other
graynes, and of all Gardayne fruit and herbs. There shall be little Oil,
habundau^ce shall be of all manner of flesh, some great news shall men here
spoken, of Kings, of Prelates of the church, and other erthly princes, great
wars and robboryes shall be made, and many young people shall dye.

In die Lune, that is Monday.
In the year yt Ianyuere shall enter on the Mondaye, ye winter shall be peasyble
enough, and the somer shall be very temperate. Than shall be great flodes of
waters, that shall break out of their lymyttes and bonds, and many ships
upon the sea shall perysshe, and in that year shall raygne diverse syckenesses,
and chaunges of great lords shall be made, many women shall perysshe in
trauaylynge with child, many great lords shall dye. That year shall be
little grass and mustarde sede, but there shall be plenty of corn and wynes,
and good chepe of flesh, and but little oil.

In die Martis, that is Tuesdaye.
In the year that Ianyuere shall enter on ye Tuesdaye, the winter shall be
chau^geable and not steadfast, for in the Prymetyme, of truth it shall freese,
and that shall hurt sore the Rye, the Vynes, and the flowers, and the So^mer
shall be dry, hot, and burning, in so much that the herbs of the gardynes
shall have no power to come out of the ground. All things shall be dear,
save only corn, many men shall dye of the blody flyxe. There shall be no
tidings of thondres, lyghtnynges, and tempests, but all flesh shall be
dear, many wynes shall turn.

In dei Marcurij, that is wednesdaye.
In the year that Ianyuere shall enter on the wednesdaye, the winter shall be
temperate, but in the end there shall be snowes and froste. The prymetyme
shall be raynye, great habundaunce of all corns, of wynes, of fruytes, of
hay, of grass, and generally of all good things. The so^mer shall be a
little clowdy, by the which thereof shall come great syckenesses, pore
laborers as hand crafts, and artyfycers, shall gain meately well this
year. Many thenes shall be, by whom the mean people shall before pylled and
discomforted, great waters, battayll, and slaughters shall be toward the
mids of the year, by the which shall come great goods to some men. In the
end of the year, there shall be diverse pestylences, botches, and falling
euylles, and in especyall next the sea.

In die Iouis, that is Thursdaye.
In the year that Ianyuere shall enter on the Thursdaye, the winter shall be
long and most part dry, and this year shall be very wholesome. The prymetyme
shall be very wyndy, the so^mer shall be good and temperat, and Harvest shall be
most part rayny, by the which the waters shall sore break out of their
bonds. The wheete and wynes shall be good chepe, there shall be of otes, of
hay, of grass, and of fruytes co^petently enough, great war and dyuysyon
shall be between the Church and the kings, and the princes, and in the end
the princes shall have victoryes of their enterpryses, women shall set them
self much to lechery, the people shall be well eased of taxes and talleges.

In die Veneris, that is Frydaye.
In the year that Ianyuere shall enter on the Frydaye, the winter shall be
long and dry And the so^mer unwholesome, Harvest shall be dry all corn shall be
dear, the vyntage shall be good enough, and habundaunce of oil, of fruit, of
hay, of grass, and of all gradayne herbs. The world shall be sore persecuted
with diverse syckenesses, as of sore iyes, and of all etyckes, many young
children shall dye. Great thondres, lyghtnynges, and tempests shall be, that
shall grieve sore all the ground. There shall be earth quakes, and good chepe
clothe poor people shall gain little or no thing, many beestes shall dye for
hunger, for the dyuersyte and maladye of the time.

In die Sabbati, that is Saterdaye.
In the year that Ianyuere shall enter on the Saterdaye, the winter shall be
temperate suffycyentlye. And in the Prymetyme shall be frostes, the which
shall dystroye the Ryes, the vynes, the oils, and the fruytes. The so^mer
shall be meately temperate, the Harvest time shall be dry, the otes and other
corn shall be good chepe, all gardayne herbs shall be good chepe, enough, and
flesh shall be good chepe, many old people shall dye, fevers tercyans shall
grieve sore the world, that shall be sick through evil heete. And many
murmuracyons, war and murders shall be done, by the one against the other,
and neighbors against neighbors and many other cases shall be often
committed and done.

Finis. Thus ends the Pronostycacyon for ever.
Imprynted by me (Robert Wyer) For Richard Banks.

Cum priuilegio, Ad imprimendum solum.


