A Commentary of M. John Calvin, upon the Book of Iosue, finished a little
before his death: Translated out of Latin into English by W. F.

Whereunto is added a table of the principal matters.



Imprinted at London, for George Bishop, 1578.

The Argument of the Book of Iosue.
COncerning the author of this book, it is better that we should suspend our
judgment, than that we should affirm any thing of so uncertain a matter.
They which think it was Iosue, because it is entitled of his name, lean
upon a very slight and weak reason. For the holy history bears the name
of Samuel, in which notwithstanding is a rehearsal of such matters as followed
after his death. And surely, the book which follows next in order, is not
therefore called the book of Judges, because it was written by them: but
because it reports such things as were done by them, and under their
government. Now that history which is reported in the. 15. Chapter of the
taking of the two cities Hebron and Debir, was executed after the death of
Iosue. It were therefore a more likely conjecture to think, that the
principal sums of matters were gathered together by Eliazar the high Priest,
out of which this book was compiled and made. For it was his peculiar charge,
not only to teach the people of his age by his own voice while he lived: but
also to leave a testimony unto the posterity of the grace of God in
preserving his Church, that true religion might the better be enlarged. And
before the Levites grew out of kind from their first institution, they had
among them by order as it were public Notaries or Registrers, which committed
to perpetual memory, whatsoever was worthy to be remembered in the government
of the Church. But as for that which is not certainly known unto us, neither
yet is very necessary to be known, let us not be loath to leave it in doubt
and uncertainty: so long as we are certain of that which is the cheifest
point, namely, that the doctrine which is contained in this book, is inspired
of the holy Ghost for our profit, out of which no small fruit may be
received of the diligent and attentive readers.

For although the people having before this time obtained notable victories,
dwelled in a country that was of reasonable commodities, and meanly good
fruitfulness: yet the promise of God concerning the land of Chanaan remained
still in suspense, and wanted execution. Yea, the chiefest point of the
covenant, as yet did lack the effect and performaunce: as though that God,
after he had cast the people into a narrow corner, had given over his
enterprise, and left it maimed and imperfect.

This book therefore declares, that when the intolerable ungodliness of the
people had broken off the course of their deliverance, yet God notwithstanding
in taking punishment of their sins, did so temper the rigor of his
judgment, that nevertheless at the length he performed whatsoever he promised
of the inheritance of the land of Chanaan. Where also we meet with a very
profitable consideration: that although men being taken away by death, do
fail in the midst of their course, yet the faith of Gods promise never
falls away. There seemed to follow by the death of Moses an heavy change
and conversion of the state. The people were left as a body whose head was cut
off. In this so great fear of their dispersion, appeared not only the
immortal truth of God, which never dies, though men decay, but also in the
person of Iosue was declared and showed as it were in a notable clear glass,
that when God takes away those men, whom he has adorned with singular gifts,
he has enough in store, whom he can set up in their place: and that, although he
will have some men to excel for a time, yet his power is not so tied unto
their persons, but he can find successors for them, whenever it pleases
him: yea, he can raise up men of stones, which shall be meet to take in hand the
greatest affairs.

First of all therefore, when the passage through the red Sea, in the space
of 40. years, by which God led the people through the wilderness, was almost
grown out of remembrance, by the same miracle in the passage of the river
Jordan, the continual tenure and course of their deliverance was again
renewed and continued. As for the renewing of Circumcision was as much, as if
God should afresh establish his covenant, which through the shameful
negligence of the people was buried, or through their infidelity and despair
rejected. Then it follows, how by the hand of God they were brought into
the possession of the land of promise.

The taking of the first city was an earnest and pledge unto them of that
virtue and power of God, which they should hope for in all the rest, while at
the only sound of the trumpettes the walls of Hiericho were shaken and fell
down of their own accord. And yet these nations were not discomfited in one
battle, nor chased away by wars of short continuance: but by little and little
they were spent and wasted away by many painful conflictes. Where also it is
to be noted, that the people had many great difficulties laid in their way,
whiles the Kings that were their enemies conspiring together, gathered all
their forces into one, and so came to fight against them, so that they had not
war with every people severally, and at sundry times, but with an infinite
multitude, which might have run over the Israelites all at one brunt. But
these their violent attempts in the end have this issue, that whiles the power
of God shows it self to be above them, his mercy also and faithfulness in
defense of his elect people shines more gloriously. Undoubtedly, that
continual course of their happy success, and so many wonderful victories,
did openly represent the hand of God as it were stretched out of heaven to help
them. But this was a most manifest proof that they warred under the conduct of
God himself, that at the request of Iosue the course of the Sun was stayed,
as though all creatures of the world being armed unto his aid, were present at
his commandment.

Now, although the long deferring of the final discomfiture of these nations,
was a profitable trial of the constancy of the people, yet must we therein
consider the wonderful purpose of God, whereof they were admonished in good
time by Moses, that they should not faint through weariness: namely, that God
would not have those nations at once destroyed, least the wild beasts should
enter upon the country being void of inhabitants. Deuteronomy. 7. 22.
But whereas God by this appointment had very well provided for their
security in time to come, they through their wickedness turned it into their
own destruction. For when they had once obtained sufficient room and
commodious for their habitatio^, as they thought, through their wicked sloth
and cowardlinesse they turned their course backward, and shamefully retired:
which one offense of theirs drew many other after it. For they were also
disobedient to God, and unfaithful in finishing the course of their warrefare
like runnagate Soldiers, which forgetting the oath of warrefare shamefully
forsake their standarde. And as for the dominion of the whole land, which God
offered unto them, through wicked unthankfulness they forsook, and received
only a part thereof. Moreover, whereas they were commanded to purge that
holy land from all corruptions, that no profanation of the pure and lawful
woorshippe of God should remain therein: they suffered those ungodly
superstitions, which the Lord abhorred, to remain, and be in force, as they
were accustomed. Beside this, whereas they knew right well, that it was for
their own safety, that they should not be mingled with those nations, to be
snared and entangled with their deceiptfull and crafty practices: yet as
though they desired of purpose to make a trial thereof, they suffered them to
remain as the matter of a most dangerous and detestable fire of destruction.
And that by no threatening of punishment they were terrified to beware in time,
therein they bewraied their obstinate infidelity. Yet at the length they tried
by experience, that all was not in vain that God threatened, that those
nations, to whom they had showed such unlawful favor, should beecome pricks
Number, 33. 55,
and thorns in their sides. For they were vexed with their daily invasions,
spoiled by their robberies, and at the length almost oppressed with their
tyrannical violence. Finally, they did as much as lay in them, to make the
truth of God his promise to be of none effect. Although a question may be
moved of this matter: For if the promise made to Abraham was founded upon
nothing but the good will of God, whatsoever the people were, it had been
against reason that it should have failed through their fault. How then shall
we reconcile those matters together? That the people obtained not the whole and
perfect inheritance, and yet God was true of his promise? But certainly the
faith of Gods promise was never so greatly shaken, decayed, or by any means
diminished, but that in performance thereof it may better appear, how cunning
a workman he is, which according to his incomprehensible wisdom, knows
how to turn light even out of darkness. It was said unto Abraham, Unto thy
seed will I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river
Euphrates. Iosue affirms, that the effect of this promise was Gene. 15. ^8.
near and already present. Nevertheless, they being overcome with
slothfulness, came not to those bounds: but rather as it were wilfully
casting themselves into streightes: they made a certain stop against the
bountiful liberality of God. By this means there seemed as it were a
certain Eclipse to darken the covenant of God. And there is no doubt, but the
minds of godly men were troubled with much carfulness and doubtfulnesse,
when they saw the work of God as it were cut off. Yet did he so moderate
himself in chastising of the peoples wickedness, that this great and
dangerous temptation, was turned into an aid and furtherance of their faith.
For this want of performance admonished the people of God, that they should
look for a better state, in which the grace of God should be seen more
plentifully: yea, after it had overcome all lettes or stays, should shine in
full brightness. Hereby their minds were lift up unto Christ: whereby also it
became manifest, that the perfect felicity of the Church depended upon the
head thereof. To this purpose they were aided and supported with new
prophesies. For that which Iosue does now rehearse out of the ancient
covenant, the Psalm translateth unto the kingdom of Messiah: Psalm. 72. and 89.
because God had deferred until his coming the full enjoying of the land,
that he might make the kingdom of his son more glorious. A pattern hereof was
showed in David, which did bear the person of Christ: and then it appeared
that the promises of God were not otherwise established, but by the hand of the
Mediator. Now then we see, that there is no absurdity in this, that the truth
of God, which was stayed by the malice of the people, did not perfectly show
it self, but in the right ordered state of the Church, when in the person of
David an image of the Mediator was set before the peoples eyes, in whom the
perfect felicity of the Church is reposed. All this while, that mean taste of
the favor of God, was sufficient to stay and hold up the faithful, until
they should be more fully satisfied. Neither was that partition of the land,
which Iosue and the rulers of the people, to whom it was committed, did make a
foolish or counterfeit division: but that inheritance was truly and certainly
divided, by the commandment of God, who as it were by his own hand did put
them in possession of the same. In which behalf also appeared the holiness of
the covenant made with Abraham. Jacob, a little before the end of his life, had
appointed out certain seats and dwelling places for some of his sons. If
every tribe had received their portion by the only appointment and free
determination of men: it might have been thought, they had been directed by the
authority of that Patriarch. But when the lots are cast, than the which
nothing seems more chaunceable, they fulfilled the prophecy no less, than if
God had openly appeared and established that donation in effect, according to
his former promises. Wherefore, after the idleness of the people had made an
end of the war, Iosue sent home the Rubenites and Gadites with the half
tribe of Manasses, and discharged them of the warrefare.

Then follows a notable history, whereby it appears how valiant the
Israelites that dwelt in the land of Chanaan were, in defending the true
worship of God. For, when these two tribes and an half had set up a monument
of their brotherly society, with the other tribes, they supposing they had
builded an altar for sacrifice, which was unlawful, immediately decreed to
war against them, and determined rather to destroy their own kinsmen, than
to suffer the religion of God to be torn a sunder with false worshipping and
Idolatry. And yet their moderation is also commended, that as they were
soudenly kindled with an holy zeal to take armor, so when they received a
reasonable answer, they were easily appeased.

In the end of the Book is set forth, how careful Iosue was to publishe the
glory of God, and with what diligence he endeavored to meet with the
lightness and infidelity of the people. Hereto perteine those most weighty,
not only exhortations, but also obtestations: and especially the covenant
renewed by a corporal oath, and after a most grave and solemn manner.

The Commentary of M. John Calvin, upon the book of Iosue, which he finished
a little before his death.
Chap. 1.
NOw after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, the Lord spoke unto
Joshua the son of Nun, Moses minister, saying,

2 Moses my servant is dead: now therefore arise, go over this Jorden, thou,
and all this people, unto the land which I give them, that is, to the children
of Israel.

3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon have I given you,
as I said unto Moses.

4 From the wilderness and this Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river
Perath: all the land of the Hittites, even unto the great sea toward the going
down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1 Now after, etc.) First here is declared the continual care that God had,
in cherishing the people, and providing for their safety. For in that he
confirms I^sue to be a new captain, giving him a new charge, it shows the
continual course of his grace, that they should not think they were left
desolate and forsaken by the death of Moses. And Iosue in deed was chosen
already to govern the people, neither had he only received the bare office
that was laid upon him, but also he was furnished with spiritual gifts meet
to execute the same. But because the most valiant men that are, although they
be never so well furnished, yet when they come to the point of execution of the
charge, either they ^^ay or stagger: this exhortation was not superfluous, that
Iosue should immediately prepare himself unto the voyage. Although not only
for his own cause his calling is again confirmed, but that the people might
pluck up their hearts, and not doubt at all, to follow such a captain, whom
they might see not to set forward one foot, but as God went before him.

2 My servant Moses, etc.) A double sense may hereout be gathered. The first
is this, Forsomuche as Moses is dead, now the whole burden and charge is
turned over to thee. Therefore take upon thee his place, unto whom thou art
appointed to succeed. The other sense is this, Although Moses be dead, yet give
not over the enterprise, but proceed and go forward. But I do rather allow
the former illation, that by the right of succession he should take upon him
that charge, which Moses left vacant by his departure. The addition of (a
servant) which is attributed to Moses, has special respect unto the
government of the people, and the affairs thereof: because it must be
understood, according to the circumstance of the place: for here he entreteth
not of the law, but of the office of government, which by his death was
fallen unto Iosue. And God verily, not so much to commend Moses, calls him
his servant, as that the authority of Iosue might be established, which Moses
set up in his place. Moreover, because the people perhaps would scarce have
rested in a bare precept, after he had commanded them to pass over Jordan, he
promises that they should be Lords of all that region in peaceable possession
wheresoever they did set their foot. For as nothing does make us more cowardes
and unprofitable than distrust, so when GOD sets before us a happy
success, faith and trust does inspire a courage and cheerfulness to take any
enterprise in hand. Add hereunto, that he does not now first begin to lift
up their minds unto a good hope, with a new promise which they had never
heard of before: but rather calls to their remembrance what Moses had
testified long before unto them. Wherefore he says, that now the time is
come, wherein God would perform and exhibit, whatsoever he had promised before
unto Moses. If any man will object, that The same thing was spoken to Abraham
long before Moses was borne: or rather, Whatsoever Moses heard four hundred
years after, proceeded most properly out of the perpetual covenant, that was
made with Abraham: I answer, that The old promise was omitted which was
commonly known and notorious among them, and that Moses is brought forth for a
witness, the memory of whom was fresh, and by whose death the faith of the
people had been sore shaken, if God himself had not pronounced, that the effect
of all things which he had spoken, was even ready to be performed.

4 From the wilderness and Libanus, etc.) How the truth and effect of this
promise advanced it self, above all lettes of the peoples malice and
wickedness, and yet the people them selves did not immediately enjoy so large a
dominion, I have already declared in the Preface, For, although God had set
abroad the inestimable treasures of his goodness, in appointing them to be
Lords of the land: yet he spared not to chastise and punish their
slothfulness: yea, it was necessary to be fulfilled, which Moses threatened
unto Number. 33. 55.
them: that except they destroyed these nations appointed to destruction, they
should become unto them pricks and thorns, with which their sides and eyes
should be pricked. But as by the delay of forty years, in which they were
led about the wilderness, the promise of God was not made frustrate and of
none effect: so the full possession of the land^, although it were long held
in suspense, yet it changed nothing of the faith and truth of Gods decrees, by
which it was adjudged unto them. The people might well in due time have gone
foreward unto the bounds and limits that were appointed unto them: but they
would not. Therefore were they worthy to be utterly driven out again.
Nevertheless, the mercy and clemency of God granted them a country, that
was sufficient for their commodious dwelling. And although it was told them
before, that those remnantes of the nations which they had reserved, as a just
reward of their disobedience, should become their deadly enemies, yet suffered
they no displeasure at their hands, but when through their own
unfaithfulness and continual rebelling against God, they provoked his anger
against them. For so often as they enjoyed prosperity, straight way they fell
to lasciviousness and wantonness. But always it came to pass by the
wonderful goodness of God, that when they were oppressed by the violence of
their enemies, and as it were overwhelmed in the grave, yet they lived in the
midst of death: and not that only, but oftentimes there were raised up
deliuerers that restored their state, when it was utterly decayed and lost. By
the great sea is meant the midland sea, over against which stands the land
of the Hitthites, as Euphrates is over against Libanus, so we remember that
under the name of Libanus, is comprehended not only the mountains, but all
the desert along, as it is manifest by an other place of Scripture.

5 There shall not a man be able to withstand thee all the days of thy life. As
I was with Moses, so will I be with thee: I will leave thee, nor forsake thee.

6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shall thou divide the
land for an inheritance, which I swear unto their fathers to give them.

7 Only be thou strong, and of a most valiant courage, that thou may observe
and do according to all the law which Moses my servant has commanded thee:
thou shall not turn away from it, to the right hand, nor to the left, that
thou may prosper whithersoeuer thou go.

8 Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success.

9 Have not I commanded thee, saying, Be strong and of a good courage, fear
not nor be discouraged: for I the Lord thy God will be with thee, whithersoeuer
thou go.

5 There shall, etc.) Because they had to fight against many warlike enemies:
it was needful, that Iosue should be encouraged with this especial
confidence. Or else whatsoever God had promised concerning the delivery of that
land into their hands, would have been darkened with this carfulness, as it
had been with a cloud: Yea, but what a wonderful enterprise will it be, to
discomfice and chase away so many mighty nations? Wherefore that impediment is
now taken away. And that he may the rather take away all doubtfulnesse, he
sets forth the victories which Moses obtained, by which God had made it
manifest, how easy it is for him to overthrow all the armies of his
adversaries, be they never so strong. Wherefore Iosue is commanded, in that
aid and succoure which God brought unto Moses, to behold what should be the
end and success of his wars, which he should take in hand under the same
conduct and governance that Moses did. For unto his succession, a continual
course and tenor of his grace was annexed. That which follows, although it
tend to the same end, yet does it also further extend, I will not forsake
thee. Wherefore the Apostle willing to withdraw the faithful from
covetousness, applies the same to the Heb. 13. (...)
staying of all our carfulness, and the correction of to great fearfulness.
And verily that distrust which grows of doubtfulnesse, does kindle in us
such a desire to bestirre our selves, that in every little danger, we are
miserably tossed to and fro, until we be persuaded both that God will be
present with us, and also that in him we shall find help enough, abundantly
to defend us. And surely, when he prescribes none other remedy to heal our
fearfulness, he teaches us that his presence ought to suffice us for aid in
all our distress and miseries.

6 Be of good comfort, etc.) Now follows an exhortation unto fortitude and
courage, and that again repeated, that it may more vehemently move his mind.
Although the promise is also interlaced in other words, whereby Iosue is
assured of his calling, that he should not take upon him that charge with any
doubtfulnesse, which he was assured to be laid upon him by God himself: or
that if he should wrestle with lettes and hindrances, he might not faint and
give over in the midst of his course. For it had not ben sufficient to have
prepared him self manfully in the beginning, if he had not ben thoroughly
furnished to continue unto the end. And although it be the property of faith,
to encourage us to take in hand any thing manfully, as likewise by slacknesse
and cowardice infidelity is bewrayed: yet out of this place we may gather,
that bare promises have not sufficient force in them to move our dull minds,
except there be added the pricks of exhortations. For if Iosue, whose courage
was otherwise singular, had yet need to be stirred up to do his duty, how
much more sharply is it necessary for us to be pricked, which are so slow and
dull by nature? Consider also, that not once nor in one word, strength and
constancy is required of Iosue, but because he was to be exercised with many
and sundry conflictes: he is often and with many words confirmed and
encouraged. He is willed to be of a valiant and invincible courage. Although by
these two words, it might be evident, that God charge him with a very
earnest matter, yet not content with this doubling of words, he repeateth the
same sentence again with an amplification: in that he adds the Aduerb,
greatly and exceedingly. Wherefore out of this place let us learn, that we
shall be never able to execute great and weighty affairs, except we go about
them with all our might: because both our ability is small: and Satan hardly
withstandeth us, so that nothing is more like, than that our hearts should
fail us. But because many with wandering and uncertain attemptes do bend all
their force in vain, here is set forth the true mean and way of
valiantness: namely, that Iosue apply all his study and endeavor to keep
the law of GOD. Whereby we are taught, that by this means we shall become
invincible, if we apply our selves with all our might, to yield faithful
obedience to GOD. Otherwise it were better for us to lie still like ^luggardes
and cowardes, than to be carried forth with rash and headlong boldness.
Moreover, God will not have his servant to be valiant only to keep the law,
but rather he wills him to contend manfully, that he faint not under the
burden of his painful office: but because this doubt might trouble him, how
he should acquit himself in matters of perplexity, and what counsel he
should take: he calls him to the doctrine of the law, for that in following
God, who therein goes before him, he should be sufficiently instructed, for
all matters. Thou shalt do wisely (says he) in all things, so long as thou
keep thy self under the direction of the law. Although the Hebrew Uerbe
SHACAL does not only signify to do wisely, but also to prosper, because
rashness is for the most part punished with misfortunes. How so ever it be,
by this mean he is more certainly encouraged to hope for the help of God, if
he give himself wholly to be his scholar. For it is a matter of great force to
comfort us, when any danger is at hand to make us afraid, that we can assure
our selves, that the matter we have in hand pleases God, because we seek
nothing else but to obey his commandementes. And because it were not sufficient
to obey God in some part, he commends unto him modesty and sobriety, by
which Iosue should be retained in simple obedience. For many, which are
otherwise well affected, do some times take upon them to be wiser than they
ought to be: whereby it comes to pass, that through negligence they omit
many things, or else mingle their own devises with the commandment of God.
Therefore that which was Dent. 12, 32.
generally forbidden unto all men by the law, to add or take any thing away:
now does God especially apply to Iosue: for if this be the only right way for
private men to frame their lives, it is much more necessary for them that rule
and govern the people, namely that they submit them selves to God. And if so
excellent a person as Iosue was, had need of this bridle of modesty to keep
him in, that he passed not his bounds: what intolerable boldness would it
be, if we that be far inferior unto him, should take more liberty unto our
selves? And this does GOD expressly charge his servant withal, that they
which excel in honor, may acknowledge that they notwithstanding are subject
even unto the same law that the common people are.

8 Let not depart, etc.) He is commanded also to use daily meditation of the
law: for when that study is omitted but for a short time, many errors will
easily creep upon us: and our memory wax^th rustie, insomuche that many
which have cast off the continuance of study, come as it were new and raw
to take any thing in hand. Wherefore God commands his servant, to make
daily proceedings, that all his life long he cease not to profit in the law.
Whereof it follows, that they to whom this study seems loathsome, are
blinded with intolerable arrogancy. But why does he forbid the law to
depart, rather from his mouth, than from his eyes? Whereas some men do
expound the mouth for the face, by the figure Synecdoche, the part for the
whole, it is but frivolous. I doubt not therefore, but that this does
peculiarly perteine to his person, which was bound to employ that study that
is here commanded, not only to his own use privately, but for the whole
people whom he had taken in charge to govern. Therefore, he is so commanded to
give heed to the doctrine of the law, and in such sort, that according to the
office that was laid upon him, he should utter and bring forth that which he
had learned to the common profit of the people. And withal he is commanded,
by his diligence to give other men example of obedience. For many in preaching
will have the law in their mouth, which in the mean time are the worst
obseruers thereof in their life. Both is therefore commanded, that in teaching
other, he should frame himself and his whole life unto that rule.

That which follows in the other part of the verse, shows that profane and
unholy men shall at length have evil success, what soever they attempt with
contempt and neglect of the word of God: and although the beginninges at the
first seem pleasant and prosperous, yet their end shall be accursed: because it
is not lawful to look for prosperous success, but only from the favor of
God. Whereof it is meet that all devises, rashly, and unadvisedly taken in
hand, should be utterly destitute, as also all arrogancy which is likewise
joined with contempt of God himself. Wherefore the faithful, that they may
have good success in all things, ought to procure unto themselves, the
blessing of God, as well by earnest desire of learning, as by obedience of
faith. In the end of the verse, because the Uerbe is of double signification,
as I have said: either the same sentence is repeated, or else a second promise
is added: which latter sense I do very well allow. For it agrees very well,
that after happy success is promised, Iosue should also be admonished, that
men do nothing rightly, in good order, or with true knowledge: but so far
forth as they submit themselves, to be governed by the word of God. Therefore
that wisdom which the faithful learn out of the word of God, is contrary
to the bold confidence of those men, which think they do all things with
great wisdom, when they are led with their own understanding.

9 Have not I commanded thee, etc.) Although the Hebrews do often times by
interrogation simply affirm, and that phrase is very common among them: yet
this interragation has a special force, to confirm the former doctrine,
while God brings forth his authority, and discharges the mind of his
servant, both from doubt and care. Is it not I (says he) which have
commanded thee: even I also will be present with thee. This is therefore
spoken with a force or emphasis, because it is not lawful to resist his
commandments. Again, this place does teach us, that nothing does more
prevail to make us have sure trust, then when we are bold upon the calling
and commandment of God, and being well assured thereof in our conscience, we
do follow him as a guide, whithersoeuer he does call us.

10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,

11 Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you
vitailes: for after three days ye shall pass over this Iordaine, to go in to
possess the land, which the Lord your God gives you to possess it.

12 And unto the Rubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of
Manasseh spoke Joshua, saying,

13 Remember the word, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
saying, The Lord your God has given you rest, and has given you this land.

14 Your wives, your children, and your cattle shall remain in the land which
Moses gave you on this side Jordan: but ye shall go over before your brethren
armed, all that be men of war, and shall help them.

15 Until the Lord have given your brethren rest, as well as to you, and
until they also shall possess the land, which the Lord your God gives them:
then shall ye return unto the land of your possession, and shall possess it,
which land Moses the Lords servant gave you on this side Jordan, toward the
sun rising.

16 Then they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou have commanded us, we
will do, and whithersoeuer thou sendest us, we will go.

17 As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: only the Lord
thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.

18 Whosoever shall rebel against thy commandment, and will not obey thy
words in all that thou commaundest him, let him be put to death: only be
strong and of good courage.

10 Then Iosue commanded, etc.) It may be doubted whether this decree were
published, after the espialles were sent, and after their return. And verily
it seems to me not only likely, but also I am thoroughly persuaded, that
after he had known by their report, such things as he would, then he
thought best to remove the camp. Otherwise it had been but over headie
hastiness, to take his journey that way which he knew not: seeing he thought
it profitable to be first instructed of many things, before he entered into the
land of his enemies. Neither is it a strange thing, that the order of time is
neglected, and that which followed being omitted, is afterward rehearsed.
Wherefore, the second Chapter shall be as it were a Parenthesis interlaced, which
does more fully declare, at what time Iosue commanded the people to remove
with bag and baggage. Therefore, when he had perfect intelligence of every
matter, he thought it high time to march forward, and so commanded the
people by an edict to prepare them selves to remove. And whereas with so great
confidence he pronounces, that after three days they should pass over
Jordan, he would never have been so bold to have made such a promise, if the
spirit of God had not directed him thereto. No man had assayed to find a
foorde, neither was there any hope that any might be found. And as for bridge,
or vessels, there were none, by which they might pass over. And it had been an
easy matter to have kept them from the passage. Wherefore, nothing else
remained, but that God should miraculously carry them over. This did not Iosue
hope of rashly, nor of his own brain, but as it was revealed to him by God.
In their readiness of obedience appeared the faith of the people, for that
seeing before their eyes so great difficulty, they would never have been so
obedient, if they had not cast all their care vpoa GOD. And there is no doubt,
but God him self gave this courage into their minds, that he might take away
all stoppes, which might let the effect of his promise.

12 To the Rubenites, etc.) These tribes had their inheritance granted them on
the other side of Iordane for this condition, that they should go a warfare
with the rest of their brethren, until they had chased away the nations of the
Chanaanites. Now therefore Iosue exhorts them to perform their promise, that
leaving their wives and children, with all their goods, they should pass over
Iordane, and not give over the warrefare, until they saw their brethren all
placed in quiet possession of their inheritaunces. And he bseth two arguments
chiefly to provoke them to do their duty, of which the former is taken of
authority, the other of equity. First therefore he rehearses unto them what
Moses gave them in commandment, from whose decree it was not lawful for them
to decline, when all men knew right well, that Moses spoke nothing of his own
head, but only such things as God by his own mouth had uttered. And withal,
though he do not express it, yet by the way he gives them to understand,
that they were bound by covenant, because they had promised that they would
so do. Then setting before their eyes the equity of the cause, he moves them
to consider, that it were not meet that those should be in unequal condition,
to whom the same inheritance was alike appointed. It were not at all
convenient (says he) that your brethren should adventure them selves, and take
pains to hold out the war, and you should sit quietly and enjoy your ease
at home. But whereas he wills them to go before, he means not that they
should be the first that should abide the brunt of their enemies, and so being
laid open to all dangers, should take more pains, and endure greater hardness
than all the rest. Only by this means he exhorts them to march forward
cheerfully, because it had been a kind of drawing back, if they should have
followed all the rest slowely in the rereward. Therefore, to march before
their brethren, is not to stand in the vauntgard of the battle when they
should fight: but in keeping their order and array to show forth their courage
and good will. For it is certain, that as they were divided into four
standards, so they marched forward. But in that he names those that were men
of war among them, it may be gathered (which in other places is more
manifest) that old men, and such as were not of sufficient strength, were
permitted to look to their affairs at home, or else to take their ease if
they were feeble, or in health appaired.

16 Then answered, etc.) They do not only obey, but also most liberally and
frankly they offer such service as was required of them. And this is the way
for men to do their duty, cheerfully to perform whatsoever God requires
of them, not with heuinesse as 1. Cor. 9. 7.
S. Paul says. If any man will object, That they do brag of such obedience
as they showed to Moses, more than modesty would they should, seeing they had been often times disobedient: I answer, that Although they did not always
follow him with such fervent zeal as they ought to have done, yet they were so
reasonably well framed unto obedience, that their modesty was not only
tolerable, but also worthy of great commendation, if we consider how proudly
their fathers rebelled, and with what obstinacy they attempted to cast off the
yoke which God had laid upon them. For in this place speak not those rebels,
by whom God complains in the Psalm, that he Psalm. 65. 8. (...) 10. 11.
was provoked to wrath: but such as being subdued by example of their
punishment, had learned quietly to submit them selves. Although in their words
they do not so much advance their own virtues, as they do set up and extol
the authority of Iosue, whiles they profess that they will take him, even as
they took Moses, in whose room he succeeded. The prayer which they add, does
contain the matter of their trust and confidence: that God would be present
with his servant Iosue, even as he helped Moses. For they declare that they
will be in a readiness to fight under the conduct of their new Captein
general, because they are persuaded, that he being furnished with the power
and aid of God, shall have the victory, as they had often experience before,
that God was wonderfully with them to assiste them by the hand of Moses. And
hereupon it may be gathered, that they had this confidence, both because they
rehearse the trial and experience of Gods goodness to encourage them selves
therewith, and also in that they acknowledge Iosue to be the successor of Moses,
not only in place, but also in happy success. For this addition is not
without great weight, Thy GOD: but to show a continuance of the course of Gods
grace toward him. Yet the form of speaking may be taken indifferently, both
for the confidence of faith, and for a wish or prayer. Wherefore, although they
signify, that they do cherish a good hope in their hearts, yet as in so
weighty a matter, they give them selves also to prayers. And surely when soon
after they do of them selves exhort him to constancy, they declare, that they
also will be fellows and companions with him in the same faith and confidence.
Where it is worthy to be noted, that although Iosue was a singular example of
fortitude and valiantnes unto all the rest, and encoraged them both by word and
deed: yet he him self is also pricked forward, when he runs before them,
that by his cherefulnes he might better encorage all the rest of the people.

Chap. 2.
THEN Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly,
saying, Go view the land, and also Jericho, and they went, and came into an
harlots house, named Rahab, and lodged there.

2 Then report was made to the King of Jericho, saying, Behold there came me^
hither to night, of the children of Israel, to spy out the country

3 And the King of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bringforth the men that are
come to thee, and which are entered into thine house: for they be come to
search out all the land.

4 (But the woman had taken the two men, and hid them,) Therefore said she
thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were.

5 And when they shut the gate in the dark, the men went out, whither the men
went I wot not: follow ye after them quickly, for ye shall overtake them.

6 (But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with
the stalks of flax, which she had spread abroad upon the roof.)

7 And certain men pursued after them, the way to Jordan, unto the foordes,
and as soon as they which pursued after them, were gone out, they shut the gate.

8 And before they were a sleep, she came up unto them upon the roof,

9 And said unto the men, I know that the Lord has given you the land, and
that the fear of you is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the
land faint, because of you.

10 For we have heard, how the Lord dried up the water of the read Sea before
you, when you came out of Egypt, and what you did unto the two Kings of the
Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, unto Sihon and to Og, whom ye
utterly destroyed.

11 And when we heard it, our hearts did faint, and there remained no more
courage in any, because of you: for the Lord your God, he is the God in heaven
above, and in earth beneth.

12 Now therefore, I pray you swear unto me by the Lord, that as I have showed
you mercy, ye will also show mercy unto my fathers house, and give me a true
token.

13 And that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and
my sisters, and all that they have: and that ye will deliver our souls from
death.

14 And the men answered her, Our life for you to die, if ye utter not this
our business: and when the Lord has given us the land, we will deal
mercifully and truly with thee.

15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house was
upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the the wall.

16 And she said unto them, Go you into the mountain, left the pursuers
meet with you, and hide your selves there three days, until the pursuers be
returned: then afterward may ye go your way.

17 And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine oath, which
thou have made us swear.

18 Behold, when we come into the land, thou shall bind this cord of red
thread in the window, whereby thou let us down, and thou shall bring thy
father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy fathers household home to
thee.

19 And whosoever then does go out at the doors of thine house into the
streat, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless: but
whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any
hand touch him.

20 And if thou utter this our matter, we will be quit of thine oath, which
thou have made us swear.

21 And she answered, According unto your words, so be it: Then she sent them
away, and they departed, and she bound the red cord in the window.

22 And they departed, and came into the mountain, and there abode three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

23 So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over,
and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all things that came unto
them.

24 Also they said unto Joshua, Surely the Lord has delivered into our hands
all the land: for even all the inhabitants of the country faint because of us.

1 Iosue had sent, etc.) This was an other kind of espying, whereof the text
now entreats, than that former was, when Iosue with other eleven was sent:
namely, to search all the quarters of the land, and to make report before all
the people of the situation, nature, and fruitfulness of the country, and of
other qualities thereof: of the greatness and frequencie of the cities, of the
inhabitants and their manners. To this intent, that they might more willingly
address them selves to march forward against them, when otherwise they were
to slow and slothful for such an enterprise. And although it appears out
of the first Chapter of Deuteronomie, that Moses was Deuteronomy. 1, 22.
earnestly required by the people, to send chosen men to spy out the land,
yet elsewhere he reports, that he did so by the commandment of God.
Wherefore those twelve persons went both by the Number. 13, 4.
commandment of God, and for an end somewhat diverse from these, that after
they had diligently spied out the land, they might be able to commend the
excellency thereof, to encourage the minds of the people to conquer it. But
now Iosue sends two men privily, which might epsy, whether they might have
free passage or no: whether the inhabitants of Jericho were in security, or
else well provided and ready to fight. Finally, he sends such espialles, by
whose report he may prevent all dangers. Wherefore the question may be argued
on both parts, Whether this counsel of his, was to be allowed, or else to be
condemned of to much carfulness: especially, because he seems to have leaned
to much to his own wisdom, whiles he asks no counsel of GOD, and is so
circumspect to prevent all dangers. But, albeit it is not expressed, that he
was commanded by oracle, to will the people to remove, and so published a
decree for the passage of Iordane: yet when the matter it self is evident,
that he did not once think of raising the camp, but by Gods direction, it is
not unlike, that he inquited of God also what his pleasure was, concerning the
sending of those espialles: or else, because God saw that they had need of
this aid for their confirmation, he did of himself inspire this counsel into
his servant. Howsoever it be, while Iosue commands his espials to consider
and search Jericho, he prepares himself to lay seege unto it, and to assault
it, and therefore he is desirous to be certified, on what part he may have more
easy and safe access unto it.

2 Entered into the house, etc.) For what cause some interpreters do spare to
call her an harlot, and expound the word ZONAH for a viteller, I see not at
all: unless they thought it had been a shame for them to lodge in an harlottes
house, or else were desirous to deliver the woman from the reproach of an
harlot, which did not only gently intertaine those messengers: but also by her
singular good courage and wisdom, preferued them from danger. It is in deed
an usual manner of the Jewish Rabbines, that they may save the honor of their
nation, boldly to wrest the Scriptures, and with their vain glosses to pervert
and change whatsoever seems not to sound honorably for them. Howbeit, it is
like that whiles the messenger sought to avoid the sight and multitude of the
people, they came to this woman which dwelc in a blind corner. For her house
ioyued unto the wall, yea the outmost wall of her house was set upon the wall
of the city. Whereby it may be gathered, that it was a blind corner, far
from the market place: like as harlots for the most part dwell in allies and
solitary places of cities. And it is nothing like, that she was a common
Inkeeper, which received all manner of ghests that came, for then could she not
have had any liberty, for such familiar talk as she had with the^, and she
should have had very much a do to have hid the^. Wherefore thus I take it,
that when they had privily stolen into the city, straight way they hid the^
selves in that corner. But whereas a woman before time given to that filthy
kind of life, was soon after knitte into the body of the elect people, that
she might be made a member of the Church, it does more notably set forth and
commend the grace of GOD, which entered even into the Stews, to draw from
thence not only Rahab, but also her father and her brethren. Surely, seeing the
name ZONAH does every where almost signify an harlot, no reason can drive me
in this place to refuse the usual signification thereof.

2 It was told the king, etc.) It is like, that as it is used in doubtful
times, and when there is any fear of war, that warriers were appointed at
the gates, which noted those strangers. The Israelites were not far off,
which openly professed unto the Edomites and Moabites, that they sought a
dwelling place in the land of Chanaan: the multitude of them was terrible:
they had slain two kings that were borderers, and possessed all their
dominions: their passage over the redsea, as we shall see afterward, was
famous and notoriously known. Wherefore, it had been to much negligence, in so
manifest a danger, to suffer all strangers to have free passage through the
city of Jericho that lies in the border of the land. Wherefore it is no
marvel, that men unknown, and such as by many tokens, might well be taken for
their enemies, were accused unto the king. And yet we may well gather, that
they were blinded of God, because they kept not their gates more diligently:
for after they were once entered, they might easily have vene apprehended, if
they had used but mean diligence. Yea, they might have been streightway
examined, and so they had been easily found out. But the Citizens of Jericho
so trembled for fear, that being amazed by the judgment of God, they did
nothing by good reason, or with advise. And in the mean time, the two spies
also were almost brought into the same streightes, being ready immediately to
be drawn forth to punishment. The king sends for them: they lie hid in the
alehouse: their life hangs upon the woman's tongue, as upon a thread. Some
think that the distrust of Iosue was thus chastised, because he should only
have trusted in the direction of God, and safely have passed over Jordan
without taking further thought for any thing. But the end of the matter
leads us into the contrary sentence, that God by delivering the messengers
out of so great danger, gave courage unto the people: for in that
demonstration of his power, he did openly show, that he watched also for the
safegarde of the people, and for their happy entrance into the land.

4 A woman received the, etc.) We may conjecture, that before Rahab was
commanded to bring them forth, the rumor was spread of their coming, so that
she had some leisure given her to hide them. And verily, after she heard the
Kings commandment, except she had provided all things before to deceive
them, there had been no place of denial: much less durst she have been so
bold, to have lied so serurely. But because she had so well hidden her
ghestes, that it was hard to find them out, she comes forth without fear,
and with a crafty answer delivers her self. Now in this place it is
demanded first, Whether this betraying of her contrie was excusable or no? and
secondly, Whether her lie was without offense: We know that the love of our
contrie is naturally ingraffed in us, which is as it were our common mother.
Wherefore, seeing Rahab knew, that the matter concerned the destruction of that
city, whereof she was a Citizen and member, it seems to be detestable
inhumanitie and treason, that she should aid the espialles with her counsel
and help. It is a childish shift, to say, That they were not yet professed
enemies, because that war was not proclaimed against them: when is is
manifest, that they co^spired the destruction of their fellow Citizens.
Therefore that only knowledge that God put in her mind, does discharge her from
that crime, as one exempt from the common law. Her faith is praised by two
Apostles, which both do testify, that the Heb. 11. 3^ I am. 2, 25.
^^rtesie which she showed to the espials, was acceptable to God. No. marvel
therefore, if GOD, when he vouchsafed to remotte this strange woman unto his
own people, and to graffe her into the body of his Church, did separate her
from the unholy and cursed nation. Wherefore, although she was bound unto her
countriemen, even until that day: yet as soon as she was coupled unto the
body of the Church, this her new state, was a certain manumission and
deliverance, from the law of society, whereby Citizens are bound one to
another. Finally, that she might pass, through faith, into a new people, it
was necessary for her, to forsake her old country men. And because she gave
place only to the judgment of God, there was no fault of treason in her.
Concerning her lie, we must so take it: although it tended to a good end, yet
was it not without offense. For they which do altogether excuse that kind of
lie, which they call duetifull, do not sufficiently consider, how precious a
thing truth is unto God. Therefore, although our purpose be to help our
brethren, to provide for their saftie, and to support them: yet is it never
lawful to lie: because it can not be good, which is contrary to the nature of
God: and God is truth. Nevertheless, the work of Rahab is not therefore
spoiled of all praise of virtue, although it be stained with this spot. For
oftentimes it happens, while holy men intend to keep the right way, sometimes
for all that they turn aside, as it were into crooked bywayes. While Rebecca
procures the blessing for her son Jacob, she follows the judgment of the
divine answer. Genesis 27, 5.
In this obedience her godly and laudable zeal appears. But when she sets
her son Jacob in the place of Esau, there is no doubt, but she departs from
her duty. For that subtlety of hers, does stain in some part, her work,
which of it self was commendable. And yet that particular fault, does not
btterly abolish all praise of her holy purpose: because it is buried in the
mercy of God, that it should not be laid to her charge. Rahab also did amiss,
when she made a lie, in saying, that the messengers were departed: yet the
principal action was acceptable to God, because the vice that was mingled with
the virtue, is not imputed unto her. Therefore, as God would have these
espialles to be delivered, so he did not allow, that their life should be
defended with a lie.

7 The men pursued, etc.) That they were so light of belief, it shows, that
they were beerefte of their wits by God. But notwithstanding, that Rahab had
much prevailed, when she had deluded them, yet a new trouble disquieted the^,
because the gates being kept shut, the city was as a prison, that took away
from them all hope of escape. Wherefore they were once again awaked with an
earnest trial to call upon God for help. For seeing this history was written
of their report, they were not ignorant what was then a doing: especially,
when God of purpose to amplify his grace and favor toward them, brought them
into diverse and sundry dangers one after an other. And now, when they
understood they were sought for, the story says they were still waking:
whereby we gather, that they were in great care and perplexity. And where it
was told them, that they were shut in, so that they could not depart out of the
city, no doubt but it did greatly increase their fear and trembling.
Nevertheless, it appears, that Rahab was nothing at all afraid, when with
bold courage and well ordered speech she couenanteth and indenteth with them
for the preservation of her self and her family. And in this her constancy,
that faith of hers, which elsewhere is commended, does very much shine: for,
after the judgment of man, she would never have contemned the fury of the
King and the prople, to her strange ghests that were as good as half dead.
Many think that commendation to be frivolous and undeserved, which James and
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews do give her, while they rehearse her
Heb. 11. 1*
and reckon her in the number of the faithful. But whosoever shall wisely
consider all the circumstances, shall easly judge that she was endued with a
lively faith. First therefore, if the tree be known by the fruits, here we may
see rare effects of faith, which are as many testimonies thereof. Secondly out
of the seed of godliness this her judgment proceeded, that the nations all
about were already as good as vanquished and overthrown, because all their
minds and courage were stricken down with a terror and fear sent of God
upon them. And such speeches are to be found in profane writers also: which
God caused them to utter, that he might show he has power and authority to
govern and turn the hearts of men which way it pleases him. But that which
they prate of as Parrats, Rahab pronouncing out of the sincere affection of
faith that God had given that land to the children of Israel, because all the
inhabitauntes mealted before them, does challenge unto God that government
over the hearts of men, which the pride of the world does deny him to have.
For although the experience of all ages has showed, that more armies have been
vanquished and put to flight, by a soudaine fear and ^errour unlooked for,
than by violence and force of their enemies: yet this knowledge soon vanishes
out of men's minds. Whereupon it comes to pass, that the conquerors have
always extolled their own valiantness, and gloried of their prosperous
success, that they them selves were warlike and valiant men. Sometimes I
confess, they perceived, that their courage and bold spirit unto battle was of
some other occasion either given them, or taken from them: wherefore they
acknowledged that fortune was of great authority in the wars, and that she
had in a manner the whole government of them: insomuch that a Proverb grew of
soudeine terrors, which they called Panicall fears. Uowes also were hight as
well to Jupiter the stayer or stander out, as to the God of fear: but this
persuasio^ was never thoroughly settled in their minds, that every man is so
fatforth valiant, as God shall give him a good courage: or so farforth
timorous, as God shall cast down his boldness. But Rahab acknowledges, that
the nations of Chanaan were stricken with fear by God, in such sort, that they
condemned them selves before hand: and thereof she gathers, that in as much as
the children of Israel were so terrible unto them, it was a foretoken of their
victory, because they fought under the conduct of God. But whereas all their
hearts were fallen down, and as it were mealted away for fear, and yet with
obstinate madness, they prepared them selves to resist: it may well be seen,
that when the ungodly are cast down, being broken and bruised to dust by the
hand of God, yet are they not subdued to receive his yoke: but that in their
fear and perplexity they still remain untameable. And here it is to be
noted, how in a fear that is common to al men, the faithful differ from the
unbelievers: in which behalf also we may plainly see the faith of Rahab. For
she also feared as much as any one of all the people. But when she considers,
that she has to do with GOD, she determines with her self, that there is
none other remedy to avoid the mischief, but humbly and quietly to give
place and yield: for that in resisting she should nothing prevail. But what
do all the other wretched inhabitants of the land: Although they lie along
amazed with fear, yet their obstinacy is not broken, but that they encourage
them selves to encounter with them.

10 How the Lord dried, etc.) She repeateth the principal cause of their
fearfulness, because the report that was spread abroad of such miracles as
they never heard of before, had brought this opinion into all their minds,
that God did fight for the Israelites. For it could not be doubted, but their
passage through the red sea was made by God: when the waters, whose nature was
never changed before, were heaped up into great heaps, and so stood, which
could not be, except God the author of nature had so commanded them.
Wherefore, that marvelous change of the element did openly show, that God
took part with that nation, to whom he gave a dry passage through the waters,
and in the midst of the deapthes. The victories also obtained against Og and
Sihon, as they were notable, so were they worthy to be rehearsed among the
testimonies of Gods favor toward the Israelites. Although this latter matter
stands only upon a conjecture: yet in passage of the sea there was a full
and manifest proof, no less then if God had stretched forth his hand out of
heaven. This persuasion therefore had possessed all their minds, that God was
the chief captain in this enterprise of the children of Israel, whereupon
grew that great fear and terror. Howbeit, it is not unlike, but that they
were deceived by this false imagination, as if the God of Israel had obtained
the victory against the Gods of Egypt: as the Poets feign, that as every
God takes upon him the defense of any contrie, so he fights against the Gods
of other countries, whiles every one defends his Clientes. But the faith of
Rahab ascends higher, whiles she ascribes all power and eternity to the God
of Israel only. For the name of Jehovah contains in it that confession.
Wherefore, she dreameth not after the common manner of men, that one of the
whole company of the Gods does aid the Israelites: but she magnifieth and
acknowledges him to be that only true God, which was commonly known to
favor them. We see therefore, how by the common report she professed much more
than all her country fellows did.

11 The Lord your God, etc.) Here appears as it were in a glass, a goodly
image of the faith of Rahab, when she casts down all id^ls, and ascribes
the government of heaven and earth to the only God of Israel. For this is not
doubtful, that when the government of heaven and earth is confessed to be
subject to the God of Israel, all the inventions of the Gentiles are rejected,
by which the majesty and power of God is rent in pieces, and his glory
defaced. Wherefore we see, that not without great cause the faith of Rahab
Heb. 11. 38. Iam. 2, 25.
is commended by two Apostles. Certain proud and disdainful persons have that
matter in decision, but I would they could consider what it is, to discern the
only true God from all feigned and conterfeit Gods, and so to extol his
power, that he be judged to govern the whole world at his pleasure. For Rahab
speaks not doubtingly, but she does absolutely pronounce, that all power and
authority is in the only God of Israel, that he may govern all the elements,
that he may dispose all things both above and beneath, and order all the
affairs of man, as it pleases him. In the mean time, I do not deny, but
that her faith was yet imperfect: yea, I do willingly grant, that she had yet
but a small branch of godliness, which was not sufficient to eternal salvation.
Yet for all that, we must acknowledge thus much, that although the knowledge of
God was yet but small and slender in this woman: nevertheless, seeing she
submits her self unto his government, she gives forth a testimony of her
election, and that out of this seed her faith did spring, which afterward grew
up unto a perfect measure.

12 Now therefore swear, etc.) This is an other argument of her faith, that
she places the children of Abraham in certain possession of the land of
Chanaan, grounding her persuasion upon none other reason, but that she had
heard it was promised them of God. For she thought not that God would favor
them, if they had been robbers and spoilers, which with unjust violence and
oppression had entered upon the possessions of other men's lands: but rather she
is persuaded, that they came into the land of Chanaan, because the right
inheritance thereof was adjudged to be theirs by God. Neither is it to be
thought, that when they desired passage of the Edomites and other nations, that
they spared to declare whither they intended to go. Yea, those nations knew
right well, that the promise was made to Abraham, the remembrance whereof was
again renewed by the reiection of Esau. Moreover, in the speech of Rahab again
does shine, that quality which the Author of the epistle to the Hebrews
ascribes to faith, That it is a sight of things that are not seen. Rahab
dwells in her own country, and in a strong city: yet does she commend her
life to strangers that were almost dead for fear and danger, as though they
were already in possession of the land, and had power in their hand to save
and destroy whom it pleased them. Certainly, this voluntary yielding was as
much in effect, as if she had embraced the promise of God, and given over her
self into his defense and protection. Yet she requires an oath of them,
because it happens often in sacking of cities, that fury and trouble makes
men to forget their duty. For the same purpose she reherseth what gentleness
she had showed unto them, that thankfulness might the rather provoke them to
keep their promise. For though the reverence of their oath should have been
sufficient to bind them: yet it were double vngentlnesse and unthankfulness,
not to be mindful of their Hostess, by whom they them selves were delivered
from death. It is also a good point of humanity, that she is careful for her
father and her kinsfolk. And that is in deed natural: yet many are so
addicte unto them selves, that children will not dout to redeem their own life
with the death of their parents: so far off is it, that they would apply
all their studies and endeavors to save them.

14 Our soul, etc.) They curse them selves to death, if they did not use all
faithfulness, and diligence to save Rahab. For whereas some translate it, We
will deliver our souls, etc. It seems far fetched and to much strained:
seeing their purpose is nothing else, but to bind them selves before God. Wherefore
they set out them selves as monuments of Gods wrath, if Rahab suffer any
adversity through their negligence. That word (For you) doubtless is to be
referred unto her father, brethren, and sisters. Therefore they gage their
lives, that blood should be required of their hands, if the whole family of
Rahab did not remain vnspoiled. And herein consists the holiness of an
oath, that although they might break promise without punishment as concerning
men, yet God being called to witness, will have an account of their
unfaithfulness. To show mercy and truth, (among the Hebrews) is as much as
to do the office and duty of humanity, faithfully, truly, and constantly.
But this exception is added, that Rahab bewray not the matter her self, which
they require not of distrust, as it is commonly expounded: but that Rahab might
the rather take heed to her self. Wherefore this was a faithful admonition, and
proceeded of mere good will, because it was to be feared least Rahab would
bewray her self. Finally, they show how necessary it was, that the matter
should be kept close, lest the woman unadvisedly bosting of her promise should
be cause of her own death. Wherein they declare, that they were careful in
deed of her preservation, when they do in time provide, that they be not
prevented of means how to help her. And whereas they do charge her expressly,
that no person go out of her house, and protest that they will be innocent, if
any of them be slain abroad, we may gather this profitable doctrine thereof,
that we must be careful in taking of oaths, least while we promise all things
unadvisedly, we profane and dishonor the name of God. The counsel that Rahab
gives, that they should get them into the hills, and there tarry three
days, does teach us, that such wariness is not contrary to faith, whereby
men seek to prevent manifest dangers. There is no doubt, but the messengers
crept up fearfully into the mounteine: yet that trust which they had conceived
of the help of God, did so direct their steps, that they did nothing
disorderedly. Here again this question is moved of some men, seeing it is an
offense to clime over the walls, Whether it was lawful Against the Civil law.
for them to escape out of the city by a window: But we must remember, that
walls of cities were not counted holy in all places, because there were not in
all places, such as Romulus was, that sought occasion to kill his brother under
color of climing over the walls. Again, that law, as Cicero does teach us,
must be tempered with equity: for that man is more worthy of reward than of
punishment, which leapeth over the wall to drive back and repulse an enemy.
The end of that law is, that by well keeping of the walls, the Citizens may
be in safety. That man therefore, which neither of contempt, nor of frowardnes,
nor by subtlety or sedition, but constreined by necessity climeth over the
walls, should unjustly be charged with treason, only for that cause. If any
man will obiecte, that It is a matter of evil example: That I confess: but
when a man's purpose is only to deliver his life from unjust violence or
robbery, so it be done without offense or hurt of any body, necessity does
excuse it. For S. Paul is not to be blamed, because he was let down in a Act.
9. 25.
baskette when he was in danger at Damascus, because God permits us, so it
be without any trouble or sedition, to escape the violence and cruelty of
wicked persecuters.

24 And they told Iosue, saying, etc.) This place does teach us, that Iosue
was nothing deceived, in choice of these espialles, for that by their speech it
appears, they were men of singular wisdom and honesty. Some other perhaps,
scarce yet recovered from the great fear they were in, would have troubled
all the army. But these men, while they acknowledge the wonderful grace of
God, as well in the happy success of their journey, as in their deliverance
from dangers, they exhort both Iosue and the people to march forward
coragiously. And although the only promise of God for possession of that land
ought to have sufficed them: yet God does so much yield unto the infirmity of
his children, that to take away all cause of doubtfulnesse, he confirms that
which he promised by experimentes. That fear therefore wherewith the nations
were stricken, did prove, that God had not spoken in vain, when he began
already to put them to flight, and as it were by sending in of hornets to chase
them away. For they reason as Rahab did, That the land was given unto them,
because the inhabitants were almost shroonke away for fear. Therefore I have
translated it with an illatiue Conjunction, whereas it is word for word, and
also. But we read it so, yet is that confirmed thereby, which they said
before, as thus: And surely their courage is altogether fainted, as if they did
already feel them selves to be chased away by the hand of God.

Chap. 3.
THen Joshua rose very early, and they removed from Shittim, and came to
Jordan, he, and all the children of Israel, and lodged there, before they went
over.

2 And after three days the officers went throughout the host,

3 And commanded the people, saying, When ye see the Arc of the covenant of
the Lord your God, and the Priests of the Levites bearing it, ye shall depart
from your place, and go after it.

4 Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by
measure: ye shall not come near unto it, that ye may know the way, by the
which ye shall go: for ye have not gone this way in times past.

5 (Now Joshua had said unto the people, Sanctify your selves: for to morrow
the Lord will do wonders among you.)

6 Also Joshua spoke unto the Priests, saying, Take up the Arc of the
covenant, and go over before the people: so they took up the Arc of the
covenant, and went before the people.

7 Then the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in
the sight of all Israel, which shall know, that as I was with Moses, so will I
be with thee.

8 Thou shall therefore command the Priests that bear the Arc of the
covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brinke of the waters of Jordan, ye
shall stand still in Jordan.

9 Then Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the
words of the Lord your God.

10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know, that the living God is among you,
and that he will certainly cast out before you the Chanaanites, and the
Hittites, and the Hiuites, and the Perizzites, and the Gergashites, and the
Amorites, and the Iebusites.

11 Behold, the Arc of the covenant of the Lord of all the world passes
before you into Jordan.

12 Now therefore take from among you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel,
out of every tribe a man.

13 And as soon as the soles of the feet of the Priests (that bear the Ark of the Lord God, the Lord of all the world) shall stay in the waters of
Jordan, the waters of Jordan shall be cut off: for the waters that come from
above, shall stand still upon an heap.

1 Iosue arose, etc.) It must be remembered that I showed before, that Iosue did
not remove the camp, the next day after the return of the spies, but after he
had heard their report, he gave commandment by his lieftenantes, that they
should make all things ready for their remove, for that three days after,
they should pass over Iordane. Therefore, that he arose early in the morning,
must not be referred unto their return, but unto the publishing of the edicte.
For when three days were finished, the captains were sent again through the
camp, to declare unto the people, how they should pass over the river.
Although these things be cold in several places, yet it is an easy matter,
to set forth the order of the history. But before it was declared what
passage the people should have, the multitude lying by the rivers side, had
occasion to move sedition.. For Iordane indeed might be passed over at
certain foords or shallow places, but that at that time, the waters so swelled
and ouerflowed the banks, that all passage was denied, even to men that were
without all impediments and carriage. So that there was no hope that their
wives, and young children, with their cattle, and the rest of their stuff,
might be transported unto the further shore. But that in a case so doubtful,
and full of desperation, they wait quietly for the end, when they could not
conceive what should be the manner of it: by this obedience of faith it
appears, how unlike they were to their fathers, which for every small
occasion, were stirred up unto rebellion against God and Moses. Which chance
happened not without the singular work of Gods spirit in them.

2 After the end of three days, etc.) Namely, since the remove was proclaimed.
For they stayed not at the shore longer than one night. But because the time
of three days was appointed for their passage, and they were deceived of that
hope: now Iosue exhorts them, to forget all lettes and difficulties, and to
consider nothing but the power of God. For although the fame of the miracle be
not yet described and set forth: yet when the Arc of the covenant is brought
forth as a standard to guide their journey, it was easy to gather, that God
prepared to do some great and unaccustomed work. But while they are held in
suspense, their faith is once again proved with an earnest trial: for it was
a token of great virtue, simply to obey his commandment, and so to follow
the Arc, when they were not yet plainly informed what the success should be.
But this is the chief property of faith, not to enquire curiously what God
will do, nor to dispute subtily, how that may be brought to pass which he
pronounces: but to cast all our cares, wherewith we are troubled, upon his
providence: and because his power is infinite, that we may rest upon it, to
lift up our senses above the world, and to embrace by faith that which we
cannot conceive by reason.

4 Yet a space, etc.) Seeing the inferior Levites, whose charge Number. 4. 15.
was to carry the Arc, were straightly forbidden to touch it, or to see it
uncovered, no marvel though the common people were kept a long distance from
it. The dignity of the Arc is therefore set forth and commended, while the
people are commanded to keep themselves far from it, and so to testify in
what reverence they have it. And we know what happened to Uzia, when he saw it
ready to be cast off by the winching kine, and of unadvised zeal laid his 2.
Sam. 6
hand under it, to hold it. For although God do familiarly call us unto him,
yet trust breeds no security and rash boldness, but rather is always
joined with fear. After this sort the Arc of the covenant, was a sweet and
pleasant pledge of the grace of God: but so, that the majesty thereof was also
terrible, to bring down the pride of the flesh. Now this humbleness and
modesty was also profitable for the exercise of their faith, least they
should restrain the grace of God within to narrow bounds, but that
notwithstanding they were separated far from the Arc, yet they might be
assured that the power of God was near them. In the end of the verse it is
showed, how necessary it was for them to be guided by God, in an unknown way:
that fear and carfulness might keep them under the protection of the Arc.

5 Iosue said, etc.) It was meet that the singular and extraordinary power
of God should be set forth, for to help them, least slacknesse through
doubtfulnesse might cause any stay: but that the Israelites might depend
altogether upon the purpose of God. Iosue does not yet express what kind of
miracle God would work: except we will read in one context that which
follows a little after. And this is the right trial of faith, so to rest upon
the providence of God, that we do not inquire over carefully of the manner of
his doing, or what he means to do. Because the Uerbe KADASH does sometimes
signify to prepare, sometimes to sanctify, and both the senses do well agree
with the place, I thought good to leave it indifferent to the readers, whether
they will take. For both faith does prepare us to receive the power of God, and
also when GOD did show himself more nearly unto them, they used to
consecrate themselves after a solemn manner. As we see at the proclaming of
the law, that Moses, by Gods commandment, did sanctify Exodus 19. 14.
the people. But whereas some do expound it, that the people for this cause
only were commanded to purge them selves from corruptions, that nothing might
hinder their passage over Iordane, it seems to be to straight an exposition.

6 Spoke unto the Priests, etc.) It is like the Priests were admonished for
what purpose God would have the Arc to go before, that they might be the more
ready to execute the commandment: because all the people is soon after
certified of the cutting a sunder of the waters. For when the people before
were commanded by their captains, to follow the Arc of covenant, the
Priests were not ignorant what office they should execute. For it was
expressly pronounced, that they should be as it were guides or standards.
But when they were all in readiness, Iosue does openly rehearse the answer
of God which he had received. For it was not meet, that the grace of God
should have been more clearly declared to the people than to them. But it
follows immediately, that the people were made privy of the miracle.
Wherefore I conclude, that after God had held the Priests in suspense a
certain time, with the whole multitude, when he had tried their obedience, he
did openly declare unto them what he would do. First of all therefore it is
declared, that Iosue commanded the Priests to carry the Arc before the
people: and afterward, least any man should think that he attempted the
matter rashly, or upon his own head, he declares the promise, whereby he was
instructed so to command them. And although it be not there expressly set
down, that the course of Iordane should be stayed: yet we may gather by the
speech which Iosue used in the people, that God spoke more at large, and did
in order expressly declare, what he was purposed to do. For Iosue reports
nothing, but that which he understood and heard out of the mouth of God
himself. Yea, before he utters the matter, he commands them to hear the
words of God, and so by that preface he declares, that God was the author of
all that he would say.

10 Hereby you shall know, etc.) He extends the force of the miracle further
than to their entrance into the land, and not without good cause: For that they
should only have a way opened into their enemies land, out of which they could
have no escape, had been nothing else but to deliver them up unto death and
destruction. For being taken in the streighte of an unknown land, they might
easily have been cut in pieces, or else have perished through famine and want
of all things. Wherefore Iosue tells them before hand, that when God should
drive back the river, it should be all one, as if he stretched forth his hand
to chase away all the inhabitants of the land: and that token of his power,
which he showed in the passage of Iordane, should be a certain prophecy of
the victory that they should obtein^ against all those nations. Hereby shall
you know (says he) that God will be at hand to help you. For what purpose:
Not only that you should have footing in the land of Chanaa^, but that you may
enjoy the same as your own. For truly when mention is made of chasing away the
nations, a quiet and undisturbed possession is noted. Therefore, as by dividing
of the river, God clearly showed, that his power was with the Israelites: so
the people likewise ought to conceive hope of continual aid, as if they had
alredie seen their enemies vanquished and discomfited. For God uses not to
forsake the work of his hands which he has taken upon him, maimed and
imperfect. God divided Psalm. 136.
the waters of Jordan, to make a dry passage to bring his people into the
promised inheritance. Therefore, what had been greater frowardness, than that
they should have stayed in that one transitory act, and not to have had sure
trust in him always afterward, until they had obtained full and quiet
possession of the land. Wherefore, by this example let us learn, wisely to
join together, such benefits of God, as perteine to the sum of our
salvation: that happy beginnings, may nourish in us an hope of like ending.
And whereas Iosue does say, that the people should know by that miracle that
God was present: he does covertly reprove their distrust: because the only
promise of God ought to have been sufficient to their full assurance upon which
alone if our faith be not grounded, we can not choose but waver and stagger
often times. But notwithstanding that our faith ought properly to rest in the
only truth of God: yet that lets not, but trial by experience as a second
prop of our weakness, and a profitable aid for confirmation, may help to
stay the same. For that which God has promised by his word, he seals and
confirms by the deed it self: and look how many documents of his grace and
power he sets forth unto us in acts, he would have them to be so many
trialles of his word, and aids to take away all doubtfulness.

11 Behold the Arc, etc.) First he says the Arc shall go before them: then
he declares for what end: namely, that Iordane might give place, as
astonished, at the presence and sight of God, as it is said in the Psalm. As
for that story which is interlaced of the twelve Psalm. 114.
men, etc. is broken off, because he does but only touch breefly those
matters, which afterward he sets out plainly and more at large. Now let us
observe no more but this, that when the Ark went before, God showed his power
in governing the people. And by this means was commended, that religious
worship which was according to the law, when the Israelites did see, that it
was no vain thing, which God committed to them, to be the token of his
presence. For the river Iordane was none otherwise constreined unto obedience,
than if it had seen the majesty of God. And yet withal let us remember, that
God was not moved, in any other respect, to set forth his grace in the Arc,
but because he had placed therein the tables of his covenant. And because the
matter was hard to be credited, Iosue called back the minds of the people, to
consider the power of God, which overcomes all difficulties. For it is no
small title. (The Lord of all the earth) which is here given to God: but it
aduaunceth his authority over all the elements of the world, that the
Israelites should not doubt, seeing that seas and floods are under his
dominion, but that the waters, though of their own nature they be running, yet
by his commandment should be made to stand immovable.

14 Then when the people were departed from their tents, to go over Jordan,
the Priests bearing the Arc of the covenant, went before the people.

15 And as they that bare the Arc came unto Jordan, and the feet of the
Priests that bare the Arc were dipped in the brinke of the water, (for Jordan
uses to fill all his banks all the time of harvest.)

16 Then the waters that came down from above, stayed, and rose up on an
heap, and departed far from the city of Adan, that was beside Zaretan: but
the waters that came down toward the Sea of the wilderness, even the salt
Sea, failed, and were cut off: so the people went right over against Jericho.

17 But the Priests that bare the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, stood dry
within Jordan ready prepared, and all the Israelites went over dry, until all
the people were gone clean over through Jordan.

15 After they came, etc.) The virtue of the Priests was worthy of no small
commendation, which went forward boldly into the channel, even into the water
it self, where manifest danger of drowning seemed to be. For after they had
once entered the water with their feet, what might they look for, but soon
after to fall into the deep goulfe, in which they should be overwhelmed*
Therefore, whereas they were not made afraid, when they came to the river it
self, but that they kept on their way unto the place that was appointed them:
it was a sign of singular good courage, which they had conceived of faith.
This was moreover a peculiar temptation, that the river Iordane had then
ouerflowed his banks, as he uses yearly to do, in the beginning of Summer.
For the plain being covered with water, the tracte of the banks could not be
known, nor any shallowe be found: and the waters being spread all abroad,
increased fear and carfulness. And with these lettes would God have his
people, and especially the priests to strive, that the victory of their faith
and constancy might be the more excellent: and besides that, by these
difficulties he extolleth the glory of the miracle, when those waters gave
place at his commandment, and stood as it were cloddered together on an
heap, which had before ouerflowed their banks. First therefore he sets
forth the order of the miracle, to take away all doubt, least profane and
vnreligious men should seek out other causes to ouerwhelme the grace of God.
It may come to pass in deed naturally, that for a short time the stream of
waters may be stayed: and some dry plotte may appear, or else the course of a
river may be changed and turn it self an other way: But that waters should
stand still gathered together on an heap, it could never come to pass
naturally or by chance. After this sort it is said, that the waters which
before flowed out of an higher ground, so that by their only fall they sought
a continual course, did now stand still, and not run. And there is no dout,
but this wonderful sight was terrible to behold: that the Israelites might
the rather acknowledge, that they were saved in the midst of death. For what
other thing seemed that great heap of waters, but even as a grave to
ouerwhelme the whole multitude, if the waters had once run down according to
their nature? If they had walked upon the waters, faith should have been in
steed of a bridge unto them. But now, while the mountains of waters hang over
their heads, it is all one, as if they had found a plain and easy way under
waters. The place is described between two cities, that the memory thereof
might never be forgotten, like as also God would have stones to be set up
there, for a perpetual monument, that so wonderful a benefit might be
celebrated and praised of all ages unto the worlds end.

Chap. 4.
AND when all the people were wholly gone over Jordan, (after the Lord had
spoken unto Joshua, saying,

2 Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,

3 And command you them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan,
out of the place where the Priests stood in a readiness, twelve stones,
which ye shall take away with you, and leave them in the lodging, where you
shall lodge this night.)

4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of
Israel, out of every tribe a man,

5 And Joshua said unto them, Go over before the Ark of the Lord your God,
even through the midst of Jordan, and take up every man of you a stone upon
his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel,

6 That this may be a sign among you, that when your children shall ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean you by these stones?

7 Then ye may aunsweare them, that the waters of Jordan were cut off before
the Arc of the covenant of the Lord: for when it passed through Jordan, the
waters of Jordan were cut off. Therefore these stones are a memorial unto the
children of Israel for ever.

8 Then the children of Israel did even so, as Joshua had commanded, and took
up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the Lord had said unto
Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and
carried them away with them unto the lodging, and laid them down there.

9 And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where
the feet of the Priests, which bare the Arc of the covenant, stood, and
there have they continued unto this day.

1 And it came to pass after, etc.) That which he had breefely and darkely
touched before concerning the twelve men, now he sets it forth more at
large and plainly. He had said, that they were chosen out of every tribe: but
breaking off that speech, he declared not for what end they were chosen. Now
he says, that by the commandment of Iosue, they took up twelve stones, and
set them up in Gilgal, that they might be a notable monument unto the
posterity. And for so much as he rehearses what was done after the people were
passed over, that which is interlaced, must be translated by the
Preterpluperfectense. As for the Conjunction copulative, it is easy to
consider, that it may be taken for a Causall or Illatiue. The sum is thus
much, that before the Priests removed one foot cut of the midst of the
river, where they stood, that the stones were taken from their feet, and
placed in Gilgal, that they might be perpetual witnesses of the miracle: and
so Iosue did faithfully perform that he was commanded by God. Wherefore
Iosue calls the men, whom he had chosen out before, but not without the
commandment of God, that the testimony might be of greater authority. For
if Iosue had set up such a tropheie, of his own mind, his godliness in
deed might well have been praised: but the instruction perhaps would have been little set by, as erected only by the will of man. But now, when God
himself does set up a monument, it is by no means tolerable to pass it
over negligently. Wherefore it was a monument worthy to be diligently
considered, when he brings in their children demanding of them, What these
stones meaned?

7 Then you may answer, etc. Although the stones speak not of them selves,
yet the monument of them gives the parents matter of speech, to testify unto
their children what the benefit of God was. And in this place are the elder
sort charged to set forward the study of godliness, and to take pains in the
instruction of their children. For God would have this doctrine to be
delivered, as it were from hand to hand, through out all ages: that they which
were not yet borne yet being instructed by there parents, might be witnesses
of that which they had had heard: although they saw not the thing with their
own eyes. And acording to the number of the tribes, the stones were set up,
that every tribe by their own token might be stirred up to thankfulness. In
deed the two tribes and the half, whose inheritance was allotted to them, on
the other side of Jordan, had no need of that passage for their own parts.
But because the land of Chanaan was possessed to the common benefit of the
whole stock of Abraham, it was not meet that some of them should have been
severed from the rest, seeing there was a common cause perteining to them all.
And although hitherto there is no mention made but of these twelve men, yet by
this clause it appears, that the commandment was given to all the people,
because it is said, that the children of Israel were obedient unto the words
of Iosue. It is like also, that they were chosen by voices, which should carry
these stones in the name of all the rest.

9 Twelve stones also, etc.) It seems there was no use of these stones, which
should lie under the water: and therefore it was a vain thing, to lay stones to
be overwhelmed in the deepest place. For by the other that were set up in
Gilgal, because they were in open sight, occasion was given to enquire what was
the cause of their erection. But those that lay in the botome of the river
hidden from the sight of men, were nothing available to stir up their
minds. I confess, it had been an unprofitable monument, if it had been
altogether buried in silence: but when they rehearsed one to another, that they
had leafce in the chanel of the river, a token of their passage, it was
availeable to the confirmation of their faith, to hear of that which they saw
not. The Arc of the covenant was enclosed in the sanctuary, and covered with
a veil that was over it, and yet that glory which was hidden, was not
unprofitable, when they learned out of the law, that the covenant of God was
there laid up: It may be also, that when the waters of the river were fallen,
the heap of stones might be seen at some times. But that which I said
before, is more like to be true, that although Iosue hid stones in the botome
of the river, yet he made thereof a profitable testimony to the people, which
afterward might be set forth in the speech and talk of all men.

10 So the Priests, which bare the Arc, sto^^ in the midst of Jordan,
until every thing was finished that the Lord had commanded Joshua to say
unto the people, according to all that Moses charged Joshua: then the people
hasted and went over.

11 When all the people were clean passed over, the Ark of the Lord went
over also, and the Priests before the people.

12 And the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, went over before the children of Israel armed, as Moses had charged
them.

13 Even forty thousand prepared for war, went before the Lord unto
battle, into the plain of Jericho.

14 That day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they
feared him, as they feared Moses all the days of his life.

15 And the Lord spoke unto Joshua, saying,

16 Command the Priests that bear the Arc of the Testimony, to come up out
of Jordan.

17 Joshua therefore commanded the Priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan.

18 And when the Priests that bare the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, were
come up out of the midst of Jordan, and as soon as the soles of the Priests
feet were set on the dry land, the waters of Jordan returned unto their place,
and flowed over all the banks thereof, as they did before.

10 The Priests, etc.) If we be commanded to stay, when other men make have,
we know how soon we shall be weary of staying: because our case seems to
be worse than other men's. Wherefore the patience of the Priests is worthily
commended, that while all the people came over speedily unto the further
shore, they alone stood quietly in their standing. They might have doubted,
least the whole stream of the waters, which was above their heads, should
soudeinly fall down and swallowe them up. Wherefore they did no less show
their godliness in standing there still, than they did before, when they were
so bold as to march even into the river. So at the first appeared their redines,
then followed their constancy, which did openly declare, that they were
obedient to God, not only upon a soudden brunt, but of a littely faith. For
this their constancy which is commended, could not proceed, but of a lively
root. It was a point of modesty, that they attempted nothing unadvisedly, but
al their doing was framed according to the word of God, as a most certain
rule. And although it is like, that Iosue was instructed by a new oracle, what
was needful to be done, yet it is said, that he followed that, which was
commanded by Moses. Which I do so interpret, that Moses had charged him
earnestly, that he should depend and hang altogether upon the mouth of God: and
that he was thoroughly obedient, and therefore did always observe that which
pleased God. Finally, the commandment of Moses, which is mentioned, was
general: and God, as the case required, did specially admonish Iosue.

12 Also the children of Ruben, etc.) He makes special mention of the passage
of these two tribes and half: because they went not on this warfare for their
own private cause: but that they might help their brethren to the possession
of the land of Chanaan: by whose manhood they had obtained their portions on
the other side of Jordan. This condition Moses had charged them withal, and
they had bound them selves by an oath, that they would accompany the rest of
the people, until they had all obtained a quiet resting place to inhabit. The
same promise they renewed (as we saw in the first Chapter) when the camp
should remove. But of that which is here told, we gather, that only a part of
them was chosen out of the rest. For here are mustered but only forty
thousand men, namely, the third part, or there about, of them that were
mustered not long before. But seeing in all places, they are said to have
fulfilled their promise, it is like that the purpose of Moses was not, that all
they which were mustered, should leave their wives and children, and go a
warfare into the land of Chanaan, until it were thoroughly subdued. And
surely, it had been an hard matter, and a cruel point, to have forsaken the
weak multitude, without leaving some to defend them, being compassed about
with many hateful nations. Neither would the remnants of their enemies, with
the aid of the nations adjoining, have omitted so great an occasion, but they
would surely have revenged them selves in killing the women and children.
Wherefore it was necessary, that a sufficient garrison was leaft in the
country, not yet quietly possessed, to keep out the invasions of their
enemies. Neither was Moses so extreme, but that he would have regard of those
poor wretches. Moreover, such was his wisdom and equity, that he would
never have spoiled, of all defense, that contrie, which he had so lately
conquered with force of arms. Hereto we may join this reason, that the
concourse of such a multitude, would rather have been an hinderance than an aid
in conquering the land of Chanaan. Moses was therefore content with this
indifferent order, that the Ru^enites and Gadites, while their brethren were
occupied in warfare, should not sit all idle at home, and eat up their
profits, while their brethren had need of their aid, whom they were bound to
thank, for that inheritance which they had obtained alredie. And herein was
tried the honesty if these forty thousand men, that while the rest of their
tribes were at rest, they refuse not the burden, the troubles, nor the
dangers of warrefare. They might have laid for themselves, that they had as
good cause to be discharged of the wars as the rest. Therefore, that being
chosen out, they march forward cheerfully, whither they were commanded, and
envy not the freedom and quiet of their brethren, it appears that they came
forth willingly, and with a good courage. Although there is no doubt, but the
chief flower of their soldiers being chosen out, all occasion of quarelling
and striving was utterly cut off. For there was no reason to contend, but that
old men, and weak persons, were to be spared: except a man had rather guess,
that this army was appointed, not by man's judgment, but by lottes. Howbeit, I
think rather, that as every one was most valiant and best able to endure
trauelles, so they offered themselves.

14 That day, etc.) This was not the chief end of the miracle, that Iosue
might increase in power and authority: but when it was much for the common
profit, that the government of Iosue should be established, that is set
down, as an increase of the goodness of God, whereby he was adorned, as it
were with holy robes, which might cause great reverence of him amongst the
people, least any man should be so bold to despise him. For except the common
multitude be governed by an head, it falls to ruin even of it self.
Wherefore, God minding to provide for the safety of the people, beautified
Iosue with this excellent mark, which might assure them of his calling. Out of
this place we must learn, that such men are commended unto us of God, by whose
hand he does notably show forth his power, that they might obtain due
honor and reverence amongst us. But if an many will obiecte, That the people
are said to have feared Iosue, even as they feared Moses: it is confuted by so
many troubles and seditions, which they raised against him, not only
frowardly, but also furiously. The answer is easy, that the whole time is
not comprehended, since they came out of Egypt: but only that time is noted,
in which, after they were subdued and camed with punishments, they began
obediently to reverence Moses. For now his quiet government is described,
after they had shaken off their old frowardenesse: but especially, when their
seditious fathers were dead, a better issue succeeded in their place. And
therefore we read not, that it was any trouble to rule and govern them. That
which I have already expounded, I do now touch breefly. For at the
beginning, when Iosue exhorted them to obedience, they said, They would be
obedient, even as they were before to Moses.

16 Command the Priests, etc.) Now it is more plainly expressed, with how
quiet and obedient minds the Priests submitted them selves to the pleasure of
God: for they moved not a foot until Iosue commanded them to retire. And as
it was singular virtue in them to be so tractable and obedient: so the fatherly
carfulness of God shows forth it self in this, that he vouchsafed to
direct and guide almost every step they removed, with his own voice, least
any doubtfulnesse should make them slacker in their office. Then follows a
more notable confirmation of the miracle, that as soon as they were come up to
the bank, the river Iordane began to flow, as it was wont to do. For
except it had returned unto the old nature thereof, and that soudeinly: many
would have imagined some secret cause of that change, but yet such as came
by chance. But when God does set forth his power and grace, at such narrow
pinches and moments of time, all doubtfulnesse is taken away. So soon as the
Priests feet were wette with the water, Iordane went backewarde: now at
their departure he recouereth his free course, and that at the same instant,
that they were come up upon the bank. For the dry land is here taken for
that part, which was not covered with the ouerflowing. So the river, although
he could not speak, yet was he an excellent crier, to testify with a most
loud voice, that Heaven and Earth are subject to the God of Israel.

19 So the people came up out of Jordan the tenth day of the first month, and
pitched in Gilgal, in the East side of Jericho.

20 Also the twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitche
in Gilgal.

21 And he spoke unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall
ask their fathers in time to come, and say, What mean these stones?

22 Then ye shall show your children, and say, Israel came over this Jordan on
dry land:

23 For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan before you, until ye
were gone over, as the Lord your God did the red Sea, which he dried up before
us, till we were gone over.

24 That all the people of the world may know, that the hand of the Lord is
mighty, that ye might fear the Lord your God continually.

19 The people, etc.) For what cause the day is noted, in which they entered
into the land, and pitched their tents therein, we shall see in the next
Chapter. The name of the first station is called Gilgal, by a figure of
prevention: because it was afterward so called up Iosue, after their new
circumcision: and the interpretation of that name, in due place, shall be
considered. But here is a special treatise of the monument of the twelve
stones: whereof, although mention were made before, yet now the solemn
dedication thereof is rehearsed, namely, that Iosue did not only make that
heap of stones, but also commended the use thereof unto the people, that the
famous memory of the grace of God might flourish from the fathers to the
children. And whereas he brings in their sons asking them, What these
stones did mean: We may gather, that they were set up in such order, as moved
the sense of them that beheld them. For if they had been cast up, on an heap,
without any order, it would never have come into their posterities mind, to
enquire of their signification. Therefore, there was some notable order in the
placing of them, which would not suffer the beholders to make none account of
it. But because the covenant of God, whereby he had adopted the stock of
Abraham, was established to have continuance for a thousand generations,
because of the unity of the body, that benefit which God had performed to
their fathers, which were dead, is made common to their children which should
be borne many years afterward. And this conjunction ought greatly to have
moved their minds: for by this means, their posterity was admonished, that
whatsoever was given in times past unto their auncesters, did also appe^^^ine
unto them. Or else the answer should have been little regarded, if the grace
of God had been restrained unto one day. But when their childrens children do
hear, that the river Jordan was dried up before them, many hundred years ere
they were borne, they acknowledge themselves to be that people, toward whom
that merueslous favor of God was showed. The same reason it is of the drying
up of the red sea, although the matter was not so ancient. Surely there were
but two then alive, that is, Caleb and Iosue, which came out of Egypt: yet he
speaks thereof to the whole people, as though they had all seen the miracle
with their eyes. God dried up the red sea before our face. Namely, for because
in favor of the perpetual adoption, which descended from the fathers to the
children, that benefit was granted. And it was expedient, that the memory of
the passage through the red sea, should be continued, not only that the
similitude of the miracle might cause credit: but also that by hearing the
history of Jordan, that former miracle might be renewed withal, although no
visible token thereof remained before their eyes.

24 That all people may know, etc.) He declares that God did show that token
of his power, not only that it should be published among his own people, but
that the fame thereof might be spread far and wide, among the nations. For
although God would have his praise remain in Sion: yet would he also that his
works in some part should be known to the strangers, that they might be
constrained to confess, that he is the true God* and that him, whom they had
willingly despised, they might fear against their wills: as it is said in the
song of Moses, Our enemies are judges. For he signifies, Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
that whether the vnbeeleuers will or nill, yet this confession is wrested from
them, by the knowledge of the works of God. But because it profited them
nothing, to know how great the power of God is, Iosue discerns them from the
Israelites, unto whom he ascribes a peculiar knowledge, namely, such as
breeds an earnest fear of God: That the nations may know, says he: and
thou may fear God. Therefore, while the unfaithful do ouerwhelme the light
in their darkness, let us learn to profit in the fear of God, by the
consideration of his works. He adds, All thy days, because the grace,
whereof he now speaks, was enlarged into many ages.

Chap. 5.
NOw when all the Kings of the Amorites, which were beyond Jordan Westward, and
all the Kings of the Canaanites, which were by the Sea, heard that the Lord had
dried up the waters of Jordan before the children of Israel until they were
gone over, their heart fainted: and there was no courage in them any more
because of the children of Israel.

2 That same time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and
return, and circumcise the sons of Israel the second time.

3 Then Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the sons of Israel in
the hill of the fores kinnes.

4 And this is the cause why Joshua circumcised all the people, even the males
that came out of Egypt, because all the men of war were dead in the
wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.

5 For all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people that
were borne in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt, were not
circumcised.

6 For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till
all the people of the men of war that came out of Egypt were consumed,
because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: unto whom the Lord swear, that
he would not show them the land, which the Lord had sworn unto their
fathers, that he would give us, even a land that flows with milk and honey.

7 So their sons, whom he raised up in their stead, Joshua circumcised, for
they were uncircumcised, because they circumcised them not by the way.

8 And when they had made an end of circumcising all the people, they abode in
the places in the camp til they were whole.

9 After, the Lord said unto Joshua, This day I have taken away the shame of
Egypt from you: wherefore he called the name of that place Gilgal, unto this
day.

1 When they heard, etc.) The acknowledging of the fearful power of God, did
so much prevail with them, that they were astonished through fear, and
fainted: but it prevailed not to bend their minds to seek the remedy of
their trouble. Their heart was melted, in that as men destitute of counsel and
force, they stirred not them selves, but as touching obstinacy, the same
hardness did bind them still. And we have alredie seen else where, that the
unfaithful have been all amazed for fear, and yet ceased not to wrestle
against GOD: and so have fallen, that still with their fierceness they have
cast stones against heaven. Therefore that fear, which should have provoked
them to beware, did nothing else but drive them headlong upon their own
destruction. Thus were they terrified by God in favor of his people, that they
might more easily obtain the victory: and that the Israelites might have
better courage, when they saw that they had to do with such enemies, as were
already discomfited and half dead. And so did God favor their weakness, that
he removed all lettes and hindrances, to make the way plain for them: other
wise they were of them selves to fearful and slow. The sum is this
therefore, that their enemies were already overthrown, because the fame of
the miracle, had stricken such a fear into them.

2 That time, etc.) It seems to be most unreasonable and monstrous, that
circumcision was so long time omitted: because they being admonished by daily
instructions, should have been more diligent in practicing all such exercises
of godliness. Circumcision was a seal of their adoption, through which they
obtained deliverance. And surely while they remained in their greatest misery,
and morned under the tyranny, yet they did always circumcise their children.
And we know how sharply God threateneth, that he will revenge it, if any
omitted the eight day. So that if they had neglected the keeping of that
sacrament in Egypt, their flacknes had been more excusable, for then it might
have seemed unto them, that the covenant of God was grown out of use. But now,
when the truth of God shines a fresh upon them, to establish his covenant,
what excuse can they have, if they do not for their parts also testify, that
they are the people of God? That defense which the interpreters do commonly
allege, is altogether frivolous. I confess they were daily in a redines to
remove, and that they were always uncertain, when they should depart.
Nevertheless I say, we do not well gather hereof, that they had never a day
free for that purpose: because it should have been a cruel thing to circumcise
the young infantes, when they should presently after remove with the whole
camp. For nothing should have been of so great force with them, that for it,
they should contemn that which was said to Abraham: The soul that is not
circumcised, shall be cut off from his people. And if there had Genesis 17. 14.
been any danger of death, the best and only remedy had been, to have rested
upon the fatherly providence of God, which doubtless would not have suffered,
that his commandment should be cause of destruction to the infantes. Finally,
omitting of the sacrament in respect of peril, could grow of nothing else, but
of distrust. For if their infantes should have been cast into present danger,
yet for all that, they should have been obedient to God: because the sealing up
of the covenant, by which they were received into the Church, was more precious
tha^ an hundred lives. Neither would Moses have suffered so great negligence,
if he had not been induced by an other reason. Wherefore* as in a doubtful
matter, I conjecture, that they gave not over circumcision from the first day
of their departure out of Egypt: but only since that time, that for their
stubbernesse they were drawn backward. And by this reason is expressed, both
their falling away, and their punishment. For it is not said, that they were
circumcised again, for that in their wandering through the wilderness it
behooved them oftentimes to change their place: but because forty years must
be expired, till those wicked backsliders were consumed, which wilfully
rejected the promised inheritance: Therefore this cause must be well marked,
that the children of Israel wandered over the wilderness, until all that
generation was abolished, which refused to follow God: Whereupon, in my
judgment, we may gather, that in token of Gods curse, and their reiection, the
use of circumcision ceased all that time. It is true that this punishment was
laid upon the innocent children: but yet it was profitable that their parents
should be punished in their person: as if God from that time forward, had
forsaken them. Therefore, when they saw, that their children differed nothing
from the profane and unholy strangers, they might easily see thereby, what
they them selves had deserved. Yet hereof seems to grow an absurdity:
First, that when they were condemned, soon after they were taken to favor:
And secondly, because hope of pardon was also left for them: And especially,
because they were not deprived of other sacraments, of which they might not be
partakers, if they had not been separated from the profane nations. I confess
in deed, that God, in forsaking of them, does also testify that he will be
merciful to their children: but yet it was a profitable correction for them,
to see the sign of their reiection in their children, until they were all
brought to naught. For God withdrew this pledge of his grace but for a time,
and kept it as it were laid up with himself, until they were all dead.
Wherefore this punishment was not laid properly upon their children, which were
borne afterward, but the suspension from it, was of like force, as if God
should have openly declared, that he deferred their circumcision, least it
should be profaned and unhallowed, until the due time came, in which it
should be renewed. If any man will object, That it was a great absurdity, that
such as were uncircumcised should hold the Passover: I confess it was so,
according to the common usage. For none were admitted unto the Passover, and
other sacrifices, but such as were consecrated unto the worship of God. Like as
at this day, the mystery of the supper, is not common to other then such as
are received into the Church by Baptism. But it was free for God to change
the ordinary use for a time, and to make those men partakers of other holy
things, from whom he had taken circumcision away for a season. So in one part
the people were excommunicated: and yet relieved with sufficient helps, that
they might not despair. As if a father being displesed with his son should
hold up his fist, as though he would drive him away far from him, and yet
with the other hand stay him at home: and should make him afraid with
threatenings and stripes, and yet would not suffer him to depart away from
him. This seems unto me to be the chief reason, why God spoiling the people
of the chief pledge of their adoption, yet would not have them be destitute
of other helps. If any man will object, That it is expressly said, that none
were circumcised in the journey since their departure out of Egypt: I answer,
that for bre^ities sa^e, all things are not exactly set down: yet it may be
gathered by the text that none other were uncircumcised, but such as were
borne after the rebellion and sedition. For it is said, that Iosue circumcised
their sons, whom God had set up in their place. Whereby it appears, that
the people were then as it were newly created, which did succeed those
stubborn backesliders. But this was an hard and heavy trial, that GOD
would not have the people to be circumcised, before they were besieged on
every side by their enemies. It seems, that it had been a more convenient
and safer way, to have done it before they came over Jordan, in the land of
Basan, where the country was quiet, and all the inhabitants either slain or
chased away. But God wayteth until they were enclosed in the midst of their
enemies, and so laid open to their lust and violence: as though he did of
purpose offer them to death. For it was necessary, that they all being
infeebled with their wound, should lie sore for a time: so that they might
easily have been slain. For if the two sons of Jacob, were able boldly to
break into the city of Sichem, and slay all the Citizens, and to sack it:
how much more easy a matter had it ben, for all the nations adjoining, to set
upon the Genesis 34.
Israelites, being wounded in like manner, and to have slain them every
mothers child? Wherefore, as I said, this was a very sharp trial: and
therefore their ready obedience is worthy of greater praise. Although the
place it self seems to be chosen out by GOD of purpose, that they might be
more willing to obey. If the same thing had been commanded on the other side
of Iordane, it was to be feared, least they would have been discouraged, and
by occasion of this stay, have again refused to enter into the land. Now,
when with so happy success, they are brought into the possession thereof, as
it were by the hand of God himself: this only let being taken away, they
conceive full hope and assurance, that they shall sone end their wars. Wherefore
it is no marvel if they obey more readily, then they would have done, if they
had not been so lately and so notably confirmed in their faith of Gods
promises. Also the very sight of the land ought to move them to obedience,
when they see, that they are again consecrated unto God, that their
uncircumcision should defile that holy land.

9 The Lord said to Iosue, etc.) Some expound the shame of Egypt, that the
uncircumcision made them like to the Egyptians, that is, unholy and
reprochefull: as if it had been said, that now they were received to be the
peculiar people of God, when they were anewe beautified, with this mark, that
they might differ from the unclean nations. Some take it in the Active
signification, that it was done, that they should no more be a scorn unto the
Egyptians, as though GOD had deceived them: which interpretation, as far
fetched, I can not allow of. Other think, that they should no more be charged
with this false reproach, as though they worshipped the Gods of the nations.
But I think rather, it is to be understood, that they are delivered from the
envy of that crime, wherewith they should otherwise have been charged. It was
an hateful matter, that they did cast off the yoke, and fall away from that
Ringes obedience, under whom they lived. And whereas they bosted, that God was
their deliverer from that unrighteous tyranny, it was an easy matter to cast
in their teeth, that they did falsely pretend the name of GOD to cloak their
treason. Wherefore they might have been taken for fugitives, except
circumcision had been received to wash away that reproach: by which sacrament,
the election of God was sealed in their flesh, before they came down into
Egypt. Wherefore, by renewing of the ancient covenant, it was made manifest,
that they were not rebels against a lawful government, nor yet departed of
their own rashness, but that liberty was restored to them by GOD, which had
long before received them into his protection. And of the taking away of this
reproach, the name was given to the place. For they which think, that the
foreskinne which was cut off, was called Gilgal, because it was like a round
circle, depart from the words, and follow a strange devise far fetched, and
nothing necessary, when the matter is clear of it self, that the place was
called revolution, because GOD did there deliver his people from the reproach,
wherewith they were unjustly charged. Whereas Josephus does expound it for
liberty, it is vain and ridiculous. Whereby it appears, that he was no less
ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, than he was in the knowledge of the Law.

10 So the children of Israel abode in Gilgal, and kept the feast of the
Passover the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plain of Jericho.

11 And they did eat of the corn of the land, on the morrow after the
Passover, unleavened bread, and parched corn in the same day.

12 And the MAN ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the corn of the
land, neither had the children of Israel MAN any more, but did eat of the
fruit of the land of Chanaan that year.

13 And when Joshua was by Jericho, he lift up his eyes, and looked: and
behold, there stood a man against him, having a sword drawn in his hand:
and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou on our side, or on our
adversaries?

14 And he said, Nay, but as a captain of the host of the Lord am I now come.
Then Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him,
What says my Lord unto his servant?

15 And the captain of the Lords host said unto Joshua, Lose thy shoe off thy
foot: for the place whereon thou stand, is holy: and Joshua did so.

Here is declared, that the Passover was celebrated upon the day appointed by
the law. Although there be some which think, that mention is here made of it,
as of a thing unwonted: and thereof they gather, that it was omitted forty
years, even as circumcision was leaft off. Namely, because it had been
inconvenient, that men uncircumcised, should celebrate that holy feast: and
secondly, for that from the beginning of the second year, we do not read,
that any Paschal lamb was slain. Howbeit, it is not like, that it was so
soudeinly cast off, which GOD so lately had ordained to be perpetual. For it
was said unto them: It is a night to be observed of the children of Israel in
all their generations. How is it then likely, Exodus 12. 42.
that it grew out of use within two years after, which should have been
observed in all ages? And what slacknesse had it been, in so short time to have
buried the remembrance of such a benefit so lately received? But it will be
replied, that want of circumcision kept a great part of the people from it,
least the mystery should be profaned. For it was likewise said: No
uncircumcised person shall come near it. I have answered already, that this
was an extraordinary Exo. 12. 48.
privilege, that the children of Israel were discharged of that law. For all
that while they used the sacrifices, and exercised them selves in the rest of
the ceremonies of the law: which had not been lawful, except GOD had remitted
somewhat of the precise form of the law. It is certain, that all unclean
persons were forbidden to enter into the court of GOD. Yet therein the children
of Israel, which were uncircumcised, offered sacrifices, which was as much, as
to kill the Passover. Therefore by a tolleration, it was permitted unto them,
which otherwise was not lawful, according to the rule of the law. And whereas
Moses makes mention of that second Passover, it was for another purpose,
namely, that he might covertly reprove the negligence and slacknes of the
people, which would not have observed a yearly sacrifice, after the end of the
first year, if they had not been put in mind of it. For although GOD had
commanded, that once a year, through all ages, they should renew the memory
of their redemption, before one year was ended, they had forgotten it, so that
they failed in doing their duty. For it was not in vain, that they were
urged with a new commandment: but because they were not ready enough of
their own accord. Wherefore, that place is so far off from proving, that
the use of the Passover was omitted, that a probable conjecture may be
gathered out of it, that it was observed yearly: for that before the year went
about, God prevented them, that they should be more diligent in time to come,
to take heed that they never departed from the commandment which was given
them.

12 And they did eat, etc.) It is not very certain, whether this were the
first time, that they did eat corn. For they had dwelt before in a country
not unoccupied, which was meetely fruitful. And doubtless, in the dominion of
those two Kings, there was store of victualles, which was sufficient for the
inhabitants. Neither is it like, that the children of Israel would suffer the
corn, which they found there, to be corrupted and rotten. And I doubt not,
but they did eat the flesh, which remained of the sacrifices. Therefore it may
be, that they abstained not altogether from bread made of wheat, and yet they
forsook not their accustomed victual. For that country, which was appointed
for the tenth part of the people, was not sufficient for the provision of so
great a multitude. There is no doubt, but that an equal proportion was
observed, when Moses had placed there, two tribes and an half. Wherefore, the
whole twelve tribes had not yet obtained sufficent victualles: especially,
seeing the country was spoiled with war, and the Israelites had not yet
given them selves to tillage, neither could they without danger depart from
the camp. Wherefore, it was necessary for them, to be fed still with Manna,
until they obtained greater store of victualles: which came to pass in the
land of Canaan: at what time they returned to the common food of men. But why
they deferred the matter until that day, it is not known: unless that after
their wounds were healed, it behooved them to bestow certain days in
gathering of provision. But the Law permitted them not to make bread
immediately, least they should break the Sabbath. For, although they kept
holy the rest, yet by the circumstance we may gather, that they made haste:
because their meal was ready before: seeing they could not well grind, and
bake, both in one day. Howsoever it is, GOD provided victual for them, so long
as there was any scarsitie. But whereas Manna failed soudeinly, and at that
very instant, it ought to have been an other testimony of the grace of GOD
toward them: for thereby it appeared, that Manna was a food ordained to serve
them, but for a season, which rained out of the clouds by the fatherly
providence of GOD. As for this provision, it is manifest, that it was of the
increase of the year before, and it were in vain, to make a question of it:
and they had been to hasty, if they had fallen upon that same present years
wheat, which was no^ yet ripe: and they should have been a whole month before
they had gathered together, so much as would suffice so great a multitude.
Wherefore, I see not why the interpreters trouble them selves about a matter so
clear and manifest.

13 When Joshua was, etc.) Here is rehearsed, a notable vision, by which Iosue
was encouraged. For although he did his office valiantly, yet was it profitable
for him to be pricked forward, when he ran well. And yet the Angel appeared
not for his cause only, but for the confirmation of all the people: yea, GOD
had a further respect, by manifest arguments to testify unto the posterity,
that his grace and favor, which was never sufficiently considered. For
although they boasted gloriously, that they were planted in the holy land, by
the hand of GOD: yet they could scarce be brought by so many miracles,
earnestly to acknowledge, that they were there as Gods tenantes. Therefore,
this vision ought to be profitable unto all ages, that the benefit of GOD
might not be called in doubt. Where it is said, that he lifted up his eyes, it
signifies the certeintie of the matter, least any man should think, that his
sight was deceived with a vanishing show. Now, this sight at the first, was
fearful to behold: for it is like, that Ioshue was then alone, whether he
departed from company, of purpose to pray, or to view the city. And the
latter cause seems unto me likely, that he viewed by him self, on what
part the city was best to be assaulted, least the rest should be discouraged
by the difficulty of the matter. Surely it appears, he had no company with
him, seeing he meets with the Angel alone: and there is no doubt, but that he
was ready to have fought, if he had met with his enemy. But he demands the
question of him, as of a man: because he knew him not to be an Angel, but by
his answer. And this his doubtful inquiry wins more credit to the
vision, while he was brought by little and little, from the sight of a man,
whom he speaks withal, unto the knowledge of an Angel. Although the words
sound, that he was not one of the common sort of Angels, but one of principal
excellency. For he calls him self, The Prince of the army of GOD: which
may be understood, as well of the chosen people, as of the Angels: but the
former opinion is better: because GOD brings forth no new matter: but
continues that, which we read to have been before performed to Moses. And we
know, that Moses him self preferred that benefit before all the rest, and
not unworthily: for they by GOD did openly and familiarly show his glory. And
therefore he is called indifferently, An Angel, and also adorned with the title
of the eternal GOD. Whereof Saint Paul is a sufficient witness, 1. Cor. 10.
4. Exodus 32. 34.
which does expressly affirm, that it was Christ him self. And Moses him
self acknowledges the presence of GOD, in the person of the Mediator: for
when GOD pronounces after the calfe was made, that he would be no more guide
unto the people, and promises he would give them one of his Angels, meaning
one of the common sort: Moses earnestly entreats him, that he would not so
do. For if the Mediator were taken away, he could not hope that GOD would be
merciful. Therefore, it was a singular pledge of Gods favor, that the Prince
and head of the Church, with whom Moses was acquainted, was present with him.
And surely, the adoption of GOD could not otherwise be steadfast and ratified,
but by the hand of the Mediator.

14 No: but the Captain, etc.) Although the denial does aptly agree to both
parts of his demand: because he was neither an Israelite, nor a Chanaanite: as
if he did precisely deny, that he was a mortal man: yet we may ap^ly
restrain it unto the second part, where Iosue demanded, Whether he were one
of their enemies? But because that is not greatly material: it is sufficient
to hold that, which is principal, that his coming was to be Captain of the
chosen people, whom he calls honorably, The army of God. That he makes
himself an other then GOD, there is noted therein the distinction of the
persons, but the unity of the substance is not thereby diu^ded. We see, that
in the books of Moses, the name of Jehovah is often ascribed to the Angel that
was their governor: who was doubtless the only begotten son of GOD. Namely,
for because he is both true GOD: and also, in the person of the Mediator by
dispensation, inferior to GOD. Now I do willingly receive that, which the
old Doctors teach, while Christ appeared in times past in the shape of a man,
it was a foretokening of that mystery, which afterward was exhibited, when
GOD was showed in the flesh. Yet must we beware, that we do not imagine, that
Christ did then take flesh upon him: seeing we read, that GOD sent not his
son in the flesh, before the fullness of time: and moreover, as he is man,
he must be the son of David. But as we read in Ezechiel, it was the only
similitude of a man. But whether it were a substantial Ezech. 1.
body, or only an outward shape, it were in vain to dispute curiously, and
to strive about it, hurtful. There remains one question, How the Prince of
the host of GOD, is said to come now, which never forsook the people that
was committed to his charge: and even of late, in the passage of Iordane, had
showed forth a wonderful token of his presence? Howbeit, after the usual
phrase of the Scripture, God is said to come to us, when we feel his help in
deed, which seems to be far off, except it be showed us plainly by
experience. It is therefore as much, as if he offered his aid to overcome
those battelles, that were at hand: and by his prese nce promised a happy
end of the wars, which he had in hand. By his worshipping of him, it cannot
be gathered certeinely, whether Iosue did thoroughly know Christ, that he did
give him divine honor. But when he demands, What my Lord Adonai would
command his servant: he ascribes unto him such authority, as agrees to
none, but unto God him self.

15 Loose thy shoe, etc.) For no other cause, but that the vision may be more
holy, this great Angel requires, that Iosue put off his shoes in sign of
reverence and fear. Moses declares that the Exodus 3. 5.
same commandment was given to him in the mount Sinai, for no other cause, but
that God did there show his glory. For one place is not holier than an other,
but by the especial appointment Genesis 26. 17.
of GOD. So Jacob cries out, that the place where he had a nearer knowledge of
God, was the house of God, a terrible place, and the gate of heaven. Therefore,
when this holy man is commanded to pluck off his shoes, God by this
ceremony, seals up the faith of his presence, and adds more way to the
vision: not that the bareness of his feet by it self, is accounted a part of
Gods worship: but because the weakness of men must be aided with such
healpes, the better to prepare and stir up them selves to reverence. And even
as God by his presence, does sanctify those places, in which he appears:
so I think, that the excellency of the land of Chanaan, is set forth with
this commendation, that God had chosen himself a seat there, in which he
Psalm. 95. 11. and. 132. 14.
would be purely worshipped. Whereupon, it is commonly called his test. In the
end of the verse, the obedience of Iosue is praised, that the posterity may
learn, to exercise godliness in that land holily and devoutly after his
example. So there seems to be a secret comparison or opposition, which does
extol the land of Chanaan above other regions.

Chap. 6.
NOW Jericho was shut up, and closed, because of the children of Israel: none
might go out nor enter in.

2 And the Lord said unto Joshua, Behold, I have given into thine hand
Jericho, and the king thereof, and the strong men of war.

3 All ye therefore that be men of war, shall compass the city, in going
round about the city once: thus shall you do six days:

4 And seven Priests shall bear seven trumpets of Rams horns before the
Arc: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the
Priests shall blow with the trumpets.

5 And when they make a long blast with the Rams horns, and ye hear the
sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shoute with a great shoute: then
shall the wall of the City fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up,
every man straight before him.

6 Then Joshua the son of Nun called the Priests, and said unto them, Take
up the Arc of the covenant, and let seven Priests bear seven trumpets of
Rams horns before the Ark of the Lord.

7 But he said unto the people, Go and compass the City: and let him that
is armed go forth before the Ark of the Lord.

8 And when Joshua had spoken unto the people, the seven Priests bare the
seven trumpets of Rams horns, and went forth before the Ark of the Lord,
and blewe with the trumpets, and the Arc of the covenant of the Lord
followed them.

9 And the men of arms went before the Priests, that blewe the trumpets: then
the gathering host came after the Arc, as they went and blewe the trumpets.

10 Now Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shoute, neither
make any noise with your voice, neither shall a word proceed out of your
mouth, until the day that I say unto you, Shoute, then shall all ye shoute.

11 So the Ark of the Lord compassed the city, and went about it once: then
they returned into the host, and lodged in the camp.

12 And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the Priests bare the Ark of the Lord:

13 Also seven Priests bare seven trumpets of Rams horns, and went before the
Ark of the Lord, and going, blewe with the trumpets: and the men of arms
went before them, but the gathering host came after the Ark of the Lord, as
they went, and blewe the trumpets.

14 And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the
host: thus they did six days.

15 And when the seventh day came, they rose early, even with the dawning of
the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only that
day they compassed the city seven times.

16 And when the Priests had blown the trump^^s the seventh time, Joshua
said unto the people, Shoute: for the Lord has given you the city.

17 And the city shall be an execrable thing, both it, and all that are therein,
unto the Lord: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she, and all that are with
her in the house: for she hid the messengers that we sent.

18 Notwithstanding be ye wary of the execrable thing, least ye make your
selves execrable, and in taking of the execrable thing, make also the host of
Israel execrable and trouble it.

19 But all silver, and gold, and vessels of brass, and iron, shall be
consecrate unto the Lord, and shall come into the Lords treasury.

1 Jericho was shut, etc.) He says that Jericho was shut up, because the gates
were not opened: as in time of war, Cities are kept more diligently than at
other times. And for greater vehemency, he adds, that the gates were locked,
as if he should say, That the Citizens were diligent to keep watch and
ward, least they should be surprised unawares. So there was no way to take
it, except it were by violence of assault: for by policy it could not be
taken. This sets forth the grace of God, because along and painful seege
would have wearied the children of Israel, except present remedy had been
speedily showed out of Heaven. For in the mean time, there was great danger,
least they being driven into a narrow corner, might be consumed with famine
and hunger: because it was not possible to have provision of victualles in
their enemies land. God therefore aideth them with an unwonted miracle, that
they should not linger long at one City: and overthrowing the walls, makes
an open breach for them to enter, that they might be the bolder to assault
other Cities afterward. Now we see, how the two first verses agree together:
namely, that Jericho was shut up, and so the children of Israel were kept out
from entering thereinto: and that God promised that he would take the City by
assault himself: for that by this means, he would prevent them, that they
should not trouble themselves by doubtful deliberation. To be short, God
provides by this so happy beginning so easy victory, that their hearts
should not faint in time to come. In the mean time we may note, the brutish
dullness of that people, which thought, that their walls and gates were able
to resist the power of God, as though it were an harder matter to break and
dissolve a few boordes and stones, than to dry up the waters of Jordan.

3 You shall compass, etc.) The promise in deed, of it self, was sufficient
and of force to make them hope for victory, but the manner of the doing, which
was appointed, seemed so ridiculous, that it took away the credit of the
promise. God commands, that they should compass the City round about
every day, until the seventh day, and that day he bids them to compass it
seven times, to blow the trumpets, and to shout: all which was nothing else,
but to play like children. But it was a goodly matter, that their faith was
proved by this trial: that while in the thing it self they saw nothing but a
deceiving of their hope, yet they might nevertheless stay themselves in the
oracle of God: for which purpose he does often hide his power for a season,
under infirmity: and seems to play with vain trifles, that at the length
his weakness may appear stronger than all power, and his foolishnes may shine
above all wisdom. So, when the Israelites bidding their own reason farewell,
depend only upon his word, in playing the fools, they profit much more, than
if they had made a violent assault, and shaken the walls with infinite strong
engines of munition and artillery. Only God would have them to seem fools
for a short time, and not to be to curious and quick witted, subtily to
enquire of the end: for that had been as much, as to stop up the way against
the power of GOD. And in the mean time, although their walking round about,
might be laughed to scorn by their adversaries, yet by their prosperous
success at the length it was known, that God commanded nothing in vain.
There might also another care and doubtfulnes trouble their minds, that if the
inhabitants of the city should soudenly break out upon them, the army might
easily be discomfited, because they were drawn out into such a length, as
compassed the whole city round about, and marched not in battle array ready
to encounter with the enemy. But in this behalf also, what care so ever
troubled them, it behooved them to repose them selves upon God: for that is an
holy security, which rests upon his providence. This also served to exercise
their patience and endurance, that they were commanded to compass the city by
the space of seven days. For what was more unseemly, than to weary
themselves six times without any profit: And wherefore should they keep
silence, except it were to bewray their fearfulness, and so to provoke their
enemies to issue out to fight against them, whom they were neither willing nor
ready to receive: But because profane men, when they are most busily occupied,
do often times turn all things vpside down, God commands his soldiers to
keep silence, and to be quiet, that they might accustom and acquaint them
selves the better, simply to obey his commandments. This is also worthy to be
noted, that the silver trumpets are not taken out of the sanctuary, that the
Priests might sound them, but only trumpets of rams horns are given them.
Uerily, the sound of the holy trumpets would have prevailed more, to make them
have good courage, but their obedience was better tried, while they are content
with an usual and vulgar token. And they were set in such order, that the
greater part went before the Arc, which is understood to be the men of war,
and those followed, which used to wait upon the carriage. For it was their
part to provide, that the rearegard were not dispersed. Because the name of
congregation was dark and uncertain, I have used that word, which is more
usual among the Latins. Whereas some appoint this office to the tribe of Dan,
it has no sure ground: for at this time they were not set in araie, as at
other times of their ordinary iournayes.

15 When the seventh day came, etc.) Here also God seemed, by carrying the
people about so often, not only to hold the matter in suspense, but of purpose
to delude the poor men, that wearied them selves in vain. For, why does he
not bid them to set upon the city soudenly: Why does he keep them in their
old silence, until they were weary, and opens not their mouths to shout:
But the fruit of this patience teaches us, that nothing is better, than to
leave unto his pleasure the moments of times, and opportunity of matters, and
not to prevent his providence by our hastiness, in which except we rest
altogether, we stop up the way against his virtue and power. Wherefore, when
the Priests sounded their trumpets, GOD would have his people to shoute and
make a loud noise, that he might teach them hereby, that he allows no heat,
that men are stirred unto of their own accord, but always requires moderation
of zele, the only rule whereof is this, that we move neither tongue, nor feet,
nor hands, before he him self commands us. For the Rams horns
undoubtedly did signify his authority.

17 The city shall be, etc.) Although GOD had decreed to enriche his people, not
only with spoil and pray: but also to place them in cities, which they had
not builded: yet there was a special respect in the first city, because it
was meet, it should be consecrated to him as the first fruits. Wherefore, he
challenges to him self, as well the buildings as the stuff, and forbids
that any thing thereof should be taken to any private use. This first beginning
of the war, perhaps, might seem unto the people, to be heavy and
unpleasant: that they should overthrow the houses, in which they might well
have dwelled: and spoil all other things, that might have served them for many
needful purposes. But, seeing they had taken no pains in fighting, they might
well be content to forbear the spoil, and willingly to yield unto God the
reward of the victory, at whose only commandment, the walls fell down, and
with the walls all the hope and courage of the Citizens, Ant GOD was so
content with this token of their thankfulness, that he would also have the
people to learn betimes, that nothing was their own, but of his only free
liveralitie. For by the same right he might have adi^^ged all the rest of the
cities to the like destruction, but that he gave them to his people to dwell
in. Of the word CHEREM this I will repeat breefly out of other places: that
when it is referred to holy oblations, it is taken for an abolishing, in
respect of men: that they should none otherwise renounce the things that are
so addicce to abolishing, than if they were consumed to nothing. The Greeks
call the same thing (...), or (...), as it were a thing laid aside: we in the
French tongue call it aptly An interdictment. Hereof comes the exhortation,
that they beware of the thing accursed: because it was lost, as concerning men,
which was separated only to GOD. In the next verse it is taken otherwise, that
the host of the Israelites be not made a curse, whereby is simply noted
perdition, overthrow, or destruction. As for the vessels that were made of
metal, GOD appointed for the use of the sanctuary: all other things he
commanded to be burned with fire, or otherwise to be destroyed.

20 So the people shouted, when they had blown trumpets: for when the people
had heard the sound of the trumpet, they shouted with a great shoute: and the
wall fell down flat: so the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city.

21 And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city: both man and woman,
young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.

22 But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go
into the harlots house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she has,
as ye swear to her.

23 So the young men that were spies, went in, and brought out Rahab, and her
father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had: also they
brought out all her family, and put them without the host of Israel.

24 After they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the
silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and iron, they put unto the
treasure of the house of the Lord.

25 So Joshua saved Rahab the harlot, and her fathers household, and all that
she had, and she dwelt in Israel even unto this day, because she had hid the
messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

26 And Joshua swear at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord,
that rises up, and builds this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation
thereof in his eldest son, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates
of it.

27 So the Lord was with Joshua, and he was famous through all the world.

20 So the people shouted, etc.) Here the obedience of the people is praised,
and also the truth of GOD is magnified. They testified their faith by their
shouting, being persuaded, that they were not commanded to do so in vain: and
GOD suffers them not to loose their labor, but fulfilleth in art, that which
he promised by his word. The other virtue was not inferior to this, that
despising the unlawful gain, they willingly destroyed all the spoil of the
city. For no doubt, but many thought in them selves on this manner: Why will
GOD have so great riches to be cast away? Why does he envy us to enjoy those
things which he has delivered into our hands? Why does he not rather
reward us with it, that we might have occasion to give him thanks? But
letting, all reasons pass, that might hinder them from doing their du^tie,
they do willingly cast away all the spoil, which they had in their hands,
even the riches of an whole city, which was a token of care and excellent
continency. That they slew all the people, without respect of age or sex,
both women and children, young and old, it might seem to be a cruel
murder, but that GOD him self commanded it so to be done. But because he, in
whose power are life and death, had justly condemned those nations unto
destruction, let all argument and disputation cease. Add hereunto, that he had
borne with them four hundred yaeres already, until their iniquity were come
to the full. Who should now complain of immoderate rigor, when God
suspendeth his judgment so long? If any man will object, That yet at the least
the young infantes were free from offense: the answer is ready, Because they
were a cursed and a reprobate broad, they were iu^^ly destroyed. This in deed
we must confess, that it had been extreme and barbarous cruelty, if the
Israelites following their own rage and fury, had slain the tender infantes,
with their mothers: but now it is accounted godly and laudable forti^^de, and
defended to be a holy zeal, while they execute the commandment of God, which
would have the land of Chanaan, which long time had been corrupted with
foul and stinking filthiness, in this sort to be purged.

22 Iosue said to the two men, etc.) How faithful and upright Iosue was to
keep promise, appears by this carfulness: but because the whole city was
subject to the curse, the question may be moved of the exception of one
family. For it was not lawful for a mortal man, to change any thing in the
sentence of God. But because Rahab had couenanted for her safeguard by
inspiration of Gods spirit, I judge that Iosue, in preserving her, did nothing
but wisely, and with good consideration. Moreover, the messengers at that time
were not tied with any religion, because GOD had not yet pronounced his
pleasure, concerning the destruction of the City. For they had heard
generally, that all those nations were to be destroyed: yet was it free for
them to make a covenant with one woman, which willingly departed and fell away
from her own countriemen. Although a more ready answer will follow soon
after: namely, while by the commandment of God, the Israelites exhorted all
men, against whom they came, to yield them selves, upon hope of pardon, but
they blinded with stubbornness refused the peace that was offered because God
determined to destroy them all: when all the rest were manifestly hardened unto
their own destruction, it follows that Rahab was exempted by privilege,
that when the rest perished, she might be preserved. Wherefore Iosue did wisely
consider, that this woman, which willingly removed into the Church of God, not
without the peculiar grace of God, was delivered in time from the destruction:
In deed the case of her father, and her whole family, was not l^^e: but
seeing they did all willingly renounce their former state, by promptness of
obedience, they confirmed that preservation which Rahab couenanted for them.
But by the example of Iosue, let us learn, that although we do not
maliciously and of set purpose break our faith and promise: yet that is not
sufficient to testify our honesty: except we give all diligence to perform
such couenantes as we have made. For he does not only suffer Rahab to be
saved by her ghestes, but he takes heed in time, that at the first tumult,
she suffer no injury: and that they might be more ready to do their duty,
he puts them in mind, that they were bound to it by oath.

23 So the spies entered, etc.) No doubt but God would have them to be saved,
whose minds he bended so willingly to embrace their deliverance. Or else they
would have cast her off, no less proudly, nor with less scorn, than the two
sons in law of Lot did. But they are much better provided for, while they
are set without the host, and so by straight charge are called to the denial
of their former life. For if they had been immediately admitted, and joined
unto the people, perhaps they would never have thought of their uncleanness,
and so might have been frosen in it.

Now when they be placed apart, least they should infecte the congregation
with their uncleanness, they are stricken with shame which might move them to
earnest repentance. For it is not to be thought, that they were removed into a
place of safety, least any of the people should have violently risen against
them: for they should have been received with great favor and gratulation of
all men: but in the solitary place they were more subject to hurt. Wherefore,
by this separation, their former uncleanness was set before their eyes, least
they being defiled, should rashly rushe into the holy assembly: but rather
by this rudiment should be taught, to change their former life. For it
follows soon after, that they dwelt in the midst of the people: for when
they were purged from their uncleanness, they began to be taken none
otherwise, than if they had been descended from the stock of Abraham. Finally,
it signifies, that after they had confessed them selves to have lived before
in filthiness, they were admitted indifferently with the rest. And by this
admission, Rahab received a singular fruit of her faith.

26 And Iosue swear, etc.) Therefore this consecration ought to prevail, not
only for one day, but to admonish the posterity of all ages, that this City
was overthrown by none other, but by God himself. Wherefore, he would have
ruins and waste places in steed of a tropheie to remain for a perpetual
monument: because the new building would have been as a blotte, to wipe out
the memory of the miracle. Therefore, that the deformity of the place, might
renew the memory of the power and grace of God unto the posterity, Iosue
decrees with a severe curse, that no man should build the City being once
destroyed. And out of this place we gather, that the dullness of men has
need of many helps, least they bury the benefits of God in forgetfulness.
Therefore, the sight of these ruins, in which the power of God was plainly
seen, did as it were covertly reprove men for their unthankfulness. The
sum of the curse is this, That if any did ever attempt to build up Jericho
again, he should feel by unhappy and lamentable success, that it was a
wicked and detestable work. For, to lay the foundation upon his eldest son,
is as much, as to cast down his son, that being bruised and overwhelmed with
a heap of stones, he might end his life miserably. So, to set up the gates
upon his younger son, signifies as much, as to take in hand that building,
which should not be finished, but by the death of his son. So he is condemned
in his offspring, which should run headlong into so great madness. Neither
did Iosue pronounce this curse of his own head, but as he was a proclamer of
the vengeance of God. So much the more monstrous it is, that there was a man
found among the people of God, whom this terrible adiuration, conceived in
solemn words, could not refrain from such sacrilegious rashness. For in
the time of Achab, there arose up one Hiel a Citizen of Bethel, which was so
bold to provoke GOD, as it 1. Reg. 1^.
were of set purpose in this matter. But the holy history does testify
likewise, that the curse was not in vain which God pronounced by the mouth of
Iosue: for in Abiram his eldest son, he laid the foundation of new Jericho,
and in Segub his younger son, he set up the gates of it: that in the
destruction of his children he might acknowledge, what it is to attempt any
thing against the will of God and his determination.

Chap. 7.
BUT the children of Israel committed a trespass in the excommunicate thing:
for Achan the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah of the
tribe of Judah took of the excommunicate thing: wherefore the wrath of the Lord
was kindled against the children of Israel.

2 And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethauen, on the
East side of Beth-el, and spoke unto them, saying, Go up, and view the
country. And the men went up, and viewed Ai,

3 And returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up, but
let as it were two or three thousand men go up, and smite Ai, and make not all
the people to labor thither, for they are few.

4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men, and they
fled before the men of Ai.

5 And the men of Ai smote of them upon a thirty and six men: for they chased
them from before the gate, unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down:
wherefore the hearts of the people mealted away like water.

6 Then Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the
Ark of the Lord, until the euentide, he, and the Elders of Israel, and put
dust upon their heads.

7 And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord God, wherefore have thou brought this people
over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, and to destroy us?
Would God we had been content to dwell on the other side Jordan.

8 O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their backs before their
enemies?

9 For the Canaanites, and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it,
and shall compass us, and destroy our name out of the earth: and what will thou do unto thy mighty Name?

1 But the children of Israel transgressed, etc.) Here is rehearsed the offense
of one man, and that done in secret, the fault whereof is ascribed to the whole
people: and not that only, but the punishment is laid upon many, that were
innocent in the fault. But it seems not agreeable to reason, that all the
people, which were ignorant of the crime, that was both private and secret,
should be charged withal. I answer, it is no strange thing, that the sin
of one member should redound to the hurt of the whole body. If the reason
thereof were hidden from us, yet it ought abundantly to satisfy us, that
transgression is imputed to the children of Israel, when the fault is
restrained but unto one man. But because it comes to pass oftentimes, that
not the worst men, by winking at their brothrens offenses, do nourishe their
sins, and so part of the fault is worthily laid upon all them, whom their
dissimulation and forbearing linketh in society with them. By this reason S.
Paul lays to all the Corinthians, the private offense of one man: and
inueiheth 1. Cor. 5. 4. 5. 6.
against their pride, who being stained with so great reproach, yet durst be
bold to boast and glory. But here it is easy to reply, that all men were
ignorant of the theft: and therefore there is no place for that common saying,
That he is guilty of the crime, that may let it from being committed, and does
suffer it to be done. I confess in deed, it is not manifest, why this private
offense should be imputed to the whole people, except perhaps for that they had
not diligently punished offenders before times: whereupon it might grow, that
this wretch was made bolder to commit this horrible crime. And verily, evil
weeds do spring up and bud out as it were by stealth, and bring fourth
hurtful fruits, if they be not plucked up beetimes. Although the reason why
God makes all the people guilty of theft, is more high and secret: because he
would have them to be admonished in time to come, with an unwonted document
and instruction, that by the wickedness of one man, all the rest may be made
guilty, that they may learn more diligently to beware and take heed of vices.
Wherefore, there is nothing better in this case, than to hold our minds in
suspense, until the books be opened, where the judgments of God shall be
openly seen, which are now shadowed with our darkness. Let it suffice, that
the whole people was infected with one man's disease, because the highest Judge
has so pronounced, before whom we ought now as well to keep silence, as when
we shall be brought before his judgment seat. It is showed of what stock
Achan was come, as it were to increase and enlarge the reproach of his wicked
lust, as if it were said, that he was the shame to the stock and kindred that
he came of. For the writer of the history ascends even unto the tribe of
Judah, of whence he was descended. Whereby we are taught, that when any of them
that are near unto us, behaueth himself shamefully and wickedly, a note of
shame is laid upon us in his person, that we may be humbled: not that it is
meet we should insult against all the kindred of a wicked man: but that all men
might apply themselves the better, to the reformation of their kindred, and
such as be near unto them: and secondly, that they may acknowledge their
winking at their offenses, or else their own sins are punished in the shame
of their kindred. Now in this crime here was a greater occasion of offense, that
might trouble them all, that such an heinous fact was found in the tribe of
Judah, which was the flower and honor of all the nation. And doubtless, it was
by the wonderful counsel of God, that the prerogative should remain in that
tribe, which might nourish the hope of the promised kingdom. But when, even in
the beginning, this honor is stained with deformity, through the offense of
one man, the matter might not a little trouble the weak minds of many.
Howbeit, by sharp correction, the offense, which otherwise was conceived, was
clean taken away. Whereupon we gather, that when occasion is given to the
ungodly to speak evil, there is no more apt remedy to deliver the Church
from reproach, than if we do severely punish the offenders.

2 Iosue sent, etc.) To search out the situation of the city, and to consider
always that might be to come unto it, was a point of wisdom: least marching
forward rashely in places unknown, they might be circumuented by the lying in
wayt of their enemies. But when it was needful, that the whole army should
soon after march further, to send such a small power to take a city by
assault, it seems to be a great imperfection in warlike knowledge. Wherefore,
it had been no marvel, if two or three thousand men by soudaine issuing out of
their enemies, were made afraid: and put to flight. And surely, it had been
profitable for the multitude that twenty or thirty thousand had been sent
abroad thereabout, to gather virtuals. Morouer, if they had had the upper hand,
yet in execution of the slaughter, though all their enemies had held out their
throtes to be cut, yet it would have soon tired so small an army to kill
them. Therefore, that three thousand, or there aboutes, were driven back, it
seems to be a just reward of their security and negligence. But the holy
Ghost expressly affirms, that the fewness was not the cause why they were
discomfited, so that the default of this loss is not therein to be sought. But
rather it came to pass by the secret counsel of God, that when he would show
a sign of his wrath, yet he would have it to be in a small number, that it
might be with less hurt. And sure, it was a singular token of his clemency,
that by chastising the people gently, and without great slaughter, he would
awake them to seek remedy in time for the mischief: peradventure also the
Citizens of Hai, durst not have set upon the Israelites if they had beseeged
the city with a sufficient army. Wherefore, GOD made a way for his judgment,
which yet he did mitigate in such sort, that he did only uncover the secret
offense wherewith otherwise the whole people might have been consumed, as with
a pestilence. And although it was no meruell, that the Israelites were
overthrown that fought upon an even ground in the going down of an hill, yet
did it openly appear, that through fear and faint hearts, they were vanquished
before they came to handstroks: because they turned their backs, and ran away
down into a deep valley out of an higher place. And that they were shamefully
contemned of their enemies, appears by their boldness and valiantness, that
they were not afraid to pursue them almost unto the host, as they ran away
cowardly before them. Hereto we may join that trembling which was in all the
army, wherewith all their hearts mealted for fear. I confess they had great
cause to fear, for until this time, as it were in playing, they had obtained
so many victories, and now they saw themselves shamefully overcome For matters
unwonted do greatly trouble us. But they were stricken with fear from heaven,
rather than for the loss of thirty men, and putting to flight of three
thousand.

6 Iosue rent, etc.) Although it had been an easy matter, to lay the fault of
this shame and loss upon some other cause: and that it was not meet for so
valiant a Captein as Iosue was, to be so greatly discouraged for the loss of
thirty men: especially, seeing that he might easily have made his power an
hundredth times greater, and have over taken his enemies being weary of the
chase, and so to have distressed them: yet not without a cause he is oppressed
with heaviness, and almost discouraged. For the promise of God would not suffer
him to admit that cogitation, which uses to comfort and refresh them that are
vanquished, namely, that the chance of war is doubtful and uncertain: for
God had promised, that they should always be conquerours. Therefore, that the
success answers not to his hope, he judges as the truth was: that there
was no other cause of this unlucky battle, but that they were destitute of
the promised help of GOD. Therefore, both he and the elders do not only give
them selves to sorrow and heaviness: but also take upon them a solemn
mourning, as is used in greatest affliction, by rending their garments, and
casting dust on their heads. And although this ceremony was used of the
unfaithful also, to testify their sorrow: yet the godly, and the religious
worshippers of God, had a special respect therein, humbly to entreat him to
appease his anger. Therefore, in rending of their garments, and such like
signs, was contained a profession of repentance: it is also gathered of the
prayer annexed: which partly comes of faith and sincere affection of
godliness, partly itis mingled with immoderate percurbation. That they turn
themselves straight unto God, and acknowledge that in his hand, by which the
wound was given, there is a medicine ready to heal them, it proceeds of
faith, and yet being carried away with excess of fear and sorrow, they pass
the bounds. Hereof comes it, that they are so bold to reason the matter with
God. Hereof comes that preposterous wish, I would we had tarried in the
wilderness. Neither is it a strange matter, that when godly minds are
kindled with holy zeal to seek God, the light of faith is covered with the
behemencie and force of affections, as it were with a cloud. And thereby should
all their prayers be defiled, if God of his infinite mercy did not pardon
them, and wyping away the spots, did receive them as pure. And yet when they
do so expostulate, that they cast their care upon GOD, although this
simplicity have need of pardon, yet is it more acceptable to God, than the
feigned modesty of Hypocrites, which carefully take heed, that no word
should escape them that might signify to much boldenes, yet inwardly they
swell and are full stuffed with pride and stubbornness. Iosue forgecceth
modesty, when he chideth with God, that he brought the people out of the
wilderness: but he grows to further distemper, when against the promise and
decree of God, he utters his rash and troublesome wish, I would we had
never come out of the wilderness. Which was all one, as if he would break the
covenant of God. But because his purpose was to maintain and defend the glory
of God, his vehemency was excused, which otherwise might have provoked God to
anger. Here we are taught that the Saints, even while they run to the right
mark, do often stumble and fall, which happens also sometime in their
prayers, in which the pureness of their faith, and well ordered affection of
their obedience, ought most of all to shine. But that Iosue was chiefly
careful for the glory of God, it is evident by the next verse, where he
takes upon him the defense of it as a matter enjoined unto him. What shall I
say (says he) when it shall be objected, that the people have turned their
backs? And he does worthily complain, that he has nothing to answer:
because God had made him a witness and publisher of his grace, from whence a
perpetual course of victories was to be looked for. Therefore, whereas he had
mightily extolled the power of God, according to his office by Gods
commandment, now by the contrary event he must shamefully hold his peace. We
see therefore, that he was troubled with nothing more, than with the shame of
his calling: not in respect of his own reputation, but that the truth of God
should not sustain reproach before the world. Finally, because he had not
brought the people into the land of Canaan, but by Gods commandment, now he
calls upon him in this adversity, as the author and maintainer of this his
enterprise: as if he said, Seeing I am cast into these streightes by thee, that
I may seem to be a deceiuer, it is thy part to help me, and to minister
matter of defense.

9 And the Chananites shall hear, etc.) He sets forth another cause of
fear, least all the people thereabout, which either subbued with misery, or
terrified with miracles, had hitherto been quiet, should soudeinly take heart
of grace, and run upon the people. And this was like, that as the power of
God before had broken them, and made them astonnished: so they would boldly
come down into the battle, as soon as they ceased to feel, that GOD did
fight against them. Therefore he obiecteth unto God, the danger of the time to
come, if he did not provide in due season, because the Chanaanites, which
hitherto had lain bound as it were with numnesse, taking this occasion, would
step forth lustily, and setting upon the people being thus discouraged,
would easily destroy them. But by the conclusion it appears, that his
principal care was not for the peoples safety, but that the honor of Gods
name might remain untouched, and not be subject to the lewd scorns of the
ungodly: which would have come to pass, if the people had been cast out of
the inheritance that was so often promised them. That saying of God is well
known, which is contained in the song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 27.
My mind-was to destroy them, but that I feared the pride of their enemies:
left happily they should say, It is our high hand, and not the Lord, which
has done all these things. Therefore, that which God (speaking like a man)
pronounced, that he feared, now Iosue says is to be prevented, lest by this
overthrow of the people, their enemies wax so proud, that they would
triumph even against God himself.

10 And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up: wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face?

11 Israel has sinned, and they have transgressed my covenant, which I
commanded them, for they have even taken of the excommunicate thing, and have
also stolen, and dissembled also, and have put it even with their own stuff.

12 Therefore, the children of Israel can not stand before their enemies, but
have turned their backs before their enemies, because they be execrable:
neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the excommunicate from
among you.

13 Up therefore, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify your selves against
to morrow: for thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an execrable thing
among you, O Israel, therefore ye cannot stand against your enemies, until ye
have put the execrable thing from among you.

14 In the morning therefore ye shall come, according to your tribes: and the
tribe which the Lord takes, shall come according to the families: and the
family which the Lord shall take, shall come by the households: and the
household which the Lord shall take, shall come man by man.

15 And he that is taken with the excommunicate thing, shall be burnt with fire,
he, and all that he has, because he has transgressed the covenant of the
Lord, and because he has wrought folly in Israel.

16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes:
and the tribe of Judah was taken.

17 And he brought the families of Judah, and took the family of the
Zarhites, and he brought the family of the Zarhites, man by man, and Zabdi was
taken.

18 And he brought his household, man by man, and Achan the son of Carmi, the
son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.

10 The Lord said, etc.) God does not simply reprehend Iosue, that he lay
along, and bewailed the calamity of the people: seeing this was the way to
obtain pardon, humbly to fall down before him: but that he gave him self to
sorrow without measure. Although this chiding may be referred rather to the
time to come, than to the time past, because he bids him make an end of
mourning, as if he said, He has lie^ long enough prostrate, he must shake off
negligence, for the matter requires an other remedy. But first, in showing
the cause of the trouble, he prescribes a mean how to take it away.
Wherefore, he tells him, that the end of the battle was therefore unlucky,
for that being offended with the wickedness of the people, he has refused the
defense of them. We have showed before, why he transferreth the punishment of
one man's sacrilege unto the whole people: for, although they were not guilty
in their own judgment, nor in the judgment of other men, yet the judgment of
GOD, by which they were cast into the same condemnation, had secret reasons, of
which although perhaps we may soberly enquire, yet cunningly to search them, it
is not lawful. Yet this is a singular example of his clemency, that extending
the condemnation by his own mouth unto them all, yet he executed punishment
but upon one house, which was defiled with the cursed matters. That which
follows does set forth the greatness of the crime, and therefore the
particle GAM, is so often repeated: for otherwise they would have sought to
extenuate and diminishe the heynousnesse of the offense. Therefore, where he
says: They have also transgressed the covenant, he signifies, that they had
not lightly offended. And the prohibition that we heard of before, he calls
the covenant: for as it were indenting with the Israelites, he challenges the
first fruits, and permits to them the spoil of the whole land. Wherefore
he means not the general covenant, but complains that he was deceived in
the things accursed: as he adds immediately by way of explication, also they
have taken of the accursed things: and that without sacrilege, while they
stole that which he had challenged to his own use: the word of lying is taken
for defrauding, or deceiving, as it is often. The last thing is such, as many
at the first sight would make small account of it, and yet not without cause it
is added as the heap of wickedness, that the consecrate or accursed things
are laid up with their stuff. For surely, the covetousness of gain does
sometimes intise them that be not altogether wicked: but in hiding and keeping
it close, great obstinacy is bewrayed, when the wickedness is touched with no
repentance. In the next verse, the name of Anathema is taken in an other sense,
for a curse: because the children of Israel, for the gold that was stolen, were
accursed, and almost given to destruction.

13 Arise, sanctify the people, etc) Although the Uerbe KADASH is diuersely
taken: yet because he speaks of purging the people, I doubt not but he
prescribes a solemn ceremony of sanctification. Therefore in my judgment
they do not sufficiently express the writers mind, which translate it
generally, To prepare. But rather, because they were to be brought as into the
presence of GOD, they had need to be sanctified, that they should not appear
before him in their uncleanness. And as concerning Iosue, the manner of
sanctification is to be noted, that he commanded the people to purge
themselves, according to the Law. And although the ceremony of it self had
been to small purpose, yet it was of great force, to awake the rude people:
for that outward oblation ought to bring them unto spiritual cleanness. Their
absteyning from things otherwise lawful, did admonish them, that great and
excellent pureness is required of them. They are told before, what should be
done, that every one might examine himself more diligently.

Yea, GOD proceeds by degrees, as if he would give them time to repent
themselves. For, no other reason can be given, why he descended from a tribe,
to the families, and so to one man, whereby we may know the monstr^^us folly
of Achan, which perhaps overcome by shame, doubleth his impudency: while he
thrusts in himself boldly with the rest, and doubted not to mock with God.
For, when he sees himself taken, why does he not of his own accord come
forth, and confess his fault, but s^ubbornly tarrieth out, until he be
drawn forth against his will? But this is a just reward of them, which do
give them selves over to the Devil to be blinded. Now, when in the
condemnation of his tribe, and afterward of his family, he did plainly
know, that he was sought out, and bound by the hand of God: why does he not
then at the last step forth, that by yielding himself willingly, he might
humbly desire pardon for his offense? It appears therefore, that his mind,
and all his senses, were bewitched of the Devil, after he was hardened to
commit that wickedness. But although God does not draw forth into light
all wicked factes, after the same manner, neither always does use casting of
lottes: yet has he taught us by this example, that nothing is so secreate, but
he will open it in due time. In deed the manner of opening will be diverse: but
let every man think with himself, that such things as are hid from the
knowledge of all the world, are not hid from God, and that it is in his will
to make them open. For, although sin seems to be a sleep, yet it lies
before the doors, and watches the miserable man, until it has oppressed him.

19 Then Joshua said unto Achan, My son, I beeseche thee give glory to the
Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and show me now what thou
haste done, hide it not from me.

20 And Achan answered Joshua, and said, In deed I have sinned against the
Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done.

21 I saw among the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundredth
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, and I coueted
them, and took them: and behold they lie hid in the earth, in the midst of
my tent, and the silver under it.

22 Then Joshua sent messengers, which ran unto the tent, and behold, it was
hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

23 Therefore they took them out of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua and
unto all the children of Israel, and laid them before the Lord.

24 Then Joshua took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the
garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons and his danghters, and his
oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and all
Israel with him brought them unto the vallie of Achor.

25 And Joshua said, In as much as thou have troubled us the Lord shall
trouble thee this day: and all Israel threw stonnes at him, and burned them
with fire and stoned them with stones.

26 And they cast upon him a great heap of stones unto this day: and so the
Lord turned from his fearce wrath: therefore he called the name of that place,
The vallie of Achor unto this day.

19 Then Iosue said, etc.) Although Achan is snared by the lotte which seems
to fall at all adventures: yet, because God pronounced that he would point out
as it were with his finger, who was Author of the crime, Iosue does not examine
him doubtfully: but commands him to confess the matter as already known.
It is like, this was an usual form of charge and adiuration, as in John 9.
24. The scribes and priests do adjure the blind man, whom Christ had
restored to sight, by the very same words, to answer them, as concerning the
miracle* yet there was a special cause why Iosue exhorted Achan to give glory
to God, for that by denying and refusing to confess, he should have denied the
certainty of his decree. For now the matter was alredie determined by lotte.
Wherefore Iosue commands him simply to subscribe unto the sentence of God,
and not to increase his wickedness by pleading in vain against it. He calls
him son, neither scornefully, nor feignedly, but truly and sincerly does
testify, that he bare a fatherly affection toward him whom he condemned to
die. By which example Judges are taught, so to temper their rigor when they
punish wickedness, that they put not off the affection of humanity: and
again, so to be pitiful that they be not slack and negligent in punishing:
finally, let them in such sort be fathers of them, whom they condemn, that
severity by gentleness be not much diminished. Many with fair words flatter
the poor wretches, feigning that they will forgive them: but when they have
intised them to confess, they deliver them straightway to the gallows, which
hoped in vain to escape unpunished. But Iosue being content to have cited the
guilty person before the judgment seat of God, does not feed him at all
with vain hope of pardon: and ^o he is more free to prouounce the sentence
which was decreed by GOD against him.

20 Achan answered, etc.) Because he was amazed, he seeks not to hide
himself, nor to extenuate his offense, nor to allege any color of excuse:
but rather, does plainly and truly confess the whole matter. So the holy
name of God prevailed more to wrest out this confession, than any other
torments. And yet this plain dealing was not a certain token of repentance:
but as one astonished with fear, he does openly confess that, which he would
gladly have covered. And it is no new matter, that the reprobate, after they
have assaide for a time, all means to escape, when they be even frosen in
their vices, soudeinely become voluntary witnesses against themselves: not
that they come to it of their own accord, but because God draws them, and
in a manner drives them headlong against their will. Although this his open
confession shall condemn the hypocrisy of many, which with vain compass of
words seek to darken the clear light. For this is an Emphaticall or earnest
speech, This and that have I done: which signifies, that orderly and
distinctly he declared every part of the matter, how it was done. Neither
does he only acknowledge the fact, but neglecting all defense and excuse, he
condemns himself also in the quality of the fact. I have sinned (says
he:) which he would not have said, but that he acknowledges himself guilty
of sacrilege: whereby it appears, that he excuses not him self, by error
or by ignorance.

22 Iosue sent, etc.) Although it be no strange matter, that messengers show
their diligence in running and making speed, yet the haste that is here
mentioned does show, that they were all diligent with fear, with all speed
to take away the curse from among them. Therefore, because that severe
threatening did vex and grieve them, I will not be with you until you be
purged from the cursed things: not only to execute the commandment of Iosue,
but much rather to appease the wrath of God, they ran with all speed: so
when they see before their eyes, the things that were stolen, the cause of the
shame and overthrow which they sustained, was openly showed them. For it was
said, that therefore they turned their backs to their enemies, because that
being polluted with the things accursed, they were forsaken of the accustomed
help of God. Now when they see the stolen things: it was easy to know,
that GOD was justly offended with them. Thereby also they were admonished, that
the first fruits of all the land of Chanaan, should be offered to him wholly
untouched, that the memory of his liberality might never fall out of their
minds. They learned also, that seeing the knowledge of GOD does pearce into
the most secret corners, that all coueringes and colors are in vain, to
escape the severity of his judgment.

24 Therefore Iosue, etc.) For two causes he is carried out of the host: first
least they should be defiled with his blood (as God would always have some
show of humanity to appear, even in lawful executions:) and secondly, that
no infection of the cursed things should remain among the people. Therefore
it was an usual thing, to do execution upon offenders without the host: that
they might more abhor from shedding of blood. But now, a rotten member was
cut off from the body, and the host purged of filthiness. And by this we may
know, that it was a notable example, that the place received the name thereby.
If the extremity of the punishment trouble or offend any man: we must always
remember, that though our reason come short of the judgments of God, yet our
boldness must be restrained with the bridle of godly modesty and sobernes,
that we take not upon us to disallowe that which pleases God. It seems in
deed an hard thing, yea, a cruel and barbarous thing, that young children,
which were without fault, should be drawn to so extreme punishment, to be
stoned and burned. But that the like extremity was showed upon the brute
beasts, it was not so much meruell: for as they were created for man's cause,
so they do justly follow their owners. Therefore, whatsoever Achan possessed,
perished with him, as accessarie. But that the children should be stoned and
burned for their fathers offense, it was an extreme kind of execution. Ezech.
18.
And here God did openly take punishment of the children for their parents
crime, contrary to that which he pronounces by Ezechiel. But after what
manner he destroys no innocent, and yet casts the sins of the fathers
upon the children, I have breefely declared, when I spoke of the common
destruction of the city, and the slaughter of all sorts of people. We lament
the infantes and children, which were then slain with the sword, as murdered
unjustly, because there appears no fault in them. But if we do consider, how
much deeper the knowledge of God pearceth, than the understanding of our mind,
we will rather stay in his decree, than by advancing our selves with rashness,
and mad pride and presumption, cast our selves headlong into destruction.
Doubtless, God was not moved with unadvised hatred, to kill the children of
Achan so unmercifully. But although they were the workmanship of his own
hands, and circumcision also was graven in their flesh, which was no
deceivable token of adoption: yet he adiudgeth them to death. What remains
here for us, but to acknowledge our infirmity, and give place to his
incomprehensible counsel: It may be, that death was profitable for them as a
medicine. But if they were reprobates, their damnation could not be to soon.
Hereto join, that the life which God has given, he may take away, as often as
it pleases him, not only by sickness, but by any other kind of death. A
wild beast shall stay an infant, and rend him in pieces. A poisonous serpent
shall bite another, and kill him. One shall fall into the water, another into
the fire, another shall be smothered by his nourse, another shall be bruised with a
stone: yea, unto some the womb is their grave before they see the light. It is
certain, that none of these kinds of death do happen, but by the will of
God. Yet for all this, who shall be so bold, as to plead against him? And if
any be so mad, that he do, what shall he prevail? Hereof we must be
persuaded, that none perish by his commandment, but such as he has appointed
to die. But whereas his oxen, his asses, and his sheep are rehearsed, we may
gather, that he was rich enough: that poverty could not provoke him to
commit this wicked fact: wherein his vnsattable covetousness be wrayed it
self, that he desired stolen goods, not for necessity, but for rio^^e and
excess.

25 Iosue said, etc.) This seems to be to hard an insultation, as though he
purposed to drive the miserable man, whom he should have exhorted to patience,
almost into fury and madness. Howbeit, I doubt not, but that he spoke this
for the peoples sake, that it might be a profitable example for them all. I
judge therefore, that he meant not to ouerwhelme Achan with disperation: but in
his person to show how grievous an offense it was, to trouble the Church of
God. Although it may be, that the proud man complained, that his satisfaction
was not received, whereby he thought to have been discharged: and that therefore
Iosue, either to reform or break his pride and stubbornness, inueihed more
sharply against him. For by the interrogation it seems that he did
expostulate with him: and when he called God the Judge, he seems to stop the
obstinate man's mouth. That all the people threw stones, it was done in sign
of detestation, as if they would testify, that they were most clear of that
crime, which they did revenge in another, and still did abhor it. The heap
of stones was partly a monument to the posterity, partly for this cause, that
if the place had been vo^de, some man unawares might gather up the parcelles of
gold and silver. For, although God at the first commanded the gold and the
silver to be offered unto him, yet would he not have his sanctuary polluted
with theft.

Chap. 8.
AFTER, the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou faint hearted:
take all the men of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: behold, I have
given into thine hand the King of Ai, and his people, and his City, and his
land.

2 And thou shall do to Ai, and to the King thereof: as thou did to
Jericho, and to the King thereof: nevertheless, the spoil thereof, and the
cattle thereof, shall ye take unto you for a pray: thou shall lie in wait
against the City on the backeside thereof.

3 Then Joshua arose, and all the men of war to go up against Ai: and Joshua
chose out thirty thousand strong men, and valiant, and sent them away by
night.

4 And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the
City on the backeside of the City: go not very far from the City, but be
ye all in a readiness.

5 And I, and all the people that are with me, will approach unto the City:
and when they shall come out against us, as they did at the first time, then
will we flee before them.

6 For they will come out after us, till we have brought them out of the city:
for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first time: so we will flee
before them.

7 Then you shall rise up from lying in wait, and destroy the city: for the
Lord your God will deliver it into your hand.

8 And when ye have taken the city, ye shall set it on fire: according to the
commandment of the Lord shall ye do: behold, I have charged you.

9 Joshua then sent them forth, and they went to lie in wait, and abode
between Beth-el and Ai, on the West side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night
among the people.

10 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people: and he,
and the Elders of Israel, went up before the people against Ai.

11 Also all the men of war that were with him went up, and drew near, and
came against the city, and pitched on the Northside of Ai: and there was a
vallie between them and Ai:

12 And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in wait between
Beth-el and Ai, on the West side of the city.

13 And the people set all the host that was on the Northside against the
city, and the liers in wait on the West, against the city: and Joshua went
the same night into the midst of the vallie.

14 And when the King of Ai saw it, then the men of the city hasted and rose
up early, and went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people at the
time appointed, before the plain: for he knew not that any lay in wait
against him on the backside of the city.

15 Then Joshua and all Israel, as beaten before them, fled by the way of the
wilderness.

16 And all the people of the city were called together, to pursue after them:
and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away out of the city.

17 So that there was not a man left in Ai, nor in Beth-el, that went not out
after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.

18 Then the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thine
hand toward Ai, for I will give it into thine hand: and Joshua stretched out
the spear that he had in his hand, toward the city.

19 And they that lay in wait, arose quickly out of their place, and ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand, and they entered into the city, and
took it, and hasted, and set the city on fire.

20 And the men of Ai looked behind them, and saw it: for lo, the smoke of
the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that
way: for the people that fled to the wilderness, turned back upon the
pursuers.

21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that they that lay in wait, had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city mounted up, then they turned again, and
slew the men of Ai.

22 Also the other issued out of the city against them: so were they in the
midst of Israel, these being on the one side, and the rest on the other side:
and they slew them, so that they let none of them remain nor escape.

23 And the King of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.

24 And when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the
field, that is, in the wilderness, where they chased them, and when they were
all fallen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, all the
Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.

25 And all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand,
even all the men of Ai.

26 For Joshua drew not his hand back again, which he had stretched out with
the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.

27 Only the cattle and the spoil of this city, Israel took for a pray unto
them selves, according unto the word of the Lord, which he commanded Joshua.

28 And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, and a wilderness unto
this day.

29 And the King of Ai he hanged on a tree, unto the evening. And as soon as
the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcass down
from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and lay
thereon a great heap of stones, that remains until this day.

1 And the Lord said, etc.) It was to great purpose to encourage Iosue and the
people a fresh, that they might cheerfully address themselves to assault the
city of Hai, from which with some loss, and greater shame, they were
repulsed. God therefore, that they might take upon them this enterprise without
fear, promises that he will deliver the city unto them. For the same reason
and purpose, he commands them to fight by policy, rather than with open
force, to train out their enemies, and to lay a stale for them to entrap them
unwares. For it had been an easy matter, that a few thousands should be
ouerthrown, with an infinite multitude, if they had set open the city soudenly
and at all adventures. But because we heard before, that all their hearts were
mealted, God provided for their infirmity, to lay no more charge upon them,
than they might well bear, until they were recovered from that overmuch
fear, and waxed more courageous to execute his commandments. It is true,
that he used at this time their diligence, partly that they should not always
gape for miracles, and so become slothful, partly that in diverse and unlike
kinds of his working, they might always acknowledge the same power. But this
special reason is not to be omitted, because they were not yet recovered out
of their fear, they could scarce be drawn to an open battle: except the
policy of entrapping their enemies had been added for a succor. Although the
promise has the first place: Fear not, because I have delivered it into thy
hands: which although by the word, it seems to be directed to Iosue, yet
does it perteine to all the people indifferently: because it was most
necessary, that they should all and every one be delivered out of
doubtfulnesse, and furnished with new confidence. And whereas he commands
the city to be burned, as Jericho was: he seems to grant that unto the
grief of the people, that the remembrance of the dishonor they received,
might be abolished with this reuengement: but that they may take the journey in
hand more willingly, he leaves the spoil unto them, as a reward of their
victory.

13 Iosue arose, etc.) It is not like, that all the host was brought out of
the camp, but that an army was made out of the multitude, which was most
accustomed to the wars. And hereof it appears, that it was a great army,
that he sends away five thousand to lie in wait. For although it seems in
the beginning, that five and thirty thousand are reckoned, yet it is manifest
by the context, that the number was not all so great. But rather I conjecture,
that he led thirty thousand himself, which should fight openly: and that
five thousand were set apart by themselves, which should lie in wait. That
Iosue does speedily execute that charge that was given him, and takes his
journey in the morning: by this great hasting is expressed, how effectually
the promise of God did work in them. For if all their minds had not been
delivered from fear, he should never have found them so ready to obey. But it
seems, that he does not wisely send from him so great a multitude, which by
privy ways, should come to the place meet for the lying in wait. For
although they went quietly in never so good array, yet with the only moving of
their feet, they must needs make a great noise. Now if any man will say, that
no man met them, because all the inhabitants of the country, were fled out
of the feeldes into the city: it is told soon after, that before the
Israelites came near the city, that their coming was known unto the King of
Ha^ which scarce could have been done without espialles. Now, to grant that
no man met them in the feeldes: yet it was hard to pass by, and in the
night to set the ambushment in a convenient place, and that they should there
stay, but that they should bewray themselves by some token or other. As
touching the purpose of Iosue, although he saw right well, that the turn
might have been served with a less company, yet it seems that he was
constreined through the late trembling of the people, to beware that he
attempted nothing with danger. For if a small crewe had been sent from the
host, perhaps they would have refused the charge, by which they were driven
into so great and manifest danger. In the mean time, God deals more than
mercifully with his people, when he delivers their enemies so easily to be
vanquished. But his marvelous favor herein does especially appear, in that
he so blinds them al, that none of them could suspect the train that was
made for them. And I doubt not, but where it is said, that they knew not, but
the writer of the history does commend a rare and unwonted benefit of God:
that he protected as it were with the shadow of his hand, first thirty
thousand which Iosue led, and then the other five thousand, that none of
their enemies espied them. Now, when five thousand are mentioned, I do not so
expound it, as though Iosue sent a new ambushment to lie in wait, as though
the multitude which was alredie too great, had not been sufficient: but only
he shows now, how he ordered the thirty five thousand which he armed. For
to what purpose should so great a multitude have so small an aid: Now the
same place is here noted, which before was appointed, where they were commanded
to stay, which would not agree unto two ambushmentes.

15 And Ioshue, etc.) This was another practice, that while they feigned to
run away, they drew their enemies a great way off, that they should have no
refuge into the city afterward, because it was set on fire, before they
suspected that any evil was to be feared behind them. For while the king of
Hai pursues the Israelites as vanquished, that part of the army, which lay
in secret toward Bethel, had time enough to take the city, that the
Citizens might know that they were undone when it was too late to remedy it.
For when they were driven back before, and many of them slain, after they
saw their city on fire, they were driven to utter despair, and so enclosed,
that none could escape. That some men make a question in this place, Whether it
be lawful to oppress our enemies with craft and subtlety, it proceeds from
gross ignorance. For it is certain, that wars are maintained, not only
with hand strokes: but they are counted the best Captains, which can do more
by art and policy then by force: and he that by long practice is made subtle
and crafty, is the best soldier. Therefore, if the war be lawful, there
is no doubt, but we may use the accustomed arts of victory: so that either
when truce is taken, or any other way, we break not our faith and promise.

17 And there remained not, etc.) By the context it will appear, that some
were taken in the City, and slain: and therefore we must not understand,
that all, without exception, did issue out of the city, as though old men,
and women, and children also came abroad into the feeldes: but the sense is,
that no garrison was left to keep the City. The same he pronounces of
Bethel, whereupon we may conjecture, that because Bethel was a little town,
they warred not under their own standard. Hereof it was, that because they
were not able to defend their City, they forsook it, and offered all their
strength to the king of Hai, to whom perhaps they were tributaries. But whether
they went unto the king of Hai, before the coming of the people of Israel,
that they might meet with both their forces joined together, that is uncertain:
yet it is like, that because they were not able to resist of them selves, they
came upon agreement into Hai, which was a stronger and more populous City.
Doubtless, they thought they could not otherwise be safe, except they were
preserved under the shadow of the next city, which far exce'led theirs.

18 And the Lord said, etc.) This place teaches, that either by the great
strength of the City, or by the boldness of the Citizens, or by trembling of
the people of Israel, the victory was made harder to attain to: because God,
by the lifting up of the spear, promises that he would take the City
himself. For in a matter that had been without doubtfulnesse, the token had
been superfluous. Wherefore, it is like that their minds were careful and
doubtful, when God, by the hand of Iosue, lifts up a standard of crust, that
they should not faint. Although soon after an other end is noted, where it is
said, that the ambushment by this means was stirred up and ran. So that, if
that were the sign of rising up, it will not agree, that the vanquishing power
of God was showed by the spear, which should take all doubtfulnesse from them.
But because it is not expressed, that this was the cause why the soldiers that
lay in wait came forth, for that they saw the spear, it may be, that they
came forth of their own accord, either because it was high time, or else
because the cry and the noise admonished them, that then the battle was in
fighting. And verily, it is not credible, that they could see the spear being
so far off: namely, because Iosue stayed in the vallie. Morouer, if we say
that the lifting up of the spear, which served for an other purpose, did
profit them also to be more encouraged, therein is no absurdity at all. This
ought to be certain, that by the solemn token, they were assured of the
happy success of that battle: and secondly, that the purpose of Iosue was
nothing else, but to encourage his soldiers by the commandment of God. For
it follows at the length, that Iosue did not withdraw his hand, before the
city, was taken, his enemies destroyed, and the war finished. Whereby it
appears, that in the midst of the conflict, he carried up his spear as a
sign of triumph, that the Israelites should be in no doubt of the success.
For although he had them fight, and use their weapons manfully: yet did he
likewise declare, that they had already gotten the victory. And although it
does somewhat darken the order of the story, that one thing is twice repeated:
yet the effect is manifest, that the children of Israel made as though they
were afraid, when they retired. And that they began not to fight, before the
Citizens of Hai were shut both from returning, and from defense of their city:
and that after the two armies began to fight, the other that lay in wait,
arose and made such haste, that the flame of the city being on fire, was
seen, when their enemies turned their backs, whereby they might gather, that
their city was taken by the Israelites: but that the chiefest slaughter was
made, when they that were in the city came forth and met them, for then they
were taken on both sides, that they could make no more delay, either by
resisting or fleeing. Therefore being half dead through despair, and brought
into streightes, they were slain on every side. But where it is said, that no
slaughter was made in the city before they returned, which fained that they
ran away, I do so take it, that they joined their forces and rushed in, that
they might gather the spoil, and kill as many as yet remained. If any man
object, that it was burnt while the battle was in fighting: I answer, that
some part was set on fire, that both the armies might know, that the
Israelites had taken it, but not that it was consumed with fire, for they could
not redily both gather the prey, and drive it away: yea carry forth the
vessels and other household ^^uffe, in a moment of time: and it had been
unreasonable, wilfully to destroy the spoil, which God had given them. We see
therefore, that the first fire was not kindled, to destroy the whole city, but
that part which was on fire, was a sign of taking the whole city, although
the Israelites entered, without any resistaunce, in at the gates standing wide
open. And that is soon after confirmed, while the burning of the city is
ascribed unto Iosue: not only because the city was burnt under his conduct,
but because he returning from the battle, caused it utterly to be destroyed,
as follows immediately, that he made it a heap and a perpetual waste place.

25 And the number, etc.) The sense is not, that all they that were slain were
inhabitants of Hai: but that whosoever dwelt there, were slain: so that not
one man escaped. For we saw before, that the Citizens of Bethel were joined
with them: and there is no mention made afterward of that city. Whereupon we
may gather probably, that they forsook their town, which was not defensible,
and gate them selves into a stronger place, which they thought might better be
defended. The words therefore do mean simply, that all they, which issued
out of the city, and which were found in the city, were slain every man.
Although, if any man will refer this number unto the old men, sick men,
children, and women, which were slain within the walls, I will not strive
with him. But if we consider that another little town was joined with the
city, which was not very great nor populous of it self, it is more like, that
they which were slain in the feeld are comprehended also.

26 Ioshue withdrew not, etc.) Because by holding up his spear, he gave them a
sign and token, as it were out of Heaven to hope well of the victory: he
ceased not to retain their minds, in the beholding thereof, until they had
obtained the city. By which continuance he showed sufficiently, how far off
he was from ambition: that he showed no token of baine ostentation and
boasting. For it was as much as if he renounced the office of a Captain, and
ascribed the whole praise of the victory unto God. How valiant a warrior he
was, it appears by other places. And now he was ready enough to have played
the part of a good soldier, and that had been more apt to get him glory and
renown. But when his hand is as it were bound unto his spear, he does only
exhort his soldiers, that they would look to God alone, unto whom he
resigneth the success of the battle. Nevertheless, he prevails more by
standing so, still: than if he had overthrown great heaps of the enemies on
every side, and this rest of his, was more commendable, than any agilitie that
could be.

29 The King of Ai, etc.) Although it seems he was more sharp and severe,
against the King of Hai, to satisfy the hatred of the people: yet I doubt not
but his purpose was faithfully to execute the judgment of GOD. Conquerours are
wont to spare the lives of such Kings as they have taken, because their
dignity seems to draw with it some reverence: but among those nations the
state and condition of the Kings was otherwise, in whom God would especially
declare, how much he detested their wickedness, whom he had so long borne
withal. For seeing they were all appointed to destruction, the vengeance of
God did justly appear sharp and severe, in the heads themselves, from whom
the cause of destruction proceeded against the residue. Add hereunto, that
this shameful death executed upon the Kings, made the rascal people more
reproachful, lest the people through folly and vnsesonable pitic should have
been slacked in destroying of them. And God of purpose delivered the King alive
into the hands of Iosue, that his punishment might be made the more notable,
and serve better for the example. If he had been slain at all adventures in
the brunt of the battle, he had been exempt from this peculiar ignominy and
shame. Now does God also do execution upon his carcass after his death, yea
after he was hanged, his body was cast at the gate of the city, where he used
to sit in his throne, and to exercise judgments. And a monument is set up to
continue the reproach unto the posterity. Yet mention is made of his burial:
that we may know, that nothing was done upon a furious rage, because Iosue did
Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
diligently observe that which is commanded in the law by Moses: namely, that
such as were hanged on the gallows, should be taken down before the setting
of the sun, because it is an abominable sight. And surely, as it is a point
of humanity to lay up the dead bodies under the earth: so is it a barbarous
cruelty to cast them forth, to be torn in pieces of the wild beasts and
fowls. Therefore, that the people should not be accustomed to barbarousnesse,
God permitted them to hang up male factours in such sort, as they should not
suffer them to hang longer then one day unburied. And that the people might
give better heed to their duty in this behalf, which otherwise they would
have neglected: Moses pronounces, that every one that hangs upon the tree is
accursed: as if he should say, that the land is defiled with that kind of
death, except the offense be immediately taken away.

30 Then Ioshue built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel, in Mount Ebal,

31 As Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded the children of Israel, as
it is written in the book of the Law of Moses. an altar of whole stone, over
which no man had lift an iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto
the Lord, and sacrificed peace offeringes.

32 Also he wrote there upon the stones, a rehersall of the Law of Moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.

33 And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their Judges, stood on
this side of the Arc, and on that side, before the Priests of the Levites,
which bare the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he
that is borne in the country: half of them were over against mount Getrizim,
and half of them over against mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord had
commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.

34 Then afterward he read all the words of the Law, the blessings and
curssings, according to all that is written in the book of the Law.

35 There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded which Joshua read
not before all the congregation of Israel, as well before the women and the
children, as the stranger that was conversant among them.

30 Then Ioshue builded, etc.) This first extraordinary sacrifice, God would
have to be offered unto him in the land of Chanaan: whereby the thankfulness
of the people might be testified, and the land might begin to be consecrated
with a solemn ceremony. For before this time they could not do it freely,
and in their own ground, until they had obtained some void region. There
were two things, which God commanded at one time: that they should set up an
altar in Mount Ebal: and secondarily, that they should set Deuteronomy. 27. 2. 3. 4.
up two stones, and plaster them with plaster, in which they might write the
law, that every one which passed by, might read it plainly. Now we read that
both was faithfully performed. The third precept was rehearsing the blessings
and curssinges, which Iosue did likewise execute, with no less diligence. Now,
to begin with the altar, it is said, that it was made according to the
commandment of God, of vnhewen stones: for whole stones, over which no iron
has been lifted, are called rough and vnwroughte stones. This is especially
prescribed of the altar, whereof mention is now made, Deuteronomy. 27. But the same
law was given before generally of all other altars of stone. The reason why,
is in vain of the interpreters drawn out of an Allegory: that the hand and
diligence of many is forbidden, because that as soon as we bring forth our
own inventions, the woorship of God is defiled. Which is in deed truly and
skilfully spoken, but out of place, because the purpose of God was none other,
but to forbid altars of continuance and perpetuity. For we know, that this
was the law of right sacrificing, that they should have but one altar common
to them all, both to nourishe consent among them, and also to prevent all
corruptions, that no strange superstition might creep in amongst them.
Finally, that the religion might remain one and simple: for by variety of
altars, they might easily have fallen to discord. So the people should have
been drawn into sects, and true godliness been rent in pieces. Now to choose
a place for Gods worship, was not in the peoples authority: for God does
always in the books of Moses reserve that to him self. Therefore, he
restrains the exercises of godliness unto that place, where he should put
the memory of his name. But because the will of God herein was not immediately
revealed, nor the place appointed, yet that his worship might not be
intermitted, it was permitted to set up an altar where the Ark remained, but
either of an heap of unwrought stones, or of turfes, that it might serve only
for a short time. Let the readers note, that the people had their choice to
make it either of rough stones, that the fashion of it should procure no
reverence unto it: or else of earth, which would fall away of it self.
Finally, it served to the commendation of the perpetual altar, after God had
chosen the mount Sion. Wherefore it is said in the Psalm. 122. 1, 2.
Psalm, I rejoiced because our feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem. The
word which ^ther have translated Peace offeringes, I call, and not without
cause, Sacrifices of prosperity: because they were offered either to desire
happy success, or to give thanks, and the Hebrewe word does well agree, as
the readers shall find more fully in the books of Moses.

32 Also he wrote on the stones, etc. There was another respect of the stones,
which are here spoken of, in which God would have a perpetual monument of his
law to remain: that the pure religion as it were enclosed by them might be
defended from the superstitions of Egypt. Therefore they were plastered with
white Lime, that they might be better seen, and that the writing might be read
more distinctly. And I no willingly agree to their opinion, which by the law
repeated, do understand a copy written out: although it seems not credible
unto me, that the whole book of the law was there written: for no stones,
were they never so great, would be able to contein so large a writing. Wherefore
in the name of the law I suppose that the sum and short precepts are noted.
Whereby strangers also which entered into the land, might openly know, what
God was there worshipped: and all excuse of error and ignorance was taken away,
while the law was not hidden in a book, but set abroad before the eyes of all
men. Finally, although the Priests had been dumble, yet the stones themselves
did speak openly.

33 And all Israel, etc. The third token of obedience was, that Iosue placed
all the tribes of Israel in mount Garizim, and mount Ebal, that half stood on
the one hill, and half on the other hill. For so they were placed, that six
tribes stood on mount Ebal, and the other six stood over against them, on
the mount Garizim. And the Levites with the Arc of covenant stood in the
midst between them, that God might be compassed on each side with his people.
And it is said, that Iosue stood forth first of all, to bless the people:
namely, because it was the purpose of God to allure the people unto himself
sweetly and with amiable gentleness. For although Moses, to reprove the
stubbornes of the people, does only rehearse the curses: yet it is certain,
they were but accidental: for this was the right order, that blessings should
rather bend them to obedience, which of themselves were disobedient. But when
so general inuitation and allurement did nothing profit, the curses were added
for a new help and remedy. God had promised a liberal reward to his
servants that were obedient to the Law. Again, he terrified the
transgressoures, by setting forth the curses. Now are they every one compelled
to subscribe to his judgments, while unto every sentence they answer. Amen.
For by this means they do not only hear that they are condemned by the mouth
of God, but as if they were Preachers sent from him, they pronounce what
punishment is due unto themselves. The like proclamation was made in the plain
of Moab, beyond Iordane. But now they are more straightly bound, and do
acknowledge upon what condition they shall dwell in the land of Chanaan. And
this charge was not a little increased, in that the young children were also
taken to them for witnesses.

Chap. 9.
ANd when all the Kings that were beyond Jordan, in the mountains, and in the
valleys, and by all the coasts of the great Sea, over against Lebanon, (as the
Hittites, and the Amorites, the Chanaanites, the Perizzites, the Hiuites, and
the Iebusites) heard thereof,

2 They gathered themselves together, to fight against Ioshue, and against
Israel, with one accord.

3 But the inhabitants of Gibeon heard, what Ioshue had done unto Jericho,
and to Ai,

4 And therefore they wrought craftily: for they went, and feigned themselves
Ambassadors, and took old sackes upon their asses, and old bottels for wine
both rent, and bound up,

5 And old shoes and clouted upon their feet: also the raiment upon them was
old, and all their provision of bread was dried and mouled.

6 So they came unto Ioshue into the host to Gilgal, and said unto him, and
unto the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make a
league with us.

7 Then the men of Israel said unto the Hiuites, It may be that thou dwell
among us, how then can I make a league with thee?

8 And they said unto Ioshue, We are thy servants. Then Ioshue said unto
them, Who are ye? And whence come ye?

9 And they answered him, From a very far country thy servants are come,
for the name of the Lord thy God: for we have heard his fame, and all that he
has done in Egypt,

10 And all that he has done to the two Kings of the Amorites that were
beyond Jordan, to Sihon King of Heshbon, and to Og King of Bashan, which were
at Ashraroth.

11 Wherefore our elders, and all the inhabitants of our country, spoke to us,
saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet them, and say
unto them, We are your servants, now therefore make you a league with us.

12 This our bread we took it hot with us for victuals out of our houses, the
day we departed to come unto you: but now behold, it is dried, and it is
mouled.

13 Also these bottels of wine, which we filled, were new, and lo, they be
rent, and these our garments, and our shoes are old, by reason of the
exceeding great journey.

14 And the men accepted their tale, concerning their victuals, and counseled
not with the mouth of the Lord.

15 So Ioshue made peace with them, and made a league with them, that he would
suffer them to live: also the Princes of the congregation swear unto them.

1 When all the Kings, etc.) Seeing these Kings were not ignorant from the
beginning of the peoples coming, it is certain, that their minds were made
drunk from above with security, or rather slouthfulnes, that they did not at
the first make a league, and join to gether to come forth against them. For
it was a point of extreme blockishnesse, to take no care of themselves before
they were violently drawn out of their drowsiness, by the overthrow of two
cities. For because it was a common war, it was a kind of voluntary
yielding, to send no aid to their neighbors against their enemies, yea to
have no army in a readiness that might violently set upon them for their
defense. But by this means God favored the infirmity of his people, unto
whom the strength of so many nations being joined in one, would have been very
terrible. Wherefore it is certain, that by their sloth and dullness, the
Israelits were made more valiant. For they had time given them to gather their
forces together, and they that would have been troubled with the very name of
their enemies, prepare themselves at leisure to be ready to receive them when
they came. So although the reprobate do use all means to destroy the church:
yet God, to take away from them all power of annoying, does scatter and
overthrow their counsels: yea does cut off their courage. On the other side
their furious boldness bewraieth it self, that they are not moved with so
manifest a miracle, but they will still set themselves like fearce and mad
beasts, against the invincible power of God. The report of the taking of
Jericho was brought unto them. But how was it taken? By policy or labor of
men? By assault, or by artillery was it ouerthrown? Nay, the walls fell down
alone. With what confidence then do they conspire to make war against Heaven?

3 But the inhabitants of Gibeon, etc.) Only the Inhabitants of Gibeon refuse
the purpose of war, and apply their minds to subtlety, that under pretense
of dwelling far off, they might obtein peace. Now was this an odious matter
among their neighbors to attempt: for it was a kind of departing from them,
to diminish the force of their confederates, and so to set open the gates to
the Israelites. And although the foolish credulity and light belief of Iosue,
and the rulers was worthy of reprehension, in that they would so unadvisedly
make a covenant, before they knew the matter: yet God, which is wont to bring
light out of darkness, turned it into their benefit: for that hereby relief
was given them, that the Israelites might rest in a quiet soil. Surely, the
Gibeonites did well and wisely determine, that it was better for them to suffer
any thing, rather then by resisting in vain, to provoke God any more against
them. But to circumuent those men by fraud and unlawful craft, whose favor
they humbly desired, it was no less unreasonable and ridiculous, then against
reason and equity: for how could that league be steadfast which was grounded
upon nothing but gross deceiptfulnesse. For they feign that they were
strangers that came from a far country. Therefore Iosue makes a covenant
with counterfeit or imagined men, and the league has no hold, but according
to their words. So the craft, by which they sought to thrust in themselves,
ought to have profited the^ nothing. But as there was greater integrity and
sincerity among men in those days: so they thought it enough, to get an oath
by deceiptfulnesse: which they were sure the people of Israel would never
break. Where it is said, that they also dealt craftily, some refer it
amiss to that stratagem or policy of war, which Iosue used in deceiving the
Citizenes of Hai: and no less unskillfully do some draw it unto the time of
Jacob, whose sons Levy and Simeon by fraud oppressed Genesis 34.
the Sichemits. But rather it is an opposition between the warlike preparation
of the Kings, and the crafty subtlety by which they did set upon Iosue.
Therefore, after it was said, that the rest conspired to come to open fight:
there follows the craft of the Gibeonites: and therefore the sense is, that
Iosue had to do, not only with professed enemies, which gathered themselves to
fight: but also with the crafty dissimulation of one nation. Yet it may be
enquired, why they took such pains in a matter nothing necessary. For we
shall see in another place, that the Israelites were commanded to offer peace
to all men, that upon their refusal they might proclaim just and lawful war
against them. But because it was commonly reported, that they sought a dwelling
place in the land of Chanaan, which they could not obtain, except they chased
away the inhabitants, the Gibeonits persuade themselus, that they might not
otherwise be moved to compassion, except they deceived by subtlety, because
they thought that wittingly and willingly they would never have suffered the
land which they invaded to be possessed of other. Yea, because the commandment
was known, that they should destroy them all, this necessity compelled them
to subtlety, because all hope of health was taken from them. And by this
reason soon after they desire pardon for their subtlety, whereunto they were
driven by necessity. Yet here arises a question: because the Israelites do
object again, that it was not lawful for the^ to make any covenant with the
nations of Chanaan, but that they must destroy them all. Indeed these two
things do not agree: that they should exhort them to yield, and yet not
receive them which humbly and willingly did yield. But although God would
keep the law of arms, according to the usual manner and custom, and that
peace should be offered on that condition, that they would give place: yet he
meant only to try the minds of those nations, that by their own obstinacy they
should be cause of their own destruction: and the people of Israel were charged
utterly to destroy the^: whereupon this judgment is taken, that they which
dwelt in the land of Chanaan, might not be borne withal, with whom it was not
lawful to make any covenant. And afterward, both these matters are plainly
expressed: namely, that they did all obstinately make war, because that the
judgment of God was, that their hearts should be hardened, that they might
perish. Wherevpo^ we may gather, that they could not be saved, which were
appointed to die. If any man object, that the Gibeonites which willingly
desired peace, were therefore accepted: I answer, that the Israelites do not
consider at this time, that solemn ceremony, which took no effect: but took
hold of the only promise, with the commandment of God: whereby it comes
to pass, that they leave no hope at all unto them: because they were simply
and precisely commanded to kill them every one, to purge the land, and to dwell
in their places whom they had slain.

6 So they came, etc.) I said before, that by good right this league was in
vain, and to no purpose. For what do they win, if they obtain their
desire, but that they should be in safety, if they came out of a far
distant region of the world? And the oftener they do repeat the same lie, the
more they do abbrogate the covenant procured by deceit, because the league is
not conceived, but in these words, That the Israelites do not molest a
strange and far distant people, especially, when the Israelites do by name
exclude all the inhabitants of the land of Chanaan. Therefore they should have
gained no reward by their subtlety. Neither does it any thing help them, that
they do deceive the mind of Iosue, with a false pretense of the name of God.
For they pretend, that they were come in the name of God: as though they
professed, that they gave glory to God, and even to the God of Israel: in
which words is contained a refusal of those superstitions, unto which they
were accustomed. For if it were true, that they were moved to come by the fame
of those miracles, which were showed in Egypt, they ascribe the highest power
to the God of Israel, though unknown to them.

14 So the men took, etc.) They be vain collections of them, which think
they tasted of the bread, to feel whether it were moldie with oldnesse: or
that they did confirm their league with a feast: whereas in my judgment,
rather their too much credulity is reproved, that they did lightly believe
such a feigned tale, and that while they look only to the bread, they did not
consider, that this feigned devise was without color of truth. And surely, if
their senses had not been dulled, they might easily have found many things to
disprove the Gibeonites. But because the quickest sight is sometimes deceived
with a vain show, their error is more sharply reproved, that they enquired
not what was the pleasure of God. The remedy was at hand, if they had
attempted nothing without the oracle of God. And the matter was of such weight,
as they ought to have diligently enquired of it. Wherefore, it was a sign of
gross negligence, when the Priest was at hand, which by Vrim and Thumim might
have enquired an answer of God, to decree unadvisedly of so doubtful a
matter: as though they had had no counsel to direct them. Wherefore, their
rashness was the less excusable, which was joined with such manifest neglect
of the grace of God.

16 But at the end of three days, after they had made a league with them,
they heard that they were their neighbors, and that they dwelt among them.

17 And the children of Israel took their journey, and came unto their cities
the third day, and their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and
Kiriathearim.

18 And the children of Israel slew them not, because the Princes of the
Congregation had sworn unto them, by the Lord God of Israel: wherefore all
the Congregation murmured against the Princes.

19 Then all the Princes said unto all the Congregation, We have sworn unto
them by the Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them.

20 But this we will do to them, and let them live, lest the wrath be upon
us, because of the oath which we swear unto them.

21 And the Princes said unto them again, Let them live, but they shall hew
wood, and draw water unto all the Congregation, as the Princes appoint them.

22 Ioshue then called them, and talked with them, and said, Wherefore have ye
beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you, when ye dwell among us?

23 Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from
being bondmen, and hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of my God.

24 And they answered Ioshue, and said, Because it was told thy servants,
that the Lord thy God had commanded his servant Moses to give you all the
land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land out of your sight:
therefore we were exceeding sore afraid for our lives, at the presence of you,
and have done this thing:

25 And behold now we are in thine hand: do as it seems good and right in
thine eyes to do unto us.

26 Even so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the
children of Israel, that they slew them not.

27 And Ioshue appointed them that same day to be hewers of wood, and drawers
of water for the Congregation, and for the altar of the Lord unto this day, in
the place which he should choose.

16 And after three days, etc. That within three days after, the error being
espied, their lightness was reproved, the speedy punishment ought to have
stricken them with more reproach and shame. For so it was known, that through
to much negligence, they were more than shamefully deceived, because they would
not stay to enquire of a matter that was almost before their eyes. That they
take their journey peaceably in that country, that they enter safely into the
cities, and find victualles at will, that proceeds of the fatherly
mercifulness of God, which does not only pardon their offense, but also
turns into good, that which of right should have been hurtful unto them. And
here is declared, that the children of Israel do not exercise any hostility
in that contrie, because the immunitie that was promised to the Gibeonites, was
confirmed with an oath. Now it is first demanded, Whether the Israelits were
bound by any religion, whose purpose was nothing less, than to bind their
faith to such deceivers? Then arises an other question, Whether it were not in
the peoples authority, to break that which the Capteines had foolishly and
lewdly promised? As touching the general sentence, the religion of an oath
ought to be so holy amongst us, that under pretense of error we depart not
from those couenantes, even in which we have been deceived: seeing the holy
name of God is more precious than all the riches of the world. Therefore,
though a man have sworn unadvisedly, no loss or hinderance ought to break
his promise. And I doubt not but in this sense. David says, that Psalm. 15. 4.
the true worshippers of God, if they swear to their hinderance, do not
change it. For they will rather suffer loss, than by breaking their promise
bring the name of God in contempt. Wherefore I determine, if only our private
commodity be to be considered, whatsoever we have promised by oath, is to be
performed. And by the words it appears, that the Israelites were afraid to
bring the name of their God in reproach among the nations of Chanaan. For I
understand, that it is said for vehemence sake: that they swear by the God of
Israel. But there was a special reason, which made it free, for the Israelites
not to abide by that deceiptfull covenant: because they had not only departed
from their own right, but also they had gone from the commandment of God,
which it was not lawful to touch in the smallest point. It was not in their
power, either to spare them that are vanquished, or else to make any couenantes
of giving over and yielding. But now they indent, as though the matter were in
their own hands. We see therefore, how they have twice dishonored the name
of God, while under pretense of an oath, they do obstinately defend that,
which they had foolishly promised. But whereas the common people do yield so
much to their Capteines, in that they hold their hands from the Gibeonits,
therein appears the honest simplicity of that age. For it had been an easy
matter to illude them, that the whole people was not bound, by the decree of a
few men: like as once the Romans refused the peace called Caudina, unto which
only the Consuls and Liuetenantes and Tribunes had sworn, without the
commandment of the Senate, and the people. Therefore, that rude simplicity
was more commendable, in which appears more reverence and religion, than too
curious and near sifting of matters, in which the greatest part of men at
this day do please themselves, and greatly delight. And although the people
take it heavily, that the Capteines have taken upon them more than was meet
they should, yet it was a token of modesty, that the people proceeded no
further, than murmuring and grudging.

20 This will we do, etc.) Although they grant the Gibeonits their life,
according to the covenant: yet they do not confirm the league, but touching
the one half thereof. For whereas they should have performed unto the
Gibeonites, perfect safety, they take from them their liberty, which was
deerer than their life it self. Whereupon we gather, that Iosue with the rest,
as in a doubtful and uncertain matter, devised this mean way, that the oath
should not be altogether in vain. The chief reason indeed of this devise,
was to appease the multitude: yet because they were highly displeased, that the
Gibeonites had so deceived them, they punished their crafty dealing, lest if
they had escaped without any revenge, the scornful reproach might have been
increased. And this was an hard condition, not only to be bound to slavish
labor, but also to be drawn from their houses, to lead a wandering and an
uncertain life. Therefore they are appointed to be cleauers of wood, and
drawers of water for the host, which was an office no less base, than
painful. But this is an increase of the slavery, that they must cleave
wood, and draw water, wheresoever it shall please God to place the Arc.

22 Iosue called, etc.) Because he was to pronounce a sharp and heavy
sentence against them: he tells them before, that he decrees nothing
unjustly, because it was nothing convenient, that they should take any
advantage of their own craft and deceiptfulnesse. Therefore he rebukes them,
that they sought by making a lie to avoid the danger: and afterward
pronounces, that they were accursed: by which word I understand, that the
fault of their bondage is laid upon them selves: that they sustained no harder
punishment, than they deserved by their fraud and subtlety: as if he said,
The matter of that condemnation which he pronounces, was in them selves. It is
sharp in deed, that no end is appointed to their labors, whereunto they
were made thrall, and so the words do sound: There shall never fail to be
servants of you. But yet he affirms they shall have no wrong, because they
were accursed through their own fault. As for them, they excuse their fault as
much as they can by necessity, and yet they refuse not the punishment, which
they acknowledge they have justly deserved. It may be they were so overcome with
fear, that they refused nothing, or else that without flattery they did
humbly and ^uetly submit them selves to such conditions, as were laid upon
them. For what should they have prevailed by contending or striving? Because
their conscience did accuse them, and they were not able to defend their
offense: I doubt not but that they thought they were very gently dealt withal,
that their life was preserved.

Chap. 10.
NOW when Adoni-zedek King of Jerusalem had heard how Ioshue had taken Ai and
had destroyed it: (for as he had done to Jericho and to the King thereof, so he
had done to Ai and to the King thereof:) and how the inhabitants of Gibeon
had made peace with Israel, and were among them,

2 Then they feared exceedingly: for Gibeon was a great city, as one of the
royal cities: for it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty.

3 Wherefore Adoni-zedek King of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham King of Hebron, and
unto Piram King of Iarmuth, and unto Iapia King of Lachish, and unto Debir King
of Eglon, saying,

4 Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for they have made
peace with Ioshue, and with the children of Israel.

5 Therefore the five Kings of the Amorites, the King of Jerusalem, the King
of Hebron, the King of Iarmuth, the King of Lachish, and the King of Eglon,
gathered them selves together, and went up, they with all their hosts, and
besieged Gibeon, and made war against it.

6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Ioshue, even to the host to Gilgal, saying,
Withdraw not thine hand from thy servants, come up to us quickly, and save
us, and help us: for all the Kings of the Amorites, which dwell in the
mountains, are gathered together against us.

7 So Ioshue ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him,
and all the men of might.

8 And the Lord said unto Ioshue, Fear them not: for I have given them into
thine hand: none of them shall stand against thee.

9 Ioshue therefore came unto them soudenly: for he went up from Gilgal all the
night.

10 And the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great
slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goes up to Beth-horon,
and smote them to Azekah, and to Makkedah.

11 And as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to
Beth-horon, the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them, until
Azekah, and they dyed: they were more that died with the hailestones, than they
whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.

12 Then spoke Ioshue to the Lord, in the day when the Lord gave the Amorites
before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stay
thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon, in the vallie of Aialon.

13 And the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, until the people avenged
them selves upon their enemies: (Is not this written in the book of Iasher?)
So the Sun abode in the midst of the heaven, and hasted not to go down for
a whole day.

14 And there was no day like that, before it, nor after it, that the Lord
heard the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.

1 When Adoni-zedek, etc.) That which he touched before breefly, he does now
prosecute more at large, of the confederation of the Kings, which dwelled both
in the mountains, and in the plain. For when he had said, that they were at
the length stricken with fear, to take in hand the war in common: he
breaks off the speech, and passes straight to the Gibeonites. And that which
he spoke of the Kings in general, now he refers unto the person of one
King: not that Adoni-zedek only was afraied: but because he stirred up all the
rest, and was General captain, and chief governor of the war against the
Israelites. And that is sufficiently expressed by the plural number of the
Uerbe: When Adoni-zedek heard, they were exceedingly afraid: whereby it
appears, that they were all of one mind: but because in this fear, the rest
were slack, this man which was greatest in authority, and nearest the
danger, called four other unto the wars with him. Therefore, in the
beginning of the Chapter is repeated, how the five Kings joined in league, to
fight against the Israelites, to prevent the danger that was equal to them
all. But because the Gibeonites, in the mean time, had yielded them selves,
they turned their force first against them, both that by taking punishment of
them, as Traitors of their contrie, they might make them an example to all
their neighbors: and also that by conquering them, they might strike a terror
into their enemies, and encorage their own soldiers with greater boldness.
Therefore, they determine to set upon the Gibeonites, which had made a breach
by their embassage to make an open entry to the Israelites. And this was
indeed an honest pretense of war, to be revenged of their cowardlinesse,
which had rather to reach their hand to strangers that wasted all things, th^^
faithfully to defend their neighbors. But the Gibeonites had now tried by
experience, how unprofitable their crafty devise was, except they had been
saved by the mercy of the Israelites. In the mean time, God suffered them to
be in danger, that being twice delivered, they might more willingly and
quietly submit themselves unto the yoke of bondage.

6 So the men of Gibeon, etc.) The order of the story is perverted: for surely
the Gibeonites did not stay till they were beseeged, but when they saw the
army to be gathered, and made in a readiness. And there is no doubt, but they
should bear off the first brunt themselves, because they procured the hatred
of all men against them: therefore, before they were assalted, they fly in
time to the fidelity of Iosue, for it had been neither right nor honest nor
lawful, to forsake them, to whom they had given their life: yea, because they
yielded themselves after the covenant, they must be defended against violence
and injury. Wherefore, not without cause they desire help of the Israelites,
under whose protection they were: neither is Iosue stacke to help them,
because he judges it to be his duty to defend them, whom he has once
received into his tuition. It is true, they had deceived him: but since their
craft was espied, and they confessed it with an excuse, pardon was given them
again: so the Israelites were bound in respect of equity and duty, not to
leave them undefended: yet the willing readiness of Iosue is praise worthy,
(...) so soon as he was desired, he aideth them without delay: for it is said
that he traveled all the night, so that he could not have made greater have
for the safegarde of all his own people. If the same sinceri tie had always
been in the profane nations, they would rather in time have helped their
confederates, than have revenged the injuries offered unto them after they had
sustained great calamity. And yet the word (suddenly) must not be restrained to
one day, as though they had accomplished in one night three days journey, and
the next day have appeared unto the Gibeonites. Only great speed is noted, that
he deferred not the journey until the next day. For when the Israelites had
removed their camp from Hai, or some place near unto it, it was three days
before they entered into the cost of the Gibeonites. We see that being then
set in array they marched forward slowly, and Iosue was now fare off: when
he was called to aid the ^^^beonites. For we see that Gilgal was the first
station from the passage of Jordan, so that it was further off than Jericho. If
any man think it against reason, that after he had possessed the dominion of
certain of cities, he retired back again, and so left the country open to
the enemies, which it would be some labor to recover again: I answer, it
was not to be feared, lest they would come far to meet him, and take a
journey that was so full of great danger and like trouble. For it is like, that
when an army was mustered for the taking of Jericho, that the women, children,
and all the weak multitude, stayed with their stuff, in that quiet corner:
when on the contrary short of Jordan that was over against them, they that
were left of the Rubenites and Gadites, with the half tribe of Manasses, were
a defense unto them. For to what purpose should they ^aue drawn with them the
children and women, whereof some were great with child, some newly delivered,
some nurses with young infantes, into the battelles? Where should so great a
multitude had victuals in the midst of the out ridings of their enemies?
Where was watering to suffice such a multitude of cattle? Wherefore, thus I
take it, that Iosue and the soldiers returned to their tents, to refresh
themselves a while, with their wives and children, and to lay up the spoil
there, where with they were enriched.

8 The Lord said, etc.) It is doubtful, whether God did not prevent and arm
Iosue with his oracle, and drew him out of Gilgal before he removed, or else
confirmed him when he was now ready to take his journey. I think rather, that
Iosue as soon as he was required, did not rashly run forth without asking
counsel of God: but then, when at the length he was certified of his pleasure,
he did boldly and cheerfully take armor upon him: especially when he was but
lately punished for being too easy to be entreated, it is a likely conjecture
that in so doubtful a matter he attempted nothing, but by the commandment of
God. Therefore, God took pity on the poor Giveonites, when he suffered them
not to be destitute of the aid of his people. And Iosue is armed with
confidence of victory, that he might succoure them, because God does more
sharply prick us forward to do our duty, by promising, than by commanding:
although that which is here promised to one, pertains to all. But it is
committed peculiarly to Iosue for his honors sake, that he might deliver it
afterward to the whole army. For God does not speak out of heaven to al men
indifferently: but he has honor^^ ^is chief servants and chosen Prophets
only, with this prerogative. Furthermore, it is worthy to be noted, that Iosue
abused not the promise of God to slothfulness: but so much the more
vehemently he was kindled to take pains, after he was instructed of the happy
success. For many, while they boast of faith, through lewd^ securitse beecome
idle and slouthful. He hears that the victory is in his hand: and runs
swiftely to fight, that he may enjoy it. For he knew that the happy success
was not therefore revealed unto him, that he should be more idle or
slothful: but that he might labor more earnestly about it: so it came to
pass, that he set upon his enemies before they looked for him.

10 And the Lord, etc.) The first slaughter he made with the swords of the
people: but through his own power. Whereof we gather, that when soever he
works by men: his glory is nothing diminished, but he must challenge to him
self all that is done. For when he uses the labor of men, he does not call
them to aid, as his fellows: nor boroweth any thing of them; but when it is in
his power with his only beck to bring to pass what he will, he uses men as
instruments, that he may show how they are governed by his hand and pleasure.
In the mean time both is truly said, that the enemies were discomfited and
vanquished, either by God or by the Israelites, because God, by the Israelites
did overthrow them. In the other slaughter the hand of God does more clearly
appear, when they were overthrown with hailestones. And it is expressly
said, that more were stricken down with the hail, than slain with the hand:
that it might not be doubtful, but that the victory was given from heaven.
Whereby again it is gathered, that this was no usual hail: as storms are
naturally raised: for then more should have been wounded, or else dispersed and
scatered abroad, than soudeinly slain: and secondly, except God had directly
thrown it, part would have fallen upon the heads of the Israelites. Now,
when the one only army is stricken with it, and the other being free from
hurt, comes as it were to join with him, it is clearly manifest, that God
himself fights out of heaven. To that same intent pertains that which is
said, that God threw great hailestones out of heaven: for the sense is, that it
fell with an unusual force, and exceeded the common quantity in greatness.
If any tempest rising in the midst of a battle, has been profitable to the
one part, it has been thought that God has showed a token of his favor.
Hereof comes this saying of the Poet Claudian to the Emperor Theodosius, O
Prince of God beloved right,
The clouds, and all, for thee do fight,


Howbeit, in this place a more notable miracle is rehearsed, in which God did
openly show his power.

12 Then Ioshue spoke to the Lord, etc.) The words are so read, although some
do expound it, Before the Lord, for that to speak to God, whom piety
teaches to be humbly entreated, it seems scarce agreeable to the modesty of
faith, and immediately after it follows, that Iosue directed his words to the
Sun. Howbeit, I doubt not, but in the first part of the sentence his prayer
or wish is noted: in the other the testimony of his confidence and trust,
after God had bearde him. For it had been a matter of great pride and
rashness, to command the Sun to stand, if he had not obtained license so to
do. Therefore he prays and consulteth with God: and after he has received an
answer, he boldly commands the Sun to do that he knows to be the
pleasure of God. And this is the force and prerogative of faith, which Christ
commends, that she makes mountains and seas obedient to her commandment.
For the more Math. 17. 2^ Luke, 17. 6.
the godly do acknowledge their emptines, the more liberally God both power
his virtue and power into them: and when faith is joined to the word, he
shows his power in her: finally, faith borrows the boldness of commanding
of the word, in which she is founded. So Elias shut up heaven, and opened it at
his commandment, 1. Reg. 17, (...).
and drew fire from heaven. So Christ armeth his disciples with heavenly
power, that they might subdue the elements unto them. Only we must beware,
that no man run forth of his own head to unadvised commandments. For
which cause Iosue did not attempt to stay and restrain the course of the
Sun, before he was thoroughly instructed of the purpose of God. And although
by that word, where it is said, Iosue spoke unto God, is not expressed that
modesty and submission, which becomes the servant of God to use in prayer:
yet let it suffice us, that thereby is breefly noted, that Iosue required of
God, that which he desired, and when he had obtained his request, he did boldly
and freely set forth that incredible miracle, which was not yet come to
pass. For he would never have been so bold with such security to command the
Sun before all men, except he had been thoroughly persuaded of his calling:
otherwise he should have sustained a foul and shameful reproach. Therefore,
that he does not doubtfully break out into this voice, That the Sun and the
Moon should decline from the pernetuall law of nature, it is as much as if he
did adjure them by the infinite power of God, wherewith he is endued. And here
shines the singular favor of God toward his Church, that as in favor of
mankind he divides the day from the night by the daily course of the Sun,
and it turns about continually that mighty great globe with unwearied
swiftenesse: so for a short time he would have it to stand still, until the
enemies of Israel were destroyed.

13 And the Sun, etc.) Some do no less unseasonably move a question, how
the Sun stood in Giveon, than they do unskilfully answer it. For Iosue
does not subtily place the Sun in one point: that we must needs feign the
battle to have been fought on Midsummer day: but because he was going down
toward the country of A^alon, so far as a man could judge by his sight,
Iosue commanded him there to abide and stay, that he might remain above the
Horizon, as they call it. Finally, the Sun is stayed from going down,
whereunto he was then inclined: neither do I greatly regard the number of
the hours, because it is sufficient for me, that the day was prolonged by the
space of one whole night. If any stories of that age were remaining, there is
no doubt, but so notable a miracle should be set forth in them: yet that the
credit of it should not be doubtful, the writer of the book testifies, that
it is contained in an other writing, although the book which he cites be
lost: and interpretours do not well agree about the name Iazar. They that
would have Moses noted thereby, do fondly draw the example, which is here
told, to general predictions. But because Moses so calls the chosen people,
it will better agree, that by this book is noted the Chronicle of their acts
and deeds. I truly by that word do understand, either God, or Israel, rather
than the author of the history.

14 And there was no day, etc.) Once again we read in the Prophet Esaie, and
in the holy history, that the ordinary course of Esaias. 38. 5. 8.
the Sun was changed in favor of King Ezechias. For that he might be
persuaded, that his life should be prolonged by the space of fifteen years,
the shadow of the Sun was drawn back by ten degrees, which he had
descended. Therefore it is not precisely denied, that any such like thing has
been granted to any other, but the miracle is extolled as singular. Whereas
some turn the Uerbe SHAMANG to obey, I refuse it as to hard. For though it is
said in the Psalm, that God does according to the desire of his servants,
which is as much in effect as to obey, yet it is better to avoid what soever
seems to bring GOD in subjection. Simply therefore the excellency of the
miracle is praised, because no such thing had been seen before, nor has
happened afterward. In the second member of the verse, as well the gentleness
and facility of God is commended, as also his fatherly favor toward the
people, for whom he is said to have fought.

15 After, Ioshue returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal:

16 But the five Kings fled, and were hid in a cave at Mak-kedah.

17 And it was told Ioshue, saying, The five Kings are found hid in a cave at
Mak-kedah.

18 Then Ioshue said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set
men by it for to keep them:

19 But stand ye not still: follow after your enemies, and smite all the
hindmost, suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the Lord your God
has given them into your hand.

20 And when Ioshue, and the children of Israel, had made an end of slaying
them with an exceeding great slaughter, till they were consumed, and the rest
that remained of them were entered into walled cities,

21 Then all the people returned to the camp, to Ioshue, at Mak-kedah in
peace: no man moved his tongue against the children of Israel.

22 After, Ioshue said, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out these five
Kings unto me forth of the cave.

23 And they did so, and brought out those five Kings unto him forth of the
cave, even the King of Jerusalem, the King of Hebron, the King of Iarmuth, the
King of Lachish, and the King of Eglon.

24 And when they had brought out those Kings unto Ioshue, Ioshue called for
all the men of Israel, and said unto the chief of the men of war, which
went with him, Come near, set your feet upon the necks of these Kings: and
they came near, and set their feet upon their necks.

25 And Ioshue said unto them, Fear not, nor be faint hearted, but be strong
and of a good courage: for thus will the Lord do to all your enemies, against
whom ye fight.

26 So then Ioshue smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees,
and they hanged still upon the trees, until the evening.

27 And at the going down of the Sun, Ioshue gave commandment, that they
should take them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave, (wherein
they had been hid:) and they laid great stones upon the caves mouth, which
remain until this day.

28 And the same day Ioshue took Mak-kedah, and smote it with the edge of the
sword, and the King thereof destroyed he with them, and all the souls that
were therein, he let none remain: for he did to the King of Mak-kedah, as he
had done unto the King of Jericho.

15 And Ioshue returned, etc.) This verse is interlaced not in proper place.
For immediately after is annexed the end of the battle, and the punishment
that was taken of the Kings, which followed after the battle. It is said
also, that they pitched in Mak-kedah: at length, in the end of the Chapter, is
repeated, that which is here said, without regard of the order of the time of
their return into Gilgal. Therefore, that which is told of the fleeing and
hiding of the Kings, agrees with the history before. For when word was
brought to Iosue, in the midst of the heat of the battle, that they were
hid in a cave: he provides wisely, least if he should have been occupied in
taking of them, the rest should have escaped. Therefore he commands, that
the mouth of the cave should be stopped up with great stones, and sets men to
keep them, that being enclosed as it were in prison, they might be drawn
forth in due time to suffer death. And hereof it appears, that it was an
exceeding great army, that when the Israelites followed fiercely at the backs
of them that fled, and the Sun himself gave them leisure to kill them, yet
it could not be avoided, but that many escaped into the strong cities. But this
was sufficient to testify the goodness of God, that without resistaunce they
slew as many as came in their hands, until they were weary, and returned
without loss. For where it is said, that none durst stir their tongue, it
is noted, that the victory was without bloodshed on the Israelites part: as
if they had come forth, not to a battle, but to a slaughter.

18 Then said Ioshue, etc.) When the army was discomfited, then Iosue did
freely and at leisure take punishment on the Kings, wherein we must always
consider the commandment of GOD. Or else it had been barbarous cruelty, and
intolerable pride, to tread with their feet upon the necks of Kings, and
to hang up their dead bodies upon the gallows. For surely, they were not long
before lifted up by God, into that excellent dignity, and placed in the royal
throne. Wherefore, so to rejoice in despite of them, had been no point of
humanity, but that God did so command it. But because he would have it to be
so, we must rest in his sentence, neither is it lawful to enquire, Why he was
so severe? Although we must remember that, which I touched before, that seeing
from the highest to the lowest, they were all worthy of destruction, because
their iniquity was come up to the full, the Kings which exceeded the rest in
wickedness, deserved the sharper punishment: and secondly, example of rigor,
without mercy, was to be showed in their person, least the people fondly
desiring the praise of unlawful clemency, should have been made more ready
to pardon the rest. For God would have them all to be destroyed, and the
execution of this judgment he had committed to his people. And except he had
sharply pricked them forward to do their duty in this behalf, they would
have found out goodly pretenses of granting of pardon. But that mercy is
detestable, which breaks the authority of God, for the will and pleasure of
men. Now when the honor of Kings is not spared, all cause of humanity
toward the inferiors, and the whole multitude, is cut off. And by this
instruction GOD shows, how greatly he esteems the chosen people: for it was
a token, that he did highly esteem them, that he subdued Kings under their
feet: that they might insult over their excellency, as much as if they had
been poor varlots, as it is said in the Psalm: A two edged sword in their
hands, that they may be revenged upon the nations: Psalm. 149. 6. 7. 8. 9.
to bind their Kings in fetters, and their Nobles in chains of iron, that they
may execute the judgment that is written, Such honor have all his Saints.
Also that fearful sight served to strike a terror into the Israelites, that
they should not follow the manners of the Gentiles, whose wickedness they
saw that God did so sharply punish. Therefore Moses does often use this
admonition, Thou saw how God took vengeance upon the nations, that were
before thee in the land of Chanaan: Therefore beware, that thou provoke not the
wrath of thy God with their perverse works. Finally, that he might be
worshipped more purely, he commanded the land to be purged from all coruptions:
and because the inhabitants were exceeding wicked, he would have his curse to
be showed upon them after a strange and unwonted manner.

25 Fear not, etc.) Now Iosue does celebrate a triumph in the person of these
five Kings, over all the rest that remained. For he does even as much exhort
his men to boldness: as if they which yet were untouched, did lie already
under their feet. Whereof we gather, that while these few were trodden under
feet, the people were lifted up, as it were into a great hight, that they
might look down, and despise all the rest, as already overthrown. And surely
the power of God was therein clearly seen, which might make them have a
courage in time to come. And we must note, that they were hanged up, not that
Iosue would show any greater cruelty against them: but only to their
reproach, because they were slain already, but it was profitable that the
notable vengeance of GOD should be openly set forth in the sight of all men.
Peradventure also the purpose of God was, to drive the rest of nations through
desperation into rage and madness, that they might procure to them selves more
speedy destruction, while they whette the Israelites to wrath, by their
stubbornness. The same shameful end is given to the King of Mak-kedah, which
brought forth no army against them. The like slaughter is made of all the
people which remained still, within the walls. Yet it is like, they attempted
some hostility. But the chief cause was, that God had given one sentence upon
them all. I have showed before, wherefore their carcases at even were cast into
the cave. And this story sets forth to us, as it were in a glass, that
when God sits in his seat of judgment, all the glory of the world
vanishes away before him: yea, that by his judgment, the glory of them which
seemed to excel, is turned into extreme shame.

29 Then Ioshue went from Mak-kedah, and all Israel with him unto Libnah, and
fought against Libnah.

30 And the Lord gave it also, and the King thereof, into the hand of Israel:
and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were
therein: he let none remain in it: for he did unto the King thereof, as he had
done unto the King of Jericho.

31 And Ioshue departed from Libnah, and all Israel with him unto Lachish, and
beseeged it, and assaulted it.

32 And the Lord gave Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that
were therein, according to all as he had done to Libnah.

33 Then Horam King of Gezer came up to help Lachish: but Ioshue smote him,
and his people, until none of his remained.

34 And from Lachish Ioshue departed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him, and
they beseeged it, and assaulted it,

35 And they took it the same day, and smote it with the edge of the sword,
and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed the same day,
according to all that he had done to Lachish.

36 Then Ioshue went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron, and
they fought against it.

37 And when they had taken it, they smote it with the edge of the swoorde, and
the King thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were
therein, he left none remaining, according to all as he had done to Eglon: for
he destroyed it utter ly, and all the souls that were therein.

38 So Ioshue returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir, and fought against
it.

39 And when he had taken it, and the King thereof, and all the cities thereof,
they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the
souls that were therein, he let none remain: as he did to Hebron, so he did
to Debir, and to the King thereof: as he had also done to Libnah, and to the
King thereof.

40 So Ioshue smote all the hill countries, and the South countries, and the
valleys, and the hill sides, and all their Kings, and let none remain, but
utterly destroyed every soul, as the Lord God of Israel had commanded.

41 And Ioshue smote them from Kadeshbernea, even unto Azzah, and all the
country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.

42 And all these Kings, and their land, did Ioshue take at one time, because
the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.

43 Afterward, Ioshue, and all Israel with him, returned unto the camp in
Gilgal.

29 Then Ioshue, etc.) Now is described the taking of those cities, out of
which that army was gathered, where God showed his power no less wonderful,
then in the field: specially, if we consider the quick dispatch. For although
they which fled into them, out of the battle, caused some fear: yet that
fear being ceased, they might be profitable for their defense. Surely, the
garrison was increased by their number. Therefore, whereas Iosue in a short
time obteineth them all, with the little towns adjoining, undoubtedly in the
success, which was no less incredible, than unlooked for, the presence of God
did shine manifestly. For although they that were beseeged, did but only shut
their gates: yet because Iosue did neither bring ladders to scale the walls,
nor artillery to break them down, the siege of etterie one might have been
some stay and tediousness. Therefore, when he takes one city the next day
after he assaulted it, and an other the same day, these continual victories so
easy and ready to obtain, exceed the measure of man's strength. Wherefore, not
without great cause, in the end of the Chapter, the grace of God is celebrated
with this commendation, that it was made manifest, that he did fight for
Israel, while Iosue at once took so many Kings with their dominion: because he
could never have passed so speedily from city to city, as it had been only to
view them, except all lettes being removed, his way had been made open by God
himself. This also increased the miracle, that the King of Geser, which came
to aid the other, no doubt but with great boldness, was soudenly and with
none a do discomfited, and nothing stayed his continual tenor of marching for
ward. As for them that were slain in the cities, do as it were in a glass
represent those men, whose punishment God suspendeth, while he is doing
execution upon others: for although they rejoice in themselves, for the respite
of a short time, yet they are in worse case than if they had been drawn unto
death at the first. It had been a miserable thing, to have been slain in the
feelde. Well, they escaped, and defend themselves with the malles of their
cities. But there (which is more miserable) their wives and children are slain
in their sight: and they themselves have a more shameful end, than if they
had been slain fighting in the feelde. Let us not therefore envy the
reprobate, their short truce, while God does bear with them: for when they
shall promise unto themselves security, soudeine destruction shall come upon
them. In the mean time, let us not abuse the long suffering of God, while 1.
These. 5. 3.
he deferreth his judgment: and if we shall seem to have escaped one danger,
or if any holes offer themselves to hide us, let us not therefore please our
selves: but rather let us think upon that saying of Jeremy, That some ripe
figs, hauesome taste. but other are Ierem. 24.
rejected for their bitterness.

40 And Iosue smote, etc.) Here again is brought in the authority of God,
which discharges Iosue from all note of cruelty: for if he had raged without
respect, upon his own head, against women and children, none excuse would have
served: but that it had been detestable cruelty, the like whereof is not read
of, no not in the savage and almost beastly nations. But that which otherwise
all men would abhor, we must reverently embrace: because it proceeds from
God. Clemency has chief praise among virtues, and worthily: namely, when men
that have been hurt, and which have privately just cause to shed blood, do
moderate their wrath. But because God had appointed the swords of his people
to slaie the Amorites, Iosue could do no other, but obey his commandment.
Therefore by this voice, not only the mouths of all men are stopped, but their
minds are also restrained, that they step not forth to wrong judgment. If
any man do hear that Iosue sieve all that came before him, without respect,
although they threw down their weapons, and humbly desired peace: this bare
and simple report, would trouble quiet and peaceable minds: but when it is
added, (As God commanded) it is no more lawful to speak against it, then
when execution is done upon wicked offenders. And although in our judgment,
at least wise the children, and many women also were without fault, let us
remember, that the Court of heaven is not subject to our laws. But rather,
when we see that green trees are so burnt, we that are dry wood ought to
be afraid of greater destruction. And surely, if every man do well examine
himself, he shall find him self worthy of an hundred deaths. Why should not
God then find just matter of one death in an infant, yet scarce come forth out
of his mothers womb? In vain truly should we trouble him with murmuring and
grudging complaints, that he did throw the issue of the cursed nation into
the same destruction: for when we have all said, the Potter has still, full
and sovereign authority over his own vessels, or rather over the clay. The
last verse confirms that, which I said before, that all the people had their
abiding place in Gilgal, and the soldiers that went forth to the war returned
thither, both to refreshe themselves from weariness, and also to lay up their
praise in safety. For it was not meet, that they should have been dispersed
far abroad, till the lottes were cast, which showed where every one
shouldabide.

Chap. 11.
ANd when Iabin King of Hazor had heard this, then he sent to Iobab King of
Madon, and to the King of Shimron, and to the King of Achshaph,

2 And unto the Kings that were by the North in the mountains, and plains,
toward the Southside of Cinneroth, and in the valleys, and in the borders of
Dor Westward,

3 And unto the Chanaanites both by East and by West, and unto the Amorites,
and Hittites, and Perizzites, and Iebusites, in the mountains, and unto the
Hiuites under Hermon, in the land of Mizpeh:

4 And they came out, and all their hoastes with them, many people, as the sand
that is on the Sea shore for multitude, with horses and charriots exceeding
many.

5 So all these Kings met together, and came, and pitched together at the
waters of Merom, for to fight against Israel.

6 Then the Lord said unto Ioshue, Be not afraid for them: for to morrow
about this time will I deliver them all slain before Israel. Thou shall hough
their horses, and burn their charriots wtih fire.

7 Then came Ioshue, and all the men of war with him, against them, by the
waters of Merom, soudeinly, and fell upon them.

8 And the Lord gave them into the hand of Israel, and they smote them, and
chased them unto great Sidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the vallie of
Mizpeh Eastwarde, and smote them, until they had none remaining of them.

9 And Ioshue did unto them, as the Lord bade him: he houghed their horses,
and burnt their charriots with fire.

10 At that time also Ioshue turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the King
thereof with the sword: for Hazor before time, was the head of all those
kingdoms.

11 Moreover, they smote all the persons that were therein, with the edge of the
sword, utterly destroying all, leauing' none alive, and he burnt Hazor with
fire.

12 So all the cities of those Kings, and all the Kings of them did Ioshue
take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed them,
as Moses the seruante of the Lord had commanded.

13 But Israel burnt none of the cities that stood still in their strength,
save Hazor only, that Ioshue burnt.

14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel
took for their pray, but they smote every man with the edge of the sword,
until they had destroyed them, not leaving one alive.

1 When Iabin, etc.) In this new conspiracy also does shine the loving care of
God, more than fatherly, in preventing the dangers of his servants: and also
his mercy and kindness, in helping their infirmity. If Iabin with his
confederates, which are now mentioned, had joined with the former Kings, the
weight of the war would have lien more heavy upon the Israelites, and
greater care and doubtfulnesse would have troubled them. Indeed it had been as
easy for God, to have overthrown that huge army all together, and to have
delivered them from all fear and terror at once: but he would not press his
people that were but weak out of measure: that by setting against them, such
an infinite multitude at once, they might be overcome with to much fear and
trembling. Wherefore, he restrained many nations, that otherwise might sooner
have armed themselves, and kept them as it were a sleep in astonishment:
until his chosen people, by such notable victories as they obtained, were made
more bold and courageous to take in hand the rest of the wars. First
therefore they waste and spoil a large country, and leave it bare, both of
inhabitants, and riches. None of the next adjoining nations, which should have
restrained them, once stirs against them. They return back to visit their
wives and children. When they had well reposed them selves, and are in a
readiness to make new war: soudeinly there is raised against the^ an
exceeding great army, gathered of diverse nations, which until this time had
sitten still, and given them leisure to conquer. For that they were no sooner
awakened, it was as good, as if they had granted a truce with them. Wherefore
God did not only fight for his chosen people: but also by dividing their
enemies into sundry factions, did mightly increase the forces of his
soldiers. How terrible should this assault have been, if the Israelites, by
little and little, had not been accustomed to set upon their enemies holdly,
and had tried manifestly, that God was at hand to help them? The multitude is
compared to the sand of the Sea, then is rehearsed their chariottes and
horsemen: at which furniture it is meruell, that they were not altogether
discouraged, which had no horsemen at all. Wherefore they were brought forward
by degrees, even as their ability was able to bear. For certainly, in the
former battelles, he did but only exercise them as it were but in pleasant
pastimes of war. And then by many victories oftentimes obtained, he testified
his power, that it should not be less esteemed, than it was meet it should
be. For if they had been all discomfited at once, in deed the praises of God
should have been notably celebrated: but the memory of the victory would
soon have fallen into forgetfulness. Wherefore it was meet, that many
arguments of Gods providence and power, should be distinctly and severally set
forth, left men would have ascribed one victory only, to Fortune.

6 The Lord said, etc.) The more hard and difficult it was, to overthrow so
mighty and well furnished an army: so much the more necessary it was for
them to be newly confirmed in faith, that they might have good courage.
Wherefore God appears to his servant Iosue, and promises, that he would
give him the same success, which he had done in his other wars before. And
we must note diligently, that so often as he repeateth his promises, men are
admonished either of their forgetfulness, or of their siouthfulnesse, or of
their lightness. For except new and fresh nourishmentes be often times added
to our faith, they will soon wax cold and vanish away. And yet we are sick
of a froward lothsomnesse, that almost it greeueth us, to hear one thing
twice. Wherefore let us learn, whenever new conflictes are at hand, to
call to our mind the promise of God, which may reform our slothfulness, and
stir up our dullness. Especially, that which is spoken generally, we must
apply it to our daily use: like as now God does especially confirm in the
present matter in hand, that which he had pronounced of all the nations. But by
the circumstance of the time it may be gathered, that those Kings, had set
them selves forward a good way in their journey, that they might have set upon
Iosue, and the people in Gilgal. For immediately after the answer of God, is
added the journey of Iosue. And the victory is promised the next day, therefore
they were not far off. And the lake Meram, where they had pitched their
camp, which adioyneth unto Jordan, is nearer to Gilgal than Genasara, out of
which coast part of the enemies were come. For they say, that this lake does
either diminish or increase, as the snow is either hardened in the mountains,
or else mealceth down. But where commandment is given to Iosue, and the
people, to hough the horses, and burn the charriots, no doubt but it did
signify, that all such principal furniture of war, as was in use with the
profane nations, must be taken away from the people of God. For he would have
them to hold wars, and valiantly to fight against their enemies, but so, that
they should depend only upon God: that they might remember, that they were
valiant by his power, that they might trust only in him: which could scarce
have been, if they had been furnished with horsemen and charriots. For we know
that glorious furniture does dazell our eyes: and make our minds drunk with
proud confidence. Therefore, a law was given, that the Kings should not
multiply unto them selves horses and charriots: because nothing was more like
to fall out, Deu. 17. 16.
than that they should transfer to their munitions, that which God did
challenge peculiarly tohim self. Hereof came that common saying: Some in
charriots, some in horses: but we will advance our Psalm. 20. 8.
standard in the name of the Lord our God. God would also take from his people
the matter of foolish boldness, that they might be quiet and content with
their own bounds, and not to set upon their neighbors unjustly. And
experience has taught, that when froward ambition moved their Kings to
prepare horses, they took in hand wars no less rashly, than they ended them
unluckily. Wherefore it was need, that the horses being houghed, should be
made unprofitable for the wars, and that the charriots should be destroyed,
lest the Israelites should be accustomed to the manners of the Gentiles.

8 The Lord delivered, etc.) The greatenesse of the slaughter is hereof
gathered, that they were slain, even unto Sidon, which is far distant from
the lake Merom. And it was called great Sidon, because it was a great mart, and
a very populous city above the rest. For it is not compared with another
lesser city of the same name. The Hebrew word MOZEREPHOTH, which some retain
as a proper name, I thought good to translate, Heates: because it is like, that
hot waters did there spring out of the ground. And as that great fear,
which caused them to run away so fast, did openly show, that they were
driven headlong, by a secret instinct of God: so it is certain, that the
Israelites, which durst pursue them in their flight, through so many dangers,
were carried with heavenly force above the strength of men. Then is praised as
well the abstinence of Iosue, as his ready obedience: for except the fear of
God had prevailed in him, he would not willingly have lost so many horses and
charriots: for such is our ready invention to find out pretenses, that we
would have gladly pretended, that although he did not make them serve for the
wars, yet the price of them was not to be despised, if they had been sold.
But Iosue thought it not good to consider any thing, but that which pleased
God. Now, because he had obtained, through his virtue, that he had the people
tractable and obedient, that which was performed by all men, is reckoned in the
praise of one man.

12 All the cities of these Kings, etc,) When the army was thoroughly
discomfited, then they began to waste and spoil the contrie, and to take and
sack the cities. Where it is said, that the cities, which remained untouched,
were not burned, thereof we may gather a likely conjecture, that some were
taken by force and assault, and so destroyed. Only Hazor, after it was taken,
and the heat appeased, was consumed with fire: because it was the firebrand to
kindle the rest unto war. Moreover, that which we have seen before, that
Iosue refrained not the heat of his wrath, until he had slaiue all, from the
greatest to the least, it is often and plainly repeated in this place. For
that which before was not expressed, is now plainly set down: that Iosue did
faithfully perform his duty, because he accomplished that, which God by
Moses had commanded. Therefore, it was even as much, as if he had consecrated
his hands unto God, when he destroyed those nations, according to his
commandment. For thus we must take it, though all the world condemn us, yet
it is sufficient to discharge us of all crime, that we have God for our
author. In the mean time, we must wisely consider, what every man's vocation
requires: that no man take upon him to follow Iosue in the licentiousness of
his own zeal, least he be judged a cruel bloudsucker, rather than a severe
minister of God.

15 As the Lord had commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command
Ioshue, and so did Ioshue: he left nothing undone of all that the Lord had
commanded Moses.

16 So Ioshue took all this land of the mountains, and all the South, and all
the land of Goshen, and the low country, and the plain, and the mountain of
Israel, and the low country of the same,

17 From the mount Halak, that goes up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the
vallie of Lebanon, under mount Hermon: and all their Kings he took, and smote
them, and slew them.

18 Ioshue made war long time with all those Kings.

19 Neither was there any city that made peace with the children of Israel,
save those Hiuites that inhabited Gibeon: all other they took by battle.

20 For it came of the Lord, to harden their hearts, that they should come
against Israel in battle, to the intent that they should destroy them utterly,
and show them no mercy: but that they should bring them to naught: as the
Lord had commanded Moses.

21 And that same season came Ioshue, and destroyed the Anakims out of the
mountains: as out of Hebron, out of Debir, out of Anab, and out of all the
mountains of Judah, and out of all the mountains of Israel: Ioshue destroyed
them utterly with their cities.

22 There was no Anakim left in the land of the children of Israel: only in
Azzah, in Gath, and in Ashdod were they left.

23 So Ioshue took the whole land, according to all that the Lord had said
unto Moses: and Ioshue gave it for an inheritance unto Israel, according to
their portions, through their tribes: then the land was at rest without war.

16 And Iosue took, etc.) In the continual course of these victories, when
the land of it self did spue out the old inhabitants, to give place unto the
Israelites, it did openly appear, which is said in the Psalm, Although they
fought valiantly, yet they conquered Psalm. 44. 4.
not the land with their swords, nor (...) them selves with their own arm,
but by the hand, and arm, and brightness of the countenance of God they
obtained all things. For this purpose the places and regions are reckoned up,
that we may know, that God proceeded with a continual course in that work
which he began. But they are deceived, which think a certain mountain to be
noted by the name of Israel, because it will appear in the end of the Chapter,
that the hilly part is indifferently called by the name of Israel and Judah.
Wherefore, the singular number is put for the plural: because the mountains
of the ten tribes are compared with the mountains of Judah. Therefore this
opposition must be understood. In the other hill the name is doubtful, some
take it for a division, as though the hill were cut in two parts, other for
smooth, because it was without trees, like as a man's head becomes smooth
with baldness. Let the readers take their choice in a matter uncertain and of
small effect.

18 Many days, etc.) Before, within a short time, and as it were with a swift
course, he had conquered five kingdoms: in the rest there was another respect,
not through slacknesse, or weariness, or idleness: but because God did
exercise his people diversely, that his manifold grace might appear more
manifestly: which for the most part is not esteemed of us, if it show it self
all after one manner. Therefore, like as before, that wonderful easiness of
victories did set forth the power of God: so this lingering warfare, did
declare the ready help of God by many documentes. Neither did it so happen
soudenly and unlooked for: for God showed aforehand by Moses, that it should so
come to pass, least if the land were straight way made desolate, the wild
beasts would increale upon Deuteronomy. 7. 22.
it. Finally, we see here, as it were in a glass, that whatsoever God promised
by Moses, was performed in deed and plain effect. But with the truth of the
promises we must also consider the singular favor of God toward his chosen
people, that as a provident and careful householder, he neglected or omitted
not any thing, that might serve for their profit.

19 There was no city which made peace, etc.) At the first sight it is
contrary to this sentence, that which is often repeted by Moses, Exodus 23. 32.
Deuteronomy. 7. (...).
that the Israelites should not make any covenant with those nations, nor
admit any conditions of peace, but utterly consume and destroy their race
^s^ed their name. Therefore, seeing they were excluded from all couenantes, and
should have desired peace in vain, it is against reason, that their
destruction should be imputed to their own stubbornness, when they could by
no entreatie have obtained pardon. For suppose they had sent Ambassadors with
olive branches, and have desired peace: Iosue would straight have answered,
that it was not lawful for him to enter into any treaty with them, because
God had forbidden him. Wherefore, if they had assaied an hundred ways to have
avoided the war, yet they must needs have been destroyed. Why are they blamed
therefore, that they did not desire peace? As though they were not constrained
of necessity to fight, when they saw they had to do with such a people, as
would not be pacified. Wherefore, seeing they could not do otherwise, the fault
is unjustly laid to their charge, that being constreined they set themselves
against the fury of their enemies. I answer, although the Israelites were
forbidden to receive them to mercy, yet that the war might be just they were
interteined with hostility. And that was wonderfully governed by the secret
providence of God, that they, which were appointed to destruction, should
offer themselves thereto, and by provoking the Israelites, should procure their
own overthrow and utter decay. Therefore God, which forbad that any pity
should be showed on them, drove them into such a fury, that they might not be
worthy to have any mercy bestowed upon them. And in this behalf it was not
meet the people should be to curious or inquisitiue. For when God on the one
side forbad them to enter into any covenant: yet would not have them to show
any hostility, except they were justly provoked, to doubtful a disputation
would have troubled their minds. Wherefore, this was the only way to be rid of
this perplexity, to cast all their care on God alone. And he himself,
according to his incomprehensible wisdom, provided, that when they came to
the point, the course of the people should not be hindered with any let. So the
Kings beyond Jordan, when they had first armed themselves, suffered punishment
worthily of their rashness. For the Israelites did not set upon them with
open war, before they were provoked. Likewise, after the same manner, the
Citizens of Jericho, when they shut their gates, offered war themselves. The
like stubbornness was in the rest, which after the same sort gave the
Israelites occasion to fight. Now it appears, how aptly these things agree
together, that God commanded Moses, that the nations, which he had appointed to
destruction, should be utterly defaced, and rooted out: and therefore he does
open a way for his decree to take place, when he hardens the reprobate.
Therefore, in the first degree is placed the will of God, that it might have
the preeminence, as the chief cause.

For, because their iniquity was come up to the full, he determined to destroy
them. Whereupon proceeded the commandment of God given to Moses, which yet
should have had no effect, except the people had been armed to execute the
judgment of God, through the obstinacy and stubbornness of them that were to
be destroyed. For this end does God harden them, that they may turn
themselves away from obteining of mercy: therefore this hardness is called his
work, because it establishes the effect of his purpose. Now, if they which
feign that God does spy out of Heaven, what the pleasure of men is, go about
to darken with their clouds so plain a matter, and cannot abide that by his
secret working the hearts of men should be bridled, what else shall they do
but bewray their own impudency? They will grant no more to God, but that he
does permit: so they hang his purpose upon the will of man. But what says the
holy Ghost? That their hardening was of God, that he might cast down
headlong, them that he would have to be destroyed.

21 And Ioshue came, etc.) We have heard in an other place, what the sons of
Anak were. They were a race of Giantes, with whose tallnesse the spies
terrified the people, so that they would not go forward into the land of
Chanaan. Wherefore, seeing they were so terrible, it was a worthy work to
take them away, that the people might be more cheerful to hope well of their
affairs. For it had been a very hurtefull thing, that such a sight should
have remained, which daily should have vexed and grieved them: for fear would
have darkened the glory of God in the former victories, and would have
overwhelmed their faith, when they did cast in their mind, that the hardest
battle of all did yet still remain. Wherefore, not without cause, this is
remembered among other helps of God, that the land being purged from such
monsters, was granted to be a quiet dwelling place unto the people. For the
less credible that it was, that they might be vanquished, the more notable was
the power of God in conquering them.

23 Ioshue took, etc.) Although Iosue was far off from being conqueror of
all the land: yet it is truly said, that he obtained the whole land, as God
testified to Moses: by which word the Deuteronomy. 7. 22.
general sentence is restrained. For this exception was added by name, that
the dominion, which God promised, should not be obtained, but by little and
little: lest they should afterward have been troubled to fight against cruel
and savage beasts, if they should have cast them selves into a waste
wilderness. Wherefore, although GOD had not yet placed the people in
possession of the promised land: yet he performed his covenant, according to
the condition with which it was made: because he gave them convenient
interteinement, and as much as sufficed them for the present time. And by the
words may be gathered, that other coasts are comprehended, which were not yet
come into their hand and full possession. For it is said, that he did
distribute according to their families, that which he had conquered. But
afterward we shall see in the portion, that lottes were cast for those
countries, which were subdued unto the government of the people, after the
death of Iosue, yea many hundred years after. Now the sense of the words is
manifest, that while Iosue was yet alive, the promise was begone to be
exhibited, so that they need not doubt, to divide the whole land by lottes.

Chap. 12.
AND these are the Kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and
possessed their land, on the other side Jordan, toward the rising of the
Sun, from the river Arnon, unto mount Hermon, and all the plain Eastward.

2 Sihon King of the Amorits, that dwelt in Heshbon, having dominion from
Aroer, which is beside the river of Arnon, and from the middle of the river,
and from half Gilead, unto the river Iabbok, in the border of the children of
Ammon.

3 And from the plain, unto the Sea of Cinneroth Eastward, and unto the Sea of
the plain, even the salt Sea Eastward, the way to Behtieshimoth, and from the
South, under the springes of Pisgah.

4 They conquered also the coast of Og King of Bashan, of the remnant of the
Giantes, which dwelt at Ashtaroth, and at Edrei,

5 And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the
border of the Geshurites, and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, even the
border of Sihon King of Heshbon.

6 Moses the servant of the Lord, and the children of Israel smote them: Moses
also the servant of the Lord gave their land, for a possession, unto the
Rubenites, and unto the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh.

7 These also are the Kings of the country, which Ioshue, and the children of
Israel smote on this side Jordan Westward, from Baal-gad, in the vallie of
Lebanon, even unto the mount Halak, that goes up to Seir, and Ioshue gave it
unto the tribes of Israel, for a possession, according to their portions,

8 In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the hill
sides, and in the wilderness, and in the Southe, where were the Hittites, the
Amorites, and the Chanaanites, the Perizzites, the Hiuites, and the Iebusites.

9 The King of Jericho, was one: the King of Ai, which is beside Beth-el, one:

10 The King of Jerusalem, one: the King of Hebron, one:

11 The King of Iarmuth, one: the King of Lachish, one:

12 The King of Eglon, one: the King of Gezer, one:

13 The King of Debir, one: the King of Geder, one:

14 The King of Hormah, one: the King of Arad, one:

15 The King of Libnah, one: the King of Adullam, one:

16 The King of Makkedah, one: the King of Beth-el, one:

17 The King of Tappuah, one: the King of Hepher, one: (...)

5 And the land of the Gibilites, and all Lebanon, toward the Sun rising,
from Bahal-gad, under mount Hermon, until one come to Hamath.

6 All the inhabitants of the mountains, from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and
all the Sidonians, I will cast them out from before the children of Israel:
only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites, to inherit, as I have
commanded thee.

7 Now therefore divide this land to inherit, unto the nine tribes, and to the
half tribe of Manasseh.

8 For with half thereof the Rubenites, and the Gadites, have received their
inheritance, which Moses gave them beyond Jordan Eastward, even as Moses the
servant of the Lord had given them,

9 From Aroer, that is on the brinke of the river Arnon, and from the city
that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba, unto Dibon,

10 And all the cities of Sihon King of the Amorites, which reigned in
Heshbon, unto the borders of the children of Ammon,

11 And Gilead, and the borders of the Geshurites, and of the Maachatites, and
all mount Hermon, with all Bashan, unto Salcah.

12 All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigns in Ashtaroth, and in
Edrei, (who remained of the rest of the Giantes:) for these did Moses smite,
and cast them out.

13 But the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the
Maachatites: but the Geshurites and the Maachatites dwell among the Israelites,
even unto this day.

14 Only unto the tribe of Leui he gave none inheritance, but the sacrifices
of the Lord God of Israel are his inheritance, as he said unto him.

1 When Ioshue was old, etc.) Because we have seen before, that after one and
thirty Kings were subdued, the land was in quiet: it is like, that some time
of rest was granted to the people to refresh themselves, lest under continual
warrefare they should have fainted. Neither was that to be reprehended, so that
they rested but for a time, and were always bent to run to the mark that
was appointed for them. But lest that intermission that was granted them to
recover new strength, should have been an occasion of slouthfulnes: God
pricketh them forward again to proceed in their enterprise. For he
commands the whole inheritance to be divided among the tribes, and that all
the coast of the Midland sea, which was yet possessed of the enemies, should be
taken into the lot: surely, that partition might seem to be foolish and
unreasonable, yea, worthy to be laughed to scorn, when they cast lottes for
other men's lands, as if they had been their own. But God, of very good
purpose, appointed it to be so. For first they would have cast aside all hope
of the promise, and contented themselves with the present state. Yea, after the
lottes were cast, and that God had assigned unto them wholly whatsoever he
promised: yet, through their slothfulness, as much as lay in them, they
sought to discredit his word. Neither was there any help in them, but that
the truth of God should have remained maimed and imperfect. Wherefore, the
casting of lottes, should have been to them a pledge of sure possession, that
they should be always in a readiness. Now they, whose portion fell in the
enemies land, because they were in the mean time but tenantes at will, and
dwelt as it were by sufferance out of their own inheritance, were appointed to
be callers upon the rest, to prick them forward daily. And surely, it was to
much blockishnesse, to neglect and forsake that, which was assigned unto them
by God. Now we see for what end it behooved the whole land to be parted by
lottes, and that every tribe should be placed in their own seat. And that
was necessary to be done, while Iosue lived. For that, after his death, the
people would not have so readily obeyed. For no man succeeded, whose authority
might have atteined to so hard a matter. Moreover, because God by the mouth of
Moses commanded it so to be done, except he had done his duty herein, the
whole work should have been made imperfect for want of a sufficient minister.
And although the time be not put in certain, yet it is like, that when there
was no more hope, that while Iosue lived, the people would take armor again,
to enlarge their borders, then at the length he took in hand to divide the
land: as though he cried out and promised with a solemn testification, that
the effect of that division should be ratified and confirmed, because the
truth of God could not decay by the death of a man.

2 This is the land, etc.) The old borders appointed by God in times past, are
called to remembrance: that Iosue, and the people, might be certainly
persuaded, that the covenant made with Abraham, should at the length be
fulfilled to the uttermost. Wherefore, they are commanded to apply their
diligence to conquer those parts that remained. And it will be an apt
application, if this perseverance be applied to that continuance which is
required of us, namely, that forgetting these things which are behind, we
labor forward to the reward of our high calling, and continue our course to
the mark that is set before us. For, it shall nothing profit us, to have
run in the race, unless we study to continue to the end. The beginning of
the borders is from the river which divides Egypt, toward the Sea, from the
holy land: whether it be Nilus, as we have transla ted it, after the common
opinion: or else a little river which ^u^^eth by the town Rhinocornia, which of
many is thought to be Raphia or Raphane. But this is out of doubt, that the
inheritance of the people on that side, bordered upon Egypt. And although I
have followed the consent of many men, that their borders were extended no
further, than to that coast, which is less inhabited, and almost desert, lest
too near neighborhood should have been hurtful, if they had had familiar and
near acquaintance with the Egyptians: yet I do not utterly refuse the
contrary opi^ion. In the first verse rises a question, because that, after it
is said, that there were five principalities about the Sea coast, the Auites
are added in the sixth place. Some think they are not reckoned among the five,
because it was a small province. But let the readers consider, whether there be
not a secreat opposition between a people that was free, and of their own
government, and of the five principalities. Therefore, because the state of
the Auites was diverse from the rest, they are numbered severally. And
therefore a Nowne plural is set for distinction sake. But as for the
rehearsal of these principalities, is not made according to the dignity or
wealth of every one: but Aza occupied the first place, because it was next
Egypt. And the same reason is in Asdod, and the rest. The Grecians, after their
manner, for the Hebrew letter AIN, put their GAMMA, and so they call that Gaza,
which the Hebrews call Aza: like as of Amorrha they make Gomorrha. Whereby their
error is sufficiently discovered, which feign that Gaza was a Persian name, so
called of riches, because Cambyses, when he would make war in Greece, laid up
his treasure there. But because in Luke, mention is made of the desert of
Gaza^it appears, that a city of the same name was builded near to it, but
in another place. Asdod is that City, which the Grecians called Azotus. Now,
all this Sea coast, or that which is nigh the Sea, is brought a long even unto
Sidon. And there be which think, that the Phenicians in times past, were
Lords both of Gaza and Azotus. Now far the mount Libanus extends, it is
well known: for some time it comprehends the mount Hermon. And for the
length of it, one part of it is called Antilibanus. Of that mount Hermon the
reader shall find Deuteronomie. 4. Toward the East is Hemath, which is also
called Antiochia of Syria.

6 All the inhabitants of the hill, etc.) Iosue is again admonished, that
although the Israelites did not yet possess those regions: yet he should not
defer the partition, but trust in the promise of God: because men do
maliciously defame his power, when they doubt of the end. Wherefore it is said,
Only do thou thy duty in distribution of the land, neither let that be
exempted from the lottes which the enemies do quietly possess, because I will
have a care to fulfill that I have promised. Hereof let us learn, in taking
affairs in hand, so to depend upon the mouth of God, that no doubtfulnesse
do stay us. Indeed it is not our part to frame vain hope unto our selves:
but when our trust is grounded upon God only, let us obey his commandments:
because it is not to be feared, that we can be deceived in the success.
Afterward he assigns the land of Chanaan to nine tribes and an half: because
the Rubenites and Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses, had their portion
given them on the other side of Jordan. And although there seems to be a
vain repetition in these words, which Moses gave unto them, as Moses gave
unto them: yet is there nothing super fluous, for that in the second member the
gift is confirmed, as if God ratified that which was done. Therefore, as Moses
gave the^ that land so let them remain in quiet possession. And for this cause
he is adorned with the title of The servant of God: that no man should break
that decree, which Gods faithful minister had published by his authority. And
surely, it was needful to stay all controversies, which otherwise might daily
have arisen.

14 Only to the tribe of Leui, etc.) This exception also was necessary, least
the Levites should complain, that they were unjustly disherited, and so might
raise great trouble about their right. Therefore he admonishes them, that
Moses was the author of this distinction: and with all teaches, that they
have no cause to complain for any thing taken from them, because a goodly
recompense was given unto them. And although the sacrifices were not equally
divided among the Levites: yet it is sufficient, that they all had their living
of the first fruits and tenthes. And as God by reward allure^h them to take
charge of the holy things: so likewise he exhorts the people to perform and
pay their holy oblations faithfully, when he pronounces that his sacrifices
are their living.

15 Moses then gave unto the tribe of the children of Ruben, inheritance,
according to their families.

16 And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the brinke of the river Arnon,
and from the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain
which is by Medeba:

17 Heshbon, with all the cities thereof, that are in the plain: Dibon and
Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon:

18 And Iahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath:

19 Kiriathaim also, and Sibmah, and Zerethshahar, in the mount of Emek:

20 And Beth-peor, and Ashdoth-pisgah and Beth-ieshimoth:

21 And all the cities of the plain: and all the kingdom of Sihon King of the
Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the Princes of
Midian, Eui, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the Dukes of Sihon,
dwelling in the country.

22 And Balaam the son of Beor the southsayer did the children of Israel
slaie with the sword, among them that were slain.

23 And the border of the children of Ruben was Jordan, with the coasts: this
was the inheritance of the children of Ruben, according to their families, with
the cities, and their villages.

24 Also Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children
of Gad, according to their families.

25 And their coasts were Iazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the
land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer, which is before Rabbah:

26 And from Heshbon unto Ramoth, Mizpeh, and Betonim: and from Mahanaim, unto
the borders of Debir:

27 And in the vallie Beth-aram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the
rest of the kingdom of Sihon King of Heshbon, unto Jordan, and the borders,
even unto the Sea coast of Cinereth, beyond Jordan Eastward.

28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gad, after their families, with
the cities, and their villages.

29 Also Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this
belonged to the half tribe of the children of Manasseh, according to their
families.

30 And their border was from Mahanaim, even all Bashan, to wit, all the
kingdom of Og King of Bashan, and all the towns of Iair, which are in Bashan,
threescore cities:

31 And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in
Bashan, were given unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, to half
of the children of Machir after their families.

32 These are the heritages, which Moses did distribute in the plain of Moab,
beyond Jordan, toward Jericho Eastward.

33 But unto the tribe of Leui Moses gave none inheritance: for the Lord God
of Israel is their inheritance, as he said unto them.

15 Moses gave, etc.) That which he seemed to have spoken clearly enough, now
he prosecuteth more distinctly, not only that the reading thereof might
provoke the people to give thanks, while the benefit of God shall be registered
in the public monumentes, and as it were conversant before their eyes: but
also, that every one might enjoy their inheritance without trouble or strife.
We know how witty the covetousness of men is, to invent pretenses of going
to law: that no man's right might remain quietly unto him, except a clear and
perfect definition of every man's right should take away all controversies.
That region was given them without lot. The rest might have objected, because
even measure was not kept, that inequality must be corrected. Therefore, that
no untimely strife should ever trouble their peace, the bounds are set in all
places by Gods authority, and as it were hedged in, to cut away all
contentions. For God does not only by one word adiudge the whole kingdom of
Sihon to the tribe of Ruben: but draws the uttermost border from Aroer, to
the river Arnon, and so in all the compass does either restrain them, or
enlarge them, that the possession of one acre should not be in doubt. And how
profitable so exact a description was, we may know by profane histories,
where often times we may see, not only hateful, but also hurtful contentions
have arisen between neighbors about their marches. Moreover, this diligence
which God disdained not to use, to provide for his people, that they might
continue in peace one with another, does verily declare his fatherly love,
because he omitted nothing, that might be profitable for their quietness. And
surely, if provision had not been made in time, they would have been consumed
by civil and intestine contentions. Once again I would have the readers excuse
me, if I labor not carefully, in describing the situation of the cities, and
am not curious in the names. Yea I could well abide that some names should be
taken appellatiuely, and so translated, which otherwise I have thought good to
leave in their own tongue, as proper names. This is worthy to be noted, that
where he speaks of the land of the Madianites, the Princes which ruled there
are called the Dukes of Sihon, that we may know, that they were partakers of
the same calamity, because they entangled them selves with unjust war, and
perteined to the government of Sihon, which was a professed enemy. And that
it may better appear, that they were justly destroyed: Balaam is said to have
been slain amongst them, by whose tongue they labored to wound the Israelites
more grievously, than with a thousand swords, as if it were said, In the
very slaughter there was found a banner of hostility, by which they
professed, that they served in war against the Israelites. Where it is said
in the Hebrew, that Jordan was the end and the end, that the repetition may not
seem to be in vain, we may aptly translate it, that Jordan, according to his
^oundes, was their border.

24 Moses gave to the tribe of Gad, etc.) The same reason is to be observed in
the tribe of Gad, that it is hedged in with lawful bounds, that their
possessions should not be litigious, or subject to contention. In the mean
time, the liberality of God is commended, that he drove out nations of great
renown, in whose room he had placed them, which is more clearly expressed in
the half tribe of Manasse, while in the portion of their inheritance, there
are rehearsed three score cities. Whereby also it is made manifest, that Moses
was not deceived in his liberality, because God was not ignorant how many
cities, (according to his bountiful largess) he would give them. In the
conclusion, the tribe of Leui is again excluded, least the Levites in time to
come should pretend, that the land which was granted to the Gadites, and
Rubenites, and the half tribe of Manasses, without casting of lotts, was
common to them also: because they were by name forbidden to cast lottes with
their brethren, which they might easily have expounded subtily for their own
advantage, that their part was left them in the other lands. But now, the
sacrifices are not called their inheritance, as a while before they were: but
God himself, with whom if they be not content, they bewray too great pride,
and intolerable disdainfulness.

Chap. 14.
THese also are the places, which the children of Israel inherited, in the
land of Chanaan, which Eleazer the Priest, and Ioshue the son of Nun, and
the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed to them,

2 By the lot of their inheritance, as the Lord had commanded, by the hand of
Moses, to give to the nine tribes, and the half tribe.

3 For Moses had given inheritance unto two tribes, and an half tribe,
beyond Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them:

4 For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore
they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with
the suburbs of the same for their beasts and their substance.

5 As the Lord had commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, when they
divided the land.

6 Then the children of Judah came unto Ioshue, in Gilgal: and Caleb the son
of Iephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou know what the Lord said unto
Moses the man of God, concerning me and thee in Kadesh-barnea:

7 Forty years old was I, when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from
Kadesh-barnea, to epsy the land, and I brought him word again, as I thought
in mine heart.

8 But my brethren that went up with me, discouraged the heart of the people:
yet I followed still the Lord my God.

9 Wherefore Moses swear the same day, saying, Certainly the land whereon thy
feet have trodden, shall be thine inheritance, and thy childrens for ever,
because thou have followed constantly the Lord my God.

10 Therefore behold now, the Lord has kept me alive, as he promised: this
is the forty and fifth year, since the Lord spoke this thing unto Moses,
while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now lo, I am
this day four score and five years old:

11 And yet am as strong at this time, as I was when Moses sent me: as strong
as I was then, so strong am I now, either for war, or for government.

12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the Lord spoke in that day,
(for thou heardest in that day, how the Anakims were there, and the cities
great and walled:) if so be the Lord will be with me, that I may drive them
out, as the Lord said.

13 Then Ioshue blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Iephunneh, Hebron
for an inheritance.

14 Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Iephunneh the
Kenezite, unto this day: because he followed constantly the Lord God of Israel.

15 And the name of Hebron was before time, Kiriath-arba: which Arba was a
great man among the Anakims: thus the land ceased from war.

1 These are, etc.) Now he comes to the land of Chanaan, for which it behooved
nine tribes and a half to cast lottes. And by and by, as we shall see, he will
break off the report of that matter, yet it was a convenient passage of his
speech from that region, which was of an other condition: that the readers may
know, that he will speak afterward of the land of Chanaan, whose division was
to be made by lot. We have said before, that Iosue and Eleazer did part out,
not only that which the Israelites had conquered: but giving credit to the
promise of God, comprehended whatsoever God promised to his people, no
otherwise, than if it had been alredie in their occupation. We shall see, that
the partition was not perfect at the first: but when the lot of Judah fell out
first, the courses of the other tribes were left in hope. But here arises a
hard question, How Iosue, Eleazer, and the Princes divided the land, if lottes
were cast for it: For the casting of lottes is not governed, either by the
sentence, will, or authority of men. If any man will answer, that they did
ouersee the matter, that no deceit might be used, the knot is not yet loosed,
yea, that answer shall be confuted by the text. Wherefore we must wit, that they
were not simply chosen to divide the land by lot: but after the casting of the
lottes, to enlarge or restrain the bounds of every tribe by just proportion.
And it is manifest, that the matter could not be accomplished only by casting
of lottes. For when nothing is more chaunceable in man's judgment, than the
falling of lottes, they knew not, whether God would place the half tribe of
Manasses, where Judah obtained his portion: whether Zabulon should have been in
the place of Ephraim. Wherefore, it was not lawefull for them, to proceed
further in the beginning, than to divide the land into ten parts or
provinces: but so, that the space of every one should remain undetermined.
For, if every one should have had their choice, some would have wished to have
dwelt in the midst of the land, some would have chosen a quiet country, some
would have followed the fruitfulness of the fields, or the good temper of the
air, or the pleasantness of the place. But the lot placed the tribe of Judah,
as it were, in the head, and sent away the tribe of Zabulon unto the Sea
coaste: and made the tribe of Benjamin neighbor unto Judah, and removed the
tribe of Ephraim further off. Finally, this was the authority of the lot, that
from Egypt toward Syria, and from the North part by the Midland sea, ten
portions fell out, so that some were near unto the Egyptians, some inhabited
in places near the Sea, some should have the hilly part, some should dwell
in the midst of the valleys. When this was once appointed, then the rulers of
the people had their part to execute, that according to the law of
proportion, they should set out the bounds of every tribe. Therefore, it
was in their judgment, to account how many thousand people was in every
tribe, and so according to the multitude or fewness, they should adiudge to
every one, either more or less compass of ground. For, by the commandment
of God, proportion was to be kept: that as they were found, more or fewer,
when they were numbered, so a larger or a straiter region should be assigned to
them: Numbers 26. It was referred to the judgment of the same Princes, to
direct the bounds, either in length or in breadth, even as the more
commodious reason required. Also we must remember that, which is read: Numbers
34. that those ten which are now called heads of the families, were not
appointed by election of men, but were created unto this office by the voice of
God. So every tribe had their own overseers, that no fraud or force should be
used. Again, it was not lawful to have them in suspicion, which were named by
God himself. Behold now how Iosue gave the land, which yet was subject to
casting of lottes.

4 But to the Levites, etc.) This is the third time that the same thing is
repeated of the Levites, that they were accounted to make one head, bu^ for
another purpose, because it follows immediately after, that the sons of
Joseph were divided into two tribes, and so by privilege their portion was
doubled. For so Jacob had prophesied: yea even as a Judge appointed by God, he
preferred his son Joseph before the rest, in this behalf. God therefore
took the Levites to his own portion, and set up in their place one of the two
families of Joseph.

6 And the children of Judah came, etc.) Now is enterlaced an other matter,
whereby that which was begone to be spoken, of the partition of the land is
broken off: namely, that Caleb required mount Hebron to be given unto him, even
as it was promised by Moses: and this happened in time long before the people
had made an end of their wars, and should cast lottes for the land. For this
is numbered the fifth year, since they entered into the land: neither does he
require a place that was alredie quietly possessed, and free from enemies: but
in the midst of the fury and heat of wars, he desires that he may have
leave to subdue and s^aie the Giantes, and so to conquer it. This only he
indenteth with them, that after ^ee has vanquished the Giantes by his virtue
and manhood, he be not defranded of the reward of his travel. The manner of
provision is, that this place come not into the common lotte of his tribe.
Therefore he alone does not take upon him this enterprise, but the sons of
Judah, of which tribe he was, agree thereunto, because that by this
extraordinary gift, which was bestowed upon one family, the portion of
every one was, by so much as his part came to, increased. Therefore, although
Caleb alone does speak, the whole tribe is with him, whose benefit it was,
that he should be enriched with this reward. But why Caleb is called the
Kenesite, I cannot certainly determine, He is called so also: Number. 32. Neither
am I ignorant, what other men guess, namely, that he was so surnamed of Kenas,
or because he or some of his ancesters dwelt among the Kenesites. But I see no
certeintie of these opinons. What if he obtained this title of some notable
act he did: as conquerers sometime do take their surname of the nations which
they have subdued? First, because this promise was not registered in the public
records, and no man was alive, that could be witness thereof but Iosue, he
appealeth to him. For it is like that when the other ten spies objected the
names of the Giantes, Enakim, to terrify the people, Caleb to confute their
lewdness, answered the truth, that when he had seen them in the Mount Hebron,
they were not so terrible, but that he durst set upon them himself, that
after he had chased them away, he might succeed in their place, and that upon
this condition his dwelling was granted to be in that place, which he should
conquer by his own valiantness.

7 I was forty years old, etc.) He seems to boast of his virtue more
gloriously, than becomes a godly and modest man. But we must remember, that
when the matter of it self was odious and subject to many quarrels, he has
need of singular commendation to deliver him from envy. Wherefore he
rehearses how faithfully he reported that, which he knew of the land. For this
clause (Even as it was in my heart) does doubtless declare sincerity, and so
his heart is opposite to deceitful words. For it is a fond interpretation,
that he said in his heart: because he durst say nothing by the way, least he
should have been slain of his companions. For he means nothing else, but
that without color and dissimulation, he did faithfully execute that, which
was given him in charge, he amplifieth the praise of his upright dealing, that
when all his companions (except Iosue) were against him, yet he gave no place
to their malice, neither was he overcome with their wicked conspiracy, but
abode constantly in his purpose. The words are, (I fulfilled to go after
God.) But the sense is clear, that he was not carried away from the
faithfulness of his duty, by the wicked practicing of those ten men, which
was hard to abide: but that he was thoroughly determined to follow God.
Namely, because he was certainly persuaded, that God was the author of the
enterprise, from which those unfaithful men assaied to withdraw the people.
But let us learn out of this place, that except the last end answer to the
beginninges, good beginninges vanish away and come to nothing: and secondly,
that this constancy is only worthy of praise, when we follow God.

9 Then Moses swear, etc.) This was one reward of his message well and
faithfully discharged, to obtain an inheritance, whereof all the people is
deprived. For, although long life be worthily accounted among the benefits of
God: yet the end is here annexed, that Caleb might obtain that inheritance,
which was denied to the rest: which was no small prerogative. Consequently, he
sets forth the truth of Gods promise, because he had prolonged his life:
and not that only, but also had given him such vigor and strength, that being
more than fourscore years old, he was no weaker, than he was in the flower
of his age. For other men have had a lusty age, (and yet but a few:) neither
have any kept their own so well, that at four score and five years of age,
they have had as much strength as they had in their best age. For he does not
only challenge to himself the knowledge and valiantness of a Captain, but
also the strength of a soldier. He adds also, that his strength will serve
for all actions and exercises of this life. For, to go in and out, does
signify as much with the Hebrews, as to perform and execute all parts of
our office. And Caleb does perform this indeed, when he takes upon him to
assault and drive away the Giantes. Neither is he lifted up with foolish
pride, to assure himself of victory: but he hops for prosperous success by
the help of God. This word (Peradventure) seems to infer an unreasonable
kind of doubtfulnesse: as if he would go to fight at all adventures. They
which think, that for modesty sake he mistrusteth himself, and considers
his own infirmity, do neither say all, nor nothing at all. For surely, they
omit that, which is principal, that this word (Peradventure) is to be
referred to the common opinion of men, such as might be conceived by the
present state of the matter. But first it is convenient to consider his
purpose. If he had desired such a hill to be given him, as without any trouble
might have been possessed: his request had been harder to obtain. But now,
setting forth the difficulty of the matter, before Iosue, and the Princes, he
wins their favor: for when they have yielded to his request, yet they
grant nothing, except he take in hand, and atchiue an hard, doubtful, and
dangerous war. Therefore, when he knew that the Israelits did tremble and
fear at the fame of the Giantes, he speaks after their opinion, as of a
matter doubtful and uncertain. But as touching himself, the words do
plainly declare, that he presumed not upon that, which was spoken to him,
with a doubtful and wanering mind. I will drive them out (says he) as the
Lord has pronounced. Shall we say, that when he brings forth a sentence of
God, that he stands in doubt, whether he will perform or no that which he
has promised? Therefore it is manifest, that to the intent he might more
easily obtain his request, he puts them in mind, how full of danger the
enterprise was, although it is not strange with the Hebrews, by this word
(Simply) to note the difficulty and hardness of a thing, although no distrust
at all does trouble our minds. But how great a matter it was to drive away
the Giantes, out of that strong hold, hereof it may be gathered, that Caleb
durst not set upon them, until after Iosue was dead.

13 Blessed him, etc.) He did so pray for him, that he did also rejoice with
him: for it was profitable, for example sake, that his virtue should be openly
commended, whereby other men should be stirred up to overcome all fears. For
it was as much, as if he had contemned the Giantes, and ouerlooked them out of
an high place. Therefore the blessing of Caleb does contain a praise in it,
which may serve to exhort the people. In the end of the Chapter, it is said,
that the name of Hebron was Kiriath Arbah. Where it is to be noted, that the
hill it self, is not to be understood thereby, but the chief city there on,
which is often mentioned in the scripture. And it is said, that it was so
named, of a certain Giant, of notable tallnesse: whereby their fable is
confuted, which will have it to be so called, of four Patriarchs that were
buried there. Thus it appears, that Caleb was not careful for his present
quietness, or private commodity, when he does not set upon the place
many years after it was given him. Wherefore it perteined no less to the
whole people, than to one private family, that that thing should be given for
a singular benefit, which did as yet hang upon the incomprehensible grace of
God, and was laid up in hope alone. Also this private reward ought to be less
odious, seeing the effect thereof could not be confirmed, without the wonderful
power of God. Yet here ^riseth a question, Seeing Hebron did not only fall to
be a portion of the Levites, but also was one of the cities of refuge, how this
gift ^^oode vndefeated? If we say that Caleb contenting him self with other
towns, resigned his right to the Levites, the knot is not yet altogether
loosed, because he is expressly appointed Lord of that city. But if we
consider, that only a right of dwelling was granted to the Leuits in those
cities, there shall be no repugnance. In the mean time, the modesty of Caleb
is worthy of no small praise, which in that portion, which by extraordinary
privilege was granted to him, did not refuse to entertain the Levites.

Chap. 15.
THis then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families:
even to the border of Edom, and the wilderness of Zin, Southward, on the
Southcoast.

2 And their Southborder was the salt Sea coast, from the point that looks
Southward.

3 And it went out on the Southside toward Maaleth-akrabbim, and went along to
Zin, and ascended up on the Southside unto Kadesh-barnea, and went along to
Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fet a compass to Karkaa.

4 From thence went it along to Azmon, and reached unto the river of Egypt,
and the end of that coast was on the Westside: this shall be your Southcoast.

5 Also the East border shall be the salt Sea, unto the end of Jordan: and the
border on the North quarter, from the point of the Sea, and from the end of
Jordan.

6 And this border goes up to Beth-hogla, and goes along by the Northside of
Beth-arabah: so the border from thence goes up to the stone of Bohan the son
of Ruben:

7 Again, this border goes up to Debir, from the vallie of Achor, and
Northwarde, turning toward Gilgal, that lies before the going up to Adummim,
which is on the Southside of the river: also this border goes up to the waters
of Enshemesh, and ends at En-rogel:

8 Then this border goes up to the vallie of the son of Hinnom, on the
Southside of the Iebusites: the same is Jerusalem, also this border goes up
to the top of the mountain that lies before the vallie of Hinnom Westward,
which is by the end of the vallie of the Giantes Northward.

9 So this border compasses from the top of the mountain, unto the fountain
of the water of Nephtoah, and goes out to the cities of mount Ephron: and this
border draws to Baalah, which is Kiriath-iearim.

10 Then this border compasses from Baalah Westward, unto mount Seir, and
goes along unto the side of mount Iearim, which is Chesalon, on the Northside:
so it comes down to Beth-shemesh, and goes to Timnah.

11 Also this border goes out unto the side of Ekron Northward: and this
border draws to Shi^ron, and goes along to mount Baalah, and stretches unto
Iabneel: and the ends of this coast are to the Sea.

12 And the West border is to the great Sea: so this border shall be the bounds
of the children of Judah round about, according to their families.

13 And unto Caleb the son of Iephunneh did Ioshue give a part among the
children of Judah, as the Lord commanded him, even Kiriath-arbah of the father
of Anak, which is Hebron.

1 And the lot, etc.) I have showed before, that in setting out the situation
of the places, and searching out the reason of their names, I would not be
curious, partly because I confess, that I am not so exercised in the knowledge
of Topographie or Chorographie, partly because of great labor bestowed
therein, small fruit would come to the readers. Yea, peradventure the greatest
part of men should take pain without any profit. But to the purpose, we must
note, that the lot of the tribe of Judah, does not only fall in a high place,
that the very hight of the region might commend the dignity of the kingdom
that should be therein: but because the name of that tribe, does first come
forth, as a foreshewing of the same matter. They begin to divide that which
was alredie conquered by war. The names of the ten tribes are cast into a
pot. Judah is preferred before all the rest. Who sees not, that he is lifted
up into the highest degree, that the prophecy of Jacob might be fulfilled?
Now, within these bounds, which are here set down, it is well known, that
there were goodly pastures, noble and fruitful vines. Thus, when the lot
does answer to the prophecy of Jacob, it is manifest, that it fell not by
chance: and that the holy Patriarch did pronounce that, which was delivered
to him by the spirit of God. They that are skillful of the places, may with
more pleasure and profit inquire more of them. But that the ruder sort be not
grieved to read unknown names, let them think, that it is well worth their
labor, if they do remember, that short sum which I have touched, namely,
that the tribe of Judah is lifted up on high, that it may be seen alofte above
the rest, until the scepter do arise from thence: and secondly, that a region
fruitful of vines and pastures is assigned to him: moreover, that all the
people might acknowledge, that his lo fell not by chance, which was
foreshewed three hundred years before. Furthermore, of the large and manifold
compass of the places, the unlearned sort may easily gather, that it was a
great province, which was assigned by lot to that one tribe. For, although some
diminution happened afterward, yet they had always the largest dominion. And
we must remember, that which I said, that nothing else was declared by the lot,
but that the border of the sons of Judah joined upon the land of Edom, and
the sons of Sin, and that on the other side, they bordered upon the brook of
Egypt, and upon the Midland sea: but they that were chosen to be diuiders, as
their judgment served them, according to the multitude of men, did measure out
how great their portion should be, and did not enlarge their bounds further:
and the same reason they followed in the rest, as the neerenesse of the places
required. Neither did the error which they committed, any thing hinder, but
that which they decreed remained steadfast. For as they were not ashamed in
part to retracte that portion, which they had made unadvisedly: so on the
other side, when the people did see, that they handled the matter, with all
faithfulness and upright dealing, they did willingly submit them selves to
their decree: neither did a particular error let a general action from being
confirmed and ratified. It shall not be amiss, in one word to touch the city
of Iebus, which afterward was called Jerusalem. Although it was already, by
the secreat counsel of God, chosen to be his Sanctuary, and the seat of the
kingdom, which should be there: yet it was possessed of the enemies, until
the time of David. For in that they were so long deprived of that place, in
which was grounded the holiness, excellency, and beauty of all the land
beside: therein appeared plainly the curse of God, to punish the slothfulness
of the people. For it was as much, as if the chief and principal ornament and
dignity of the land, were taken away from them. But on the other part did
shine the meruelious goodness of God, that the Iebusites, which after their
time was prolonged, seemed to have taken so deep and sure root in the land:
yet for all that were rooted out, and pulled out of their place, when they
thought least of it.

13 But to Caleb, etc.) If judgment should be given, according to the present
state, it seems to be a foolish thing, that an imagined gift should be so
often rehearsed, whereof Caleb received no benefit, so long as Iosue lived.
But here is set forth as well the truth of God, as the faith of the holy man,
which rested upon his promise. Therefore, although scornful men at that time,
would have derided and scoffed, as well at the carfulness of Caleb, as at the
unprofitable liberality of Iosue, and the inhabitants of the same place, (if
the report thereof had been brought to them,) would have proudly despised it,
not without scoffs and tauntes: yet God at the length declares in effect, the
certeintie and constancy of his decree. As for Caleb, although he saw, that
he was kept off from having access unto the hill, yet he testified, that he
was content with the only promise of God. like as this is a right trial of
faith, not to be grieved to want the fruition of the things that are promised,
until the due time come. Moreover, this place and such like do teach, that
the Giantes, which are commonly called Enakim, were so called of Enak the
author of their stock, and so it is a name of their kindred. But at what time
he drove away the sons of Enak, we shall see soon after. In the mean time
this place does teach us, that when Caleb alleges the name of Moses, he
used no deceipte, nor affirmed any thing untruly, because it is now plainly
aduouched, that Moses did so appoint it, by the commandment of God.

14 And Caleb drove thence three sons of Anak, Sheshay, and Ahiman, and
Talmaie, the sons of Anak.

15 And he went up thence, to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir
before time was Kiriath-sepher

16 Then Caleb said, He that smites Kiriath-sepher, and takes it, even to
him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

17 And Othniel, the son of Kanaz, the brother of Caleb took it: and he
gave him Achsah his daughter unto wife.

18 And as she went in to him, she moved him to ask of her father a feelde:
and she lighted off her Ass, and Caleb said unto her, What will thou?

19 Then she answered, Give me a blessing: for thou have given me the South
country: give me also the springs of water. And he gave her the springes
above, and the springes beneath.

20 This shall be the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah,
according to their families.

21 And the utmost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah, toward the
coasts of Edom Southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Iagur,

22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,

23 And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,

24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,

25 And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, Hezron (which is Hazor.)

26 Amam, and Shema, and Moladah.

27 And Haza, Gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-pale^,

28 And Hasar-shual, and Beersheba, and Biziothiah,

29 Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,

30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,

31 And Ziklag and Madmanna, and Sansannah,

32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all these cities are twenty
and nine with their villages.

33 In the low country were Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah.

34 And Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,

35 Iarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,

36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim: fourteen cities
with their villages.

37 Zenam, and Hadasha, and Migdalgad,

38 And Dileam, and Mizphe, and Ioktheel,

39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,

40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlishe,

41 And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah, sixteen cities with
their villages,

42 Lebnah, and Either, and Ashan,

43 And Iiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,

44 And Keliah, and Aczib, and Mareshah: nine cities with their villages.

45 Ekron with her towns and her villages,

46 From Ekron, even unto the Sea, all that lies about Ashdod with their
villages.

47 Ashdod with her towns and her villages: Azzah with her towns and her
villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great Sea was their coast.

48 And in the mountains were Shamer, and Iattir, and Socoth,

49 And Dannah, and Kiriath-sannath (which is Debir,)

50 And Anab, and Ashtemoth, and Anim,

51 And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloth. eleven cities with their villages.

52 Arab, and Dumath, and Eshan,

53 And Ianum, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah,

54 And Humtah, and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron,) and Zior: nine cities with
their villages.

55 Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Iuttah,

56 And Izreel, and Iokdeam, and Zanoah,

57 Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah, ten cities with their villages.

58 Hashul, Beth-zur, and Gedor,

59 And Maarah, and Bethanoth, and Eltecon: six cities with their villages.

60 Kiriath-baal, which is Kiriath-iearim, and Rabbath: two cities with their
villages.

61 In the wilderness were Beth-arabah, Middin, and Secacah.

62 And Nibshan, and the city of salt, and En-gedi: six cities with their
villages:

63 Nevertheless, the Ieb usites, that were the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
could not the children of Judah cast out, but the Iebusites dwell with the
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.

Here is that declared, which was done after the death of Iosue, as appears
by the book of Judges: but least the strangeness should breed a question,
for that a fruitful land and full of springes was given in patrimony to a
woman, the writer of the book thought good to enterlace that history, which
came to pass afterward, that nothing should remain doubtful in the lotte of
the tribe of Judah. First it is said, that Caleb, after he had taken Hebron,
laid seege to Debir, or Kiriath Sepher, and promised to take him to his son
in Law which first should enter into it. And it appears, that seeing he
provoke his soldiers to take the city with so singular a reward, that it
was a matter of no small hardness. Whereby is confirmed that, which we saw
before, that a painful piece of work was laid upon him, when he was
infeoffed with such a possession, as not without great danger he could
conquer. Therefore, to encourage his most valiaun^ soldiers, he promises the
marriage of his daughter in reward of his valiantness, whosoever should first
scale the walls and enter the city. Then it is added, that Othoniel, which
was his brothers som^^, obtained this reward by his virtue. But how it crepte
into the vulgar translation, (The younger brother of Caleb,) I know not: and
surely, the error can not be excused by any color: therefore diverse men
unskillfully trouble themselves, to search how Othoniel would take his Niece to
wife, because such marriage was alredie forbiden by the Law. It is easy to
prove, that he was not her Uncle, but her Uncles son. But here it is
demanded, how Caleb was so bold to promise his daughter, before he knew how
her affection stood. For although it be the du^tie of parents, to give forth
their daughters in marriage: yet they are not allowed such Tyrannical rule
over them, that they may marry them to what husbands they list, without
knowing their mind and affection to them. For when all contracts ought to be
voluntary in marriage, especially there ought to be liberty, that no man be
constrained to bind his faith against his will. But Caleb was lead with a
likely reason, that he doubted not of the consent of his daughter: because she
could not with shamefastnes refuse so honorable a condition, for such a husband
was given her, as was not one of the base multitude, but one that excelled all the rest in praise of warlike virtue. Albei^ it may be, that Caleb in the heat
of the battle did promise unadvisedly, that which was not in his authority
altogether to perform: yet I think the covenant must be expounded according
to common righ^ which is, so that the good will of the maid were obtained.
Surely, God heard the with of Caleb, while he offered him a son in Law,
according to his hearts desire: for if he had had free choice, there was no
man, whom he would more have wished.

18 And it came to pass when she came, etc.) Although we may well think, that
Achsa was a maiden endued with excellent manners, and well brought up, whose
marriage was promised to the conqueror in place of a singular reward: yet here
is bewrayed her unlawful desire, and covetous affection. She knew that women
by the Law of God were excluded from the inheritance of lands: yet
nevertheless Number. 27. 28
the coueteth, and pricketh forward her husband with unjust expostulation. For
so ambitious and covetous wives cease not to trouble their husbands, till they
compel them to forget all shame, modesty, and equity. For, although the
covetousness of men also is insatiable: yet women are carried more headlong
into that vice. Wherefore, all husbands ought to take heed more diligently,
that by their importunate counsels, they be not kindled to covetousness, as
it were with bellows. But greater disorder bewrays it self in her, when
through the gentleness of her husband, and indulgence of her father, she
waxes bolder. For, not being content with the land that was given her, she
requires a ground that is well watered. So, when one has passed the measure
of right and honesty, that vice is by and by accompanied with impudency. But
whereas her father denied her nothing, it is a sign that he loved her
tenderly. But thereof it follows not, but that the ungracious covetousness
of lucre is worthy to be hated, which blinds our minds, and peruerteth our
right judgment. Where it is said, that Achsa allighted from her Ass, some
refer it to craft and dissimulation, as though she fe^l down for grief,
and so her fall was a sign of swooning or failing of her heart, but it is more
simple to think, that she fell down at her fathers feet, the more humbly to
entreat him. How so ever it was, the woman, by craft and flattery, procured
to her self the right of other men, whereby the portions of her brethren were
diminished.

20 This is the inheritance, etc.) Before he compassed the bounds of the
children of Judah: but now after an other manner is declared, how large and
fruitful a country befel^ to them: in which also the great liberality of God
toward them is commended. There are numbered a hundred and thirtene cities,
with their towns and villages: which number does testify, not only the
multitude of men: but also the fruitfulness of the land. And yet there is no
doubt, but that a new fruitfulness was given unto it, by the blessing of God.
And yet in the very nature of the land, it behooved the grace of God to shine,
while he chose a country for his people, replenished with all abundance of
good things. Now, if we look to the men of the tribe, half that region would
have served them abundantly for their habitation. For if eight hundred were
divided into every city: the towns and villages remained for the rest of the
multitude. And certainly, soon after a portion was taken out, which was given
to the tribe of Simeon. For so was fulfilled the dispersion, whereof Jacob did
prophecy, that the posterity of Simeon should be as a Gene. 49. 7.
stranger in another man's ground. Therefore they were admitted as ghestes by
the children of Judah.

63 But the Iebusites, etc.) This makes nothing for excuse of the people,
neither is it set down for that end: for if they had endeavored to the
uttermost of their power, and had been destitute of success, the reproach had
fallen upon God him self, which had promised, that he would be their Captain
continually, till he had delivered them the land void of their enemies, and
that he would send hornettes, or waspes, which should drive away the
inhabitants. Deuteronomy. 7. 20.
Therefore, it was only through their own slothfulness and cowardlinesse,
that they obtained not the city of Jerusalem. They could not therefore,
because sloth would not let them, while through desire of quietness, they
neglected the commandment of God. A place worthy to be noted, that we may
learn to bend all our force cheerfully, to accomplish that which God
commands: and to omit no occasion, lest if we loyter, the gate be shut up
against us. If they had deferred it but a short time, they should not have
been reprehended: but the negligence and dastardlinesse of so long time, did
after a sort reject and drive back the blessing of God.

Chap. 16.
AND the lot fell to the children of Joseph, from Jordan by Jericho unto the
water of Jericho Eastwarde, and to the wilderness that goes up from Jericho,
by the mount Bethel:

2 And goes out from Beth-el to Luz, and runs along unto the borders of
Archiataroth,

3 And goes down Westward to the coast of Iaphleti, unto the coast of
Beth-horon the nether, and to Gezer: and the ends thereof are at the Sea.

4 So the children of Joseph, Manasseh, and Ephraim, took their inheritance.

5 Also the borders of the children of Ephraim, according to their families,
even the borders of their inheritance on the Eastside, were Atroth-addar, unto
Beth-horon the upper.

6 And this border goes out to the Sea unto Micmethah on the Northside, and
this border returns Eastwarde unto Taanath-shiloh, and passes it on the
Eastside unto Ianoha,

7 And goes down from Ianoha, to Ataroth, and Naarath, and comes to
Jericho, and goes out at Jordan.

8 And this border goes from Tappuah Westwarde, unto the river Kanah, and the
ends thereof are at the Sea: this is the inheritance of the tribe of the
children of Ephraim, by their families.

9 And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the
inheritance of the children of Manasseh: all the cities with their villages.

10 And they cast not out the Chanaanite that dwelt in Gezer, but the
Chanaanite dwells among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under
tribute.

1 And the lotte, etc.) First he tells generally, what lotte fell to the two
sons of Joseph, afterward he rehearses the lotte of Ephraim. And it is
maxuell, seeing half the tribe of Manasse was already placed beyond Jordan,
yet more words are spent about the other part, which remained, than about all
the tribe of Ephraim: which as it was more populous, so it did justly challenge
a larger ground: but that the speech is longer about the posterity of Manasse,
it comes by occasion: because the author of the book does repeat again,
how they had a place appointed them, without casting of lots, in the land of
Basan. Afterward he reherseth that that was confirmed by Iosue, which Moses by
authority of God commanded concerning the daughters of Selophad. Therefore,
when there was no doubt of the bounds of Ephraim, neither should there be any
strife about them, their lotte is breefly set forth. But here arises a new
question: seeing the right of the first begotten was passed from Manasse to
Ephraim, how the posterity of him, which was higher in degree of honor,
obtained their cities among the children of Manasse. For by this means their
state seems to be inferior unto them. But I do so interpret it, that when
the portion of Manasse was larger than according to the number of the men, when
just account was made, certain cities were withdrawn which made up the just
portion of the ^ribe of Ephraim: not that they should dwell intermixed as it
were by license of the children of Manasse: but because their borders were
extended further toward them, whom a s^anter possession might suffice. But in
the end of the Chapter, the sloth and cowardice of the tribe of Ephraim is
noted with in^amie, for that he drove not out the Chanaanite out of Gaza, for
if they had gone forward manfully, and wisely, to challenge the land which was
fallen unto them by lot, the victory was in their hand: for they should have
attempted nothing rashly, because the casting of lottes was as good, as if God
had reached forth his hand out of heaven. But their shameful slouthfulnes is
more clearly expressed, and their fault augmented, because they made them
tributaries, with whom it was not lawful to enter into any covenant.
Therefore, when God had expressly forbidden his people to make any contract
with those nations, and specially to co^enant with them for pardon and life,
the children of Ephraim did more grievously offend, than if they had suffered
them without any covenant.

Chap. 17.
THis was also the lotte of the tribe of Manasseh: for he was the first borne
of Joseph, to wit of Machir, the first borne of Manasseh, and the father of
Gilead: now becase he was a man of war, he had Gilead, and Bashan.

2 And also of the rest of the sons of Manasseh by their families, even of
the sons of Abiezer, and of the sons of Helek, and of the sons of Azriel,
and of the sons of Shechem, and of the sons of Hepher, and of the sons of
Shemida: these were the males of Manassah, the son of Joseph, according to
their families.

3 But Zelophehad the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of
Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the
names of his daughters, Malhah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milchah, and Tirzah.

4 Which came before Eleazar the Priest, and before Ios^ue the son of Nun,
and before the Princes, saying, The Lord commanded Moses to give us an
inheritance among our brethren* therefore, according to the commandment of
the Lord, he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.

5 And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead, and
Bashan, which is on the otherside Jordan.

6 Because the daughters of Manasseh did inherit among his sons: and
Manassehs other sons had the land of Gilead.

7 So the borders of Manasseh, were from Asher to Micmethah that lies before
Shechem, and this border goes on the right hand, even unto the inhabitants of
Entappuah.

8 The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah, beside the border of
Manasseh, belongs to the sons of Ephraim.

9 Also this border goes down unto the river Kanah, Southwarde to the river:
these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: and the border of
Manasseh is on the Northside of the river, and the ends of it are at the Sea.

10 The South pertains to Ephraim, and the North to Manasseh, and the Sea is
his border: and they met together in Asher Northwarde, and in Issachar
Eastward.

He returns again to the tribe of Manasse, especially to confirm that which
we saw before of the daughters of Selophehad. For it being a strange
matter, that women should succeed indifferently with men: yet because there
was five of them left by their father, they proved that it was meet, that left
their father, without his desert, should be punished as one that died
childlesse, it was meet, that they should be received into his portion. So God
by an oracle had given answer unto Moses, that they should make one head in
succession. Now they require, that the same may be to them performed which was
adjudged by the mouth of God. That Manasse does still retain the name of the
first begotten, we ought to take it so, that it be not repugnant to the
prophecy of Jacob: for rather his birthright is here after a manner buried,
and his dignity restrained unto the time passed. Where it is to be noted, that
men are such holdfastes, and addict unto their own profits, that it seldom
comes in their minds, to yield to other men their right. The daughters of
Selophehad by an heavenly decree had obceined a portion, neither was there any
man that durst say a word against it. But for all that, if they had held their
peace, there had been none account made of them. Therefore lest lingering should
be hurtful to them, they come to Iosue and Eleazar, and urge them that they be
not deprived of their lawful inheritance. And Iosue makes no delay, but that
they may obtain immediately, that which is just and right. Neither do the
people murmur at it. Whereupon we gather, that they were all well inclined to
equity: but while every man is careful for his own, they do too much
neglecte others, of whom they ought to have regard.

5 And ten inheritances, etc.) In this place are numbered seven stocks or
houses in the posterity of Manasse: Machir his eldest son is placed by
himself. Now it is demanded, how the inheritance was divided into ten
parts: Some interpreters do craftily make as though they saw not this doubt:
other, because they cannot lose the knot, invent very trifling expositions.
Surely it were against all reason, that four lots were given to five daughters.
And it is no more agreeable to truth, that because their father was the eldest,
therefore they had his part doubled. This is out of doubt, that Gilead the son
of Machir, which was the great grandfather to these women, of whom we speak,
did choose his seat in the mount Gilead and Basan. Therefore, seeing he had by
privilege, without casting of lottes, obtained an inheritance already, he
ought not to cast lots in the land of Chanaan: except peradventure he placed
but half his family beyond Jordan. For Hepher was one of his sons, but not
his only son: like as the issue of the other five brethren might be divided
into more heads, according to which number the division was made: For we
cannot tell, in what degree the families were taken, unto whom their portion
fell out in the land of Chanaan. And we read none other thing here, but that
ten lottes were cast among the sons of Manasse, beside that region which
they had obtained before, beyond Jordan. Therefore it is in vain to contend
about the number, the certeintie whereof we can not gather out of this present
history: for this before all things must be observed, unto how many families
the partition was made common. And it may be, that the daughters of Selophehad
had their patrimony given them there. For they are said in deed to have
dwelled among their fathers brethren: but the place is not assigned where.
Howsoever it is, I doubt not, but a mutual equality was observed, that seeing
the rest were provided for beyond Jordan, they divided the land that was
subject to casting of lots into ten families, whose names are not here
rehearsed.

11 And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher, Beth-shean and her towns, and
Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor with the towns thereof, and
the inhabitants of En-dor with the towns thereof, and the inhabitants of
Thaanach with her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo with the towns of
the same, even three countries.

12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not destroy those cities, but the
Chanaanites dwelled still in that land.

13 Nevertheless, when the children of Israel were strong, they put the
Chanaanites under tribute, but cast them not out wholly.

14 Then the children of Joseph spoke unto Ioshue, saying, Why have thou given
me but one lot, and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people, for
as much as the Lord has blessed me hitherto?

15 Ioshue then answered them, If thou be much people, get thee up to the
wood, and cut trees for thy self there, in the land of the Perizzites, and of
the Giantes if, mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.

16 Then the children of Joseph said, The mountain will not be enough for us:
and all the Chanaanites that dwell in the low country, have charriots of
iron, as well they in Beth-shean, and in the towns of the same, as they in the
vallie of Izreel.

17 And Ioshue spoke unto the house of Joseph, to Ephraim, and to Manasseh,
saying, Thou art a great people, and have great power, and shall not have one
lot.

18 Therefore the mountain shall be thine: for it is a wood, and thou shall cut
it down: and the ends of it shall be thine, and thou shall cast out the
Chanaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

11 And Manasseh, etc.) It is not easy to gather, how they were so mingled,
that they possessed certain cities in the lot of Aser, and Izachar, when the
tribe of Ephraim dwelt within their borders: except peradventure it was so
provided, lest a more commodious kind of dwelling should have been subject to
many quarelles and complaints: or else perhapps, as the whole region was
afterward better known, some thing was changed in the former partition,
according to the rule of equity. Therefore this seems to be a new addition,
while it was known, that the children of Manasse might be enlarged, without
the loss of the other. Neither was there given them a peaceable possession,
which they might presently enjoy: but their inheritance was laid up under
hope, that they might rest rather in the heavenly promise, than in the
earthly possession. Yet that they obtained not those cities, it is imputed to
their own fault, for the lot was to them an undoubted pledge of victory.
Therefore they could not drive out the inhabitants, because they were not
persuaded in their hearts, that God was true of his promise, and so they
stopped the course of Gods power, through their own slouthfulnes. But the other
fault was less tolerable: when they might easily have destroyed them all:
they were not only slothful in executing the commandment of God: but being
moved with filthy lucre, they saved those alive, whom GOD had appointed to be
destroyed. For those whom we charge with tribute, we do in a manner receive
them under our tuition and protection. God had appointed them to be ministers
of his vengeance, he had given them strength enough to execute the same: but
they were not only slack therein, but also deprived them selves of liberty
to do well. Therefore it is no meruell, if God severely revenged their so
froward slothfulness, that those nations, whom they had pardoned, contrary
to the manifest prohibition of God, should be come pricks to be thrust into
their eyes, and goades to dig in their sides. Also here arises a question,
how they had cities granted to them in the tribes of Aser and Number. 33, (...)
Izachar, when both their portions was yet unknown. Therefore, by anticipation
that is rehearsed, which was not yet fulfilled. Howsoever it be, we gather,
that because of the ignorance of the places, every part was not so exactly
divided at the first, but that it was needful more or less to correct that,
which was first set down. And geuerally we must take it so, of the tribe of
Ephraim, and the rest, that many cities, which they obtained, were so wasted,
that they served them to no use. Wherefore I doubt not, but many ruins are
here buried. And then it is to be thought, that where base towns were, through
the fruitefulnesse of the soil, and other commodities, noble cities were
builded. For surely, Sichem was of sufficient renown to have had a name, and a
degree: yet there is no mention of it here, like as there is not also of
Samaria, which being the Metropolitan city of the kingdom of Israel,
pertains to the same tribe of Ephraim, as it is well known. Therefore it is
manifest, that many cities were possessed in every tribe, whereof here is no
mention at all.

14 And the children of Joseph, etc.) Although they set a fair color of
excuse for their complaint: yet they dissemble amiss, that no more was
comprehended in one lot, than served for one tribe. Yet I can not tell, whether
the lot was cast confusedly for the sons of Joseph: and surely it seems
against reason, that it should be so. Iosue was not ignorant, nor yet the other
overseers, of the diuiu^on, that Ephraim and Manasse made two heads or two
stocks: and it has been often said before, that the land was divided into
ten tribes, which number could not stand, except they discerned the tribe of
Manasse from the tribe of Ephraim. Therefore it is certain, that they were not
deceived with so gross an error, that they would cast two names upon one
lot. For it had been intolerable unrighteousness, to bide two tribes under
the name of Joseph, that they might defraud them of the one half of their
right. A^de hereunto, that the portion of either of them, was before distinctly
described, and set forth with their several bounds. Therefore reason leads
us rather to this opinion. When the lottes were cast upon two tribes, it came
to pass, by the wonderful counsel of God, that these brethren which had one
father, should be neighbors and lie both together: therefore they do unjustly
find fault, that they have but one inheritance given them, because neither was
the negligence of Iosue so g^eate, nor his mind so malignant, that either for
lack of consideration, or through envy, he would defraud them of their clear
and manifest right: but hereof did arise this false complaint of the scantnesse
of their lands, because they made none account of all that ground, which was
yet to be conquered by prowess of war: as though the lot had placed all the
other tribes beside in a peaceable foil. And therefore Iosue, with one word,
does confute and discuss all their contention and quareling, and turns
upon their own heads that crime, whereby they assaied to make him to be
envied. If ye have such store of men (says he) and so great a multitude, why
do you not fall upon your enemies, whose region is given unto you* For, if ye
do valiantly enter into the inheritance granted to you by God, trusting in
his promise, the success shall not deceive you. We see, that although they
were well provided for, yet they are blinded with their own slouthfulnes, so
that they complain, that they are pinned in with streightes: because they
would not move their little finger, to seek the effect of their lot to have
larger room. Wherefore, this place does teach us, if we think at any time
that less is performed unto us, than ought to be, that we must diligently
search ou^ all lettes, that we do not rashly cast upon others, the fault that
rests in our selves.

16 To whom they made answer, etc.) It appears, that they were too much
addicted to them selves, because they draw back as much as they ran, that
they might not give place to the reason propounded by Iosue: th^n the which yet
nothing w^^ more ind^^ferent. They object, that the hill was unfruitful, and
as it was (...) deserte, so that if any thing were added, they should feel
small profit thereof. As touching the plain, which was well occupied and
fruitful, they object that they are shut out from it, and kept out of it,
through the terrible forces of their enemies. Therefore they make mention of
iron charriots, as though they had never tried before, that God could easily
overthrow, as well the charriots, as the horsemen. But Iosue, with a plain
and wise answer, does well reprove both their covetousness, and their
delicacie, and slothfulness. If the forest (says he) at this time, be not
fruitful enough: thou may cu^ down the trees, and make thee goodly feeldes:
so that, if thou woul^est not spare thy labor, this dwelling which thou
haste, would serve thy turn well enough. And as for iron charriots shall not
let, but God may perform that which he has promised. The inheritance is
thine: only enter upon it, with such boldness, as becomes thee.

Chap. 18.
AND the whole Congregation of the children of Israel came together at Shiloh:
for they set up the Tabernacle of the Congregation there, after the land was
subject unto them.

2 Now there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, to whom they
had not divided their inheritance.

3 Therefore Ioshue said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye so
slack to enter and possess the land, which the Lord God of your fathers has
given you?

4 Give from among you for every tribe three men, that I may send them, and
that they may rise, and walk through the land, and distribute it according to
their inheritance, and return to me.

5 And that they may divide it unto them into seven parts, (Judah shall abide
in his coast at the South, and the house of Joseph shall stand in their coasts
at the North.)

6 Ye shall describe the land therefore into seven parts, and shall bring them
hither to me, and I will cast lottes for you here before the Lord our God.

7 But the Levites shall have no part among you: for the Priesthood of the
Lord is their inheritance: also Gad and Ruben and half the tribe of Manasseh
have received their inheritance beyond Jordan Eastward, which Moses the servant
of the Lord gave them.

8 Then the men arose, and went their way: and Ioshue charged them that went to
describe the land, saying, Depart, and go through the land, and describe it,
and return to me, that I may here cast lottes for you before the Lord in
Shiloh.

9 So the men departed, and passed through the land, and described it by cities
into seven parts in a book, and returned to Ioshue into the camp at Shiloh,

10 Then Ioshue cast lottes for them in Shiloh before the Lord, and there
Ioshue divided the land unto the children of Israel, according to their
portions.

1 And all the multitude, etc.) Here is reported that solemn assembly, which
was held at Silo, where consultation was had for casting of the rest of the
lottes. For although they began to cast lottes of a godly zeal, yet that
action was interrupted: although the victory ought to have gone before the
division, which depended upon the only mouth of God. Wherefore they come
together in Silo, to decree what was needful to be done in time to come. And
there is no doubt, but Iosue called this assembly, that he might shake away
from them their slothfulness. For they utter nothing of their own accord:
but he begins to chide them, that they were slack and slow, to enter upon
the inheritance, which God him self had given them. For we may gather by his
speech, that in the beginning they were full of cheerfulness: but there
followed no perseverance. And yet that obedience was adorned with the
commendation of the holy Ghost, which soon after vanished away. And we must
note, that the people is reprehended, not for that they were negligent in
casting of lottes: but because they did not possess the inheritance which was
offered to them by God. And surely, as the casting of lottes was a sign of
some faith, so that region, which fell to every one of them, was a sure and
faithful pledge of that possession, which afterward they should have: for God
did not trifle and play, when he assigned to every one their portion. The
verb RAPHAH, which I have translated, To cease, does signify also, To be
feeble and weak. Therefore he accuses them of shameful slothfulness, that
when it was high time to chase away their enemies, by fingering and loytering,
they hindered the effect of the benefi^e of God. For if they had been content
with their bare lot, and had embraced by faith that which fell unto them,
doubtless they would have been prompt and ready to finish the wars: or
rather as conquerours they would have made haste unto the triumph. Now it is
said, that the Arc was placed in Silo, not only that their consultation might
be the more holy and grave, being as it were in the sight of God: but because
the place was quiet and safe from all foreign violence and injury. For that
of all other things was chiefly to be cared for, that it should not be left
open unto the soudaine invasions of the enemies. For although the hand of God
was stretched out on every side to keep off, and beat back the force of
their enemies: yet God did so dwell amongst them, that he would have them to
be as it were his guard and keepers. But although a standing place for the Arc
was then chosen, yet was it not a perpetual house, but only an Inn for a
time. For it was not in the will or election of the people, to appoint God a
place where he should keep residence: but that ought to have been looked for,
which is often spoken of the Law, that he himself would appoint a place for
the memory of his name: which at the length was performed, when the mount Sion
was chosen out for the Temple. For which cause it is said in the Psalm, Our
feet shall stand in thy courts O Jerusalem: by which words Psalm. 1 22. 2.
is signified, that the Arc until that time was but a ghest and stranger.
But the ruin and overthrow of Silo has taught us at the length, that they
which corrupt his benefices, shall be protected by no excellence or dignity
against his vengeance. Until the death of Helie, GOD suffered his holy name
to be worshipped there: but 1. Sam. 4.
when all religion was defiled with the ungodliness of the Priests, and
almost abolished through the unthankfulness of the people, that place became
notable unto the posterity through the example of the fearful punishment
thereof. And therefore Jeremy wills the Citizens of Jerusalem, which were
lewdly proud of the Temple, to Iere. 7. 12.
direct their eyes unto that example, Behold (says he) the cabernacle of God
was in Silo, before it came to you: now ye see into how great shame that
ancient glory is turned.

4 Deliver three men, etc.) Caleb and Iosue had alredie searched out those
coasts, and the people by inquiry had known many things: yet Iosue would
have that land divided as it were upon the present view: and commands
three spies to be chosen for every one of the seven tribes, that in the mouth
of two or three, every controversy might be ended. But nothing seems to be
less agreeable to reason, than to send one and twenty men, which should not
only pass straight through the land of their enemies, but also should compass
about by many crooked turninges, that no corner should be hid from them, but
that they should measure the length and breadth, and should also consider
unequal coasts. For every one, whom they should meet, might easily
suspecte what men they were, and for what cause they were sent about this
business. Finally, they could not return again freely, but through a
thousand deaths: neither would they of a blind and brutishe motion have
adventured themselves in so great danger, nor Iosue would have been author
unto them of so perilous a journey: but because they had good experience, that
those nations being astonished with fear from Heaven, desired nothing more
than peace: for although they hated the children of Israel, yet being subdued
with so many slaughters, they durst not stir a finger against them: so the
searchers or surueyers went forward, as it had been into a peaceable country,
either under pretext of merchandise, or else as harmless strangers. It may
be also, that being divided into several companies, they made their journey
more secretly. Certain it is, that they never could have had such boldness
and trust, but because they knew themselves to be under the shadow of the
wings of God, and therefore feared not those blind and blockish nations.
Hereuppon it is that their prompt and ready will is here commended: for except
they had been persuaded, that the hands of those nations were bound by God,
that they could not touch them, they might have had just and honest occasion to
have refused the voyage.

9. So the men went, etc.) Here is not only commended their willing obedience,
in which appears their singular virtue, but also the notable favor of God,
that he vouchsafed to give such wonderful success to the godly purpose of
Iosue and the people. If they had crept through mines under the earth, they
could scarce have escaped innumerable dangers. Now when they mark the cities
and their situations, the fields, the variety of regions, and all the coasts,
and without any evil adventure return happily again, who would doubt, but
that their life was preserved by the wonderful power of God, among a thousand
deaths? Therefore by way of Emphasis or augmentation to celebrate the grace of
God, it is said, that they returned into the host: which is as much in effect,
as that they were brought back by the hand of God, that the people might more
willingly fall to casting of their lots. For their minds would not yet have been
well purged of werines, but that they saw in this voayge the wonderful grace
of God, which promised unto them success according to their desire. Therefore
Iosue is said to have divided the land according to the portion of every one,
as though he put them in quiet possession: but yet the effect depended upon the
presence of God, because it ought fice them, that the whole matter was governed
by the authority of God, which never deceives his servants, no not when he
seems to play or trifle. But in what sense the Arc of covenant is called
God, or his face, I have expounded in many places before.

11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came forth according
to their families, and the coast of their lot lay between the children of
Judah, and the children of Joseph.

12 And their coast on the Northside was from Jordan, and the border went up to
the side of Jericho, on the Northparte, and went up through the mountains
Westward, and the ends thereof are in the wilderness of Beth-auen:

13 And this border goes along from thence to Luz, even to the Southside of
Luz (the same is Beth-el:) and this border descends to Attoth-addar, near
the mount, that lies on the Southside of Beth-horon the nether.

14 So the border turns, and compasses the corner of the Sea Southward, from
the mount that lies before Beth-horon Southward: and the ends thereof are at
Kiriath baal, (which is Kiriath-iearim,) a city of the children of Judah: this
is the Westquarter.

15 And the Southquarter is from the end of Kiriath-iearim, and this border
goes out Westward, and comes to the fountain of waters of Nephtoah.

16 And this border descends at the end of the mountain, that lies before
the vallie of Ben-hinnom, which is in the vallie of the Giantes Northward, and
descends into the vallie of Hinnom by the side of Iebusi Southward, and goes
down to Enrogel,

17 And compasses from the North, and goes forth to Enshemesh, and stretches
to Geliloth, which is toward the going up unto Adummim, and goes down to the
stone of Bohan the son of Ruben,

18 So it goes along to the side over against the plain Northward, and goes
down into the plain.

19 After, this border goes along to the side of Beth-hoglah Northward: and
the ends thereof, that is, of the border, reach to the point of the salt Sea
Northward, and to the end of Jordan Southward: this is the Southcoast.

20 Also Jordan is the border of it on the Eastside: this is the inheritance of
the children of Benjamin by the coasts thereof, round about according to their
families,

21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, according to their
families, are Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and the vallie of Keziz,

22 And Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim, and Beth-el,

23 And Auim, and Parah, and Ophrah,

24 And Chephar, Ammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba: twelve cities with their
villages.

25 Gibeon, and Ramah, and Be roth,

26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,

27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,

28 And Zela, Eleph, and Iebusi, (which is Jerusalem,) Gibeath, and Kiriath:
fourteen cities with their villages: this is the inheritance of the children
of Benjamin according to their families.

In the lot of Benjamin, there falls out nothing greatly needful to be
noted, but that it being a little tribe, is preferred before others. I confess
indeed, that in respect of the fewness of the people, it was shut up within
narrow borders, for it obtained but six and twenty cities: yet was this an
honorable thing of it self, to receive their inheritance before other more
populous tribes. Add hereunto, that by this means, they were made neighbors
and borderers upon the sons of Joseph, with whom they were next of kin. For
they were placed in the midst, between Ephraim and Manasse on the one part,
and the tribe of Judah on the other part. This was also a singular honor, that
among other cities Jerusalem also fell to their lot, so that afterward they
might grant it, as it were by license, to the sons of Judah, to be the seat
of the kingdom. But seeing they obtained so quiet a dwelling place, it is
meruell, they lead not a quiet life in all humanity and gentleness, with
their neighbors. But we remember the prophecy of Jacob, Benjamin is a ravening
wolf: In the morning he shall ravish the prey, Genesis 44. 27.
and at even he shall divide the spoil. Wherefore it seems, that either they
were too covetous and seditious by nature, or else they were driven by some
necessity, which at this day is unknown to us, to give them selves to
spoiling. As touching the city Luz, the other name is added (This is Bethel,)
because that name which was given to it by the Patriarch Jacob, was there
received in use and custom. Not far off was Beth-auen, whose name because it
was infamous and reproachful, was translated to Bethel her self, after it was
corrupted and defiled with ungodly superstitions. It is like that Kiriath-baal
was called Kiriath-ieharim, that the name of the idol might be taken away,
which had been a spotte in true godliness, if it had remained. And surely, it
had been a foul and shameful thing, that such a patron as was enemy to the
only GOD, should have been spoken of in the peoples mouth.

Chap. 19.
AND the second lot came out to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of
Simeon, according to their families: and their inheritance was in the midst
of the inheritance of the children of Judah.

2 Now they had in their inheritance, Beersheba, and Sheba, and Moladah.

3 And Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Azem,

4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,

5 And Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah,

6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuben: thirteen cities with their villages.

7 Ain, Emmon, and Either, and Ashan, four cities with their villages,

8 And all the villages that were round about these cities, unto Baalath-beer,
and Ramath Southward: this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of
Simeon according to their families.

9 Out of the portion of the children of Judah came the inheritance of the
children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too much for
them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within their
inheritance.

Next follows the tribe of Simeon, not so much for honors sake, as for a
note of reproach. Jacob had pronounced of Simeon and Leui, I will disperse them
and scatter them. In deed the penalty Genesis 49. 7.
of Leui was not only mitigated, but also turned into an excellent dignity:
because his posterity were placed as it were in a watchtowre, to keep the
people in their duty of godliness and religion. But, as touching Simeon,
that certain cities were given to his posterity within the borders of Judah,
this was a manifest dispersion, whereof Jacob had prophesied. Although they
were not cast a sunder into places far distant, yet were they but as
tenantes, and dispersed when they dwelled within the soil of an other tribe.
Therefore, for that slaughter which they committed with no less
unfaithfulness, than cruelty, they were separated into diverse lodgings. By
this means the offense of their father was cast into the bosom of his sons,
and that sentence which God delivered to his servant, he did execute indeed.
Also the truth of the lotte was clearly approved. But whereas a portion is
taken away from the tribe of Judah, we se again, that although the overseers of
the division, determined most wisely to keep equity: yet they were deceived
with an error, which they were not ashamed to correct as soon as it was found
out. And it is no absurdity, that although they were ruled by the spirit of
God, yet they were deceived in some part: because God sometimes withdraws
from his servants the spirit of judgment, and suffers them to do one thing
or other, like men, that they should not triumph too much in their exceeding
great wisdom. Add hereunto, that the people were justly punished for their
negligence and careless hastiness: because they should from the beginning
have better discussed, what right belonged to every one, which thing they
neglected. A large dominion was unskillfully assigned without discretion unto
the tribe of Judah, whereof equity constrained them afterward to appoint some
part for other tribes. Howbeit, it had been better, that their certain limits
had been set down at the first, than afterward to have some part taken away
with their grief. Moreover, every one presumed with vain hope, that they
should have large and wide possessions, as though the land had stretched forth
it self without end.

9 Of the portion of the sons of Judah, etc.) Yet the moderation and
indifferency of the tribe of Judah is worthy of praise, which does not
strive, nor allege that it is against right, that any thing should be taken
away from them, of the portion that was once assigned unto them. For they might
have pretended the name of God, by whose authority they had obtained that
seat. But because it is decreed by the common judgment of all men, that more
was given them than they might possess without the loss and injury of other
men, they do immediately cease from all pretense of striving. And surely they
should have falsely and unjustly boasted of the name of God: for that, although
the lotte proceeded from him, as concerning the region and quarter: yet in the
largeness thereof there fell out an error, because their bounds were
enlarged by the judgment of men, more than they ought to have been. Therefore
that which they acknowledge, was given a^isse to them, with the loss of other
men, they do willingly forgo, and gently enterteine their brethren, which
otherwise should have wanted an inheritance, yea they are content to part with
them that which they thought without controversy to have been their own
already.

10 Also the third lot arose for the children of Zebulun, according to their
families: and the coasts of their inheritance came to Sarid,

11 And their border goes up Westward, even to Maralah, and reaches to
Dabasheh, and meets with the river that lies before Iokneam,

12 And turns from Sarid Eastward toward the Sun rising unto the border of
Chisloth-tabor, and goes out to Daberath, and ascends to Iaphia,

13 And from thence goes along Eastward toward the Sun rising to
Gittah-hepher, to Ittah-kazin, and goes forth to Rimmon, and turns to Neah,

14 And this border compasses it on the Northside to Hannathon, and the ends
thereof are in the vallie of Iipthtahel.

15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-lehem, twelve
cities with their villages.

16 This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun, according to their
families: that is, these cities and their villages.

17 The fourth lot came out to Issachar, even for the children of Issachar,
according to their families.

18 And their coast was Izreelah, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,

19 And Ephraim, and Shion, and Anaharah,

20 And Harrabith, and Kishion, and Abez,

21 And Remeth, and En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Bethpazzez.

22 And this coast reaches to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth-shemesh, and the
ends of their coast reach to Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.

23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar, according
to their families, that is, the cities, and their villages.

24 Also the fifte lotte came out for the tribe of the children of Asher,
according to their families.

25 And their coast was Heleath, and Halie, and Beten, and Achshah,

26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal, and came to Carmel Westwarde, and to
Shihor-libnah,

27 And turns toward the Sun rising to Beth-dagon, and comes to Zebulun,
and to the vallie of Iptah-el, toward the Northside of Beth-emek, and Neiel,
and goes out on the left side of Cabul,

28 And to Ebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, unto great Zidon.

29 Then the coast turns to Ramah, and to the strong city of Zor, and his
border turns to Hosah, and the ends thereof are at the Sea, from Hebel to
Aczib,

30 Vmmah also, and Aphek, and Rehob, two and twenty cities with their
villages.

31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher, according to
their families, that is, these cities and their villages.

10 And the third lotte, etc.) In the lotte of Zabulon appears the plain
truth of the prophecy of Jacob, which foreshewed, that they should dwell
about the Sea coast. The old man, the vanished Genesis 49. 13.
man, which could not set his foot in his own ground, did assign the
region by the Sea coast to the posterity of his son Zabulon. What seems
more ridiculous? But now, when the lotte assigns to them the region by the
Sea side, there could not be required a more clear approbation of that
sentence: as if God had twice thundered out of heaven. Therefore the tribe of
Zabulon obteineth not the Sea coast by their own choice, nor by the
appointment of men: but the region adjoining to the Sea, was by God himself
adjudged to be their inheritance. So that, although men erred, yet the light
always shined in the darkness. Jacob proceeds further, and makes a notable
difference beetweene Zabulon and Isachar: namely, that the former tribe should
Genesis 49. 5. 14. 15.
travel to and fro with merchandise: the other should sit quietly and lead
their lives in their tents. Therefore it is like, that the Sea coast, where
Zabulon dwelled, was full of havens, and apt for manifold trafique. But the
sons of Isachar containing themselves in the profits and fruits of their
lands, lived of their labor and tillage. They that are thought to be skillful
in those regions, affirm that the land of the tribe of Aser, was a great corn
country, which answeareth with great consent and agreement unto the prophecy
of Jacob. That so small a number of cities is Genesis 44. 20.
here expressed, we may gather again, that there were many ruinous places,
which came not in account, but after the people were well settled, many goodly
cities were built on them, with which the land was garnished, as it is manifest
out of other places. And surely it appears, that the sum of the division is
breefly touched, and so, many things are omitted, which it is lawful to search
out, so it be not with curiosity that is without profit. Surely they which
have here but twenty or seventeen cities rehearsed, had a larger dominion.
Therefore here is only rehearsed, the abridgement of the division, such as is
like to be taken out of the short bills of the messengers which were written
in have.

32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Napthalie, even to the children of
Napthalie, according to their families.

33 And their coast was from Heleph, and from Allon, in Zaanannim, and
Adaminekeb, and Iabneel, even to Lakum, and the ends thereof are at Jordan.

34 So this coast turns Westward to Aznothtabor, and goes out from thence to
Hucdock, and reaches to Zebulun on the Southside, and goes to Asher on the
Westside, and to Judah by Jordan toward the Sun rising.

35 And the strong cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Cinnerith,

36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,

37 And Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor,

38 And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and Beth-anah, and Bethshemesh, nineteen
cities with their villages.

39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Napthalie,
according to their families: that is, the cities and their villages.

40 The seventh lotte came out for the tribe of the children of Dan, according
to their families.

41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh,

42 And Shaalabim, and Aiialon, and Ithlah,

43 And Elon, and Themnathah, and Ekron,

44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalah,

45 And Iehud, and Bene-berak, and Gathrimmon,

46 And Me-iarkon, and Rakkon, with the border that lies before Iapho.

47 But the coasts of the children of Dan fell out too little for them:
therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein,
and called Leshem Dan, after the name of Dan their father.

48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan, according to
their families: that is, these cities and their villages.

49 When they had made an end of dividing the land by the coasts thereof, then
the children of Israel gave an inheritance unto Ioshue the son of Nun among
them.

50 According to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he asked,
even Timnath-serah in mount Ephraim: and he builte the city and dwelt therein.

51 These are the heritages which Eleazar the Priest, and Ioshue the son of
Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided by
lot in Shiloh before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: so they made an end of dividing the country.

Now he entreats of the lotte of Nepthalie, which seems to agree with the
natures and manners of that tribe. For Jacob had testified, that they should be
gentle, and use fair speech to their neighbors. After this manner it
seems, that of the one part they joined upon the children of Judah, and in
other parts were compass^d about with the defense of their brethren. Surely,
when it is said, that the tribe of Dan took Lesen by assault, there seems to
be a secret comparison: because the children of Nepthalie did not thrust into
their inheritance by force of arms: but kept themselves quietly in a peaceable
province, and so under the fidelity, and as it were the protection of the
tribe of Judah, they were safe and at rest. But where it is said, that the
children of Dan challenged by force of arms the possession of the city Lesen,
which was assigned them by God, it happened after the death of Iosue. But here
is breefly, and by the way enterlaced, that history, which is set forth more
at large in the book of Judges: for their valiantness was worthy of praise,
so to embrace the right granted to them by God, that trusting in him they went
forth manfully to chase away their enemies.

49 When they had made an end, etc.) Now at the length here is rehearsed the
thankfulness of the people toward Iosue. A^hough there ought to be an equal
partition of the land of Chanaan among the posterity of Abraham: yet Iosue,
through the excellency of his virtues, deserved some honorable reward above
the rest. Neither could any man complain, that one man was enriched by the
loss of many: for first by his long staying shines forth the modesty of the
holy man, that he provides not for his private wealth, before the public
state was well set in order. For where shall you find a man, which after he
has declared one or two tokens of his manhood, will not straight way make
ha^te to be partaker of the prey: But Iosue did not so, which thinks not of
him self, until all the land be divided. Also in the very reward it self,
which he obtained, the same temperaunce and frugalitie is seen. He desires a
city to be granted to him and his family, which was indeed but a ^eape of
stones: for either it was destroyed and defaced with ruins, or else there was
no city at all builded there. But the conjecture may be likely, that to the
intent his reward might be without envy, he required some such plot, as was
not very wealthy. If any man think it an absurdity, that he bestowed not
his labor freely, let him consider, that he obeyed the calling of God most
liberally and freely, and that he did not take so great travel, to endure so
many dangers and troubles, with the affection of an hireling. But when he had
executed his office willingly, he was not to refuse a monument of the grace of
God, unless with perverse and froward contempt, he would have overwhelmed his
glory. For that prerogative, which was offered unto him, was nothing else but
a plain testimony of that heavenly power, which was showed forth by his hand.
Neither can any ambition be here noted: because he desires nothing for him
self, nor rashely thrusts in his covetous appetite: but requires to have
that honor, which God had alredie bestowed upon him, to be confirmed by the
consent of the people. Yea, if he had held his peace, he had given a sign of
slouthfulnes, rather than of modesty. Where as it is rehearsed in the end of
the Chapter, that Iosue and Eleazer made an end of distributing the land, it
pertains to a perpetual Law of determination of their bounds, that the
children of Israel should stir or move nothing, to weaken or deface that
unchangeable decree of God.

Chap. 20.
THE Lord also spoke unto Ioshue, saying:

2 Speak to the children of Israel, and say, Appoint you cities of refuge,
whereof I spoke unto you by the hand of Moses:

3 That the slayer that kills any person by ignorance, and unwittingly, may
flee thither, and they shall be your refuge from the auenger of blood.

4 And he that does flee unto one of those cities, shall stand at the entering
of the gate of the city, and shall show his cause to the Elders of the city:
and they shall receive him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that
he may dwell with them.

5 And if the auenger of blood pursue after him, they shall not deliver the
slaier into his hand, because he smote his neighbor ignorantly, neither hated
he him before time:

6 But he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the Congregation in
judgment, or until the death of the high Priest that shall be in those days:
then shall the slaier return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own
house, even unto the city from whence he fled.

7 Then they appointed Kedesh in Galil in mount Nephtali, and Sechem in mount
Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba) which is Hebron) in the mountain of Judah.

8 And on the other side Jordan toward Jericho Eastwarde, they appointed Bezer
in the wilderness upon the plain, out of the tribe of Ruben, and Ramoth in
Gilead, out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan, out of the tribe of
Manasseh.

9 These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the
stranger that soiourned among them, that whosoever killed any person
ignorantly, might flee thither, and not dye by the hand of the auenger of
blood, until he stood before the Congregation.

1 And the Lord spoke, etc.) Whereas it came not in their mind to appoint the
cities of refuge, until they were admonished again, it seems that their
slacknesse is covertly reproved: for this was decreed before by the
commandment of God beyond Jordan. When the like, and the very same reason is
here, wherefore do they stay? why do they not bring to an end that, which
they had well begone? considering that it was for great cause, that innocent
persons should have safe places of refuge appointed them, least the land should
be defiled with blood: for except that remedy had been used, the kinsemen of
them that were slain, by rashly revenging their death, would have doubled the
mischief. Surely the people ought not to have been slack in providing to
avoid that, which might be a spot or defiling of the land. Whereby we may see
how slow men are, not only to do their duty, but also to be careful of
their own health, except God did often prick them foreward, and provoke them
with the spurs of his exhortations. Howbeit, it appears by this, that their
offense was but of negligence, that they are immediately ready to obey, and do
not prolong the matter, nor hinder and stay so necessary a business with
unprofitable contentions. But what was the law of these Sanctuaries, we have
elsewhere declared. For by them was no impunitie given to wilful murders, but
if any man through error or chance had slain a man that was not his enemy,
he had safe refuge unto these cities, which were appointed for the same
purpose. So God helped the poor wretches, where they were without fault, least
they should have suffered punishment unworthily, when they had committed no
wicked fact. In the mean time God of his clemency granted thus much to the
brethren and kinsemen of them that were dead, that their sorrow should not be
increased, by having them daily in their sight, by whom they were deprived of
their friends. Finally, the people was accustomed to detest all manslaughter,
when such manslaiers as were acquitted of murder, should be banished from their
house, and from their contrie, until the death of the high priest. For that
temporal punishment did clearly show, how precious man's blood is in the
sight of God. So the law, both to the whole state and every private member
was just, indifferent, and profitable. But we must note breefly, that every
point is not here set forth in order. For upon this condition, he that had
slain a man by chance, might be preserved from danger, if first he appeared in
judgment to answer the cause, and after it was thoroughly discussed and
debated, he were acquitted of murder, as is more at large declared by Moses
concerning this whole matter Deuteronomy. 1^.


7 And they appointed, etc.) The verb, KADESH which here is set, does
signify also To consecrate and appoint. Wherefore I judge, that the cities
were so chosen out, as served best for the common profit. Whereby it is
gathered, that they did truly moderate themselves, that private utility gave
place to public profit. But in the next Chapter, we shall see, that
Kiriatharba, which afterward was called Hebron, was translated to the Levites,
whereas before it was under the dominion of Caleb. Wherein the rare, yea the
incomparable continency of that holy man appeared, which willingly delivered
up to other men, as well the city, as the suburbs, which he might well have
challenged to himself, so soon as the lotte did show, that such was the
pleasure of God. And it was needful, briefly to touch this change, because
God would have the refuge to be only in the cities of the Levites, that their
innocence might be defended among them with more fidelity and authority.

Chap. 21.
THen came the principal fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar, the Priest, and
unto Ioshue the son of Nun, and unto the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel,

2 And spoke unto them at Shiloh, in the land of Chanaan, saying, The Lord
commanded, by the hand of Moses, to give us cities to dwell in with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

3 So the children of Israel gave unto the Levites, out of their inheritance,
at the commandment of the Lord, these cities with their suburbs.

4 And the lotte came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children
of Aaron the Priest, which were of the Levites had by lot out of the tribe of
Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin,
thirteen cities.

5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan and out of the half tribe of
Manasseh, ten cities.

6 Also the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of
Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Nepthalie, and
out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.

7 The children of Merarie according to their families had out of the tribe of
Ruben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve
cities.

8 So the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with
their suburbs, as the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moses.

9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the
tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here named.

10 And they were the childrens of Aaron, being of the families of the
Kohathites, and of the sons of Leui, (for theirs was the first lotte)

11 So they gave them Kiriath-arba of the father of Anok, (which is Hebron) in
the mountain of Judah, with the suburbs of the same round about it.

12 (But the land of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb
the son of Iephunneh to be his possession.)

13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the Priest, a city of refuge for
the slayer, even Hebron with her suburbs, and Libnah with her suburbs,

14 And Iattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa and her suburbs,

15 And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,

16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Iuttah with her suburbs, Beth shemesh with
her suburbs: nine cities out of those two tribes.

17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin they gave Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba
with her suburbs,

18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs: four cities.

19 All the cities of the children of Aaron Priests, were thirteen cities with
their suburbs.

1 Then came, etc.) Here is declared afterward, that which should have gone
before. For the cities of refuge were not given, before they were assigned to
the Levites. As also we must remember, that which was said before, that Iosue
and Eleazer made an end of dividing the land: for the land was not justly
divided, until the Levites had their dwelling place appointed them. Therefore
we must consider, that when the lottes were cast in the name of the ten tribes,
certain cities in the land of Chanaan were drawn out of every portion, in
which the Levites should dwell. For they had their portion alredie appointed
them beyond Jordan. But whereas the Levites come and require, that the gift of
God may be confirmed, that they might possess their cities with their
suburbs, it is like they were neglected, until they pleaded their own cause.
For so it falls out commonly, while every man is busy to provide for him
self, they forgette their brethren. Surely it was a shame for the people to be
pulled by the ear, and to be brought in remembrance of that which God had so
plainly commanded, concerning the Levites. And yet, if they had not spoken
earnestly for a house, they were in danger to have lien abroad in the
fields. Although we may easily gather, that the people offended, rather of
negligence and forgetfulness, than of purpose to defraud them: for they make
no delay, as soon as they are admonished: yea, their obedience is praised,
that according to the word of the Lord they performed that which was equal
and right.

4 And the lotte, etc.) Here is set forth the number of the cities, whereof
must be spoken soon after. Secondly, here is plainly expressed, that the lot
of the sons of Aaron, fell in the tribe of Judah, which happened not by
chance: for God by his meruellous counsel placed them in that seat, where he
had appointed his Temple to be builded. Thirdly, the names of the cities are
rehearsed, whereof Hebron is the first, which Caleb suffered to be taken from
him with a good will. If any man object, that Jerusalem should have been
especially given them, where they should have their lawefull abiding place: the
answer is easy, that small and mean cities were delivered to them, such as
their state required. Moreover, Jerusalem was not yet recovered: for the
Iebusites had it in possession. Finally, it had been against reason, that the
seat of the kingdom, should have been appointed to the Priests. And in this,
their faith and religion was better approved, that they went willingly out of
their native country, to do their duty about the holy affairs. For no
Priest did his office there, but he was aforeigner, and dwelt in some other
place. But yet their infirmity was borne withal, when they were rewarded with
cities that were near about, least it should be troublesome to them: to take
along journey to do their office. But whereas one only family, and that not
very populous, had thirteen cities granted for their habitation, hereof is
confirmed that I have noted elsewhere, that the other tribes had many cities
under their dominion, whereof here is no mention: and that shall be confirmed
more certainly soon after.

20 But to the families of the children of Kohath of the Leuits, which were the
rest of the children of Kohath (for the cities of their lot were out of the
tribe of Ephraim,)

21 They gave them the city of refuge for the slaier, Shechem with her
suburbs in mount Ephraim, and Gezer with her suburbs,

22 And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Beth-horon with her suburbs: four
cities.

23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltkeh with her suburbs, Gibethon with her
suburbs,

24 Aiialon with her suburbs, Gath-rimmon with her suburbs: four cities.

25 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and
Gath-rimmon with her suburbs: two cities.

26 All the cities for the other families of the children of Kohath were ten
with their suburbs.

27 Also unto the children of Gershon of the families of the Levites, they gave
out of the half tribe of Manasseh, the city of refuge for the slaier, Golan
in Bashan with her suburbs, and Beeshterah with her suburbs: two cities.

28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kis-hon with her suburbs, Dabereh with
her suburbs,

29 Iarmuth with her suburbs, En-gannim with her suburbs: four cities.

30 And out of the tribe of Asser, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her
suburbs,

31 Helkoh with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs: four cities.

32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, the city of refuge for the slaier,
Kedesh in Galil with her suburbs, and Hammoth-dor with her suburbs, and
Kartan with her suburbs: three cities.

33 All the cities of the Gershonites, according to their families, were
thirteen cities with there suburbs.

34 Also unto the families of the children of Merari the rest of the Levites,
they gave out of the tribe of Zebulun, Iokneam with her suburbs, and Cartah
with her suburbs,

35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs: four cities.

36 And out of the tribe of Ruben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Iahazah with
her suburbs,

37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs: four cities.

38 And out of the tribe of Gad they gave for a city of refuge for the slaier,
Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and Mahanaim with her suburbs,

39 Heshbon with her suburbs, and Iazer with her suburbs: four cities in all.

40 So all the cities of the children of Merari, according to their families
(which were the rest of the families of the Levites) were by their lot twelve
cities.

41 And all the cities of the Levites, within the possession of the children of
Israel, were eight and forty with their suburbs.

42 These cities lay every one severally with their suburbs round about them:
so were all these cities.

43 So the Lord gave unto Israel all the land, which he had sworn to give
unto their fathers: and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

44 Also the Lord gave them rest round about, according to all that he had
sworn unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies
before them: for the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hand.

45 There failed nothing of all the good things, which the Lord had said unto
the house of Israel, but all came to pass.

20 But to the families of the sons of Kahath, etc.) For what cause it
behooved the Levites to be dispersed into every tribe, let the reader seek in
Moses. Indeed this punishment was laid upon their father for the
unfaithfulness and cruelty, which he practiced against the Sichemites. But in
steed of reproach, this dispersion was turned into their exceeding great
honor, that they being placed as watchmen in every region, might keep the
people in the pure worship of God. They were indeed but as tenantes in every
place: but with so great dignity, as overseers appointed by God, to take heed,
that the people should not fall away from true godliness. This is the reason
why it is reported so diligently, how many cities fell unto them in every
tribe, that they might be always as watchmen, to preserve the pureness of
religion amongst them.

41 All the cities of the Levites, etc.) This place especially does teach
that, which I have touched once or twice before, that the bounds of other
tribes were not so straight, but they contained a greater number of cities,
than was set forth before. It is well known, that the tribe of Levy was the
least of them all. Therefore, what equity had it been, that it should have
been enlarged fourefolde more than the tribe of Zabulon, which we see had but
twelve cities, although it was much more populous? In the tribe of Isachar are
numbered only sixeteene cities. The tribe of Nepthalie, nineteen. The tribe
of Aser, twenty two. Surely, the division had been unequal, if more cities
had been given to them that were fewer to dwell in. Whereof it is gathered,
that not only the towns which are rehearsed, as the appurtenances of the
cities, were apt for habitation: but that other cities also were comprehended,
of which there was no mention made. Finally, by the lot of the tribe of Leui it
appears plainly, how large and how ample the dominion of the other tribes was.

43 The Lord gave, etc.) If any man move question of the rest, the answer is
easy, that the nations of Chanaan were so terrified and amassed with fear,
that they thought nothing more profitable for them, than by slavish flattery
to redeem peace of the children of Israel. Therefore the contrie was thoroughly
subdued, and their habitation peaceable, seeing that no man did either trouble
them, or durst enterprise any thing against them, seeing there was no
threatening, no treason, no violence, or conspiracies. But of the second point
it is doubted, how the children of Israel were placed in the possession of the
promised land, and enjoyed it, so that not one syllable wanted in the promises
of God of the fruition thereof. Whereas before we saw, that many enemies were
dispersed amongst them. The sentence of God was, that not one should remain
alive: yet many they expelled not, but admitted them for their neighbors, as
though they had been partakers of the inheritance with them: yea, they make
couenantes also with them. How do these things agree together, that God gave
the people the possession of the land, as he promised it, which yet was
excluded from some part thereof by the force or stubbornness of their enemies?
That this show of co^trarietie may be taken away, we must discern between the
certain, clear, and steadfast faithfulness of God, in keeping his promises:
and the ^^ouch and negligence of the people, whereby it came to pass, that the
benefit of God did fall away, as it were out of their hands. What wars so
ever the people took in hand, into what part so ever they moved their
standard, the victory was ready, neither was there any other let or stay, but
that they might root out all their enemies, saving their own voluntary
slothfulness. Wherefore, although they chaced them not away, that the
possession might be voyded of them: yet the manifest truth of God did appear,
and set forth it self: because it had been no trouble for them to have
obtained the rest, if the had listed to embrace the victories that were
offered. The sum of all this is, that it was through their own cowardice,
that they enjoyed not the full and perfect benefit of God, which we shall see
in the next Chapter more plainly.

Chap. 22.
THEN Ioshue called the Rubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of
Manasseh,

2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord
commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:

3 Ye have not forsaken your brethren this long season unto this day, but have
diligently kept the commandment of the Lord your God.

4 And now the Lord has given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them:
therefore now return ye, and go to your tents, to the land of your
possession, which Moses the servant of the Lord has given you beyond Jordan.

5 But take diligent heed, to do the commandment and Law, which Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded you: that is, that ye love the Lord your God,
and walk in all his ways, and keep his commandments, and clean unto him,
and serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul.

6 So Ioshue blessed them, and sent them away, and they went unto their tents.

7 Now unto one half of the tribe of Manasseh, Moses had given apossession in
Bashan, and unto the other half thereof gave Ioshue among their brethren on
this side Jordan Westwarde: therefore, when Ioshue sent them away unto their
tents, and blessed them,

8 Thus he spoke unto them, saying, Return with much riches to your tents,
and with a great multitude of cattle, with silver and with gold, with brass
and with iron, and with great abundance of raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.

9 So the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, returned, and departed from the children of Israel, from Shiloh
(which is in the land of Chanaan) to go unto their country of Gilead, to the
land of the possession, which they had obtained, according to the word of the
Lord, by the hand of Moses.

1 Then Iosue, etc.) Here is reported the discharging of the two tribes and an
half, which followed the rest of the people, not that they should conquer any
thing for them selves: but because they had alredie obtained houses and lands
without casting of lottes, that they might hold out the common war with
their brethren, until they also had obtained their quiet inheritance. Now,
because they have been faithful companions and helpers unto their brethren:
Iosue pronounces, that they have served out their full time, and so sends
them home discharged and at liberty. Yet it may be demanded, how he judges
them to have accomplished their lawful time of warrefare, when as yet a part
of the land was possessed by the enemies, the only possession whereof ought
to have made a perfect end of that war. But if we call to mind that, which I
said before, this knot would be easy to loose. If they had followed the
calling of God, and been obedient to his power: yea, if they had not shamefully
drawn back, when he reached out his hand to help them, they might easily,
without any danger, and with small trouble, have dispatched the remnantes of
that war. Therefore, through their own sloth fullness they refused that,
which God of his liberality was ready to have given them. And so it came to
pass, that the covenant was fulfilled, whereby the two tribes and the half
had bound themselves. For they bound themselves no otherwise, but to accompany
the ten tribes, and to fight as manfully for their inheritance, as they would
have done for their own. Now, seeing they have continually showed themselves
faithful companions, and the ten tribes being content with their present
estate do not require, but rather do secreatly refuse their further aid,
they are by right permitted to return freely unto their own. And their
patience is worthy of commendation, that they are not moved with any
weariness to make suit for their discharge, but tarry quietly, until Iosue
himself of his own accord do send for them.

5 Only take heed, etc.) He does so set them free, and discharge them of
their temporal service, that he binds them for ever unto the obedience of
the only true God. Therefore he permits them to return home, but on this
condition, that they served God wheresoever they became. Also he prescribes
the manner how, namely, that they keep his Law. But because the vanity and
inconstancy of man's mind is such, that religion will easily vanish out of
their hearts, negligence and contempt will easily grow upon them, he
requires of them study and diligence in perfourming the Law. And he calls
it the Law of Moses, that their minds should not flee about vain
speculations in the air: but abide steadfast in that doctrine, which they had
learned of the faithful servants of God. Also he touches the end and sum
of the Law, that they love God and cleave to him: for else the outward form
of worshipping has small weighte in it. The same thing he confirms in other
words, that they serve God with all their heart, and with all their soul, by
which words sincertie is noted.

8 With much riches.) Because we have seen before, that the greatest part of
the two tribes were left behind in their lands beyond Jordan, when the rest
went over the river to go on warrefare, it was meet, that seeing they lived in
quiet with their families, or else were occupied about their own domestical
business, they should be content with their liuinges, and the fruit of their
labors. And surely, it had been against reason, they should have required any
part of the prey or spoil to be divided amongst them, seeing they took no
pains at all, nor adventured themselves into any danger. But Iosue stands
not upon the extremity of iustire: but exhorts the soldiers, of their
liberality, to make them partakers of their prey. Here it were out of season
to dispute, whether the prey were common to them all, or no. For Iosue does not
simply pronounce, that it was of duty which he enioyueth them: but only
admonishes them, that seeing they were enriched by the blessing of God, they
should not show themselves to be endued with humanity, except they were
bountiful and liberal to their brethren: specially, seeing there was no fault
in them, but that they were ready to have gone on the same warrefarre. But
when he bids them to distribute, he does not exact an equal partition,
such as is wont to be made among companions and equalles, but by giving away
some part, to take away the matter of envy and hatred.

10 And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, (which are in the land of
Chanaan) then the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.

11 When the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Ruben, and
the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar in the
forefront of the land of Chanaan upon the borders of Jordan, at the passage of
the children of Israel:

12 When the children of Israel heard it, then the whole Congregation of the
children of Israel gathered them together at Shiloh, to go up to war against
them.

13 Then the children of Israel sent unto the children of Ruben, and to the
children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead,
Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest,

14 And with him ten Princes, of every chief house a Prince, according to all
the tribes of Israel: for every one was chief of their fathers household,
among the thousands of Israel.

15 So they went unto the children of Ruben, and to the children of Gad, and to
the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and spoke with them,
saying:

16 Thus says the whole Congregation of the Lord, What transgression is this
that ye have transgressed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day
from the Lord, in that ye have built you an altar for to rebel this day
against the Lord?

17 Have we too little for the wickedness of Peor, whereof we are not cleansed
unto this day, though a plague came upon the Congregation of the Lord?

18 Ye also are turned away this day from the Lord: and seeing ye rebel to day
against the Lord, even to morrow he will be wroth with all the Congregation of
Israel.

19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, come ye over
unto the land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the Lords Tabernacle
dwells, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the Lord, nor
rebel not against us, in building you an altar, beside the altar of the Lord
our God.

20 Did not Achan the son of Zerah trespass grievously in the execrable
thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel? And this man alone
perished not in his wickedness.

10 And they came, etc.) This history is very worthy to be remembered, that
when the two tribes and the half were determined to set up a monument of their
common faith and brotherly concord, yet through unadvised zeal, they took
such a way, as was was worthily suspected to their brethren. But the ten
tribes, when they thought that the worship of God had been defiled through
ungodly boldensse and rashness, being kindled with an holy anger, they took
arms to be revenged upon their blood, and were not pacified, before they had
received a full answer and satisfaction. For the end of the setting up of
that altar, of it self was good and right. For the purpose of the sons of
Ruben, and Gad, and Manasse, was to testify, that although they were divided
and parted asunder, by the river, yet in religion they were all one, and
maintained a mutual consent in the doctrine of the law: for there was nothing
less in their mind, than to change any thing in the worship of God. But
yet it was no small offense that they committed, without asking the advice of
the Priest, and their brethren, to take in hand such a strange piece of
work: and secondly, because the form it self of their monument was such, as
might be taken in evil part. We Exodus 20. 24.
know how severely the law forbids two altars, because God would be
worshipped in one only place. Wherefore, seeing upon the very sight of it, it
came into every man's mind, that they had set up a second altar, who would
not have condemned them of sacrilege, as though they had invented a strange
and counterfeit worship contrary to the law of God? Therefore, seeing their
work might have been thought to be ungodly, they ought surely in so great and
weighty a matter, to have made their brethren partakers of their purpose:
especially, they ought not to have neglected the judgment of the high Priest,
seeing they should have enquired the will of God at his mouth. Wherefore they
were worthy to be reprehended, because that (as though they had been alone in
the world) they did not consider what offense might grow by the strangeness
of the example. Wherefore, let us learn to attempt nothing unadvisedly,
although the thing of it self be not evil, but rather let us always remember
that admonition of S. Paul, that we must not only consider 1. Cor. 6. 12. and
10. 13.
what is lawful, but also what is expedient: especially, let us take good
heed, that we trouble not the minds of the godly with any new or strange
examples.

11 The children of Israel heard, etc.) There is no doubt, but that they were
kindled with holy zeal, neither ought we to think, that this was too great
vehemency, that for a heap of stones they armed themselves to destroy their
own countriemen. For they judged truly and wisely, that the lawful
Sanctuary of God was overthrown, his woorshippe profaned, religion defiled,
the consent of godliness torn asunder, the gate opened to the license of all
superstitions, if sacrifices should have been offered to God in two places: for
which causes he had so straightly bound the whole people to one altar.
Therefore it is not without a cause, that the ten tribes do so much detest
the sacrilegious boldness in a profane altar. Wherefore, here is set forth
unto us, a worthy example of godliness, that if we see the pure worship of
God to be corrupted, we should seek, as much as lies in us, to see it most
sharply revenged. Indeed the sword is not given into every man's hand: but
every man, according to his office and calling, ought mantully and constantly
seek to maintain the pure state of religion, against all corruptions. But
especially the zeal of the half tribe of Manasse was worthy of singular
commendation, which setting aside all carnal respect, would not forbear
their own family. And yet I confess, that this zeal, as godly as it was,
is not without some disordered affection: for before they had enquired of the
intent of their brethren, and understood the cause thoroughly, they make haste
to decree war against them. I confess they do it not, but under condition:
because they send Embassadoures, which should report the cause unto them, when
they had well and thoroughly understood the matter, neither do they move one
finger to take punishment, before they were perfectly certified of the crime.
Therefore the heat of their anger may be excused, whiles they prepare
themselves to fight, if there had been any such departing from religion found
out, as they suspected.

16 Thus says all the congregation of the Lord, etc.) Even as though it had
been alredie known, that this second altar had been set up against the only
altar of GOD, they begin to chide with them, and that very hardely, and
sharply. Therefore, they take this as confessed, that this altar was builded,
upon which the two tribes did offer their sacrifices. Here they are deceived
in their opinion, because it was set up for an other end and purpose. But if it
had been true, which they had conceived in their minds, all the expostulations
which they use, had been just: for it had been a plain Apostasy, and falling
away, to change any thing in the law of God, 1. Sam. 15. 22.
with whom obedience is more worth than all sacrifices: and this their
condemnation is founded upon very good reason, that they are guilty of
Apostasy, which withdraw themselves from the only true altar.

17 Is it a small thing for us, etc.) They amplify the wickedness through
their stubbornness, that they cease not to provoke God oftentimes with their
abominations. They allege for that, a notable example, and that was fresh in
memory. For when they did compass the Sanctuary, and the four quarters of
the world, as good watchmen of God, when they had a rule given them how to
worship God aright, in which they were kept in continual exercise: yet they
were deceived through the entisement of harlots, and defiled them selves with
filthy superstitions, and worshipped Baal-peor. Because the whole people were
entangled with this wickedness, the ten Ambassadors doubt not, to adioyne
themselves as partakers of that offense. Therefore they demand, Is not that
iniquity sufficient for us, which we committed about the idol of Peor? They
add moreover, that they are not yet cleansed from it, as though they should
say, The remembrance of it, is not yet buried: Or the vengeance of God yet
quenched. Thereupon they gather, that the two tribes, and the half, while
through wicked stubbornness they turn them selves from God, and cast off his
yoke, do not only provide evil for them selves: but also procure like
destruction for the whole people: because God will revenge this injury
further: which they confirm also by the example of Achan, which when he alone,
and that privily, had stolen of the accursed things, yet he alone suffered not
punishment of his sacrilege: but drew other with him also: like as it well
appeared, when some were slain in the field, and all the rest shamefully put
to flight, because that pollution remained among the people. And they reason
from the greater to the lesser: If the anger of God did burn against many, for
the secret offense of one man, much less shall the people escape unpunished,
if they dissemble, and will not revenge so manifest idolatry. Yet this mean
and indifferent sentence is interlaced, that if the two tribes, and half, have
builded this altar, as though their condition were worse, because they dwelled
not in the land of Chanaan: that they also might come, and dwell in the land of
Chanaan, rather than they should provoke God with false counterfeting of his
religion. Hereof we gather, that they were not stirred up with any vain force
of affection, when they are ready with their own loss and hinderance, gently
to admit them into fellowshippe, and part of inheritance, which had desired
them selves a seat and dwelling place in an other country.

21 Then the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, answered, and said unto the heads over the thousands of Israel,

22 The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows, and Israel him
self shall know: if by rebellion, or by transgression against the Lord we
have done it, save thou us not this day:

23 If we have built us an altar to return away from the Lord, either to offer
thereon burnt offering, or meat offering, or to offer peace offerings thereon,
let the Lord him self require it:

24 And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time
to come your children might say unto our children, What have ye to do with the
Lord God of Israel?

25 For the Lord has made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of
Ruben, and of Gad: therefore ye have no part in the Lord: so shall your
children make our children cease from fearing the Lord.

26 Therefore we said, We will now go about to make us an altar, not for burnt
offering, nor for sacrifice,

27 But for a witness between us and you, and between our generations after
us, to execute the service of the Lord before him in our burnt offeringes, and
in our sacrifices, and in our peace offeringes, and that your children should
not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord.

28 Therefore said we, If so be that they should so say to us, or to our
generations in time to come, then will we answer, Behold the fashion of the
altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for burnt offering, nor for
sacrifice, but it is a witness between us and you:

29 God forbid, that we should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day away
from the Lord, to build an altar for burnt offering, or for meat offering, or
for sacrifice, save the altar of the Lord our God, that is before his
Tabernacle.

30 And when Phinehas the Priest, and the Princes of the congregation, and
heads over the thousands of Israel, which were with him, heard the words
that the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the children of
Manasseh spoke, they were well content.

31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest said unto the children of
Ruben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we
perceive, that the Lord is among us, because ye have not done this trespass
against the Lord: now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand
of the Lord.

32 Then Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest with the Princes returned
from the children of Ruben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of
Gilead, unto the land of Chanaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them
answer.

33 And the saying pleased the children of Israel, and the children of Israel
blessed God, and minded not to go against them in battle, for to destroy the
land, wherein the children of Ruben and Gad dwelt.

34 Then the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, called the altar Ed,
for it shall be a witness between us, that the Lord is God.

21 Then answered, etc.) The state of the cause stands upon definition. For
the children of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse, excuse the matter, that they had an
other purpose and intent, and so the crime is wiped away: because the quality
of the fact is otherwise than the rest did take it. But whereas they make no
stir, nor move any contention, for the injury that was offered unto them, it
is an example of rare modesty, which is set forth for us to follow, that if
it happen at any time, that that which is rightly and well done of us, be
blamed falsely and unjustly by them that are unskillful, it may suffice us to
confute the reprehension in such sort, as we may be purged of the crime
supposed. But that they may purchase unto themselves the greater credit, and
better testify their innocence, with a most weighty obtestation they reject
and detest that heinous wickedness, whereof they were suspected. Also the
repetition is not without great weight, (The Lord the God of gods, the Lord the
God of gods,) with which vehemency also they confirm, how faithfully they
desire to continue in the doctrine of the law, and how greatly they abhore all
contrary superstitions. But because their purpose was not known to men, and
according to every man's head was expounded in diverse sentences and opinions:
therefore they appeal to the judgment of God, and offer themselves to suffer
punishment, if he know they have attempted any thing of evil purpose or
intent. And that they may prove themselves to be unlike to hypocrites, which
with devilish impudency will not stick an hundred times to call upon God to
be their Judge, when their conscience never thelesse does accuse them within,
they do not only pretend their conscience, but also do pronounce, that all
the people shall be witness: as if they said, It shall be found manifest in
deed, that it came never in their thought, to invent a new worship of God:
and they do rightly interpret, how that altar should have been unlawful,
namely, if they had determined to offer their sacrifices upon it. For the law
did not simply condemn heaps of stones: but appointed, that sacrifices should
be offered in one place only, to retain the people in one faith, that
religion should not be rent a sunder, that license should not be granted to
the rashness of many, and so every one should fall away after their own
inventions. Thus we see, that the quality of the fact being showed, the
detestable use is taken away, which their ten tribes had imagined. It is in
deed improperly, but yet aptly, according to the rudeness of our sense, that
God is placed above all gods. For he could not truly be compared with other,
if there were no more but he. And therefore, to avoid this absurdity, some
do expound it of Angels, which although in some places it may well agree to
be true, yet I deny that it can be so taken in all places. Neither ought it to
seem any hard phrase, that he which is but one, and the only God, should be
called The God of gods, because he has none equal: but is above all hight,
and does in deed abscure and darken with his glory, and bring to nothing,
all names of Godhead, which are celebrated in the world. So this manner of
speech ought to be referred to the sense of the common people.

26 And we said, etc.) That gross impiety, whereof they were Exodus 20. 4.
Leu. 26. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. 8.
accused, is very well confuted: and yet they seem not to be altogether
without fault, because the law forbids to set up any images. But the excuse
is easy, that no other images are condemned, but such as were made to
represent God. But to set up a heap of stones for a Trophie, or for testimony
of a miracle, or in the remembrance of some notable grace of God, the law did
never forbid: for else, both Iosue, and many holy Judges, and Kings, which
did the like, had defiled themselves with profane superstition. But nothing
else displeased God, but that the minds of men should be drawn downewarde,
that he should be worshipped after a gross and earthly manner. Therefore the
children of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse, do well and sufficiently discharge
themselves from offense, while they profess, that there shall be none other use
of the altar, but that it should be a bond of their brotherly conjunction,
for which they bring a good reason. Because it was to be doubted, least in long
process of time, the ten tribes would exclude the rest from them, as
strangers, because they did not inhabit the same land. For in as much as the
region beyond Jordan, was not at the first comprehended in the covenant, their
several dwelling might have moved occasion of dissension. Therefore they
provide in time for their posterity, that by the altar, as it were by public
records, they might defend their right, that so the one sort might acknowledge
the other for their brethren, and altogether serve the only true God.

30 When Phinees, etc.) Phinees and the Ambassadors do rightly temper their
zeal, while they do not frowardly persist, nor urge the prejudice which they
had conceived, but gently and willingly do admit their excuse. For many
there are, which if they be offended and exasperated with any matter, there is
no defense that can pacify them, but they will always find out somewhat,
which they may maliciously and unjustly carpe and find fault with all, rather
than they will seem to gene place to reason. And this example is worthy to be
noted, that if at any time we be offended before we have known a matter
thoroughly, we may take heed of frowardness: but rather that we may ^eue place
immediately to equity and right. Moreover, that the children of Ruben, Gad, and
Manasse, are found clear from this heinous offense, Phinees and the
Ambassadors do ascribe it to the grace of God. For by these words, (We know
that the Lord is in the midst of us,) they signify, that God has been
merciful unto them, and has had a care of their health and preservation.
Which is to be marked diligently: for there upon again it is gathered, that we
never decline altogether from God, or fall away unto impiety, except he
forsake us, and being forsaken does cast us into a reprobate mind. Therefore,
all idolatry does show, that God was estraunged from them before, that by just
exc^cation and blinding of them, he might take punishment of their wickedness.
In the mean time we must note this, that we do no longer continue in
godliness, than God is present with us, and holds us up with his hand, and
confirms us with the virtue of his spirit unto continuance and perseverance.
Phinees and the Ambassadors say they were delivered by the children of Ruben,
Gad, and Manasse: because the vengeance of God is no more to be feared, when
all suspicion of wickedness is purged. At the length, the like equity and
humanity shows it self in the whole people: for they received gladly the
defense of their brethren, and gave thanks unto God, that he had preserved his
people from such an heinous offense. And although they were soudeinly set one
fire, yet they depart with quiet minds. Likewise, the two tribes and the half
give all diligence to perform their duty, when they give such a name unto
the altar, which by teaching the right use thereof, might withdraw the people
from all superstition.

Chap. 23.
ANd a long season after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel from all
their enemies round about, and Ioshue was old, and stricken in age,

2 Then Ioshue called all Israel, and their Elders, and their Heads, and their
Judges, and their Officers, and said unto them, I am old, and stricken in age.

3 Also ye have seen all that the Lord your God has done unto all these
nations before you, how the Lord your God himself has fought for you.

4 Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an
inheritance according to your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations that I
have destroyed, even unto the great Sea Westward.

5 And the Lord your God shall expel them before you, and cast them out of
your sight, and ye shall possess their land, as the Lord your God has said
unto you.

6 Be ye therefore of a valiant courage, to observe and do all that is written
in the book of the Law of Moses, that ye turn not there from, to the right
hand, nor to the left.

7 Neither company with these nations: that is, with them which are left with
you, neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by
them, neither serve them, nor bow unto them:

8 But stick fast unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.

9 For the Lord has cast out before you great nations and mighty, and no
man has stand before your face hitherto.

10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lord your God, he fights
for you, as he has promised you.

11 Take good heed therefore unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God.

Here is reported that solemn contestation, which Iosue used a little before
his death, that he might leave the pure worship of God alive behind him. And
although the peace and rest, which the Israelits had obtained among the nations
of Chanaan, be here rehearsed for an excellent benefit of God: yet it is meet
we call to remembrance, that which I taught before, as it came to pass through
their own slothfulness, that they dwelled among their enemies, whom they
ought to have chased away and destroyed. But yet the mercy of God is worthily
praised, that he pardoned their unthankfulness. Also this godly carfulness
of Iosue is here set forth to be followed of all them that be in authority.
For as he shall not be counted a good father nor a provident, which thinks of
his children but unto the end of his life, except he extend his care further,
and as much as lies in him does provide for them after his death: so good
magistrates and governors ought to forsee, that such good and well ordered
state as they leave, they confirm and prolong for a long time after them. For
this cause Peter says, that he would endeavor, 1. Pet. 1. 1^.
that after he was departed out of the world, the Church might still be
mindful of his admonitions, and receive some fruit of them. Where it is said,
that he called all Israel, it follows immediately after, the Elders, and
Heads, and Judges, and Rulers, which I do thus interpret, that it was free
for all men to come, but that assembly was appointed of Heads and Rulers. And
so this later member of the sentence seems to me, to be an exposition of the
former. And surely, it is by no means credible, that the whole people was
called together, neither could it be. Therefore after this manner, the people
were called, because the ^l^ers, Judges, and suth like, were commanded to
come, and to bring with them as many as would willingly come. Here is indeed
rehearsed a double speech of Iosue: but the writer of the history seems to
me first to touch the sum of his whole oration breefly, as the use of the
tongue is, and afterward to prosecute more at large, and to comprehend that
which he omitted. In this part, which has the first place, Iosue does breefly
exhorts and encourage the people to a certain trust in the continual and
unwearied grace of God. For when they had tried God to be true in all things,
there is no occasion of doubting left to them hereafter, but that they may
safely hope for the same success, in vanquishing and destroying all the rest
of their enemies. Also he sets before them the casting of the lottes,
whereby he had divided unto them the rest of the land, as an earnest or pledge
of the undoubtful fruition of the same, because he had not unadvisedly, but by
the commandment of God, described and allot^ed to every tribe their seat
and borders.

6 Strengthen therefore, etc.) Now he shows the way how to overcome, lest
they should take them selves to gross security, as often times it comes to
pass in steed of faith and trust. Therefore he affirms, that God would be
merciful unto them, promising that whatsoever they take in hand shall have
happy success, if they continued in the obedience of the law. The
hypocrites, although they do securely contemn God, and laugh him to scorn,
yet they would have him bound unto them: yea with full mouths, not without
great folly, they boast of his promises. But true faith does so rest in God,
that also it reteineth men in his fear. Finally, that GOD may be found, he
must be sought unfeignedly: and if we desire that he should look upon us, we
must take heed, that we turn not our backs unto him. By the verb of
strengthening, as it is said elsewhere, he means an earnest endeavor: because
that in so great weakness, no man shall thoroughly prepare him self to keep
the law, except he endeavor above his strength. Also we must note, the
definition of true obedience, which is here repeated out of Moses, that we
turn not aside, either unto the right hand, or to the left hand. Deuteronomy. 5. 32.


7 Neither mingle your selves, etc.) He does admonish them expressly, that they
can not otherwise well satisfy their duty, except they do earnestly beware
of all corruptions. For they were compassed round about with the snares of
Satan: and we know how ready, yea rather, how hasty and greedy they were to
embrace superstitions. Therefore, first of all he forbids them, that too
near acquaintance of the Gentiles do entangle them with society of their
wickedness. For, to mingle, in this place, is as much as to carry the yoke, in
S. Paul. Finally, first of all he remoueth the prouocations or intisementes of
idolatry; and afterward he detesteth idolatry it 2. Cor. 6. 14:
self. And here is to be noted, that he does not express either kneeling, or
sacrifices, or other ceremonies: but by the words of making mention, and
swearing, he does signify all parts of godly religion. Whereof we gather,
that Gods honor is taken away from him, when never so little a part of all
things which he challenges unto himself, be translated unto idols. Therefore
he concludes, that they must cleave unto God alone, which is as much in
effect, as to be altogether addict unto him.

9 Therefore he has driven out, etc.) He signifies, that so they be not
changed, God for his part will not be chaungeable. Therefore, so they may
obtain the favor of GOD, he assures them, tha^ they shall have a continual
course of victories. At the length, he exhorts them again, that as they love
their own life and health, so they would be earnest to love God. Out of which
spring arises all true obedience: for, except we do love him freely, and of a
willing mind, in vain we shall study to frame our manners according to the
outward form of the Law.

12 Else, if ye go back, and cleave unto the rest of these nations: that is,
of them that remain with you, and shall make marriages with them, and go unto
them, and they to you,

13 Know ye for certain, that the Lord your God will cast out no more of
these nations from before you: but they shall be a snare and destruction unto
you, and a whip on your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish out
of this good land, which the Lord your God has given you.

14 And behold, this day do I enter into the way of all the world, and ye
know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that nothing has failed of
all the good things, which the Lord your God promised you, but all are come to
pass unto you: nothing has failed thereof.

15 Therefore, as all good things are come upon you, which the Lord your God
promised you, so shall the Lord bring upon you every evil thing, until he
has destroyed you out of this good land, which the Lord your God has given
you.

16 When ye shall transgress the covenant of the Lord your God, which he
commanded you, and shall go and serve other gods, and bow your selves to
them, then shall the wrath of the Lord wax hot against you, and ye shall
perish quickly out of the good land, which he has given you.

12 Therefore if ye turn away, etc.) According to the usual method and order
of the Law, he adds threatenings, that if they be not sufficiently touched
with the sweetness of the grace of God, yet at the least through fear they
may be stirred up to do their duty. It is a shame indeed, that when God does
gently allure men to come to him, they do not immediately run forth to meet
him, that they may answer his gentleness with ready and cheerful obedience:
but such is the slothfulness of the flesh, that it has always need of the
spurs of threatenings. Wherefore Iosue keeps the usual order of the Law,
while he strikes a terror into the Israelites, if they do not study
earnestly and willingly to embrace the favor of God, when it is offered unto
them. And this was not once or twice denounced unto them, that the nations of
Chanaan should be pricks Number. 33. 55
in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, if they had any familiarity with
them. First, because God had consecrated that land unto him self, he would
have it be purged of all corruptions: secondly, because he saw how easy it
was to have the people corrupted by evil examples, he would also provide a
remedy for that mischief. Now, whereas the people on the one side esteemed it
as nothing, that the land was defiled with ungodly superstitions, and that
idols were there worshipped in steed of the true God: and on the other side,
too greedily drew in the infection of their vices, it was a just reward of so
gross contempt, that they should feel them hateful and troublesome, whom
they had so evil spared and pardoned. And that that which both Moses and Iosue
threatened was thoroughly fulfilled, it appears sufficiently out of the book
of Judges. And yet this open threatening of the vengeance of God was not
altogether unprofitable: for after Iosue was dead, they took courage to make
war. But this heat soon vanished away: for not long after, they were
defiled with ungodly superstitions of the Gentiles. Whereby we may see the
intemperance of man's nature in coveting false religion, which with no bridles
can be sufficiently restrained. Now it is good to consider, how far forth
this doctrine pertains to us. That ancient people had this peculiar
commandment, that by destroying the nations of Chanaan, they should be
separated from all ungodly corruptions. We at this day have no certain region
appointed unto us, which might separate us from them: neither are we armed with
the sword to kill all the ungodly: only we must beware, that too much
familiarity do not wrappe us in the fellowshippe of their wickedness. For it
is more than a hard matter, when we do willingly intermedle with them, to
keep our selves that we be not dashed with some blotte or spotte of their
ungodliness. Because this point is sufficiently handled in other places, I do
but breefly touch it here.

14 Behold I, etc.) Because it is appointed for all men once to die, Iosue
says, that end draws near unto him, which abides all Heb. 9. 27.
men: because he also was borne a mortal man. And these words he applies
unto the comfort of the people, least they should vex them selves with
immoderate sorrow when he was taken away from them. For there is no doubt, but
he left a wonderful desire of him, seeing the people, when their head was taken
away, was as a headless and imperfect body. Therefore he admonishes them,
that seeing the course of his life is brought even as it were to the mark or
end, they must not require, that his condition should be other, than is of all
mankind. But yet he means not that all men die alike, because the
incorruptible seed of heavenly doctrine, discerns and divides the
faithful from the unfaithful, that they perish not together with them: but
here he does only touch that, which is common to all, namely, when the course
of this life is ended, to go out of the world. Therefore the sum of his
speech comes to this effect: As God by his benefits and fulfilling of his
promises, has proved him self to be true: so his threatenings should not be
vain and frustrate, that by their utter destruction he would revenge the
profanation and defiling of his worship.

Chap. 24.
AND Ioshue assembled again all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called
the Elders of Israel, and their heads, and their Judges, and their officers,
and they presented them selves before God.

2 Then Ioshue said unto all the people, Thus says the Lord God of Israel,
Your fathers dwelt beyond the flood in old time, even Terah the father of
Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and served other gods.

3 And I took your father Abraham from beyond the flood, and brought him
through all the land of Chanaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Izhak:

4 And I gave unto Izhak, Iaakob, and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to
possess it: but Iaakob and his children went down into Egypt.

5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt: and when I had so done
among them, I brought you out.

6 So I brought your fathers out of Egypt, and ye came unto the Sea, and the
Egyptians pursued after your fathers with charriots and horsemen unto the red
Sea.

7 Then they cried unto the Lord, and he put a darkness between you and the
Egyptians, and brought the Sea upon them, and covered them: so your eyes have
seen what I have done in Egypt: also ye dwelt in the wilderness a long
season.

8 After, I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt beyond
Jordan, and they fought with you: but I gave them into your hand, and ye
possessed their country, and I destroyed them out of your sight.

9 Also Balak the son of Zippor King of Moab arose and warred against Israel,
and sent to call Balaam the son of Beor for to curse you,

10 But I would not hear Balaam: therefore he blessed you, and I delivered you
out of his hand.

11 And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho, and the men of Jericho
fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites and the Chanaanites, and
the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hiuites, and the Iebusites: and I
delivered them into your hand.

12 And I sent Hornets before you, which cast them out before you, even the two
Kings of the Amorites, and not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.

13 And I have given you a land, wherein ye did not labor, and cities which ye
built not, and ye dwell in them, and eat of the vineyardes and olive trees,
which ye planted not.

14 Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in uprightness and in truth,
and put away the gods, which your fathers served beyond the flood, and in
Egypt, and serve ye the Lord.

1 So Iosue gathered, etc.) Now in my judgment he does more at large declare
these things, which he touched before more breefly. For it is not like, that
the people were twice for one cause drawn into a strange place. Therefore the
order of the history is knit together by repetition. For which cause I
translate the Conjunction VAV, Therefore, which may continue the narration
alredie begone. And now he expresses that, which before he spoke not of, that
they all stand before GOD, whereby the dignity and reverence of that
assembly may seem to be more holy. For there is no doubt, but Iosue did call
upon the name of God, after a solemn manner: and preached unto the people as
it were in his presence, that every one might consider with him self: that
God was president of that assembly, and that they had not in hand there, any
private affairs: but the confirmation of a holy and inui^lable covenant with
God him self. Ande hereunto, that which follows soon after, that there was
the Sanctuary. Wherefore it is likely, that the Arc of the covenant was
brought thither, not of intent to change the place: but that in so serious an
action, they might appear before the judgment seat of God upon earth. For no
religion did forbid the Arc to be removed: and the place Sichem was not
far distant from thence.

2 Beyond the river, etc.) He takes his beginning of their free adoption, by
which GOD did so prevent them, that they could not boaste of any excellency or
merit. For God had bound them to him self with a streighter bond, that when
they were equal with other nations, God did notwithstanding choose them unto
him self for a peculiar people, for no other respect, but only of his mere
good will and favor. Furthermore, that it might more clearly appear, that
there was nothing wherein they could glory, he brings them to their first
beginning, and puts them in mind, that their fathers did so dwell in
Chaldea, that they worshipped idols commonly, with other men, and differed
nothing from the common people. Whereof it is gathered, that when Abraham was
drowned in idolatry, he was drawn out of it as it were out of hell. The Jews
indeed, that they might challenge unto them selves a counterfeit dignity of
their kindred, do feign a fable, that their father Abraham, when he would not
acknowledge the fire of Chaldea for a god, was driven to flee out of his
country. But if we consider the purpose of Gods spirit, he is no more exempted
from the crime of the public error, than Their and Nachor. To what end does
he say, that the fathers of the people served strange gods, and that Abraham
was plucked out from thence, but that the free mercy of God might shine in the
very first beginnings? For if Abraham had been unlike the rest, his godliness
would have made a difference of him. But this mark is purposely shot at,
that he should not excel in any dignity of his own, which might blemish the
glory of God, but that his posterity might acknowledge, that when he was cast
away, he was raised up from death to life. But this was incredible, and like a
monstre, that while Noe was yet alive, idolatry was not only commonly
received in the world: but also had entered into the family of Sem, in which
at the least the pure religion ought to have flourished. Surely, how great the
mad rage and untamed fury of men is in this behalf, hereby it may be
known, that the holy Patriarch, unto whom a special blessing of God was
given, was not able to bridle his posterity, but that they left the true GOD,
and gave over them selves to superstition and idolatry.

3 And I took your father, etc.) By this word is better confirmed, that which
I taught before, that Abraham by his own virtue did not swim out of that
deep gu^fe of ignorance and errors, but was brought out by the hand of God.
For it is not said, that he sought God of his owue accord, but that he was
taken away by him, and carried into another place. He amplifieth his benefices,
in that he did meruellously preserve Abraham, in all his long pilgrimage. But
that which follows breeds some doubt, that God multiplied the seed of
Abraham: and yet gave him only Isaac: for there is no mention but of him. This
comparison does set forth the singular grace of God toward them, that when
Abraham had many children, yet their father only kept the place of his lawful
heir. In the same sense it is added soon after, that when Esau and Jacob were
natural brethren, and twins, yet the one was taken, and the other refused.
Wherefore we see how notably, as well in the person of Ismael and his brethren,
as of Esau, he extolleth the mercy and goodness of God toward Jacob: as if
he said, that his stock did not excel the other, but only because it
pleased God so to accept him.

4 Jacob and his sons, etc.) After the banishment of Esau, the going down of
Jacob into Egypt is told: which although it be touched in one word, yet it
comprehends an ample, large, and plentiful matter of the fatherly favor of
God. And there is no doubt, although the author of the book does not extol
every miracle with excellent commendations, yet Iosue declared unto the people
the sum of their deliverance, as much as was sufficient. First therefore he
sets forth the miracles showed in Egypt. Afterward he celebrateth their
passage through the red Sea, where God, through his wonderful power, did
help them. Thirdly, he rehearses the time that they wandered in the
wilderness.

8 Afterward I brought you, etc.) Now at the length he begins to entreat of
those victories, which opened a way for them to possess the land. For though
the region beyond Jordan was not promised in the covenant of inheritance: yet
since God by his decree had annexed it to the land of Chanaan, as a heaping
up, and an increase of his benefits, Iosue does not without cause couple them
together: and does not only declare, that while they trusted in the power of
God, they had the upper hand in all their wars: but also were defended
against the pestilent deceipte which Balaak practiced against them. For
although that deceiuer Balaam could have prevailed nothing with his cursings
and magical execrations: yet it was very profitable, to see the wonderful
power of God, in overthrowing of his malice. For it was eue^ as much, as if he
hand to hand had fought against all their hurtes and hindrances. And that he
might more certainly persuade them, that they obtained the victory, not only
because God was their guide, but through his only power, he repeateth that
which is read in Moses, that Hornets were sent, which Deuteronomy. 27. 20.
without the hand of men should overthrow their enemies. And this was a more
notable miracle, than if by any other means they had been overthrown, put to
flight, and discomfited. For they that have been conquerours with small a do
beside their expectation, although they confess that victory is the gift of
God: yet soon after being blinded with pride, they translate his praise to
their own counsel, diligence, and valiantness. But when the matter is
brought to pass by Hornets, the virtue and power of God is undoubtedly
affirmed. Therefore it is concluded, that the people did not conquer the land
by their own sword nor bow, as it is repeated in the. 44. Psalm, and
seems to be taken from hence. Last of all, when he put the people in mind,
that they did eat the fruit of other men's labors, he exhorts them to love
God, as his liberality toward them does deserve.

15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day
whom ye will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served (that were
beyond the flood,) or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but I
and mine house will serve the Lord.

16 Then the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the
Lord, to serve other gods.

17 For the Lord our God, he brought us and our fathers out of the land of
Egypt, from the house of bondage, and he did those great miracles in our
sight, and preserved us all the way that we went, and among all the people
through whom we came.

18 And the Lord did cast out before us all the people, even the Amorites which
dwelt in the land: therefore will we also serve the Lord, for he is our God.

19 And Ioshue said unto the people, Ye can not serve the Lord: for he is an
holy God: he is a gelous God: he will not pardon your iniquity, nor your
sins.

20 If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will return and
bring evil upon you, and consume you, after that he has done you good.

21 And the people said unto Ioshue, Nay, but we will serve the Lord.

22 And Ioshue said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselues, that
ye have chosen you the Lord, to serve him: and they said, We are witnesses.

23 Then put away now, said he, the strange gods which are among you, and bow
your hearts unto the Lord God of Israel.

24 And the people said unto Ioshue, The Lord our God will we serve, and his
voice will we obey.

15 But if it be grievous, etc.) Iosue seems here to have little
consideration what becomes a godly and wise Governor. If the people had
forsaken God, and been carried after idols, it had been his part to take
punishment of their ungodly and wicked defection. But now, when he gives them
leave to choose whether they will serve God or no, he loses the bridle, that
they may boldly run headlong into all licentiousness of sinning. That also
which follows, seems to be more absurd, when he denies that they are able
to serve God: as though he would of purpose drive them to cast off his yoke.
Howbeit, it is not to be doubted, but that his tongue was governed by the
direction of Gods spirit, that he might touch them at the very heart. For
when God drives men into his obedience, they are often times willing enough to
profess the desire of godliness, from which notwithstanding they fall away
soon after: so they build without a foundation. This comes to pass, because
they do neither distrust their own weakness, so much as they ought to do:
nor consider how hard a thing it is, to give over them selves wholly to God.
Wherefore, we have need of an earnest examination, that we be not carried up on
high through a light motion, and so in the very first attempt, the success do
fail us. For this purpose of trial, Iosue sets the Israelites at liberty,
that as though they were free, and at their own choice, they might choose
again what God they would worship: not that he would drive them away from
true religion, which were too apt of them selves to fall away: but that they
should not promise unadvisedly that which they would break in short time
after. For the purpose of Iosue was to renew the covenant, and to confirm
that which was already made with God, as we shall see. Therefore, not without
cause he gives them liberty to choose, that they should not afterward
pretend, that it was of necessity, when they had bound them selves by their
own consent. In the mean while to touch them with shame, he does testify,
that he and his house would continue in the worship of God.

16 The people answered, etc.) Now appears no small fruit of this free
choice offered unto them, when the people do not incline to any other
religion, nor receive any thing to obey, which they have heard elsewhere: but
pronounce, that it were exceeding great wickedness to fall away from God. And
so it avails not a little to the confirmation of the covenant, that they
bind themselves of their own accord. The effect of their answer is, that
seeing God by meruellous redemption has purchased them to be his peculiar
people, and has always assisted them, and showed that he is their God, it
should be detestable unthankfulness, if they should forsake him, and fall to
strange gods.

19 And Iosue said, etc.) Here it seems, that Iosue does altogether
unreasonably, which discourageth the prompt and willing desire of the people.
For to what end does he deny, that they are able to serve God, but that by
very impossibility he might cast them in despair, whereby they must needs
be alienated from the fear of God: But by this so sharp contestation, it was
needful, that the people, which were slack and dull through security,
should be awakened, which thing we see lacked not good success, though it
continued not long. For they are not discouraged nor made slacker: but having
overcome this hinderance, they answer redily, that they will be constant in
doing their duty. Finally, Iosue does not discourage them from serving God:
but only declares, how stubborn and disobedient they are, that they may
learn to change their froward disposition. So Moses, in his song, when he
seems to make a divorce between God and them, does nothing else but prick
and sharpen them, that they go not forward to be like themselves. Deuteronomy. 32.
Iosue in deed does reason simply of the nature of God: but chiefly he bends
his edge against the froward manners and untamed stubbornness of the people. He
pronounces, that God is holy and zealous. This truly should not discourage
men from his service: but hereof it follows, that he will have nothing to do
with them that be vnpure, wicked, and unholy contemners of him, and which are
not afraid to provoke him to anger. For such shall find him unable to be
appeased. But where it is said, that he will not spare their wickedness, no
general rule is set down: but the speech is directed against disobedient
persons, as in many places beside. For he speaks not here of every offense,
and special sin, but of the gross denying of God, as the next verse does
show. Wherefore, the people do answer more freely, that they will serve God.

22 And Iosue s^ied, etc.) Now we see what mark Iosue did shoot at: not that
the people being amazed by fear, should be driven away from religion: but
that the bond might be holier, seeing that of their own accord they desired
his government, and had yielded themselves into his fidelity and protection,
that they might live under his defense. Therefore in their own conscience they
acknowledge, that they shall be guilty and convict of unthankfulness, except
they kept promise. And though they did not feginedly profess, that they would
be witnesses unto their own damnation: yet how lightly the remembrance of this
promise fell away, it appears in the book of Judges. For when the Elders
were dead, they were quickly drawn asunder into diverse superstitions. By
which example we are taught, how manifold deceiptes do possess the senses of
men, and what crooked corners do hide their hypocrisy and vanity, until
their own vain confidence deceive themselves.

23 Now therefore take away, etc.) How could it be, that they which were of
late so sharp reuengers of superstition, have suffered idols to have place
among them, and yet the words sound so, that they should take away from
amongst them the strange gods. If we understand, that their houses were yet
polluted with idols, we may see as it were in a clear glass, how sweetly the
greatest part of men do flatter themselves in their vices, which against other
they pursue with extreme ^igour and severity. But because it seems not like
unto me, that after the punishment of Achan, they durst be so bold to de^^le
themselves with such manifest sacrileges, I do rather refer it to their
affection, that they should drive away far from them all inventions of
feigned gods. For before, in the same Chap. he exhorts them to take away the
gods, whom their fathers served beyond the river, and in Egypt. But no man will
think, that the idols of Chaldea were laid up in their closets, or else that
they brought those filthy corruptions out of Egypt, which should be cause of
hateful discord between God and them. Wherefore, the simple sense is, that
they should renounce all idols, and deliver themselves from all corruptions,
that they may worship the only true God purely. For hitherto pertains that
clause, That they may incline their heart to the Lord, which is as much, as to
rest only upon him, or to set their love upon him, and that they should
delight and be content with him alone.

25 So Ioshue made a covenant with the people the same day, and gave them an
ordinance and law in Shechem.

26 And Ioshue wrote these words in the book of the Law of God, and took a
great stone, and pitched it there under an Oak that was in the Sanctuary of
the Lord.

27 And Ioshue said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness
unto us: for it has heard all the words of the Lord which he spoke with us:
it shall be therefore a witness against you, least ye deny your God.

28 Then Ioshue let the people depart every man unto his inheritance.

29 And after these things, Ioshue the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord
died, being an hundred and ten years old.

30 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-serah,
which is in mount Ephraim, on the Northside of mount Gaash.

31 And Israel served the Lord all the days of Ioshue, and all the days of
the Elders that ouerliued Ioshue, and which had known all the works of the
Lord, that he had done for Israel.

32 And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought out of
Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground, which Iaakob bought of
the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem, for an hundred pieces of silver, and
the children of Joseph had them in their inheritance.

33 Also Eleazar the son of Araon died, whom they buried in the hill of
Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim.

25 So Iosue made a covenant, etc.) This place declares, for what end this
assembly was called, that the people renewing the covenant, might be more
addicte and straightly bound unto God. Therefore in this contracte Iosue was
the messenger of God, which required faith and obedience of the people in his
name. Therefore, the second clause is added, that he propounded to them the
precept and the judgment. For they do utterly deprave and pervert the sense,
which do expound these words of some new speech of Iosue: when they ought to
be understood properly of the law of Moses, as if it were said, That Iosue
made none other covenant, than that they should remain constant in keeping
the law, and that none other articles of the covenant were propounded: but
that they were confirmed in that doctrine, which they had before embraced and
professed. Like as Malachias also, to keep them under the yoke of God, does
Malac. 4. 4.
require nothing else, but that they should be mindful of the law delivered
by Moses.

26 And Iosue did write, etc.) I understand that authentical volume which was
kept by the Arc of covenant, as if he had laid up a public record in the
register for a perpetual memory. And there is no doubt, but when the law was
rehearsed, this proclamation of the covenant was also published. But because
that which is written, is often times hid in shut books, he appoints an
other healpe of memory, wihch might ever be extant in the eyes of all men,
namely a stone under the oak which was near the Sanctuary. Not that the
abiding place of the Arc was there perpetual: but because it was set there,
that they might appear before God. Therefore, as often as they came before
God, the testimony or memorial of the covenant, which they made, was before
their eyes, that they might be better retained in their fidelity. Where as he
says, that the stone has heard the words of the Lord, it is indeed an
Hyperbolicall, but yet not a foolish kind of speaking, to express the
efficacy and virtue of the word of God, as if it had been said, That it
pearceth into dead rocks and stones: that if men be deaf, their damnation
sounds in all elements. To lie, here, as often times elsewhere, signifies
to do deceiptfully and craftily, to fail and break promise. Who would not
think, that a covenant established so surely, should have been firm and holy
into many ages of the posterity: And yet Iosue prevailed no more with all his
great carfulness, but that it might continue for a few years after.

29 After these things, etc.) The honor of burial was a token of reverence,
which testified the piety of the people. But neither of both had any deep
roots. Wherefore, that title, wherewith Iosue is adorned after his death, when
he is called The servant of God, took away from the wicked wretches all
excuse, which soon after despised God, which had meruellously wrought in him.
Therefore their inconstancy is covertly noted, that they served God as long as
he lived, and until the death of the Elders. For therein is privily contained,
an opposition of their falling away and alienation, when they had soudeinly
forgotte the benefits of God. Therefore it is no meruell at this day also, when
God endueth some of his servants with noble and excellent gifts, that their
authority does defend and preserve the order and state of the Church: but
when they are dead, inmediately arises an heuie dissipation: and ungodliness
that lay hid, breaks forth into unbridled licentiousness.

32 But the bones of Joseph, etc.) What time the bones of Joseph were buried,
is not here expressed: but it is easy to gather, that after the Israelites had
quiet habitation in the city of Sichem, they did their duty therein. For,
although he appointed no certain place for his burial: yet they thought good
for honors sake, to lay him in the feelde which Jacob bought. Peradventure
also this is Genesis 33. 19.
expressed, to reprove the slothfulness of the people: whereby it came to
pass, that Joseph was not buried with Abraham, because the enemies as yet had
dominion of that place. Steeuen reherseth the bones of the twelve Patriarchs:
and it may be, that the other tribes being Acts. 7.
moved with emulation, brought the bones of their fathers also. But where some
copy says that the feelde was bought by Abraham, it is a fault in the name.
As touching burial, we must hold this generally, that there is so often
mention thereof in the Scripture, because it was a token of the resurrection to
come.

Praise be unto God, Amen.
FINIS.
A table of special names and matters, contained in this Commentary upon
Iosue.
The first number notes the Chapter. The second, the verse. The third, the
leaf.
A.
AChans secreate offense rehearsed. 7. 1. fol. 33. he is carried out of the
host to be punished, and for what causes. 7. 24. fol. 38. Anak, and what his
sons were. 11. 21. fol. 62. Anathema, what it is. 6. 17. fol. 30. Angel of
principal excellency, who it is. 5. 13. fol. 26. Apostataes, who be. 22. 16.
fol. 94. Argument of the praeface upon Iosue. 1. 4. fol. 2. Arc went before
the Israelites in battle: and why? 3. 11. fol. 15. it is commended for
dignities sake. 3. 4. fol. 15. Army of Iosue, whereof it appears it was
great. 8. 13. fol. 41. Army of God, who are so called. 5. 14. fol. 26.
B.
Bethel, a little Town. 8. 17. fol. 42
C.
Capteines who are best counted. 8. 15. fol. 42. Cause of fear set forth.
7. 9. fol. 35. Celebration of the Passover. 5. 10. fol. 24. Cities diligently
kept in time of war. 6. 1. fol. 28. Common mother to us all is our country.
2. 4. fol. 9. Common destruction of the city Hai. 7. 24. fol. 39.
Covetousness of men witty. 13. 15. fol. 67.
D.
Decree for the removing of the camp. 1. 10. fol. 5. Description of the taking
of those cities, out of which the army of the children of Isreal's enemies were
gathered. 10. 29. fol. 56. Discharge of the two tribes and the half reported.
22. 1. fol. 92. Distrust, the beginning of it, and the mischeefes which follow
thereupon. 1. 5. fol. 3.
E.
Elder sort charged to set forth the study of godliness. 4. 7. fol. 17.
Example of rare modesty. 22. 21. fol. 96. Exhortation to fortitude and
courage. 1. 6. fol. 3.
F.
Faith of Rahab declared by another argument. 2. 12. fol. 11. the chief
property thereof. 3. 2. fol. 14. the effects which it works. 7. 6. fol. 34.
Faithful withdrawn from covetousness. 1. 5. fol. 3.
G
Gadites, look for Rubenites. 1. 16. fol. 6. and 1. 12. fol. 5. Gibeonites
appointed to be cleauers of wodde, and drawers of water. 9. 20. fol. 49. they
obte^^e peace of the Israelites. 9. 3. fol. 47. they have their life granted
according to covenant. 9. 20. fol. 49. God, when soever he works by men, his
glory is nothing diminished, but he must challenge to himself all that is
done. 10. 10. fol. 53. he appears to Iosue. 11. 6. fo. 59. his fatherliecare,
in pre uenting the dangers of his servants. 11. 1. fol. 58. he is humbly to be
entreated, so piety teaches. 10. 12. fol. 53. his singular favor toward his
Church. 10. 12. fol. 53. his notable favor commended. 18. 9 fol. 82. his
continual care in cherishing his people. 1. 1. fol. 1. his singular and
extraordinary power set forth, in helping his: and why? 3. 5. fol. 14.
Guilty is he of the crime, that may let it from being committed, and does
suffer it to be done. 7. 1. fol. 33.
H.
Hai promised of God to be delivered unto the Israelites. 8. 1. fol. 41. He
comes to the land of Chanaan. 14. 1. fol. 69. Holding up the spear, what
sign it was. 8. 26. fol. 43.
I.
Jericho promised to be taken. 6. 3. fol. 28. why God forbadde that it should
be builded up again. 6. 26. fol. 32. God would not have the spoils thereof
to enrich his people. 6. 17. fol. 29. Images what kind condemned. 22. 26. fol.
96. Interdictum, or Interdictment, what it is. 6. 17. fol. 30. Interrogation of
special force. 1. 9. fol. 4. Iosue required to put off his shoes: and why? 5.
15. fol. 27. a singular example of fortitude and valiantness. 2. 16. fol. 6.
appointed to be Moses successor. 1. 2. fol. 1. encouraged with special
confidence: and why? 1. 5. fol. 2. why he inueihed sharply against Achan. 8.
25. fol. 39. why he tells the Gibeonites before, that he decrees nothing
unjustly. 9. 22. fol. 50. fourscore years old, when he entered into the
land. 12. 1. fol. 63. his office of government. 1. 2. fol. 1. faithful and
upright in keeping his promise. 6. 22. fol. 31. what was done after his death.
15. 1. fol. 74. what was given him in commandment. 1. 6. fol. 3. why God
beautified him with an excellent mark. 4. 14. fol. 19. reprehended of God. 7.
10. fol. 36. he is not deceived in the choice of his spies. 2. 24. fol. 12. he
exhorts the people to consider nothing but the power of God. 3. 2. fol. 14.
Iosephes two sons, what fell to their lotte. 16. 1. fol. 76. Josephus
disproued. 5. 9. fol. 24. Israelites too much credulity reproved. 9. 14. fol.
48. their enemies overthrown, before they came to handblowes. 5. 1. fo. 22.
they are covertly reproved. 20. 1. fol. 87. they fell to lasciviousness and
wantonness, so often as they enjoyed prosperity. 1. 4. fol. 2. Judges, their
office. 7. 19. fol. 37.
K.
Kings of Chanaan, why they were made drunk from above, with security and
slouthfullnesse. 9. 1. fol. 46. their dead bodies hanged upon the gallows. 10.
18. fol. 55. how many of them were subdued. 13. 1. fo. 64. their condition was
not as other nations. 8. 29. fol. 43. their conspiracy. 10. 1. fol. 51. their
necks trodden upon with feet etc, at the commandment of God. 10. 18. fol. 55.
their new conspiracy. 11. 1. fol. 58. their names rehearsed, whose dominions
the Israelites conquered. 12. 1. fol. 63. taken prisoners, spared of their
conquerours: and why? 8. 29. fol. 43. their punishment. 10. 18. fo. 55.
Knowledge of God perceth deeper, than the understanding of our mind. 7. 24.
fol. 39.
L.
Law, the daily meditation thereof commanded. 1. 8. fo. 3. under the name
thereof, the sum and short precepts are noted. 8. 32. fol. 45. it must have
nothing put to it, nor taken from it. 1. 6. fol. 3. Levites inferior, their
office and charge. 3. 4. fol. 14. Levites dispersed into every tribe: and why?
21. 20. fol. 90. Love of our country naturally ingraffed in us. 2. 4. fol. 9.
Lying, how it is taken. 7. 10. fol. 36.
M.
Manasses posterity has in it seven stocks or houses numbered. 17. 5. fol.
78. look Rubenites. 1. 12. fol. 5. and. 1. 16. fol. 6. Men do nothing
rightly, in good order, or with true knowledge: but so far forth as they
submit them selves to be governed by the word of God. 1. 8. fol. 4. Moses,
in what sense he is called Gods servant. 1. 2. fol. 1. Moses being dead, the
whole burden and charge is turned over to Iosue. 1. 2. fol 1. Mystery of the
Lords supper, to whom it is common. 5. 2. fol. 23.
O.
Obedience of the Israelites declared by a third token. 8. 33. fol. 45.
P.
Passage of the two tribes and the half specially mentioned. 4. 12. fol. 19.
Patience, and the fruit thereof. 6. 15. fol. 29. Prerogative, wherewith God
has honored his chief servants, and chosen Prophets. 10. 8. fol. 54.
Principal cause of fear fullness in the men of Jericho. 2. 10. fol. 11.
Priests submit them selves with quiet and obedient minds to the pleasure of
God. 4. 16. fol. 20. their virtue in bearing the Arc worthy of no small
commendation. 3. 15. fol. 16. their patience worthily commended. 4. 10. fol.
18. they are commanded of Iosue to bear the Arc. etc. 3. 6. fol. 15. Purging
of the people. 7. 13. fol. 36.
R.
Rabbines usual manner. 2. 2. fol. 8. Rahab commanded to bring forth the
spies. 2. 4. fol. 9. the image of her faith. 2. 11. fol. 11. Reprobates use all
means to destroy the Church. 9. 1. fol. 46. Reward of a message well and
faith fully discharged. 14. 9. fol. 70. Rightly to discharge duty, what it is.
1. 16. fol. 6. Right way for private men to frame their lives. 1. 6. fol. 4.
Rubenites, for what condition they had their inheritance granted them on the
other side of Jordan. 1. 12. fol. 5. Rubenites, Gadites, and the half tribe of
Manasse, do not only obey, but also most liberally and frankly offer such
service as was of them required. 1. 16. fol. 6.
S.
Sacrifice first extraordin^rie that God would have to be offered unto him in
the land of Chanaan. 8. 30. fol. 44. Signs of the profession of repentance.
7. 6. fol. 34. Signs of chasing away the inhabitants of the land of Chanaan,
and of obteining victory against all nations. 3. 10. fol. 15. Slaughter of the
enemies, whereof it was gathered to be great. 11. 8. fol. 60. Slaughter of all
sorts of people, and common destruction. 7. 24. fol. 39. Solemn assembly
held at Silo, reported. 18. 1. fol. 81. Solemn mourning in time of affliction.
7. 6. fol. 34. Spies curse themselves to death, if they did not use all
faithfulness and diligence to save Rahab. 2. 14. fol. 12. Spying, the manner
thereof. 2. 1. fol. 8. Sun his ordinary course changed in favor of King
Ezechias. 10. 14. fol. 54. how Iosue commands it to stand. 10. 12. fol. 53.
T.
Thankfulness of the people toward Iosue. 19. 49. fol. 86. To lay the
foundation upon the eldest son, what it is. 6. 26. fol. 32. Token of God his
power. 4. 24. fol. 21. Treasures of God his goodness. 1. 4. fol. 2. Trust in
God, what prevails most to kindle the same in us. 1. 9. fol. 4. Twelve stones
set up in Gilgal, at Iosue his commandment. 4. 1. fol. 17. and hidden in
Jordan, they served for a testimony, etc. 4. 9. fol. 18.
V.
Vanquished, with what cogitation and thought they are refreshed, and
comforted. 7. 6. fol. 34. Uictorie of the ci^^e Hai, why it was hard to atteine
unto. 8. 18. fol. 42. Victory of the Israelites noted for cruelty. 10. 25.
fol. 55. Victories of Moses set forth before Iosue, etc. 1. 5. fol. 2.
Vision rehearsed, whereby Iosue was encouraged. 5. 13. fol. 25.
W.
Warlike knowledge, 7. 2. fol. 33. Warlike practice and policy of the
Israelites. 8. 15. fol. 42. What is to be done, when there is any fear of
war. 2. 2. fol. 8. Why the day is noted, in which the Israelites entered into
the land of Chanaan. 4. 19. fol. 20. Wickedness amplified through
stubbornness, etc. 22. 17. fol. 94. Willing obedience commended. 18. 9. fol.
82.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Thomas Dawson, for George Bishop. Anno. 1578.


