A short instruction for to arm all good Christian people against the
pestiferous errors of the common sect of Anabaptists.

Compyled by Master John Calvin.

The contents of this book.
In this book are first reproved five articles contained in one resolution,
composed by the patriarchs of that sect, which articles are common to them
all, that is to say. Of the baptism of infantes. Of excommunicacion. Of the
right or authority to bear armore. Of the power of princes Of sweringe. Also
two other articles. Of the incarnacion of Jesus Christ. Of the life and
condition of the folles between death and the day of the last resurrection.
John Calvin to the ministers of the churches in the county of Newecastel.
IF any man marvel, my dear brethren and companions in the work of the
Lord, that I will occupy my self to answer unto a book which is unworthy
to be spoken of, or to be made mention of, saying that I may occupye my self,
as men think, in beter things, and things of more fruit, it shall be
sufficient excuse for me to allege that I have done it at the request and
instaunce of many good fayethful men, with sent the book to me from far
countries, which testimony that it was very needful for the health of many
souls, that I should take it in hand. For I think verelye that this should
be sufficient to content them that be reasonable, that my intent was to
obtain as well to the judgments as to the desires of them which I knew to
be zealous for the glory of God and the edification of his people. But yet have
I an other answer for to excuse me by, to them which may think that it is
folly in me, to occupy my self in a thing so barren and trifelynge, as is this
little book, which apereth to be made by ignoraunte people: which is, that we
have no greater priuyledge than had the prophets of God, and that our pain
is no more preciouse, than was theirs. Now we se that Ezechiel was constrained
to speak and write not only against disceiuers which were ignoraunte and of no
reputacion, but also against women which would be prophetesses. Seeing the
prophet spared not to dispute against women, ye and that it was commanded him
by God so to do, because through their leasynges they led the people to
supersticio^ and error, and let the verity of his course: it should be a
presu^ption to us, not to wytsafe to do the like. It is true that this book,
which I am desired and exhorted to confute, has no need of resolution
toward them that have learning and understanding: for as much as of it
self it is sufficientelye reproved, in that it is so unlearnedly and folishly
written. But for as much as it has a certain color to abuse and circumuente
the simple, which have not the judgment to discern: our duty is to help
them, and advertise the^ of the malicious subtelties of satan, to the intent
that they be not through imprudence disceiued: we are dettours to one and other
says sanicte Paul. Therefore we must do service unto all as much as in us
is, specially when necessitye requires it. I protest therefore, that mine
entencion is only in short or few words, to show unto all fayethfull
christen men which be rude and unlearned, what and how dangerous a poison this
doctrine of the Anabaptists is: and also arm them by the word of God against
the same, to the end that they be not disceyued or if there be any, which all
ready be wrapped in their snares, that they may be brought again unto the right
way. Wherefore I beseech all them which desire to continue in the pure
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and in the obedience of his Gospel, to take pains
to read attentively this little book, even as I have dedicated it unto them:
and also take the pains well to peyse the resonnes which I do allege unto
them: that they may abide in the truth when it is declared unto them.
Therefore reason which moved me to dedicate this present treatise unto you, is
double. First, because it should be a publyke testimony of the conjunction
which I have and desire always to have with you: and that al men might
know how we are united as well in doctrine as in affection of heart. The
second is, to the end that the redynge thereof might be the better commended
and received of all them over whom you have charge to bear the word of Jesus
Christ: in such sort that the churches over which the prince of pastors
has made your ministers, may be intertayned in pure doctrine, and preserved
from al perverse opinions, contrarying the truth of the gospel It is true, that
you might right well (my dear brethren) have discharged me of this pain. And
also, alredye our brother. M. Wyllyam Farell, according unto the grace which
God has given him, and the exersies which he has of long time had, and
continual custume in fyghtyng astaynste the enemies of the truth, and
resistynge all false doctrines for to maintain Christ's kyngedome, has well
satisfied you in part, in that thing which you now require of me. As I have
seen by the acts of a disputation done in the good town. In such sort that
of those Articles which are there treated, no man can desire a more
suffitiente declaration, to satisfy his conscience, then is there given. But
because they unto whom I desire and am bound to do service, do make me believe
that it is necessary that I take this charge upon me, I will consent unto
their request, without making any longer excuses. The Lord Jesus Christ have
you always in his holy protection, and his churches which he has committed
unto you: and lead you by his holy spirit always: for to serve him with
your ministerye unto his honor and unto the health of his pore people. Amen.

From Geneua the first of June. Anno Domini. M.D.xl.iiii.
Of the Anabaptists.
TO write against al ye false opinions and errors of the Anabaptists, should
be a thing to long, and such a boto^les pit, as I could not well come out of.
For this ca^ker differs in this thing from al other sects of heretics, yt
she has not erred only in certain points: but she has inge^dred a hole sea,
as it were, of folish and salse opinions. In such wise yt skant shall a man find
one Anabaptist which has not some pha^tasy singular: which his fellows have
not. So yt if we would pluck out, or rehearse al their wicked doctrines, we
should never make an end. But now at lenght they become unto, two principal
sects: whereof yt on, though she be full of wicked and pernicius erroures: yet
does she abide in much more simpliciti. For she yet receives the holy
scripture, as we do. And if men do dispute with those yt be of ye sect, it shall
be perceived where in they disse^t from us, and they will express thermeaning,
and in co^clusio^ it may be perceived in what they accord, and wherein they
dissent. The second sect is a mase, of such folish and beastly opinions, as the
like cannot be found, in so much yt it is wonder how creatures which bear the
figure of a man, ca^ be so clean without se^ce and reason, as to suffer the^
selves so to be disceyued, and fall in to fantasies more than brutish. This
sect call them selves libertines. And counterfeit so much the spiritual, that
they set no more by the word of God, the^ they do by fables: except it be wha^
it pleases them, and when as they may deprave it, and by force make it to
serve for their deuyllyshe opinions. And besides this they have a charminge or
croking as it were Cranes, so that a man can not tell what it is, that they
would say, and no more do they wot what it is them selves: but that by this
craft they covet the fylthynes of their doctrine. For their pri^ciples ar to
co^fou^d al differences between good and ill, and to mingle god so with the devil
that it should not be discerned between the one and the other, and so to make me^
not only with out all feelynge in their consciences before God: but also
without shame before the world. Now se you wherefore they drive them selves
into such caves of obscure and doubtful words, to the end that their villainy
should not be perceived, lest we should have them in horror and excecration.
As in deed our nature repugneth against such monsterouse things as they
bring forth. So now to write in a su^me against the errors of the
Anabaptists, the shorteste and most expediente way is to keep this division:
and to gather a part in one treatise the errors of them which be not
altogyther so mad and desperate: and in an other treatise to discover the
venemouse malice of those wicked, which under the color of spiritualitie,
would make men like unto brute beasts. Now is it very true, that those
which be of the first sort, do not so agree together in opinions, that a man
can easelye gather their errors together for to reprove them by any certain
order, But because the pryncipall doctors, and as it were the Patriarchs of
the whole Sinagoge, after they had well ranged about, have made a fynall
conclusion, wherein they comprehend the some of all that which they do hold
against us, and the Papists in seven Articles: unto which al Anabaptists
communely cleave: in so much that they have found the means to cause this
fair resolution to be imprynted, and have together agreed to sow their poison
by it all abroad: and so to infecte the pore people: I will be contented for
this time, and I think also that it shall suffyce, to declare the falseheade
contained in the most part of these seven Articles: to the intent that they
do not complain and say that I lay that to the charge of them all, which is
done but of some particulars, and so unjustly defame the whole sect, This once
done, if I may have at any time leisure, I will write some other little
treatise, against the other second sort, of which I spoke before, that is
the Libertines, But as I have said, it shall be sufficient for this time, to
declare unto all lovers of the truth, that, that thing which these poor
people with one common accord hold for a foundation invincible, of their
faith, is a deadly abusio^, of the which we must beware, as we would be of the
pestelence.

I speak to al the^ which desire to be obedient unto the truth For there be some
of this vngratiouse sect, and chyefelye those which do counterfayte the
doctoures: the which being occupied with pride and presumption, se nothing
of those things which is said unto them, or rather through obstinate and
deliberate malice shut their eyes, because they will not se the light, when
it is so evidently offered to the^. In so much yt it is as unprofitable a
labor, as to beat the water when you would have it still, to proceed by
reasons with the^, to bring them to the right way, save that this profit will
come thereof, that they which be good shall know the desperate impudency, and so
wythdraw them selves, and ffye from them, as from poison.

Now because there is no fayrer color to seduce the christians which have a
zele to follow God, then to pretend his holy word, therefore the Anabaptists
against whom we now write, have always that preface in their mouth. And
truly when it is said, that it is God which speaks: al creatures ought to be
moved, for the reverence of his name, in humility to here what is said. When
we perceive that is the word of God in deed, which is set before us: there is
no more question to replye, or once to open our mouths to dispute against
it. We do not say as the papists do, that we must forsake the scriptures of
God, and stay our selves in the authority of men. For we hold that evasion,
for an execrable blasphemy. But we will that which appears to come from
God, and leans to his word, be received to us with al humility, without any
controuersitie or difficulty. And more over we think that none other doctrine
should be received for certain and true, but such as comes out of ye fountain
of al truth. Therefore be they Anabaptists, or other, which say unto us, that
that thing which they bring unto us, they have received of God, and taken it
of his mouth: that is to say, that they have it out of the blessed scripture:
let us give this glory to God, modesteouslye to understand and harken
whether it so be or not. But as it is our duty to harken unto these things
which are said, unto such time as we do know what it is: so ought we to have
this prudence to decerne between the truth and lyinge: and to judge whether it
be so, or otherwise, which is alleged out of the word of God. For it is
commanded us to prove the spirits, and to know whether they be of God or no.
And truly we se how necessary this is for us: seeing the devil him self was
armed with the word of god, and made a weapon thereof to assault our Lord
Jesus. And we have experience, that daily he uses this practice, by his
instruments, to deprau^ the truth, to lead pore souls unto perdition.

Towchinge these pore phantasticals, which so myghtely vaunte them selves to
have the word of God for them, the deed shows how it is. It is long sense
we have continually traueiled, that this holy word might be set up: and to
bring this to pass we sustain a fight against all the world. They, what
declaration have they made, or wherein have they helped this. But rather
contrariwise, they have hyndered and disturbed us. In such wise that it can
not be said wherein they have profited, without it be that they have gathered
up that word, as fast as it was aduansed by us. More over in certain
pryncipal points of our christen fayeth, they accord very well with the
Papists, holding opinions directly repugnaunte to all the holy scripture. As
of fre will, of predestination, and of the cause of our salvation. It is
therefore a false abuse, which they use under that color to make the simple
believe, that they will be whollye governed by the scriptures, for as much as
they do hold nothing thereof, but follow only the fantasies of their own
brain. Let us come now unto the first Article of the seven which are
contained in this fair forked resolution, which they hold for a revelation
disce^ded from heaven.

The first Article of Baptism.
Baptism ought to be given unto such as be taught unto penance, and do believe
that their sins be taken away by Jesus Christ, and will walk in his
resurrection. Therefore it ought to be ministered unto such as ask for it them
selves, and not unto Infantes, as hitherto has been used in the Popes
kyngedome.

The confutacion.
That is their saying. But first I Answer, that the Baptisinge of young
children is not a thing newlye brought up, neither a thing which took his
beginning in the Papasie. For I say that it has been a holy ordinance kept
always in the Christian church. And that this is true, there is no doctor so
ancient, which does not confess, that it has been always used from the
time of the Apostles. I thought it good to say this much by the way, and for
none other cause, but to infourme the simple, that it is an impudent sclaunder
of these fantastical men, which would make men believe that this ancient
observation is a superstion newlye forged: and that is come from the pope: where
as in deed the whole church used it before there was any Pope, or that any man
heard speak of the pope. Besides this I will not that the auntientie thereof
shall help us any thing to the probation thereof except it be tounde grounded
in the word of God. I know that as the custom of men gives not authority
unto the sacraments: even so to use the^ well, we ought not to take our rule
according to the same. Let us come then unto the true rule of God which we
have spoken of: that is to say, unto his word which only here ought to take
place. Their intent is, that baptism should not be communicate but to him
that asks it, making profession of fayeth and repentance. And therefore the
baptism of little children is an invention of man against the word of god.

To prove this, they aledge the place out of S. Mathewe, where our savior
Jesus Christ says unto his Apostles. Go, and teach all people, baptisynge
the^ in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: unto
which, they do add this sentence out of the.xvi. chap. of. S. Mark. He that
shall believe and shall be baptized, shall be saved. This is, as they think, an
invincible fundation. To this I answer, that in these places there is nothing
spoken of Baptism, but insidentlye. For it is put there as an accessarie of
the preaching of the Gospel. Our lord Jesus sent his Apostles to preach and
instruct the world, and added baptism for a co^firmatio^ of their doctrine.
Therefore is it to be noted, that for this cause ye doctrine ought to go before
this sacrament, which is added unto it, as the seal thereof. In this thing we
agree. But you must know how.

And this thing is it which abuses these pore phantasticals, that they do
not consider the men. For when there is a man which is an estrau^ger from the
christian church: as a Turk, a Jew, or any other heythe^ man: for to make him
a christian, it is without question that we ought not to begin with him
first by baptism, but before he be baptized, he must be instructed. And such
was the usage of the ancient church. For they which were converted unto
Christ, had for a certain time, their predication apart, which was called
Catechism. And afterward, having testimony of their faith and repentance,
they were baptized. Reason would it thus. For seeing that man is not only
introduced by baptism into the communion of the church, but also has there
his attestation sealed, that god does knowledge him for one of his children:
there is no doubt but that the doctrine ought to go before: by which the man
ought to be taught to convert him felfe to god with faith and repentance. We
se yt god did so with Abraham when he was circumcised. For before he did
institute that sign for him, he received him into his covenant, and
instructed him in his word.

And we must also note this, that when a man is received of god into the
company of the fayethful: the promise of salvation which is made to him: is not
only for his person, but also for his children. For it is said unto him. I am
thy God, and the God of thy children after the. So now a man which from his
infancy, was not received into the couenaunte of God, is as a stranger from
the church, unto such time as by the doctrine of salvation he be brought unto
fayeth and repentance. But than his seed is made by and by of the howshoulde
of the church. And for this cause are the little children of faithful men,
baptized in the virtue of this conuenaunte which is made with their fathers in
their name and to their profit. Here you se where the Anabaptists are
disceyued. That the doctrine ought to proceed the sacrament, we do not resist.
But the hole matter is as we have said, to consider how, and by what men. For
when the question is, of a man in age to be baptized, which was before no
christian: before he be christened, he must be taught those things which be
figured by baptism. But as touching his children, they shall be baptized upon
the doctrine which he has received: which does contain that God shall be a
savior not only of his person but also of his children. To make it somewhat
plain to the understanding: when a man which was a stranger to the company
of the fayethfull, is converted unto God, the doctrine upon which he is
baptized is set forth unto him: and therefore it is necessary that he
understand it, and comprehend it, before he be received unto the sacrament.
The doctrine upon which the young children of christen men be bapiised is not
setforth to them, but to their parents, and to the whole church: and therefore
it is not requisite that they understand it, before they do receive the sign.

Therefore when men make this argument: our Lord commanded his Apostles to
preach before they baptized: and has said, yt he which shall believe and shall be
baptized, shall be saved: and therefore it follows: that none ought to be
admited to the sacrament of baptism, but he that all ready believes. This is a
noughtie conclusion. For it is very notable, that our Lord in those places
speaks not, but of them which are of age mete to be taught, and which were
not before of the christen church. If we take not head unto such
circu^staunces; we shall confound many places in scriptures, and shall be
confused when we do expound them. It is said that he which does not labor,
shall not eat, and yet there is no man so cruel as to condemn little
infantes to dye for hunger. For every man sees clearlye, that the Apostles
put not them in this order, but speak only of such as be strong, and be
able. Seeing then, that our Lord in these places, does make special mention
of those which are apt to be taught, and which were not before of his
disciples, it is a deprauation, and peruertynge of scripture, to apply these
places unto the young children of christian me^ which, have not ye capaciti to
understand, and be already comprehended within the covenant of god, made unto
their fathers, that they should be of the household of the church.

These fantastical men, aledge yet further for them, the use and practice of
the Apostles. It is written in the second of the Acts, that the four thousand
men of Jerusalem, after that they had heard saint Peter preach being touched
in their hertes, did axe counsel what they ought to do: and that saint Peter
answered them: repent you, and believe the Gospel. Furthermore, when the
Eunuchus required to be baptized. Phyllype answered him, that he might be
baptized if so be that he believed with his whole heart. And out of this they
conclude that the Apostles required that men should have fayeth and
repentance, before they were baptized. I grant it to be true of such men
which must be received a new into the communion of the Christian church:
but touching those children which are of the church before they issue out of
their mother bealies, I say there is an other reason. For their fathers and
auncetoures received the promise, upon which their Baptism is founded. It was
therefore necessary, that the inhabitau^tes of Jerusalem, which were out of
the christian church, and which consented unto the death of our Lord, should
have true repentance, before they should have testimony through baptism,
that the Lord Jesus did accept them into the number of his faithful. It was
necessary that the Eunuchus should come unto the flock of Christ by true
fayeth, before he should receive the sign thereof. But seeing this promise is
made unto all fayethful me^: I am the God of thy ofsprynge: the children which
descend of them* have an other privilege: which is, that God does
knoweledge them for his, for their fathers sakes. And lest it should appear,
that I do feign this as a dream, out of mine own head: you may see that God
has showed the ensample in Isaac. It is true as we have said that Abraham was
instructed in ye doctrine, of faith and of repentance, before he received the
sign of Circumsicion. But after that God had received him into his church, he
ordained that his ofsprynge should be partakers of that benefit. And so Isaac
and all his other successors were Circumcised in their infancy. So now we
have God for our authoure of this difference: upon the which depends all
the difficulty of this question.

But because they will not admyt this similitude which we bring, between
Circumsicion and Baptysme, it shall be expedient to show, before we go any
further, that it is one thing. When we speak of a Sacrament, we must consider
that the whole substance and property, ought to be understand of the
doctrine, whereof the Sacrament is a confirmation. Let us then mark this, that
the doctrine is as the principal: and the Sacrament is as accessarie. Now let
us make comparison of Baptysme with Circumsicion. Baptism imports pernaunce,
or renewynge of life: with promise of the forgeuenes of our sins.

Cyrcumsicion does importe as much and neither more nor less. That this is
true, towching repentance, it is euyde^t as well in the books of Moses as in
the Prophets, where it is spoken of the circumcision of our hertes. For that
is that thing, which the new testamente calls mortification of the old
man. In summa, spiritual circumcision is as much to say as, repentance. And
for the second part, which is the promise of forgeuenes of sins, we can
have no clearer probacion than this sentence of. S. Paulle, where he says,
that circumcision was given to Abraham for a confirmacion, of the ryghtwysnes,
which he freely obtained of God, through fayeth. If now, men make this
argument: that it is against reason, that lyttel children, which have
neither faith nor repentance, should be baptized, for as much as baptyme is a
sacrament of regeneration and spiritual washinge which we have in Jesus
Christ: I answer that the like may be said of circumcision. And yet God
commanded that the young infantes should be circumcised. And therefore it is
as much as to reason against God: when we say that it is against reason,
that a sacrament which is a testimony of repentance, and salvation, should
be communicate unto young children. What shall we say then? Truly, if we
count that good, which God has done: we have a lesson, that it is not nedfull
that the veritye which is signified by the sacrament, should always
precede, but that it suffiseth otherwhyle, that it follow, at the least in
part: for the renouacion of life, was well signified by circumcision: and so
was likewise the justice which we obtain by fayeth. Neither repentance nor
fayeth, was in the young infantes: and yet were they not for fault thereof,
excluded from circumcision, which is the sign of the same. Now you se then,
that the sign goth before the verity of that sign. And if that this were
sometime lawful, and conformable to reason, how comes it now to pass that
it should be repugnaunte unto the same. But here may it be replied, that it
is not enough to allege that such a thing was done, except we can show
that we ought so to do now. I grant that true: neither would I that the
baptism of little children should be received as good, except I can prove
that Gods will is that so it should be, but in the mean while let us hold
fast this thing which I have already proved: which is, that it is as much,
as to reason against god, when we will always have, that the veriritie should
precede the sign. Touching the rest, we must prove that it is according with
the word of God, that we do baptize little children, which thing shall be
easy to all men's understanding, without long process to declare the same:
if we do know the grace and mercy which our Lord Jesus has done unto us at
his coming. Before that, God promised unto the Jews that the would be the
God of their children: and in wytnes thereof he sealed them with the Sacrament
of his covenant. Now as says saint Paul, the Lord Jesus is come, for to
ratify his promises made unto the Jews, and to shed furthe into all the
world the mercy of God. Yea, as it is evident in another text, he has
broken down the wall which stood between both, to separate the one from the
other: and this has he done, that there should be no more difference
between them: but that we al together, should have one manner of privilege, to
be the children of God. Wherefore, whosoever will make the grace of God less
toward us and our children, than it was toward the people of the Jews,
does great injury unto our savior Jesus Christ, and blasphemeth him. But some
will say, yt the grace of God is not made less toward us, in that our
children are not received to Baptism: so that we deny not, that God has
showed unto them like mercy, as unto the children of ye Jews I answer, yesse.
For we must esteem ye grace of God, pryncipally by the declaration which he
has made unto us, as well by his word as by his sacraments. Seeing now, that
Baptism at this day, is ordained to seal in our bodies the promise of
salvation: as of old time Circumsicion was unto the people of the Jews: we
should take from the Christians a synguler consolation, if we take from their
children that confirmation, the which the faithful have always had: that is, a
visible sign, by which our Lord declares unto them, that he accepts their
children into the communion of his Church. I know the cauillation which the
Anabaptists make in this place, taking ye name of children allegoricallie, to
signify them which are children in malisse, and not in age. And therefore do
mock us, because we are so simple to understand this after the lettre. But
what subtlety is this I pray you, to ouerwhelme those plain and clear
promises: where it is said, that God sheddeth out his mercy upon the seed of
the faithful after their death? And on the other side, what better and more
certain exposition of this thing can we have, than the holy ghost? the which
by his apostles has interpreted that which he had showed before by his
prophets. Now saint Peter does testifye unto the Jews, that they are
children of the promises: that is to say, heirs: forasmuch as they become
of Abraham's stock. And saint Paul, though of a deliberat purpose he fights
against the foolyshe presumption of the Jews, which they had in their carnal
parentage: yet does he not deny, but that the stock of Abraham is specially
sanctified, because and through the virtue of the covenant which GOD had
made with him. It is very true, that when the children of the faithful,
shall come unto the age of discretion, they may alienate them selves from GOD,
and adinchillate the virtue of Baptism. Yet may we not therefore say, that
our Lord has not chosen them, and separated them from other, for to present
unto them his salvation.

Otherwise it should be in vain, that saint Paul says. That a child
having father or mother fayethfull is sanctified which should be unclean, if
he were begotten and descended of infidels. Seeing now that the holy ghost,
authore and fountain of all sanctification, does testify that the child^en of
christen me^ are holy, may we exclude them from so great a benefit? Now if in
them be the verity of baptism, how can we depryue them of the sign, which
is less and inferior.

But they reply, that the custom and practyse of the Apostles is contrary.
For it is said that Paul and Silas preached the word of the Lord, unto the
gealer, or keeper of the prison, and to his household, before that they baptized
them. I have already given solution unto this, when I showed how that to a man
which is a stranger from the church, the doctrine ought to precede the
sacrament: but after that God has received him into the communion of his
fayethfull the promise of life is made unto him as well for his children, as for
him self.

But they think, in the.xix. of the Acts, to find in their favor a more
express scripture: where it is said, that. S. Paul, having found certain
disciples, which had not yet received the holy Gooste, did Baptize them
anewe. Now is it very certain that saint Luke, in that place, speaks of the
visible graces of the holy Gooste. For other wise: that which he says could
not stand together: that is, that these of whom he spoke, which were Jews,
did answer that they knew not whether the holy Ghost were given. Now they
could not be ignorant that God does sanctify his servants by his spirit:
seeing that there is so often made mention thereof in the prophets. But they
knew not whether these graces whereof. S. Paul spoke, were given unto the
christian church. Now seeing they be called disciples, they are not so
ignoraunte, that they should not at all know God and Jesus Christ: as it
were a simple christian of the commune people: but they lacked this thing,
that they had not received the visible graces, which God then shed forth
upon his servants.

These same were conferred unto them by the imposition of saint Paul's
hands. For it is no new thing, that the name of baptism should be taken in
such significacion: as we have an example, where it is said, that the
Apostles called to remembrance the words of our Savior, that John did
baptyse in water: but that he, would baptyse with the spirit. It is also an
accustomed use of the scripture, to expound one word or sentence by an other.
It is said then that saint Paul did baptize the^ in the name of Christ, and
then to expound what is meant thereby, it is added: that he put his hands on
them* and that the holy Ghost descended on them. It is the^ but one only thing
expressed tws ways, according unto the use of the scripture, as w^ ^^^e said.

Notwythstandinge let us grant them their asking to se what they will or can
infer upon it. Truly they can say none other thing, but that saynct Paul
baptized these disciples, because of their ignorance. Now if baptime ought to
be reiterat for this cause, why war not the Apostles rebaptised which three
years after their baptyme, had so many errors, and folyshe opinions, as to
thyncke that the kyngedome of Jesus Christ was earthlye, and understood
nothing touching his death and passion, and many other such like? Truly
such rudnes would well have required a second baptyme, if an ignorante man
ought to be rebaptysed. And as touching us, we had need always to have a lake
or river at our backs, if it should be nedeful for us to be rebaptised as
often as our lord does pourge us of any error that was in us. On the other
side, it is said, that Saint Paul did baptize those men, of whom we now
speak, before he laid his hands on them Which were a very shreude order,
if that thing be true, which these poor phantasticalles do say. For
according to their fantasy, the holy Ghost ought first to be given to his
disciples: and than consequentlye the sign. But what need is it to dispute
more hereof, seeing we have the thing so clear? Be sides this, they have
nothing to say against the baptim of infantes, but yt their is no where any
mention made yt the Apostles did use it. To this I answer, yt no more do we
read in any place, that they did at any time mynister the super of our lord
unto any woman. Why than do they make greater difficulty of the one, tha^ of
the other? They dare not say ye women be not met to receive the supper of our
lord. And yet we read not, that at any time, the Apostles did mynister it unto
women. Where now, shall we take certitude, of this matter? That shall we do in
considering the institution, the nature, and substance of the sacrament. For
in so doing, we shall se that it is as convenient for them as for men. Now
have we showed the like of baptyme: that is, that it is conueniente and does
apertayne unto young childrene: for as much as our Lord takes them into the
feloushyp of his church. What do we axe more? It is superfluous to inquiere of
the custom, where the right is very manifest and clear. I mean in this
matter: wherein only the pleasure of God ought to suffice us. And as
touching this point, I trust to God, yt I have fullye satisfied al such as
will walk in the truth. How be it if any requier a more ample declaracion,
let him look what I have intreted her of, in the christen Institution: where all the arguments abouesayed are handeled more at large.

The second Article of excommunicacion and contains three other artiles.
THe use of excomunicacio^ ought to be among all those, which have professed
the^ selves Christians, being baptized, and yet ye not wtstandyng, through
frayltie, and not of deliberat purposes, do fall into some faults. These ought
to be exhorted and warned twyse secretlye: at the third time openly banished
before all the congregation to the end that we, with one zele, might break
together the bred, and drink the cup.

Confutacion
We deny not, but that the excommunicacion is a good and holy policye: and
not only profitable: but also necessary in the church. Moreover, that
which this ingrate people do know of this matter, they learned of us: and by
their ingnoraunce or presumption they have corrupted the doctrine, which we on
our behalf do purelye teach. But brieffely to void this article: I will
declare where in we agree: and wherein they dyffer ^^om us. As I have alredye
said, we on our behalf do constauntly teach, that excomm^nication ought to
be in use, according as it was instituted by Jesus Christ: and we affirm
that it is a necessary mean to conserve the church. Furthermore, as much as
in us is, we do constauntlye procure and solicitate, that it may be restored
and practiced as it ought to be: declaryng that it is a great fault, and vice
to be reproved, when it is not so done. In this thing the^, the Anabaptists do
not differ from us, it we did co^de^ne exco^municatio^ or would make me^
believe, yt it were a thing superfluouse and unprofitable: or that we were of
that mind, yt we would it should have no place in the church: the^ might they
have an occasion to murmr against us. But in this thing we agree well.
Herein now lies the strife: that they think that in every place, where this
policy is not in his estate, or that it be not duly exercised, there is no
church: and that it is not lawefull for a christian manne there to receive the
supper. Therefore do they separate them selves from those churches, in the
which, the doctrine of God is purelye preached, taking this color, that they
will not be partakers of that polution, which is done there: because those
which have deserved, are not banished.

We on the othersyde do confess, that it is an imperfection, and shreude spote
in the church, when this order is not there. Nevertheless we do not therefore
repute it for no church, and forsake the communion of the same: and we, say
that it is not lawefull for a pryuate man to separate him self from it

Now because it is not sufficient to say let us se whether we can have a good
approbation of our doctrine out of the scripture. For I do gladlye subject my
self to this condition, that nothing be believed of that I shall say, except
it have the testimonye of the scripture. Now the first question is, whether
that company, which has not such an use of excommunication, as the Lord
Jesus ordained, ought to be taken for a Christen church? Truly this defaute
was at Corinthe, that same time that Sayncte Paulle wrote unto them, as he
declares and complains there of.

This notwythstandynge, he gives them this honor, that he calls their
congregation, the christen church. There was among them diverse sects and
parttakynges: ambicion and avarice, raygned a monge many of them. They went
so to law, as one would eat another. An offense, which among heathen men
was execrable, was not only tolerate among them: but in manner approuyd. And
besides such a corruption in manners, there were also many faults in
doctrine. Not wythstandynge all this, sayncte Paulle spekyng not of him self,
but as the mouth and organe of the holy Ghost, intituleth his Epistle unto
the Christen church which is at Corinthe. Who is that now among us which
will take upon him, to be more sencere in judgment, than god? who soever dare
do it, shall show his folishe boldenes: but he shall change nothing of that
which God has onse pronounced. What shall we say of the Galathiens? We know
the confusion and disorder which was among them. But that notwythstandyng
Sayncte Paul knoweledgeth a church to be there. We must ernestely endeavor
our selves, to come unto that perfection, which ought to be in the body of
Christ. Yet may we not look for any other state or condition in the church,
than that, which has be showed unto us, by the infallible verity. Let us not
than abuse our selves to imagine a, perfect church in this world seeing yt our
lord Jesus has showed unto us: yt she shall be leke unto a floor where on men
thresh, in which the good corn is so myngled with the chafe, that many
times it apereth not. Also that she shall be like unto a net, wherein diverse
sorts of fyshes are gathered together. These similitudes do teache us, that
though we ought to desire an excellent pureness in the church: and also do our
endeavor yt so it may be: yet shall we never se it so pure, but that there
shall be many filthynesses there in.

For where it is said that the Lord Jesus has shed his blood to cleanse
her, that she should be without wrinkle or spote: does not sygnifye that in
this world she shall be clean from all spots. But rather she believes and
goes forward in good worckes day by day, stretchynge her self fourth unto
that end, unto which she shall not attain in this world.

Furthermore, the church is spotted with vices, two ways. For there is no
membre of the same, so pure nor so perfect, which is not always compassed and
environed with many imperfections. Therefore all faithful men, as long as
they be conuersaunte in this world, have always some uncleanness remaining in
their flesh: as all holy scripture does testifye: and principally. S. Paul
in the seventh to the Romans. Touching this form of uncleanness, though we
had a church in the best governance that might be in this world: yet could we
never avoid this, that we should not have need to be washed daily by our
Lord, in forgeuynge us our sins through his mercy. The second manner or way
whereby the church is spotted, is by the wicked hypocrites which are always
among the stock of the good, to infect ye hole company with their fylthines.
Su^time there be conte^pners, of dissolute and slanderous life, which though
they keep in, their wyckednes for fear of rebuke before me^: yet in ye mean
while they declare that they have neither fear nor reverence of God. This
polution ought to be taken away by the discipline of excommunication: and to
travel diligently therein, that it may be done in deed But there be many
churches, which do not their endeavor to cast out such filthiness. Other there
be, which do take great pain and diligence, and yet do not come to such
perfection, but that there do remain always a great number of wyked men
unpunished, and that because the malice of hypocrites is so hyd, or at the
least wise not so discovered: that sentence may be given against it.

Let us for a conclusion take this to be true, which our Lord has said,
that we must unto the end of the world suffer many evil herbs: least while
we go about to pluck them al up, we destroy the good corn with all. What
will we have more? Our Lord to prove his, has made his church subject to
this miserye, that she shall be always, myngled with good and evil. We must
therefore be content therwyth.

And to say troth, we have good occasion so to do. For we ought to bear this
honor unto the holy word of God and his Sacraments: that where so ever we
se this word preached, and that according unto the rule which is given unto
us, god is there purely honored without superstition: and the sacraments there
ministered, we ought to conclude without any doubt that there is the church.
What should it else be? Shall the wyckednes of hypocrites, or of the
contempners of God abolyshe the dignity and virtue of the word of God and his
Sacraments? Now I confess that the discipline is also of the substance of
the church: and that it ought to be established in good order. And when good
policy or order wants in any place: as if excommunication be not in use,
that then the true form of the church is disfigured. Yet may we not therefore
say, that she is wholly distroyed, and no building there, seeing that she
retayneth that doctrine upon which the church is founded.

I say further, that if we should hade none other considerations, then to
esteem the church by the men and their manners: we should many times be
deceived, and cast out some company, not estemynge them for the church,
because of their imperfection: which notwythstandynge be in very deed the
church. For it might so come to pass, that we should do injury to many good
and holy personages, which among the wicked be unknown and hid, as the good
corn under the chafe. Furthermore we ought to think that there be many which
are oppressed with vices, and yet do take great dispeasure with them selves
for them, and with true repentance do desire to wythdrawe them selves from
them, that they might serve God more entierly. It is also a very rygoriouse
thing to excommunicate a man for one fault. On the other side, our natureis
so inclined unto malignitie, that it suspecteth, and gives rash iudgmente,
before the thing be well and ryghtly known unto us. Therefore ought we to
take the greater head least we declyne into that part. But as I have said,
we should do peruersly, if we should only have respect unto men For the
majesty of Gods word, and of his sacraments, ought to be in such reputation
among us: that where so ever we se them, we should be certain that there is
the church: notwythstandyng the vices and spots which be there communelye
in the life of the people. In somma, when the question is which is the church:
the judgment of god ought to be preferred before ours. Now the Anabaptists
will not stay the^ selves at Gods iudgeme^te as we have showed.

The second questian upon this Article is, when the order of excommunication,
is not used in the church, or that it be not there, practiced as it ought to be:
whyther for this default, we ought to separate our selves, and that it
should not be lawefull for us there to receive the supper of the Lords? The
Anabaptists do say, that whersoeuer the wicked be not excluded, from the
communion of the sacrament, there the christian man is polluted if he do
communicate. We contrary wise say, that a christian man ought to to be very
sorry, when he sees the holy supper polluted, through the receiuinge of it, by
wicked and vnworthi people: and ought as much as in him is, procure yt it should
not be so done. And also he knows, yt it is not for all yt, lawful for to
wythdrawe him self from that communion, and exempt him self from the supper,
but that he ought still to persevere in the worshyppynge of God with other,
hearing his word, and receyuynge the supper, so long as he dwells in that
place.

Let the Anabaptists bring forth their Aucthor, to approve their saying. As
for us, we say nothing but that which is approved by our Savior Jesus
Christ, and all the Prophets, and Apostles.

We se what vices the Prophets rebuked in the Jews church, or rather the
abominations, against which they cried out. And that was not upon one
estate: but they say, from the rulers boeth spiritual and te^porall, unto the
common people, all was so corrupted, that skante was there one whole membre.
Did they for all this cease to come and assemble with the people so perverse
and wicked? to worship God, to do sacrifices, to hear the doctrine of the
law? Did they build an aultare or temple to them selves, that they might
have a pure church? If a faithful manne be poluted in companiynge with the
wicked when he prays, and receives the doctrine, and Sacraments of our
Lord: then were all the Prophets poluted, and he capitaynes to lead us all
into perdition through their ensample. Let us come to our savior Jesus and
his Apostles. We know at the least, what was the state of Jerusalem at his
time. Yet our Lord Jesus would be circumcised communelye with other people.
Furthermore at the day of purification, he was contented to be borne to the
temple, to be presented unto God after the manner accustomed. If it be aledged
that he was received by the hands of a holy man that is to say Simeon: I
answer that all that was done there, was done in the name of the church:
which was filled with many filthynesses and abominations If any do reply and
say, that he was a young child and therefore that it was not his propre fact: I
answer that he was so a child in the nature of man which he took of us: that
there whilse he was governed by his divine providence: by which he would never
have permitted him self to be contaminate with any spotte, which were
contrary to the pureness of the children of God. But being a perfect man,
preached, and that more is, he exercised his office, and followed this trace
unto his death. If it be an offense to God to enter into a congregation (out
of which all the wicked be not excluded) to pray to God, and to make
protestation of our faith, what shall Christ say, and what exemple has he
given us, in going unto the remple of Jerusalem with the scribes and
Phariseis, a people so wicked as they then were? I know well that they will
answer me here, that Jesus Christ did not go into the temple, but for that
intent he would rebuke the vices which at that time were there committed:
and not to participate with them in their sacrifices, and other protestations
of their faieth. That this solution is false, it is easy to show. Gala. iiii.
It is not for naught that saint Paul says, that he was subject unto the
law (I mean alwais Jesus Christ) to win from the seruitud of ye same, al
those which were subject unto it. Now means he expressly the ceremonial law.
Therefore when he came unto the Temple, and chyeflye on the solemn feasts:
though he came thither to have the better occasion to advance the Gospel, and
to correct the naughti vices of the preachers: that notwythstandynge, he showed
him self an obseruer of the law, in doing those things which were
commanded, as to come unto the temple to worship, and to do sacrifice. This
thing he confirms by his own mouth, speaking to the Samaritane. For,
speaking in ye person of all the Jews, he says thus. We know what we
worship. You know not what you worship. For salvation is from the Jews. Truly
he exemteth not him self from the worshyppyng of God, which stands also in
the offering up of sacrifices* but puts him self among the rest of the
commons. The reason which he adds, gives yet a more ample confirmation of
this thing. That is, that salvation is from the Jews. For by these words he
understands none other thing: but that God did accept the service which
was done unto him at Jerusalem, only for his couenaunte of salvation which
he promised unto that people. We se the^, that a man receyuyng the sacraments
ordained by god with the wicked, does not defyle him self by their company,
so be it that on his behalf, his conscience be clean and pure.

After like sort have all the Apostles done, following the ensample of their
master. But least we should be to prolixe, let us be content with the
exemples of saint Paul. I will not allege how that every where, where he
came, he did not refrain the Jews Sinagoge, there to pray to God, and to
treat the scriptures. Look well, I will not aledge, that he was not scrupulous
to present him self unto the temple, there to worship god and to use the
ceremonies lawful and permitted, with other in common, though the priests and
Scribes which then were, were in a desperate wickedness: Not that these things
do not serve for our purpose, but because we have more manifest probations:
and which be less subject to false accusation. That is, that he complayneth,
that all they which ought to be his helpers: instead of the honor of Jesus
Christ, and the aduauncemente of his church, sought their own private
profitte.

And yet we read not, that he did separate him self from their company, for
fear to be polluted by them. Also in reprouynge the enorme vices, which were
among the Corhinthyans, and Galathyans. He says not unto them which were
pure and clean, that they should no more communicate with the^, until all
were well cleansed: but is contented to exhort them to correct these faults,
which he reprehendeth, every man in him self, without speaking of any such
separation as these pore pha^tasticals would introduce.

What neade have we to dispute of this thing? seeing that the same Apostle, in
an other place, treating how every manne to dispose him self to receive
dulye the holy supper, does not command that every man should examine the
faults of his neighbor. But he says thus. Let every man prove him self, and
the^ let him eat of this bread and dri^ke of this cup. For he yt comes
thither unworthily, he shall receive his conde^nacio^. In these words there
be.ii. Articles to be noted

The first is, that to eat vnworthylye the Lords bread, is not to
communicate with such as be unworthy: but it is, in not well preparinge him
self, in examininge whether he have fayeth and repentance. The second is,
that when we should receive the supper, we ought not to begin the examinacion
of other: but every man ought to prove him self. And in deed, if we do
consider the thing aryghte, they which have so good leisure to inquire of
other men, most commonly forget to thyncke of there own matter. There is a man
yet a live, the which being infected with this error, that he feared to
receive the supper with us, because of some men's imperfections: did therefore
deprive him self of the communion of the church. Al this while he had two
servants in his house, of a very wicked and slavnderous life. I being
advertised there of, declared this thing unto him, as farforth as he would
here me at that time, saying that he ought to endeavor him self to pourge his
own house of the which he had charge, if he thought to be defiled with the
faults of them which were not committed unto his governance. After this, he
perceived his folly, and took this as a chastisment sent of God, to mock his
presumption. And so he reconciled him self as well unto me, as unto the
church, knowledgynge that the principal is, to thyncke of our selves, and of
our howshoulde: and after that, to have respect unto other, not that we
should wythdrawe our selves from the church in dispite of them, wha^ they be
not such as they ought to be but for to correct, and reduce the^ if we ca^,
or else to cause the^ to be excluded: otherwise: to commend them unto God, that
it might please him to set an order in it. Here it may be replied, that
Sayncte Paulle in the same Epistle does sharpelye reprove the Corinthians,
because that in their congregation, vices were not punished by excommunicacion:
and further, does forbid to have conversation with whoremongers, dronkardes
disceyuers, Idolaters, and such like: To this I answer, that it is before
fault, worthy reproffe in the church, that there is no correction for sins.
And I say further that the lord does punyshe the whole people, for this
only fault. And therefore let no church, which lacks this discipline of
excommunication flatter it self: as though it were a small or light fault,
not to use it when need is: but rather let every man endeavor as much as in
him is, to redress and bring it to his estate. Likewise let every private
man, help all that he may, that it may be done. But it cannot be, that every
particular manne should have just cause, to altenate him self from the
church, as oftentimes as things do not go after his desyer, For this must be
observed, that this policy is not in ye power of one member, but ought to
exercise it self, by the consent of the wholle body. Therefore Sayncte
Paulle speaks not specialtye to each one, to impute unto him this fault: but
does impute it to the hole body. The some of this is, that touching the
communion of the church, we ought to do our endeavor, that all members
rotten or infected with contagious malady: that is to say, all those which
live a slanderous life should bekut of. But let us consider what is in us, and
when we have done yt which was our dudie and office if we ca^ not obtain that
thing which we desire to bring to pass, let us than commit the rest to
God, and pray that it may please him to put to his hand, as it is his work
In the mean while, though, by good right, we have cause to be sorye, that we
cannot se the church of God in his perfect order: yet let us bear that
imperfection which is not in us to correct. Touching that saynct Paul
forbyddeth to eat and drink with such as live a slaunderouse life: that
means he of private conversation and not of the publyke communion. But here
will some man answer, if it be not lawefull for a christen man, to company
with a wicked man, to eat and drink with him for bodilye refection: how
much less is it permitted him, to eat the Lords bread in his company. To
this I answer, that it is in our power and liberty, to use company and have
familiarity privately with the wicked. We must therefore every man in his own
self, abstain from such company. But to receive the supper of the lord, is
not a thing that is in our disposition. And therefore the reason, is diverse.
Let us therefore note this, that if the church do tolerate and suffer an
unworthy man: he that knows him to be such a one, does well to abstain
from his company privately, and he ought to do it as much as he may, so yt he
make no schism or separation in the church touching the publyke comunio^.
Touching the matter of exco^municacion, their is as much said as the matter
does require: save that I would aduertis, by the way, all lovers of the
veritye, of one point which is in the article above said, of the
Anabaptists, that by that they may se what credit is to be given them in the
rest. That is where they say, that a man which has by frailty, without
deliberat malice offendyd, after he has been twice secretelye warned, ought to
be openly chastised, or excommunicate. I forgive the^ one error in this saying
which is our lord would not that the church should precede unto
excommunication, wha^ a sinner has conte^ned to secret admonitions: but will yt
he be warned openly three times before he be cast out. They are also, once more
disceyued, in that they consider not that the lord in that place speaks not
but of secret sins. For touching those which are notorious and slanderous
among the people, there is another way and facion to proceed with them, than
to make declaration in secret Lo here be two faults which do well declare what
godly doctors these Anabapstes be, and what spirit they have to reform,
seeing they cannot speak there words but to confound all,

But yet I pardon them, al this, that I may come to that point, which is of
greater weight. For in saying that he which sins by ignorance, and not by
his own will, ought to be cast out, they do declare, as they do openly
teach and maintain, that if a man do sin wyllyngely, he shall never obtain
forgeuenes of his sin because, that all voluntarye sins, after their
phantasye, are sin against the holy Gooste, and irremissible. I say that
this opinion is an execrable blasphemy against the grace of God, and a false
doctrine very pernitiouse to drive all poor souls to despair. As I have
seen the experience in some, which were for a time seduced to this wicked
sect. It is true, that we ought earnestlye to think in our selves, and
declare the same to other, that it is no small thing, wyllyngely to offend
God, and to commit any act against our conscience, to provoke his wrath
against us. Therefore who so ever shall use these terms that if it so happen
that after we have known God, we do sin against our conscience, yt it is
but a small fault easy to be pardoned: and that God is not so greatly greaued
therwyth, that we need to torment our selves therefore: we must avoid such a
man as we would the Devil, which by such flatteries would induce us to the
contempt of God: but let us rather think this, that it is no small fault to
go against the holy will of God, by rebellion and contumacye, by advised
purpose violatynge his Justice: and so to do, is outragiouslye to violate the
grace which he has showed unto us. Yea and it is much to be feared that he
which so mocketh with God, be not given over into a reprobate mind, to be
hardened in malice, so that he shall never be converted. And here let us bring
forth the threats, which in holy scripture, are made against such
ingratitude. But when all this is said and done, yet may we not drive them
into despair, which by chance have thus fallen. For where shall we then be
become? Among ten, hardelye shall we find one, that after he knew God, has
not sinned wyllyngly. Is not this to bring the holy church in to ruin: to
bring all men into despair? They will say, that this brings consciences a
sleep, to draw them to do evil. But I say rather he is a sleep which
brings him self in belief, that he never offends but by ignorance: and
that he makes him self so pure and innocente, that he never has evil will
or evil purpose. Let us consider. I pray you, how many ways the devil does
tempte us. Who is he that is so virtuous, which does not sometime declyne?
though he be warned of God, and have the testimonye of his conscience, to
draw him in to the right way. They aledge that al sin against the holy
Gooste is vnforgeuable. I confess the same. But it is very much to say,
that all voluntarye sin, is against the holy Ghost. For he resists the holy
Ghost, which openly repugneth against the verity of God, and by dispite
enfors^th him self as much as he can, to overthrow it. Now a man may syn
wyllyngly, and yet be not in will to war against God, or to blaspheme his holy
word.

But we shall have a short solution of this question, if we do remit the
discresion thereof unto God, that is to say, if we agree to that which he has
pronounced, as reason would we should, for seeing that to him only is
reserved the authority to pardon sins, it pertayneth to him also to
determine which sins are remissible, and which not. Now from ye first
beginning he has ordained among the people of Israel that there should be two
kinds of daily sacrifices. The one, for voluntarye sins, the other, for
those which were done by ignorance* adding a promise to forgive the one as
well as the other. What will these poor phantasticals say unto this? The
Lord has said that he will forgive the voluntarye sins of the fayethfull
(for the sacrifices were done for those which were already members of the
church) and these men will bind the hands of God, and wythstande him, that
he shall show no such mercy if they reply, that this thing was done in the
old law, and that the reason is otherwise in our time this cauelation is to
folishe. For we know that the infinite goodness of God is not restrained by the
coming of the Lord Jesus: but rather enlarged. More over we know that the
ancient sacrifices were but figures of those things which should be
fulfilled in Christ Jesus. Seeing now that remission of voluntarye sins, is
represented in the aunciente sacrifices, and is promised to be done unto them
that are of the household of faith: It is a plain and euidente testimonye, that
the fayethfull obtain, by the means of Jesus Christ, remission not only of
their ignoraunces, but also of their offenses which they have done willyngly.
And to say troth, we have so mani exemples, that it is a shamlesse boldenes for
any man to bring the thing in doubt. If we take the old testament: the
Patriarchs when they conspired their brothers death, were not ignorant that it
was evil done. Ruben did not defile his fathers bed through simplicity. Judah
knew well, that whordome was a thing displeasaunte to God: and yet he did not
forsake the doing of it. David which daily punished his subjects for evil
doing, could not commit the adultery which he did, by simple ignorance. The
mercy which God showed unto all these, is it spente or dead, that he can not
as well show it now a days. But what need have we to borrowe exemples out
of the old Testamente, seeing we have so many in the new? Saint Peter before
he denied the Lord Jesus, did he not hear this sentence? He that denies me
before me^, him will I deny before my father. Therefore he could not pretend
thexcuse of ignorance. And yet the Lord Jesus showed him mercy. S Paul
co^plaineth of certain me^ which lived disorderly in Thessalonica: and yet he
has good hope of theyir salvation, so be yt they be corrected and brought to
repe^tau^ce. They which in the church at Corinth, gave the^ selves unto lusts
and uncleanness, and had such delight in their vices, that they would harken unto
no exhortation, were culpable of volu^tarie sins. And yet the same Apostle
cease not to exhort them to turn again from their vices, always
reserving for them a hope to find favor with God, if they repent, We
read: saint Peter did as much unto Simon Magus. What will we more?

Our Lord opens the treasures of his grace to them that have been overcome
by their concupiscences, though they knew that they did evil, yet they fell by
infyrmitie of the flesh. Who shall shut the gate against pore sinners, and
wythsta^d that they should receive the grace which God does offer unto them?
We se now that there is a deadly poison hyd in these words of the
Anabaptists, where they make none other sins remissible but those which are
done unadvisedly. To make an end of this Article: it is necessary that all
christians be advertised what a tail it draws after it. For though we may
easelye judge, that it is an extreme rygoure, not to bear one fault in the
church: yet at the first syghte we do not so easelye perceive how pernitiouse
this opinion is besides forth, except we do diligently mark the consequent
that follows thereof.

There have been in old time two sects of heritikes, which did myghtely
trouble the church, of which the one named them selves in greek Cathares,
which is to say, pure: the other Donatistes, after the name of their first
aucthor and master. These as well the first as the second, were in the self
same pha^tasie, that now days be these pore dremers, search out a church
in which there should be no fault found. Therefore did they separate them
selves from all christen men, that they might not be defiled through the
imperfections of other. But what came of this? God has confounded them all
with their enterprise so presumptuous. Let this then be a warnyng unto us,
that when under the color of a zeal of perfection, we ca^ bear no
imperfection, other in the body, or in the me^bres of the church, it is the
devil which puffs us up with pride, and seduceth us with hypocrisy, to
make us forsake Christ's flock: this knowing that he has gotten what he
desyereth, when he has drawn us away. For seeing that out of the church
there is no remission of sins, nor salvation: though we have an apparaunce
of holiness more then Angelical, yet if we do separate our selves, by such a
presumption, from the christian company, we are become deuylles.

The third Article is of the receyuynge of the supper, in which they can not
deny but that we do agree with them: as we do preach it daily. That is,
that none be so hardy to approach to this holy table, which is not verily of
the body of Jesus Christ, worshyppynge one God with all fayethfull men, and
serving him in good lawful vocation. But were they come to make declaration
in their fourth Article* how a mann^ ought to separate him self from al
pollutions of the world to join him self to God: there they begin to
deprave altogythers. Though yet in the beginning they have a merely good
purpose, as in condemninge the popyshe superstions, and forbyddynge all
christenmen to perticipate with them. Yet in the tail lies all the venim, as
the proverb says. For finally they conclude that all use of the temporal
sword is deuillyshe Now is this true, that perticulerlye the use of the
sword ought to be permitted unto no man, to resist evil. But the weapons of
christen men be prayers and mekenes, to possess their lives in patience, and
to overcome the evil in well doing acccordynge to the doctrine of the Gospel.

Therefore the duty of every one of us is to suffer pacientelye if any wrong
be done unto us, rather then to use force and violence.

But to condemn the commune authority, which God has ordained for our
protection, is a blasphemye against God him self.

Behold the spirit of God, which does pronounce by S. Paul, that the
magistrate is a minister of God, for our profitte and in our favor, to
repress and to let the violence of wicked people. And that for this cause
the sword is put into his hands, to punyshe ye evil doers. Seeing that God
has ordained him to do this: what are we that will let it? Likewise seeing
that God does offer unto us such a saugarde, why shall it not be laweful unto
us to use it?

More over it is very euidente, that the intent of these poor phantasticals
is to condempe all munitions, fortresses, engynes of war, and such like,
which are done for the defense of the country: and for bydde subjects to
obey their princes and superiors when they would have their help in such
necessitye.

Now to reprove that thing which the Lord never reproved, is to great an
enterpryce for any mortal man. Let us always keep fyrme this thing, that it
is to usurp over the authority of God, to condemn^ for evil, that which the
Lord has permitted unto us.

Now it is not found in all the scripture, that ever he forbode princes, by
force of armoure to maintain their contrye, against such as against right,
vexed them. It is very true that the Prophets, speaking of the kyngedome of
Jesus Christ, do say that the swerdes and spears, shall be turned into
instruments of husbandry, to tyle the earth.

But by such manner of speeches they do signifye none other thing, Esa. ii.
but that al war and enmitye, shall cease and be taken from the fayethfull.
And would God that the Gospel might so take place in the world, that this
thing might be well practiced of all men.

But seeing that fayeth and the love of God have not such rule in the most
part of men, but that ambition and couetuousnes have often times the upper
hand: when one unjustly inuadeth an others contrye, and by wars does
moleste it: so far is it of, that the prince which is ordained of God, for
the protection and defense of the same, does evil in resistyng the unjust
violence, that he is bound by the duty of his office to do the same. It is
true that a christian prince ought to search all means for peace, and to bye
it dear with losses of his own: and so to do that it come not to the swerd,
until he have assayed al remedies to avoid this necessity But when he has
done all that it him lies, and has reculed as much as he might, if he can not
otherwise maintain the country which is committed unto him: the last refuge
is to use the sword which God has put into his hand. For it is all one
reason, to pull out the sword to punish evil doers which trouble the publyke
order, and to thruste back those which vniustelye come into a country and
break peace. In this case, if a christen man, after the order of the country,
be called to serve his prince, does not only not offend God in going to the
wars, but is in a holy vocation, which cannot be reproved without
blasphemynge of God. And in deed we se that when the soldiers came to John
Baptiste to be instructed of him, he did not command them to cast away their
armoure and renounce their estate: but only did admonyshe them to be
content with their wages, and not to pole or vex any man, but to abstain
from all malice. Saint Peter baptized Cornelius the Centurion: that is to say
captain of an hundred men: and yet he commanded him not to leave his company
and office as a thing most wicked. And that more is, having received the
holy Ghost visiblye, did nevertheless remain still with the soldiers, in his
office of the wars. To conclude this matter, if we will keep a good mean to
reprehende that which is evil and viciouse in wars, Let us not condemn
simply the going to war, when it is done by the authority of the prince,
for the defense of the contrye: when the prince has none other respect but the
commune profitte of his contry, and that the subjects for their part have
none other consideration but to do their duty: but let us reprehend the wicked
desires which are the cause to ye raisyng up of war: let us reprehende the
cruelties, rapines, violences, extortions, and such other insolences which
are done there To mingle the good with the evil, to condemn altogithers without
discresion, is a thing without reason.

The fyfte Article is of pastors: in which they have somewhat advised them
selves. For before time they were in that error, that it was against God that
a preacher should be deputed to any certain place: but would that all they
which should be in that office, should run from one place to an other,
counterfaytinge the Apostles as apes, and not as true folowers.

But I think verelye that they did this of a good mind which they had,
that the ministers which did fayethfully teach, should depart and leave the
place emptye, for them, when they came to pour out their poison every where.

Now, be it that they reknoweledge their error, or that they give the^ selves
a greater privilege, then they will grant unto other: we agree well with
them, that no church can continue in her estate without a minister: and
therefore there must be ministers ordained in every congregation.

This also would I have them grant consequentlye, that every where, where
there is a minister dulye constituted, and which fayethfull^e exersiseth his
office: who so ever will be taken for a christian man ought to cleave to him,
and to use his ministry with the rest of the flock. Now what do they?
Because we will not approve their error: though we bear the word of Jesus
purely, yet are we to the^ rauishi^g wolfes, and they have us, in such
abhominatio^, yt they think yt they should sin deadly against God, if they
hear one sermon of us. And out of this they do ordain ministers in have, to
make seperatio^ in the church, to draw away ye people, to make a contrary
assemble to ye other: to the intent that the name of God be not invoke in
unity and concord as it ought to be.

The sixte Article of Magistrates
WE agree that the temporal sword is an ordinance of God, besides ye
perfection of Christ, so the princes and superiors of ye world are ordained to
punish ye wicked, and to put them to death. But in the perfection of Christ,
excommunication is the vtmoste pain, and not corporal death.

The confutation.
Here must we note, that this is a moderation which they do make, to correct
that which before time they have said, after they perceived that for the
absurdity of their saying, they were rejected of all the world. For this
honor did they give unto principalites, and Seignories of the world, that they
rekened them among murder and theuery. But perceiving that this could not
be borne, they have advised them selves gentlye to retracte this Article, using
this fault color, ye wordly dominion, is an ordinance of God, besides the
perfection of Christ. Now by this, they do signify that it is an estate
unlawful and forbidden to al christen men as they the^ selves expou^de it
afterward. We must therefore consider whether christianity, and the estate of
Justice or worldely superiority are things that may not stand togythers. So
that if a man wylbe the one, he must be constrained to renounce the other.
First I axe, whether it be an estate repugnaunt to the vocation of a
fayethfull man, to exersice the office of the sword, or of worldly
superioritye: seeing that the judges in the old testamente, and also the good
Kings, as David, Ezechias, Josias, and also some of the prophets, as Daniell
have used it? To say that it was a vicious imperfection in them, is to no
porpose: seeing that the holy Ghost witnesses of the judges, that God raised
them up to deliver his people: and this singularlye apereth in Moses, the
which having express commandment, would gladlye have wythdrawen him
self, if he had could. But it behooved him, under pain of disobedience to
God, to receive this charge on him. Touching David, his reign was not only
aproued of God, but praised and adorned with very honorable tiles. The like
ought to be esteemed of his successors: seeing the reason is one. Therefore,
there rests none other evasion, to these ennymies of all order, but to say,
that God requires a greater perfection in the christen church tha^ he did
among the people of the Jews. Now is this very true, touching ceremonies.
But that we have any other rule to live by, touching the moreal law, as we
call it than had the aunciente people, is a faulse opinion. They that have so
thought, took occasion out of the fyfte of saint Mathewe where it apereth at
the first brunte, that the Lord Jesus does ad some thing unto the law,
which before was not commanded unto the people. But when we do marcke
diligently what the law of Moses does contain and do lay the one to the
other and make comparison: we perceive that the intention of our savior
Jesus, was not to make any addition: but only to restore the law to his true
understanding, which was depraved by the false gloses of the Rabions. Let us
therefore hold fast this resolution, that as touching the true spiritual
Justice, that is to say, that the fayethfull man should walk in a good
consience, and should be perfect before God, as well in his vocation as in all
his works, their is a whole and plain declaracion in the law of Moses: unto
which we must simplye cleave, if we will walk in the right way. Therefore
whosoever adds to it, or takes from it, goes without the limittes. So this
argument is suere and infallible. We serve the self same God, that the
ancient fathers did. We have one and the self rule that they had, to show us
how we ought to be have our selves, for to walk ryghtlye before god. Therefore
it follows, that yt vocacion which was than holy and lawefull, cannot be
reproved among the Christians. For as much as the vocacion is the pryncipall
part of humainie life and yt it imports most before God. Her upon follows
it, that we ought not to exclude from us the estate of ciuele iuistce, neither
yet to chase it out of the Christen church: seeing that the Lord has
ordained and approved it, as good to the people of Israel: and has in that
office ordained his must excellent servants, and also his prophets.

It is possible they will replye, that all this civil governance of the
people of Israel, was a figure of the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ, and
therefore it did continewe but to his coming. I grant well, that in part it
was a figure: but that it was none other thing, I deny that: and notwithout
reason. For it was of it self a polityke governance, as it is necessary that
such one be among all people. That so it is: ^t is said of the leuiticall
priesthod, that it should take end, and be abbolished, at the coming of our
savior Jesus. But where is there any such thing spoken of the externe
policy it is treue that the scepter and governance was taken from the stock
of Judah, and from the house of David: but that there should be no more
governance, is manifestly against the holy scriptures.

But to take a way all scrupull in this matter. We have a very evident and
express probacion, for where the prophets speak of the raygne of Jesus
Christ it is said that kings shall come and worship him, and do homage unto
him.

It is not said that they shall depose the^ selves from there estate to become
Christen wen but rather being constitute in riall dignity they shall be
subject to Jesus Christ, as unto there sovereign Lord.

David following this, in exhorting them to do there deutie, Psalm. 11.
does not commau^d them to cast away there diademes or septers: but only
to kiss the son: that is to say to do him hommage, and to be subject unto
him, having governance of other. He speaks there of the kingdom of our
savior Jesus Christ: and he does monyshe al kings and superiors to be
wise, and to take good head unto them selves. What is this wisdom? What lesson
does he give them? To give over al? No: but to fear god and to give honor
unto his son. Moreover: Esaias prophesteth yt the kings shall be as fathers,
nurces unto the christian church, and that the queen's shall nursse them with
there breasts. I pray you how agreth this, that the kings shall be protectours
of the christen church, and yet there estate cannot stand with christianity?
If the lord give unto the^ so much place among his people: as he gives unto
the prophets: we have sufficient to prove our intencion. Seeing that he does
apoynte unto them, so honorable a place in the feloweshyppe of his people, that
he gives them this honor, I say, as to ordeyne them protectours of his
church: what impudency is it to exclude them out of all? We conclude
therefore, that princes serving God, may well be Christen men: for as much
as the Lord gives them such a pre-eminence in the Christen relygion.

And in deed, it were a very folyshe thing that God should so exalte and
magnify such a vocation, if it let a man to be the servant of God.
Saint Paul exhorts every christian man to persiste in that vocation in the
which he was called. All shepeheardes and laborers of the earth, all handye
crafts and such like ought to think their estate, holy, and that it
hyndereth them nothing, towchynge christian perfection. Let us se now, which
estate is most approved of God, of one that keapeth beasts, or of one that
governs the people: which is not only approved: but also praised as
worthy and excellent above all other.

I will cease to rehearse a great meynye testimonies, which make well for the
probation of this matter, only for breuites sake. And also because one only
is suffitiente for us. What greater praise will we have of any estate, then
that by Gods own mouth it be called divine? If this title be given unto the
estate of Princes: who shall dare say that it is unmeet for a fayethful man.
Now it has a more large praise. For the Lord shows this favor to
Princes, as to call them Gods: and that not for their own persons sake: but
in consideration of the dignity wherein they are. The Lord Jesus shows the
reason why, that is because god has committed and ordained such a charge unto
them. Me think that God can not give a more express testimonye, for the
approbation of any estate, then when he communicates his name unto that man
which is constitute in the same, as if he called him his Lieuetenaunt, which
represents his person. Wherefore I conclude, that who so ever despises this
vocation, so much honored of God, does blaspheme his heavenly majesty. They
will answer me, that to make it inferior to the christian perfection is not to
disprayse it. But I replye, that they can not speak with greater contumelye.
For in saying that it can not stand with christianity, they do reiecte it as
a profane thing. I pass not of their fair color, by which they cover
their blasphemye, in saying that it is an ordinance of God. For the whole
matter stands in this, whether it be an holy office, which may be exercised
by the faithful, or whether a man which comes thereto, be thereby polluted.
Now they do say that who so ever does sytte in the seat of justice can not
be reputed a christian manne, because the office of a sword has no place in
Christ's church.

Though there were no more but that which saint Paul says, there were
inoughe to content all such as will agree to reason. He pronounces that
princes are ministers of God: and that the sword is given them by God, for
the co^seruation of the good, and puneshemente of the evil. Upon these words,
these poor frensye men do make this gloss, that it is very true, that they
be ordained of God, but yet that it is not lawefull for a fayethfull manne to
take it on him. Which is as one would say: I confess that this work is
commanded of God: but there is no man that can do it with a good conscience,
and also who so ever shall do it shall forsake God. I pray you is there any
man, that has but oune once of brain, that will speak on this manner? I
would they should answer me, in this one thing. Seeing they put no doubt,
but that all handye crafts, which are ordained to serve unto the commune
utility of mankind, are lawful and holy, wherefore do they exclud out of
this number, the vocation of princes, which does excel all the other? As for
example. They deny not but that a christian man may be a tayloure or a
shoemaker. And yet these crafts have no express wytnes in the scriptures.
Wherefore the^ do not they as well permit a christian manne to be a minister of
Justice, seeing that that estate has so large approbation and praise of the
mouth of God? God does pronounce that Princes and all Superiors are his
ministers, and that he has ordained them to be defenders of the good and
innocente, and to chastyce the wicked: and that in doing this, they do execute
his work, which he has committed into their hands.

What Devil constrayneth these frensye men to make this addition, that the
maMagistrates in serving God, are shut out from the company of Christen
men? Which thing is not done to the hangeman for dogs, by their own
confession.

I will aledge one place more and then an end. Saint Paul perceiving in his
time, that the most part of the princes were mortal enemies of the Gospel,
and that this thing might stomach the faithful, and cause them to bear no
good affection toward them, does command Timothe, that solemn prayers
should be made for them in the church: adding for a reason, that God would
that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. He means
not that God will bring to salvation, and by consequence, to the knowledge of
his gospel, all men of the earth, from the first unto the last: but he
means al estates: because it might appear that this estate of princes, of
which he spak, was as it were reiecte and curssed, for as much as all did
persecute the gospel. Which thing if it had been true, it had been superfluous
and folly to pray for them. Let us now gather out of these words of the
Apostle, that, which may plainly be gathered and seduced.

If god will bring Princes unto the knowledge of his truth: by what authority
will the Anabaptystes thirst them out? If any man will replye, that Princes
may well be converted unto God, but that must be in forsakynge their dignity
That saying is to to manifest against the mind of Saint Paul.

For saint Paul says not, yt they should forsake their Principalities, for
to become christians. And also the words yt he uses, ca^ in no wise stand
with such evasion. For if it behooved a prince to give over his dignitye, to
become a christian man, it should follow, that that estate should be void of
the grace of God, as unlawful and reproved.

But they think surely, that they have invincible objections to excommunicate
out of the church, and from all hope of salvation the estate of Princes, in
alledgynge certain places evil understood, which they wrest shamfully to
this purpose.

First they aledge that the Lord Jesus, did not ordain, that the womanne
which was taken in adulterye, should be stoned to death, as the law of God
required: but that he used mercy toward her, saying. Go sin no more.
Before I answer, I will are one question of them. They say that in the
christian church, excommunication does succeed the material sword, in such
wise, that where as before time a crime was punished by death, now the offender
ought to be punished by priuatio^ from the company of the fayethfull.
Therefore I ask them how they will excuse Jesus Christ, for that which he
has done? For he has not observed their rule: neither in condemnynge the
woman to be banished from the holy congregation: neither yet to dye. By this a
man may se, how brayneles they be, speaking without reason. Now do I come
unto the true solutio^ which is very easy. It is to be noted, that these
poor beasts in this place, follow the exposition, wherewyth the Papasticall
priests have made their stones fat. For seeing marriage was forbidden them,
for a recompense, they sought to have leave, to play the whoremongers, and so
have borrowed their neighbors wives. And because adulterye should not appear
to be so great a sin, they said that in this matter, we be under the law
of grace. And in a manner they reknowledge the grace of Jesus Christ in none
other thing, but only in this, that he left adulterers unpunished. These
poor people do follow them, and it happens unto them, according to the
saying of our Savior Jesus Christ, that if one blind lead an other
blind, boeth fall into the dytche. Now is it very true that the Lord Jesus
would in no point change the policy or cyuyl order: but without any
derogation thereunto, would do his office, for which he came into the world:
that is to say, to pardon sins. For he was not sent of God his father to
exercise the office of a worldelye* Judge: but to redeem the world by his
death, and to testifye the grace of this redemption, by the preaching of the
Gospel, and of all other goodness which we receive by him. As we se how he
promises to receive the thief into Paradyce: and yet nevertheless does suffer
him to bear the pain of his wicked deed. Therefore it is all one absolutio^,
which he makes unto the womanne, and unto the thief. But the worldly Justice
punishes the thief: the woman does depart unpunished because the Judges were
gone a way for shame. In somma, the act which our savior Jesus Christ did to
the woman in adultery, is none other, but the same which his servants and
ministers of his word, now adays unto al evil doers. For they take pain only
to exhort the^ unto repe^tau^ce and to turn the^ into the right way, and
after ward to conforte the^ in their consciences, presentynge unto them the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and assuring them of the remission of
their sins They do not take upon them to punish them. For that thing does
not appertain unto them, but in the mean while they do not hinder Justice,
that it should not be ministered. The whole matter is, if we knew the office of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the^ should we be out of all doubt in this matter.
His office is to forgive sins, and to bend his word ts the consciences of
sinners To do corporal punishments, he does not meddle but leaves that unto
them which have that authority, and unto whom the charge is committed:
following that which in an other place he said. Give to Caesar yt which is
Cesars. Out of the same ignorance proceadeth the second allegation which they
make.

Jesus Christ say they, would not make perticio^ between two brethren.
Therefore it follows that a christian man ought not to intermeddle in Civil
quarrels, to be a Judge.

First, Saint Paul permits christian men to do that which Jesus Christ
refused in this place to do: that is frendelye to accord the differences,
which rise among the fayethfull, for worldely goods. For after he had
rebuked the Corinthians, for that they pleded before painim Judges: and that by
this occasion the name of God was blasphemed: he shows unto them how much
better it were, that they should end their controversies by arbytrers,
choosing Judges among the faithful, to decide their processes. And further
makes this argument, that seeing we shall judge the Aungelles, by a strong
reason we be able to judge worldly matters. If we after the exemple of Christ
ought to refuse all arbytterme^tes and judgments. S. Paul did evil to induce us
unto it.

Now is it certain, that it is the holy Ghost, which speaks by his mouth.
We se the^, how these dulheades blaspheme God in that they would co^de^ne that
thing, which he approves. Moreover if it be not lawful for a christen man, to
take upon him to end quarelles that rise, touching possessions, heritages, and
other goods. I do axe of these good Doctors, what shall become of the world?
For it is not possible that men shall maintain contractes togythers: as the
necessity of man requires, but that sometimes there will arise doubts, which
will require an arbitrer or a Judge to decide them.

If they say that, that thing shall not happen among the Christians. That is
a false lie. Forasmuch as between two men of good conscience, by the infirmity
of our nature, may happen some strife. As we be blinded in our own cause: so
do we think every one to have the right. If a christian man may not meddle
in their controversies, to set them at one, by arbittermente: what confusion
shall there be in the end? By this it is easy to perceive, that these wicked
fantasticals, do pretend none other thing, but to see all things out of
order, to make al goods commune, in such wise, that who that can catch them
shall be happy: though they deny it myghtely. But let all Judgments and
arbittermentes be taken from the world, according to their intent, and
according as they strayghtlye command, what shall there be then but an
unbridled theuerye over all? or else they do hope to persuade all governors
and ministers of justice to forsake their places, that they themselves might
succeed into them as into a void possession.

Why then, (will they say) has the Lord Jesus refused to do a good and a holy
work? herke^ his answer, and this question shall be soluted. Who has (said
he) made me a judge, or a diuider between you? He says not that it is an
unlawful thing: but only he aledgeth that he is not ordained in that
vocation. And in deed the office for which he came into the world, should have
been darkened, if he had occupied him self in these things. Wherefore if we will
take profit by these exemple, and follow it. Let us follow that rule which
Sayrte Paul gives unto us, that every manne take heed where in he is called.
And for as much as we be one body in the Lord, that the arm do not usurp
over the eye, neither yet the hand over the fot. And to conclude in few words.
I ask whether pertition be a lawefull thing among christians: or that all
things ought to be co^fused. For if it be permitted to divide heritages: he
yt takes the office upon him to make the perticio^ is not worthy reprofe, if
so be, he be thereunto appointed. These enemies of the cyuyl policy, make not
another argument.

Jesus Christ, wtdrew him self into ye mountain, and hid him felfe there, when
they would have made him king. It follows therefore yt a christian man were
chose^ to the estate of justice, he ought by no means to accept it: but to
wtdrawe him self after ye exemple of his master.

The answer. I am almost ashamed to rehearse such vain things. But for
as much as I do perceive that the simple and rude are seduced by such: I am
constrained to advertise them, how they may avoid them. Every manne knows
the folyshe fantasye which the Jews had of Messiah. That is, they thought that
he should have his kyngedome flourishing in this world, to make them live in
this world at their case, and in good rest, and to make the^ triumph. In so
much that the very Apostles, till after his resurrection, had also this
fantasye in their heads: as. S. Luke declares in the.i. of the Acts. This
moved ye people to make Christ a king perforce, yt they might thereby be made
fre from the subjection of the romans. Therefore it is no wonder if the Lord
hid him self, for as much as this proceaded from an evil and perverse error,
and drew with it a very perniciouse co^seque^ce. It is certain that his
kingedome is not carnal nor of the world: but spiritual, and which does
consiste in things that do not appear upon the earth. Now what kingdom
would me^ give him? Therefore if he had consented unto the folly of the people,
should he not have co^fyrmed that error which was already to much roted?
should not he also by that means, have buried his grace and his verity, for
as much as men should have imagined nothing of him but carnal. Besides this,
he should have been ordained king, by sedition, and by the^ by whom it
appertains not. For seeing that Jury was in subjection unto the Romayne
Empire: the people had none authority to chose a new king at their pleasure.
Thus for these causes Jesus Christ refused to be king, and not to reprove the
estate as wicked or repugnaunte to a christen life. But in the mean while it
is sayede, Prouer. vii.
that it is by him that Kings do raygne: that it is he which does give grace
to the ministers of justice, to make laws and statutes, and to govern the
people in equity. What will we have more Jesus Christ is not a king in his
person, but he is the protector of al kingdoms, eue^ as he has founded and
instituted the^. But these fa^tasticals do replye, yt he has also commanded
us to do the like, saying to his apostles. The kings of the nations have
dominion over the^: but it shall not be so among you I grant unto the^, that
the office of the Apostles, and of the worldely principalities, be not both
one, and yt in their office is no dominatio^. Now Jesus Christ would there none
other thing, but decerne between the one and the other. For the occasion of
those words of our savior, came of that the Apostles had already co^te^tion
among the^ selves who should be the chieffest, and as it were gouerner of the
rest in the kingdom of Jesus Christ. To take away such ambition, he declares
unto the^, yt his kingdom is spiritual: and therefore, yt it does not stand
in worldly dignity, pomp and lordship: but that all the prehemine^ce which
his ministers and officers should have, should be in service. Seeing then yt
this place, does not make me^tio^, whether kings may be christian me^ or no,
but only shows yt the Apostles and ministers of the church: shall not be as
kings to have dominion. it is a very beastlines to infer out of this, ye Christ
has forbide^ us al superioriti. It is as much as one would say. It is not lawful
for a king to do the office of a minister, unto which he is not called: ergo
ye estate of a minister is an ill and unlawful thing. I pray you does the
destinctio^ and difference of estates make, yt the one should be condemned,
because ye other is praised? Let kings therefore co^teine the^ selves within
their limets, and likewise let the spiritual shep: perdes be contented to
exercise there office, without usurpation of that which apertaineth not unto
them, and then al shall go well* And the Lord Jesus, will allow the one, and
the other. Therefore these power phantasticalles do euilly expound this place,
to say yt in place ye power of the swerd is forbobde^. To make up a great
healpe of witnesses, they do also allege, that Saint Paul does say: that
those which God knew before, he has preordeyned to be made like unto the
exemple of his son. I grant unto them, that following the exhortacion which
Saint Paul makes in that place, behooves us to bear the mortification of
Jesus Christ in our bodies, and indewer those tribulations and miseries, by
which God will try us. But does it follow of this, that a fayethful man, may
not govern the people which are committed unto him? They say ye, because
that Jesus Christ did suffer, and not rule. As touching the first, that he
did suffer, I say so did David: in whose person the passions and sufferynges
of him were prefigured. And yet that notwythstandynge, we cannot say, that he
did not govern. Therefore of there own head they do ad this second part,
unto the text of Saint Peter mischeuously falsefyeng it, to disceiue the power
simple people. For in there book they go about to persuade, that Saynct Peter
speaks after that manner, when it is nothing so. Behold now David which was
a King, administerynge the power of the sword: and yet that hindered him not
to suffer, that he might be made like unto the Image of Jesus Christ, yea
even so much, that he did represent him. Saint Phillip following this, when
he should baptize the Eunuichus, which was one of the governors yt of
kingdom of Ethiopia, did not lay unto him this condition, that he should no
more be a ruler: but only axid of him, if he believed with his whole heart in
Jesus Christ: and so left him in his estate as he was. And truly if to have
dominion be a thing contraye to a Christen man: that same should as well be
true over one man, as over a communaltie. Now is it true that S Paulle does
permit Christen men, to have superiority and dominion over there servants
which in those days were unto them as bond men and slaves: and does not
command them to set them at liberty: but only to use them gentelye, and
frendelye with humanity. Moreover he suffered Philemon, whom he calls his
companion, to keep his bondsman, in his authority only he requires that he
should order him gentelye. We se than, that though it were expreslye said
that Jesus Christ did not govern, how folishe a thing it is thus to resonne,
Jesus Christ has suffered, and not ruled: therefore al dominion is reproved.
For it is as much as who would say. That Jesus Christ had not aplace to
lay his head one, as him self witnesses: therefore it is evil done when a
Christen man does posses other housse, or garden, or heritage. How much this
argument goes from reason, every man seyeth.

Last of al, like as a dronkerde, after he has well belched, does degorge the
vyllaine broth which charged his stomach: even so these wicked men, after they
have detracted this holy estate which the Lord has so much honored,
finallye with full throat, they do spewe out exceeding deformed blasphemies.
The governance, say they, of the Magistrates, is after the flesh: and that
of Christen men, is after the spirit. Me thinks now, that I do here the
painted pope, blasphemynge against holy marriage. For he uses these terms.
But this is nothing, compared to that which follows. The habitacion of
Magistrates, say they, is permanent in this world: but the habitacion of the
Christians is in heaven. And such like. I beseech you, by the name of God, all
fayeth full men, and I admonish you, well to consider those things, which
Sayncte Peter and Sayncte Jude, have written of certain corrupters, which in
their time perverted the fayeth of the simple: and by there words I pray you
make comparison with those things which I will recite of the Anabapstes. In
this thing I will say nothing, but that, which every man shall perceive to
be true: that is yt the one sect, differs nothing from the other in this
thing. But because every man has not the books at hand I will here set the
places together. The first says thus: they shall be presumtuous and stobborne
dispraysaynge them that are in authority, and they have no sham to blaspheme
against all dignity, like unto brute beasts, dispraysynge those things
which they know not. And Saint Jude says: they shall reject the signeuries,
and blaspheme against the dignites Now Michel the archangell, pledynge against
the devil for the body of Moses, durst not give raylinge sentence against
him but said: the Lord rebuke the Satan. But these speak evil of those
things which they know not: and those things which they know naturallye,
as brute beasts, in those things they do corrupt them selves: These be the
words of Apostles: which be so truly verified upon our Anabaptists, that
it might well apere, that they were expresselye spoken of them.

In that they say, that the habitation of princes, is permanente in the
world: how often times does Dauyd prove them liars, where he protests that
his meditacion was holy, to tend and aspire unto spiritual life? It is very
certain that the other good kings have done likewis. God commanded Daniel to
exersice his office of earthly governance in the kings court of per^e till
giving attendaunce over those things which were reveled unto him and fynallye
the day of the rsurrection. And Moises, the prince of prophets, ceased not to
have his conversation in heaven, by hope and desire: though here beneth he had
the civil governance of ye people?

I will therefore, lay before the Anabaptists, Moses, David, Ezechias,
Josias, Joseph, Daniell, all the kings and Judges of Israel, to se how they
can mayntaine their cause: to know whether they were banyshed the kingdom of
god because they had the office of the swerd in this world. In that they say:
be that al princes cares of this world, Esaias reproves them, where he
promises that the earthly kings shall serve to maintain the heavenly and
spiritual kingdom of Christ. Even so saint Paul, in exhorting that prayers
should be made, for all such as be in estate of pre-eminence, that we may live
a peaceable life under them, in the fear of God, and holy life: does declare
that the pryncypall end of Magistrates is not to keep their subjects in peace
after the flesh: but rather to procure that God be served and honored in
their contrye, and that every man lead a good and honest life.

Therefore in this point, we se how false and perverse the allegations of the
Anabaptists be, to condemn the vocation of the Magistrates, which God has
so well approved. Furthermore we se how the devil speaks by their mouths,
to thend to turn away the Princes, and to hinder them to do their duty. For
instead to exhort them to indeuer them selves and take pain that the name
of God might be exalted, and that he might raygne over them, in such wise
that they shall be but as his vessels and officers: come these and would make
them believe that this appertains nothing unto them, and that they should
in no wise meddle or busye them selves with the honor of God. I will say but
two words, touching the end whereunto they pretend: that in it they do show
the^ selves the enemies of god, and of mankind. For it is to make war
against God, to be in will to bring out of reputation, that which he has
honored, to be in will to throw down that which he has exalted. And a man
can not better go about the destruction of the world, and it were introduce a
theuery over all, then so labor to abolyshe the cyuyl governance, or power
of the swerd, which is in deed thrust down if it be not lawefull for a
christian manne to exercise it.

The seventh Article of Swerynge.
WE be this far agreed touching an oath, that it is a confirmation which
ought to be done only in the name of God, and in truth not in liyng, after
the commandment of law, but to chistian men all other are forboden by the
Lord Jesus Christ.

The confutation.
At the first show it appears that there is no evil in this Article. We se
at this day the world sore given to oaths, there is no good heart, which is
not greaued to se the name of God thus contemned: by which it is brought to
pass that every oath, what so ever it be, is become odious. More over there is
a certain apparaunce, in these words of our savior Jesus, which they do
allege that all oaths in general are forbidden, and it appears true, if a
man do not take good head unto the censes. But touching the first part, it is
true that such an enorme and disprayse worthy dissolution and license, as is
now adays in the world, in the matter of oaths, ought excedyngely to
displease us. And it were much better, not to swear at all then so vaynelye to
swear for every cause, or rather without cause. Notwithstanding we must note
this, that ye mean to reprehe^d and correct an abuse, is not to mingle and
co^fou^d it with the good use, to condemn indifferently the one and the other
together. There is now adays an excessive pomp and superfluity among many in
eating and drynking: chiefly in their bankets, d^onke^nes, which is a villayne
and dishoneste vice, does now a days raygne in many people. If a man for to
reprove these abuses would wholly condemn the use of wine, and all good
meats, should it not be a blasphemyng of god, so to vituperate and reprove the
good creatures, which he has destined to our use. As Much or more is it of an
oath. The Lord has ordained it to confirm and ratify the truth, when there
is need thereof. Such a manner of swerynge turns is his honor double.
Because that by that means charity is continued among men, and the truth,
which he has in singular recommendation, is maintened: and forasmuch as it
is done for the only testimony of the truth, in doing thereof men give unto
him one of the pryncipall honors which he requires. And in deed, it is
expressed in the law, that a true and lawful oath, is a kind of honor which
is done unto him by his people. For even as he commands that we should
invoke and call on him only, eue^ so he commands that we should swear by
his name. And the prophets cryinge our against Idolatrye, make often mention,
that men have sworn by strange Gods: contrary wise, willing to signifye
that the service of God should whollye be restored, they say that men shall
swear by his

This is then the right way to treat of oaths. First of all, we must show
that the use thereof is double, that is, to give testimonye of things past and
already done, and to bind our selves to do in time to come that which may
lawefullye be required of us.

After this, we must show, that to swear is to call God unto witness: and
therefore it behooves us herein to show what reverence we bear unto his name.
Of this it follows that a man should never open his mouth to swear but with
fear of God, in singular honor and humility. Thus by this means all these
forms of blasphes, where the name of God and of Jesus Christ is
contumelioustre taken, shall be right well reproved. Moreover it must be
showed, by how many ways the name of God is taken in vain and first of al,
deteste al periuries and false attestations, as excreable blasphemies: for as
much as the veritye of God, thereby is turned into leasinge: for as much as
all his glory thereby is over thrown, and thereby me^ would as it were
compel him to deny him self. Consequently it must be showed what a
contemnitie of God it is, to take his sacret name in daliau^ce, as by pleasure,
or to deck our language, or for a superfluouse fyllynge up of our speech,
or by anger, or by laughter and myrthe: and so much more sharpelye rebuke this
vice, as we see it now a days roted fast in the world, and that the custom
thereof is so commune: on the other side, we must rebuke these superstitions
by which the name of God is polluted, as when men do indifferentelye take the
names of saints and myngle them with it. After this sort, an oath does not
only importe, no profanation of the name of God: but does greatly make for
his honor. Now when the end is such: who shall dare say that it is a
viciouse and a wicked thing? The sum is that the world be warned that God
has nothing in greater recommendation then the glory of his name to
maintain it thorowlye, and to punyshe those which do obscure or lessen it,
Therefore no man ought to take his name but in great reverence, only to make
it serve unto such end that he may be glorified thereby.

But the Anabaptists like mad bedlems, do condemn all oaths without
exception: without decernynge whether there be good or evil in it. And by
this it appears, that their saying is nothing grounded on reason. Let us
now come unto authority, to se whether they have any testimony of the word
of God. They do make a great buckler of these words of our Savior Jesus
Christ, where he forbids utterly to swear for out of that they do conclude,
that neither for right nor wrong it is lawful to swear. For answer, I do
first ask them, whether they think that Jesus Christ would ad any thing unto
the law of God his father, or whether he would simplye interpret the law?
If they do say as touching that, that he has declared the perfection of the
law: Then ask I further, whether this perfection was never known by fore? If
they say no: I say that it is an evident lie. Moses after he had published
the law, does protest unto the people, that he has showed the way of life,
and the way of death.

Moreover reducynge altogyther ininto a short summarye, he says that his
doctrine does tend unto this end, that a man should love God with all his
heart, with all his understanding, with all his soul and strength. Also in
an other place: And now Israel, what is that which God requires of the, but
only that thou shouldeste cleave unto him with thy whole heart? These
sentences do sufficientlye prove that the doctrine of the law does contain a
rule of well living, to lead a man to an whole perfection. It is therefore
very certain that God has in the law, declared his good will. He has I say,
once for all pronunced of good and evil, touching those things which are
pleasing or displeasinge to him. Therefore the Lord Jesus, always when he
spoke of the perfect life, Matthew.xx.
did se^d those that he taught thither. And S Paul in the twelfthe of the
Romans does lead us unto the same end, that we might the better perceive what
is our duty. Therefore to say that Moses did but half teach the people of
Israel to honor and serve God: is a blasphemye, first forged by the Papists,
and now renewed by these pore phantasticals, which take for a revelation from
heaven, what so ever fabils they have heard of their gra^dmothers

If any do here replye against this that Jesus Christ is called the
perfection of the law, and that it is said that we be no more governed by
childysh doctrine, as the aunciente people were. I answer, that this word
perfection is not mente of the doctrine: but is referred unto the grace of the
holy spirit, by which, that which is contained in the law, is written and
imprynted in our hertes, to the end that the Lord should not only speak
to our ears, but also unto our will: and that we should not only hear
those things which he does command us but that we should do them.

There is also a second reason, which is that the Lord Jesus him self alone
has in his own person accomplished al Justice, and was a perfect obseruer of
the law, that his obedience which he gave unto his father, might be imputed
unto us.

Touching that, saint Paul calls the law childyshe doctrine: that means
he only of the ceremonies and figures. And in a like sense he says that the
law could not bring her Disciples to perfection. For as much as the end,
the accomplishmente and verity thereof, is in Jesus Christ. In the rest, as
pertaining to the doctrine of life, such as it was in the beginning, such
is it even now at this present, alike to us and to the children of Israel.
For it varieth not but as the will and justice of God is immutable, even so the
law which is a true and certain declaration thereof, does remain unto the
last end, such as it was at the beginning, If it be granted touching
swearyng, Jesus Christ has simplye interpreted the commaunddement of God his
father, and has added nothing thereunto: as we must neades confess: then
have we won yt which we require. For the law forbids not to take the name
of God in no co^ditio^, but forbids to take his name in vain: signifiynge
yt there is a lawful way to take and use his name the which he has also
permitted.

Notwythstandynge it is necessary that we expound the words of our savior
Jesus, because that at the first sight, it appears that he would forbydde
all oaths Now to have good and perfect understanding, it behooves to know
the occation which moved him thus to speak. The Scribes and Phariseis as it
appears through out the fyfte chapter of saycnte Mathewe, had by their
faulse gloses so corrupted the people, that men made no conscience to do
many things against the commandments of God: so that they could make any
excuse or color to cover them selves. So comunelye they thought it not evil
done, to swear in vain and folyshly by heaven, and by ye earth so that they
did not directlye swear by the name of God.

Now the Lord Jesus shows that it is a folyshe cauillation and sophistry,
to think so to purge them selves before God: seeing that under heaven and
earth his name is indirectly comprysed. So when he forbyddeth to swear at all,
this word, at all, is referred unto the manner of speech, or to the words
which men use, which may be proved by that he adds consequently, another by
heaven: for it is the throne of God: nor by the earth: for it is his footstool. Now the Anabaptists do peruerslye apply this to the motif, or to the
cause: as though it were forbidden to swear for any cause that might be,
which is contrary to the mind of the Lord and contrary to the sense which
him self does give, in the process and deduction of his words.

In the mean while they would make us believe yt we do gloss this place, as
though we should have said, that it is evil done to swear, or by the
earth: but to swear by God it is permitted. Or at least wise, they do lay
this unto our charges before the simple Idiotes, which have nothing heard or
seen of us to Judge by. And then having cast out this faulse report of us,
they cry out saiynge. Oh blind foles which do not perceive that God is
greater the^ his throne. To whom do they speak this, but to them selves?
seeing that they and no body else, have forged this in their fantastical
brains, because it follows in the words of our Savior Jesus Christ, that no
man shall swear by his head: because no man can make one here white or blake.
Behold say they, the cause why all oaths be forbidden: is for that we can
not perform that which we promise. But I say contrary, that if Beasts
could speak, they would speak more wiselye. First, there is a manifest
contradiction in that which they babble.

For this reason is special for all oaths, where we promise to do a thing to
come. Therefore it follows yt that oath, by which I testify of a thing which
is already done is not evil. Does it not appear I pray you, that they are
altogyther without wit, to reason thus? we can not perform that which we
promise, therefore all oaths are forbidden. The replication to this is easy,
that there is one kind of oath, in which there is no question to be bound to do
any thing: but only to wytnes the truth, of a deed past. Also that it is the
most used oath.

Secondly the sense is far otherwise the^ they do imagyn. For the Lord Jesus
proceadeth forth to show, even as he has begun, that if a man swear by
his head, it is as well to take the name of God indirectly, as it is to swear
by heaven, or the earth, or by Jerusalem.

Therefore as he has said that heaven is Gods throne, the earth his footstool, Jerusalem his holy city: even so co^seque^tly he declares that a man's
head is a portion of his seignory: for as much as he alone does dispose it
after his will.

As though he would say: who so ever does think that when he does swear
by his head, he swears by a thing that does pertayne unto him self, and
that his oath does not touch God, is abused. For God has also there his
rule, in such wise that man can do nothing. Therefore it is all ways to take
the name of God. We se how the Lord has still continued his purpose. These
braynelesse men would transport it with them for to make it leap quickelye
from the cock to the Ass.

The conclusion is, that our words should be yea, yea, nay, nay: and that
what so ever is more then that comes of the evil. These words are easy to
understand, were it not that these hogs do overthrow them with their groynes,
in such wise that they make them all confused.

For they say, yt this is as much, as if he had said, that our purposes
should be, yea and nay, and that it is evil done to admore the^ that Now the
Lord Jesus puts each of these words twyse, to signify that we ought to be
fyrme and constaunte in our purposes.

As though he would say, do not change, to retracte every time your words:
and that there be no leasing or hypocrisye in your purposes. But let your yea
be yea, and your nay nay. And in deed I James, being in will to give the same
doctrine, speaks even so, word for word. Let your yea (says he) be yea,
and your nay, nay, by which he signifies, that all fayethfull men ought to
have a certain truth in their words. Which loyalty and truth, if it were
among us, all oaths should be superfluous. For this simplicity of words,
should suffice to affirm and deny without swearyng. It must needs be therefore
that the truth reigns not, where oaths be frequented. Therefore it is not
without a cause, that our savior says that this thing does proceed of evil.
And to say troth, the cause which induces us to swear, is for yt the whole
world is so full of lying, cantels, fayninges, and falsheades, that scant is
there any that dare trust his own brother.

Thus one evil draws to him an other. But in all this, the Lord Jesus
means nothing of lawefull oaths, which were permitted by the law: but only
does reprehend and correct that unlawful liberty of swerynge, which the
people, being evil instructed by evil teachers, did use: first thincking that
it was none oath to take the name of God in directly: and tha^ after made no
matter of periuries, esteminge also these vain and light as nothing.

Now that I have sufficientlye overthrown all the foundations, upon which
the Anabaptists, going about to condemn all oaths without any distinction or
exception, do lean: it rests now, that by good reasons and testimones of
the scriptur, I do show how a Christian may lawefullye swear without
offendyng God. Here I proteste again that thing which I have said before:
that is, that I intend not to vnbridel the world, to induce it to abuse the
name of God, in making oaths at pleasure and rashelye. I know that that vice
is to common: and therefore we ought rather to study to repress it, than to
agmente it. I know also that it is no small fault, to take the name of God in
vain, and therefore that we ought so much the more to travel by all means to
let such an evil. But how? To condemn that which is good, when we would
take a way the abuse, is no good way to proceed. Wherefore, when I say that
it is lawefull in a certain case for a Christian to swhere, I would every
man should thyncke that I mean of the right use, which is joined with the
fear and reverence of the name of God, and that no man take occasion of my
words to make vain, superfluous, or vicious oaths. To define ye matter more
playnelye: when I say that a Christian man may swhere without offense, first I
mean when it behooves to give testimonye unto the truth. Secondlye if the
thing do require it: the which consideration ought to have respect unto the
honor of God and love of our neighbor. That is to say if it be expedient
and profitable to swear, as well for Gods honor, as to conserve charity
amongeste us. Thirdelye that necessitye do require it: that is to say, that it
be needful to use such a confirmacion. Fourthlye that the deliberacion and
intent of him that swereth be such. Finalli that it be done in fear and
reverence with a desire to sanctify the name of god. In such a case, and none
otherwise, I say that the use of swerynge is permmitted to Christen men. If
any bragger do abuse it: it shall be to his condemnacion.

For confirmation of my saying, I will allege the co^manndement of God, in
which I will abide. That is where he ordained and commaundid, that men should
swear by his name: when any lawful cause were. Out of this I conclud, that to
swer, is not a thing simple, and of it self evil. For it cannot be, that the
thing which is evil should at any time please God.

Moreover, seeing it is a kind of homage which the fayethfull do give unto
God, as it is often time showed in the Prophets it is to manifest a
resistaunce unto the truth, to say that it is a vice and sin. The probation
is easy which is, that it is expedient manitymes that the verity, which
other wise is doubtful, be confirmed: and there is none other means but by
oath. That which the Anabaptestes do allege touching the correction of this
commandment is a manifest blasphemye. For so should it follow that Jesus
Christ should retracte that, which was once established by God his father.
Which, as we have showed, can be by no means tolerable. And in dead, the
Apostle speaking of an oath, though he speak there of incidentlye treating an
other matter, does not say that the use thereof is abrogate: but calls it the
end and decision of al controversies between men. I pray you when the Apostel
speaking to Christen men does pronounce that an oath is to make an end of al
controversies, does he not sufficiently signify that it is an order approved
of God, the which has place in the Christen church? What folishe boldness is
it than to be against it, and to reiecte this remedy which is given us, as
though it were a damnable vice?

With this doctrine, there be also the exemples, as well of God, as of all his
servants. Men, says ye Apostel in the place before alleged, do swear by the
name of god because he is above them: God swereth by him self because he has
no superioure, but is above al. Touching God, the Anabaptists do answhere,
that he may well swear, for as much as he may well accomplish all that he
says: and so is out of danger of periurye, for as much as he is fayethfull,
and will keep all that he promises: but it is otherwise with a mortal man: the
which many times can not perform that which he has promised all though he
would: and therefore it is foleshe raishnes for him to swear, byndynge him
self to that which is above his power. When they have blasted out into the
air, this solution, they thyncke they have done, and that they have stopped
our mouths. But the replication is redye: that they cannot say the like of
all the Patriarchs, Prophets, holy kings, and aunciente fathers which have
also sworn after the insample of God, behold Abrahame the father of all
fayethfull men which has sworene. Behold Isaac, behold Jacob, Dauyd,
Ezechias, and Josias which have done likewise. What difference is there bewene
them and us? Therefore it may well apere that there answer here above is a
mere cauillacion.

If, to avoid this they will allege, that these be exemples taken out of the
old Testamenete: and that now in the Christen church we have a harder
brydell: though this error be all redye refuted yet will we show that it
helps them nothing. For we will bring forth for us, the Apostles, which
have also used oaths, yea, even in their wrytynges when neade required. Now
let us hear their pretty excuse which they make to avoid this.

Saint Peter and.S. Paul say they, did not swear to promise any thing: but
only to assure ye promise made by god:

Here may we clearly se, how they which do deliberate to speak against the
truth, do wrepe them selves in a thousand absurdites, and yet have no shame
of their impudency. First, in that they make such an answer, they grant unto
us that there be some lawefull oaths: that is when a man does witness
things paste. For it follows of their words, that then only is the oath
evil, when we promise a thing to come.

Are they not paste shame, so evidently to lie, going about to persuade that
we see not that thing which we se? ii. Cor. i.
Saint Paul swears unto the Corhynthyans, that he came not unto them,
because he would spare them. Romans ix.
He swears unto the Romans, that he would be content to be cast out from
Christ, ii. Cor. xii.
that the Jews might be saved. To confyrme his love which he bare unto the
Phyllyppians, he swear also. Also unto the Corhynthyans he swaer that his
conversation, was among them in a good conscience. Also he swears unto ye
Thessalonia^s that he came not unto them for couetuousnes, or for any
profytte, and calls God to wytnes how holylye he lived among them. These
phreneticalles do say, that the Apostles did never swear to affirm any thing
touching their own matter: but only when they should testifye the couenaunte
of God. I pray you what does such impudency deserve? At the least, are they
worthy that a man should open his mouth to speak unto them?

Notwythstandynge we will open this doubt, which they put forth, which
is, that a man ought not with an oath to promise any thing, because it lies
not in him to perform it.

To this I answer, that when a subject swears unto his Prince, to do his
duty, in obeyinge, and being fayethful unto him: he does not this in
confidence of his own power, or vauntyng him self as dispisynge God, and
setting him at naught: but rather in calling upon the healpe of God, he
answers that his will shall be such as it ought to be. How be it, it is a
folyshe imagination to reprove oaths, and yet to permit simple promises. For
if there be folishe rashness in the one, so is there also in the other.

Therefore if it be lawefull for us to promise, they must show a reason why we
may not assertayne our promise, by an oath, when necessity requires us, That
in such a case, an oath is holy and lawefull, we have many exemples in holy
stripture: and among all three, which be very notable. It is said in ye book of
the Cronicles, that Asa king of Judah, being admonished by Azarias sacrificer
and Prophet, called all the people into Jerusalem, and there caused them to
swear to serve God for ever. As much is written of Josias, when the book of
the law was found that for to renew the couenaunte made by Moses, he swear
the people, making them promise to persevere for ever in the obedience of God
The third exemple is of Esdras and Nehemias, at whose instau^ce, the people
being returned from Babylon, did swear, for ever after to follow we God and
his word. If we do well consider the thing, the like was done at the first
publication of the law.

But because I know that I have to do with brayneles and obstinate people, I
would aledge none, but such places, where is manifestly made mention of oaths.
Ye se then how the whole church of Israel, made solemn oaths unto god,
promising that thing which is most hard to be kept, that is, to cleave
fayethfullye unto him. This is done often times. That the Act is good, there
is no doubt. For it has wytnes, and is also praised of the holy Ghost. I will
not greatly stand in this, to declare how men may this bind them selves to
God, to do that which is not in them: but only put you in remembrance of
that thing which I have touched in the way, that the fayethfull do always
presuppose that God will not fail them of his grace which he has promised
them: and upon that they ground their oath. But seeing that it is so, that god
has approved this kind of oath, and that his church has often times used it
by his ordinance: I ask of our dulheades, by what authority they dare reprove
it? or rather without troublynge my self with them, because it is time lost.
I desire and exhort all servants of God to consider what boldenes these
poor ignoraunte men have, to make such Magistrall determinations, and to go
about to constrayne the world to receive them as things irreuorable and not
to be again said.

For my part I doubt not, but that in the matter of an oath, as in the other
before, I have fullye satisfied all such as have ears and understanding, and
be in will to consent unto the truth known.

The two last Articles.
I Have finished the.vii. Articles, contained in the book, which the Patriarchs
of the Anabapti^^es have made as a final resolution of those things, which
they do hold apart from other.

And therefore there does now rest nothing else, but to conclude and make aue^d
of this book. were it not that they have left two Articles of as great
consequence, as any of the other of the which it is neadfull to speak, for as
much as all the Anabaptists do communely cleave to the^. Besides this, I know
that they which composed this goodlye resolution, did at that time teach them.

The one is, that they do not believe that Jesus Christ was a very man: but
rather do make him touching his body, a phantasy.

The other is, that they do think that the souls being separated from their
bodies, do sleep unto the day of Judgment, without fealynge or knowing any
thing: or else that the soul of man is naught else but his life, the which
defaileth in dienge, unto such time as he be raised up again, every man may
se the consequence which these two errors do emporte.

That they have spoken never a word of these, I can not tell whether it be by
craft, because they be so odious, that by goodright they should make their
whole doctrine excerable. For what cause so ever it be, seeing I have taken
upon me to arm all fayethful people, against their faulse opinions: it is not
good that I should dissimble these two so pestilente and mischeuouse opinions,
seeing they are commune to them al.

Touching that some among them have holden opinion that all goods should be
commune, also that a man may have many wives, so yt they have compelled some
which were content with one, to take more, and a thousand other absurdites: I
will speak nothing at al. For they the^ selves being co^fused in there selves
have for the most part by littel and littel wtdrawe^ the^ selves. But touching
the twoe Articles, where of I have spoken, there is an other reason: for as much
as they al do hold them yet still,

Touching the first: which is of the body, or humayne nature of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it is to be noted that there was twoe aunciente heresies like, or
approchynge unto this, which these do hold. For the Maniches phantasied, that
Jesus Christ, brought an heavenly body, into the womb of the Vyrgen his
mother. The Marcionistes had a vain dreme some what differente from the other,
that he had not a very substaunciall body: but only an apperaunce, or
lykenes of a body: which we call a phatasiye. The purpose of ye one and of
the other, was to deny that Jesus Christ take flesh of the virgin. Therefore
we se that ye Anabaptists, in this behalffe, do but stur up the errors.
which the dyuyl had raised more than fortene hundereth years past, and were
coufou^ded by the word of God. Notwythstandynge, as in the beginning I have
protested, I will not that it his shall be any prejudice unto there cause,
except I do convince them first, by the pure word of God, so as if it had
never be spoken of before ^ any manne. This that I do speak is only to give
warning, that all men may know, out of what fountain proceeds that which
the Anabaptists now bring forth, as though it were reveled unto them, latlye
from heaven And also to give warning unto them selves. For all the great
doctors which were of their seete, have been so ignoraunte of the histories,
and of all auncientie, that I think never a one of them can tell so much as
what this name Marcion is. It is good therefore, that as well they as other, be
advertised, that the first author of this opinion, where with they do troble
the world, was cast out and accurssed with his opnion, not of a few, but of
the whole Christen church, shortly after, that is, with in fortye yerres after
the death of the Apostelles. For Eusebyus and Saint Hierome do write that
Policarpe, disciple and familiar friend of Saint John the Apostel, metynge
him at Rome, called him the eldest son of Satan. I will not recite the other
errors, wherwyth he troubled the church. For wha^ this is well plucked out, men
shall well know I trust, that heardly may there be found any one, more
execrable.

First I will show by many and very sure testimones of scripture, that the
Lord Jesus did verilye take flesh and man's nature, when he was reveled unto us
in this world, by God his father: and I will prove it so playnelye, that there
shall not be so littell a child, which shall not perceive, that it shallbe to
great an impudency for the Anabaptists to kycke any more against it. As it
shall not be needful to gather all the places of scripture which might serve
to this purpose. So to avoid prolixitie, I will take those which seem to be
most couenable. We know that at the first beginning of the world, the Lord
promised heua, that her seed should over come the serpente.

Let us se if this be accomplished in us, or whether it have ever been
accomplished in any mortal man, but only by the means of Jesus Christ,
which has, for us, vanquished and overcome Satan. But because this promise
was yet somewhat obscure, it has been sense made much more clear, boeth to
Abraham, and Jacob: when it was said un them, that in there sede all the
nations of the earth should be blessed.

Now, this sede, as Sayncte Paulle does interpret it, and reason shows the
same, is Jesus Christ.

Therefore the promise cannot otherwise be verified, but yt Jesus Christis
descended of the stock of Abraham. Likewise when it was said unto David: I
will set the fruit of thie womb, upon they seat to reign ever lastingely. And
likewise, when in the same sense, it is confirmed by the prophet Esaias, yt he
shall be as a bud proceeding out of the rooett of I say: we know yt the same
cannot be otherwise understood, tha^ of the same redemer which was promised
unto Abraham Therefore it must neds be yt he be of the ligne of Dauyd, as
touching the generation of the flesh: or else the promise is void. For this
cause Sayncte Matthew going about to recite his genealogy, begins the,
calling him the son David, the son of Abraham yt he might the more expressly
specifye, that he was the self same that was promised. And in deed, it was a
manner of speech, very commonly used among the people of the Jews, so to
name him: as we may se by the Evangelists.

Unto all this, the Anabaptists make one soluacion, the which a lone does
sufficientlye declare what beasts they be, and how desperate there impudency
is. He is, say they, called Dauiddes son, not because that he took any thing
of the virgen marye, or that he was made man of her substance: but only
because she bear him in her body: as water passes by a pype. This might be
said, if this word sede, were not expressed. How be it touching the truth,
all men of good Judgment might se that it were but a craftye euacion.
Notwythstandynge there might be a littell more color, or shadow. But seeing
this is so often repeted, that he is of the sede of Abraham: what cauilacion
can be made to deny him to be very man? And in dead, when Esaias promised
his coming, he says not symplye that he shallbe the child of a vyrgin: but
he says first that he shall be conceived This conception imparteth that he
should be formed of her sede: as they which do know the significacion of the
word, can well Judge.

Moreover Saint Paul does express this thing more playnelye, when he
says, that he was made of the seed of David touching the flesh, and was
notwithstanding declared the son of God by his power. Behold, Jesus Christ
on the one part, is called the son of God: and again he adds yt as
touching his human nature he is of the stock of David. Is not that man very
mad, which does close his eyes, and stop his ears against all this, to
persiste and maintain the contrary, that Jesus Christ has no part of the
nature of man as touching the substance of his body? Likewise in an other
place, the same Apostle, speaking of the dignity and noblenes of the Jews,
among other things says, that they be the successors and progenye of the
fathers, of whom Christ is assended as touching the flesh. I pass over
many other places: as where he says, that God was manifested in flesh:
also, he yt suffered in humility of the flesh. Likewise where saint John
says, that the word was made flesh: and besides al this, where he so often
times does attribute unto him self the title of the son of man, and other
like places: because it should be superfluouse, after these two notable places
which I have aledged.

I think it therefore sufficient, to bring forth these places, the which do
at the first syghte boeth prove mine intention, and also declare how
necessary it is for us, to believe that the Lord Jesus has put on, and verily
taken our nature when he was made man. The Apostle in the epistle unto the
Hebrews takes a goodly argument, to amplyfye the love which he bears unto
us, because he took not the nature of Angels: but of us. If we do receive ye
fa^tasy of these unhappy me^. This grace and inestimable goodness of the Lord
Jesus shall be clean put out of our memory, for we shall not perceive that
he has any more honored us, then he has the Angels.

He says further, that by the means of the communication which he has w
us in his flesh, and his blood, he calls him self our brother, and is
verily our brother By this we may conclude, that the greatest benefit which
we may have, should be taken from us, if Jesus Christ do not communicate with
us in flesh and blood.

For how should we be the children of God, without being his brethren? Now
the Apostle says, that we obtain this because he is joined unto us in one
nature, and by none other means. He adds further that it was necessary that
he should be like unto his brethren, that he might be a faithful
intercessoure and pittyfull. Wheroute he deduceth a singular consolation, that
we have an advocate which will have compassion on our infirmities, seeing
that he him self was tempted, being in all things like unto us, except sin.

Moreover, for as much as in the similitude which he puts between us, and
Jesus Christ, he makes no difference but synit follows, that in all the rest,
he is like unto us, this understood, that in that place he speaks namelye
of the humayne nature. In these places we do not only se, how the Lord Jesus
is verily our brother in unity of one self nature: but also the profit which
we have thereby: of the which they do spoil and depryue us, which do
attribute unto him. I can not tell what heavenly body, which has nothing
common with ours.

In like manner all the disputation which Saint Paul makes to the Corynthyans
to prove our universal resurrection in the resurrection of Jesus Christ can
not stand if he have not a nature commune with us. Seeing Christ is risen
says he, we shall rise again, and if we shall not rise again then is
Christ not risen again.

It were easy to replye against this: if it might be aledged that Jesus
Christ brought an heavenly body with him, into his mothers womb.

For that were no maruayle, that a substance which came from heaven, was
exempted from corruption. And so should it not follow of that, that our
bodies which are earthlye, and have in them nothing but corrupt mattier
should arise again. ^ Therefore that all such deductions may be fyrme and
sure: it is necessary that our Savior Jesus Christ be pertaker with us in
one self nature.

For therein lies the whole hope that we may have of the resurrection, that
this corruptible flesh which we now bear, is already raised up in Jesus
Christ, has taken possession of heaven, and is there immortal. By this means
I say, we have a good earnest, and surety for to certify us: and otherwise
not. In an other place, ye same apostle going about to show how that the
Lord Jesus is our mediatoure, says expreslye that he is man, because he
knew well that we could never be induced to draw our selves toward him,
unless we had first this persuasion that he is our neighbor, and that he
pertayneth unto us.

Therefore in this thing lies and rests our confidence to make us to
trust in Jesus Christ, and to seek him for our meadiatour, because he is
joined unto us, and does perticipate with us in one self nature.

And that is it which Esaias means, where he says, that he was made
Emanuell, that is to say, God with us. For that can not be without true
similitude and vnio^ of nature.

Unto this purpose there be yet other peremtory reasons: the which though they
be not expressed in holy scripture: yet be they nevertheless true. For as much
as they be grounded in the same.

For that it was necessary, yt he which should be our mediator should be very
God and very man it appears in the office of a mediator, which is to
reconcile men to God, and to put away the mortal enmity, which was before.
Now was there no hope that this should be done, except that the majesty of
God did discende unto us, ioynynge him self with the infirmity of our nature.
Likewise the office of a mediator was, to make us the children of God, and
inheritours of his kyngedome, where as we were the heirs of death and damnation.

This is therefore the earneste to confyrme our confidence, that we be the
children of god, for as much as the natural son of God has taken a body
of our body, and flesh of our flesh, to be made one with us. More over it
was necessary to our rede^ptio^, that ye disobedience, which was committed in
our nature, should be repared again in ye sam nature Therefore the Lord Jesus
came a very man, presentynge him self as in the person of Adam, of whom he
also took the name: that he might pay the pain of syn in that flesh in the
which it was committed.

Therefore they which do spoil Jesus Christ of his humayne nature, do not only
much obscure his goodness, but they do us also great wrong in destroyinge
the true object which we have, to have right and full affiaunce in him. And lest
it should apere that I do dissimule any thing of that which might serve for
that purpose. I will bring forth all those places which seem to give any
color to their phantasye.

Saint Paul in a certain place, says, that Jesus Christ made him self of no
reputation taking the form of a servant, being made like to men, and in
apparaunce of no reputation, taking the form of a servant, being made like
to men, and in apparaunce showed him self a man. Out of this, Marcion does
conclude, that his body was a fantasye. The Anabaptists at this day conclude
out of this place that his body was not such as ours is.

The answer to this is very easy. For Saint Paul does not speak of the
substance of Christ's body, but does only show, that though it so be,
that he might show him self in his gloryouse majesty as God: yet he behaved
him self as a simple man in all mekenes. He exhorts the Philyppians to
humility. To do this, he brings Christ for exemple: saying that he was in
the form that is to say, in the glory of God, and that notwythstandynge he
made him self of no reputation. He adds afterward that he showed him self
in the form of man, and that he behaved him self as man. What other thing
do these word signify, but that under the veil of his flesh in which he
appeared little and contemptible, he hyd the glory of his divinity, in such
wise yt there appeared in him but the trayle condition which he outwardlye
showed. Thus as touching the solution of this place, there is no difficultye.
But there is an other, the which seems to have a little more of apparau^ce It
is in the.xv. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthyans, where saint
Paul says, that the first Adam was earthly, made of the earth: the second
is heavenly, being come from heaven. Out of this the Anabaptists after the
example of their predecessors the Maniches, do conclude that Jesus Christ had
an heavenly body, and not formed nor created of humayne seed: that is to say
of the substance of his mother the virgyn. The solution of this argument, is
easy, if we behold. S. Paul's purpose, and do continue and knyt one sentence
with an other, and not cut of and snatche one word to the deprauation of the
whole sense.

Saint Paul there going about to prove whence comes death, and whence
comes resurrection from death. That is to say, the first of Adam, the
second of Jesus Christ, among other things said, that Ada^ was made a living
soul: Jesus Christ a quickenynge spirit. Now by this he intended not to
deny that Jesus Christ had a soul like unto ours, but he does signifye that
he had a greater thing: that is to say his spirit which is not only
living: but has in him self the virtue to quycke^. Then he adds further,
that the first Adam was earthly, for as much as he was of the earth and that
Jesus Christ is heavenly, being come from heaven.

There is no doubt but that this place ought to be understand as the other,
of the quality of Jesus Christ, and not of the substance. I mean of that
virtue supernatural and divine, which he has from heaven as the son of God,
and not of the earth as a mortal manne.

And in deed, as we have said, the strength of the argument which saint Paul
makes there, to confyrme us in the hope of the resurrection were nothing, if
Jesus Christ had an other substance of body then we,

They aledge further, that it was conceived of the holy Ghost. But this virtue
of the holy Ghost, is not to exclude the substance of his mother. It is true
that there was no conjunction of man and woman to beget him after the natural
course of other men

But that is no impedimente, to the merueylouse operation of the holy Ghost, by
which he was formed of the substance of his mother, that he might be the very
sede of Abraham, and fruit of the womb of David: as the same holy Gooste had
long time before named him.

I know their answer to this is, that this inconvenience should follow, that
for as much as the whole sede of man, is a cursed and corrupted, so should
the Lord Jesus descend of corruption But I answer that this miraculos
conception takes away that difficulty. For the workynge of the holy Ghost was
to that end to sanctify him from the beginning, and in sanctifiynge to
preserve him from all spots of ma^s fylthynes. For this cause S Paul said,
that he took the similitude of sinful flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh.
For in taking our flesh, he took not the sin, for as much as the virtue
of the holy Ghost did separate from the condition o the other.

They have also a folyshe and fantastical consideration, that they think that
it should be a dishonorynge to Jesus Christ, to make him so low, that he
should be of like nature to us: and therefore they think that it appertains
better to his dignity, to attribute unto him an heavenly body.

I answer that it is great folly to esteem that the glory af Christ is any
thing lessened, or that it does any thing derogate to his dignity, to say
that he humilied, yea made him self of no reputation, for our redemption and
salvation.

There is much more said of him in the xxii psalm, that he is a worm and no
man, the opprobrye and abiection of the people. Likewise that which Esayas
says is much more, that he was esteemed as one of no valor, rekened as a
lipper, counted among the number of evil doers. But can a man say more then
Saint Paul has said? That is, that he was accursed, and made an execration
for us? if this diminyshe his honor, then must we be ashamed to confess
that he was crucified for us. For this word crucifiyng is a more ignominios
word, then at this day is the gallows.

Therefore let us not deceive our selves with these folyshe imaginations,
thinking to honor Jesus Christ after our fantasy, or else to be in fear
that we shall dishonor him, in knowledgyng that he was made little for our
sakes, as touching his humayne natures. Even as without all beginning he was
God of one self glory with his father: eue^ so does he continue still, without
any diminution. In that he has taken upon him our flesh, and in the same
was humbled, he has given a notable testimony of his infinite goodness, and of
his incomprehensible love which he has unto us, So far is it of that this
should any thing derogate to his highness, that it is the principal matter
that we have, to magnify and praise him for. For a conclusion: if we will
truly confess the Lord Jesus to be our savior, let us confess according
to the exhortation of saint John, that he is come in the flesh to unit us to
God his father, by means of the obedience which he gave unto him in our
humanity, as in our persons, He that makes not this confession is
Antichriste: and we ought to abhor him.

The second Article,
IT is time that I do come unto the second Article of the which I promised to
treat: That is that the Anabaptists communely all do hold opinion, that the
souls being departed from the body, do no more live, until the day of the
resurrection. Howbe it they do somewhat differ among them selves. For some of
them do think that the soul is not a substance, or a creature haui^ge an
essensiall being: but that it is only the virtue that man has to breathe, to
move, and to do other actions of life, whylse he is yet a live. The other do
confess that the soul is an essensiall creature, and yet nevertheless do
Imagyn that the souls of them that be dead, do sleep without any sense, or
vnderderstandynge, until the day of judgment. Therefore if we shall
thorowlye confute the Anabaptists, we must first show that the souls have
an essensial being of their own.

Secondelye: that after death, they do felt and know their condition and
estate, but before we go any further in this matter: we must note that this
word Soul, is diversely taken in the scripture. First: for the life, as
where it is fayed in Job, I bear my soul in my hands. Also in saint Mathewe
is not the soul more then the meat? and in infinite other places.

Sometime it is taken for the will or the desire, as where it is said in
Samuel, that the soul of Ionathas was knytte to the soul of David. And in the
Acts, where it is said the multitude of beleuers had one heart, and one soul
Sometime it is taken for the whole man, as where it is said, that there descended
into Egypt with Jacob three score and fyf, tene souls. Also where the Prophet
pronou^ceth that the soul which synneth shall dye. Also, for breathinge or
blowynge, as in Samuel, where Saull says. I am overcome with angwyshe,
though all my Soul be yet in me.

Likewise, when Eliseus said that the soul of the child did return into his
bowels. Fynallye, when it is joined with this word spirit, it signifies an
affection, as when Esaias said: my soul desyereth the in the night, and I
watch unto the in my spirit. Also saint Paul prays God to keep the
Thessalonians undefiled in body, and in spirit, and in soul.

Likewise this word spirit, is diversely taken of which I need not now make long
declaration: but only this, that we know that it is often times taken for the
soul, as it shall evidently appear in those places, which hereafter shall be
alleged.

This being noted let us se whether the soul of man have an essensuall being
of her own, which is given to her of God. And let us begin at the creation
of man, which will help much to this marter, Touching Beasts and other
living creatures, God does command them to be made symplye. When he comes
to the making of man, be enters into consultation, saying. Let us make man
to our Image and lykenes. Now where shall we find this Image of God, except
there be a spiritual essence in man, in which it is imprynted.

For the body is not that thing, wherein the Image of God is residente. It is
true, that Moses by and by adds, that manne was made a living soul, which
thing he does say also of Beasts. But to declare a special excellencye, he
says. That God has inspired the virtue of life in the body which he made of
the earth. Therefore though the soul of man have certain qualities common
with those of beasts: yet for as much as she bears the Image and lykenes of
God, she is of condition differente from the other, And for as much also as she
has her beginning apart, she is of an other pre-eminence, and this is it that
Solomon means, where he says, that in death, the body returns unto the
earth, whence it was taken and the soul returns to God, which gave it. And
therefore it is said in the book of Sapience. That man is immortal, in that he
is created to the Image of God. It is no aute^tyke book of the scripture, but
yet is there no inconvenience, that we use the testimonye thereof, as we may
do of an aunciente doctoure, how be it, this only reason ought to suffice us,
that the same image of God which was set in man, can not be but in a spirit
immortal, if we mark well what it does contain after saint Paul's
exposition: that is, that we do resemble God in ryghtuousenes and true holiness.
This much is said touching the creation.

Now are there many places in holy scripture, which are much more euidente
as where Saint Peter says, that the reward of our faith, is the salvation
of our souls. Also where he says that the fayethfull do purify their
souls. Again that the desires of the flesh do fight against the soul.
Also, where he calls Christ the Bishop of our souls. For these sentences
can not consiste, except there be souls which be saved, and which be
assaulted by evil co^cupiscences, and which be purified from their spots,
and governed by Jesus Christ their bishop. According to this, it is said in
the hystorye of Job, that men do dwell in earthe^ housses, which manner of
speaking. S. Peter uses, where he says, that he will admonyshe the
fayethfull, as long as he shall dwell in his earthlye tabernacle. If it were
not that the pryncipall part of man did dwell in the body, as in a
tabernacle, this should be spoken without reason.

The Apostle also, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, declares, as much, or more
expreslye the same thing, where he says, that our fathers which begat us in
this world, are fathers of our flesh: but God only is father of our
spirits. I pray you, how shall we understand these words, if the soul be
not an essensiall thing? and a little after, speaking of the citezyns of
heaven, he says, that they be the Angels, and spirits of Just men. Would
we have a more clear proste then this? Also I se not how we shall expound the
exhortation which. S. Paul makes unto us, that we should purge us, from all
fylthynes of the flesh and the spirit, except we take this word spirit for an
essential soul. For as the body is a subject, which receives pollutio^, so
must it needs be, that the soul on her behalf, be a creature which may be
polluted, and sanctified.

There is a like reason, in that where he says in an other place, that the
spirit of god bears wytnes to our spirits, that we be the children of God.
Howbeit, if we did hold that principle, which ought to be certain, amongst
us christen me^, we should not need to enter into disputation of this matter:
that is to say, whether the soul be an essensiall substance, or no: seeing
that this was the error of the Saduces, which expreslye is reproved in the
scripture. For in the.xxiii. of the Acts it is said, that saint Paul, going
about to excuse him self, does protest that he was persecuted because he did
not approve the sect of the Saduces. And Saint Luke declaryng what this sect
was, says that the Saduces do not believe the resurrection, nor that there be
any Angels, or any spirits, or souls. What will we have more then this? S
Paul confesses, that he is a Pharisee in his Articles. Now is it plain that
the Phariseis do confess, as says Saint Luke, that the souls be very
essensiall creatures.

Therefore let the Anabaptists, take the quarrel of the Saduces, their
predecessors, and defend it against saint Paul. And when they have won
their cause against him, then shall we se what we can say unto them. In the
mean while, we, following the whole doctrine of God, will hold for certain,
that manne is composed and conlifteth of two parts, that is to say, of body
and soul

It is now time to come unto the.ii. point: that is, what is the estate of the
souls, after the separation from their bodies. The Anabaptists do think that
they be a sleep, like dead We say they have life and feeling: and that it so
is, we have the testimony of Jesus Christ, where he exhorts his disciples,
not to fear them which do kill the body, and have no power to kill the
soul, but to fear him which after he has killed the body, can cast the
soul into hell fire, if the soul were nothing, or that she were as killed,
when she is separate from the body, then were it not true, that tyrauntes and
persecutours have no power over her.

Thus has God showed great mercy unto us, in that he has not made our
souls subject unto these hangmen, which would do worsse and more cruellye
then all the persecutours of the world: which is, would murder our souls
with our bodies. But let us hear their propre cauelation.

It is true say they, that the Soul dies for the time, but she does not
utterly perish, for as much as she shall rise again.

I ask them, what does the body? For if the soul does not dye, alonely
because of the hope, which she has because of the resurrection, the same
reason may be made for the body, that he does not peryshe another.

Now the Lord Jesus does notably decerne between the one and the other,
saying that the body is stain, and not the soul. In this manner, spoke Jesus
Christ, when he said unto the Jews: destroy this temple, and I will
reedifye it in three days. Saint John added, that he spoke of the temple of
his body: thus he reserved the soul a part, signifiynge that he could not be
distroyed: and in deed when he dyed, he commended her unto God his father.

And saint Stephan after his ensample. Lord Jesus (said he) receive my
spirit. This ought we therefore to think, that God is protector of our
souls, to preserve them from the tyranny of men, that when we should dye,
every one of us should commend his soul unto him.

Likewise when saint Peter says, that the Lord Jesus came in his spirit,
to the spirits that were in prison, he does clearly testifye by his words,
that the Souls have sense and understanding ofter death. For otherwise they
should not perceive the preaching of Christ, which as he says, did
preach unto them. I confess that this place has been taken for a dark
place, and that it has been diversely expounded: but yet w^ll I aledge nothing
for my purpose, which is not certain. The Apostle therefore having before
spoken how Christ was humilied, and having also showed how that all
fayethfull men must be made like unto* him, for consolation, he adds that
Jesus Christ was not overcome by death, but that he overcame death. After this,
to certify us that this virtue of his resurrection, does pertayne unto us, he
says, that not only the living have felt it, but also the dead: and not
only the fayethful, but also the unbelieving, and rebels. It is true, that when
the matter requires: that we must distinguyshe we se that he speaks but of
the second kind: but that hinders not, but that he speaks fy^ste, of all in
general. Touching that he puts, as well the souls of the good, as of the
evil, in prison, that does he to signifye the vehemente desire, which the
fayethfull had for the coming of Jesus Christ, which hild them as it were in
anguyshe.

Therefore the sense is this, the virtue of Christ's redemption, has appeared
unto the souls of them that be dead, as well to the beleuynge, as unto the
unbelieving, But when he must speak in special, he leaves the first.

Notwythstandynge to the end that we do not dispute touching the sense, when
there is no nead concerning the present matter, only I ask this question of
these good people, whether the spirits, of whom the Apostle does speak be
living souls or no? Moreover he adds an other sentence, which to yet more
clear, that is, that the gospel was preached unto the dead, that they should be
condemned in the flesh, as touching to men: but should live to God in the
spirit. We se that he does subject the body only unto death, reseruyng the
soul alive.

The like was showed before by Solomon: where, in discovering man's death, he
says, He does separate the fault far from the body, until the earth do
return to hy^ earth whence it was taken, and that the soul go to God, which
gave her. If they gloss, and say that this word spirit, does signifye but
life, there is not so little a child, which serth not, that, that is a
corruptinge of the text.

If there were none other testimonye but this sentence of Moses, where he
says, that God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, about three hundred
years after their death, it should be sufficient to such as would not be
contentious.

But if there be any opiniatoure which will again say it, then will the
exposition which our Savior Jesus Christ, makes upon these words, take
away all doubts. That is, that his father is not the God of the dead, but of
the living.

I know their answer is, that the dead be called living, because of the hope
of the resurrection. But that is nothing. For seeing that the Patriarckes were
dead, at that time when Moses spoke, it follows that they lived in a better
life.

And therefore Saint Luke adds that they do all live unto God, signifiynge
that the Lord does maintain his in life, by his grace and virtue.

Unto which agrees this saying of the Apostle. If so be yt we live, let us
live to ye lord if we dye, let us dye to the Lord. And whether we live, or
dye, we be the Lords, and Jesus Christ is dead and risen again, that he
might have rulle over the living and the dead. For this is sure, that Jesus
Christ, told have no dominion over us, if we were not, therefore if his
empeyre be extendyd unto the dead, it most needs be that the fayethfull after
death have an essential being.

And in deed, the vision which Saint John rehereseth in the Apocalipse,
cannot other wise be true. Which is that he saw the souls of the Martiers,
under the heavenly ^^iter, criyng with a loud voice, Lord how long do
thou differ, to avenge our blood? And that God commanded to give them white
garments, and commanded them to have patience for a littell while, until the
number of their fellows were fulfilled.

There is no doubt but that these white garments, do signify beginning of
glory which God does give unto the martiers, while thy tarrye for the day
of judgment. For that is no new thing in the scripture, as when Daniell
said, that he saw the Lord clothed in a long white robe. And Jesus Christ
was so in his transfiguration in the mount of Tabor. The Aungel also, which
apered to the women by the sepulcher, was clothed in a white robe. So were the
aungelles which appeared to the disciples, after the ascencion of the Lord
Jesus as much is said of the Aungel which apered unto the Cornelius the
Cneturien. Final lie, in the parable of the prodigal son: it is said that
when he was returned, his father commanded to bring him his best robe, in
sign of Joy and fasting. We se therefore, how much this does repugne
against the error of the Anabaptists, which in the place of white robes,
would give pyllowes to the souls to make them sleep.

Moreover; in that it is said, that the souls cry, axynge vengaunce of God,
it is declared that they sleep not. For this cry, cannot be expounded as the
cry of Abelles blood: because the desire which the holy souls have, is there
expressed. This is sufficientelye comfirmed unto us, by the historye of
Lazarus, where it is said that his soul was borne by the aungelles of God, in
to the bosom of Abraham. And the soul of the rich man went in to hell.

They think that they have a fair solucion and well colored, when they do
answer that it is a parable, that is to say, an exemple and not a storye

But I axe them, where they have seen it in holy scripture, that in a simple
parable or similitude the proper name of a man has been expressed, as it is
here.

And even thus have all the doctors of the church understand that a place,
as reason would. But be it that I do grant unto them, that it is ^^parable,
yet must it needs be that it be taken of the veryte. Our Lord says, that the
soul of Lazarus, was borne by his aungelles, in to the bosom of Abraham, and
that there, it received Joy and co^solacion.

On the othersyde, he says that the soul of the rich infidle, did suffer
marvelous torments in hell. He says that there is a great distaunce between
the one and the other. If the soulles have no feeling after death, of good nor
evil, what should this narracion of the Lord be, but a fable, and as a tale
of the book of Mellusine?

Therefore this tergiuersation of the Anabaptists is a blasphemye, which
dishonoreth the Lord Jesus, as though he had told us a vain tale to no
purpose. Besides this it is a folyshe imaginacion repugnaunte to humayne sense,
as little children may perceive.

And this is the promise which was made unto the poor theife when he axed
mercy on the cross. For the Lord Jesus answered him.

This day shall thou be with me in paradise. By this word paradise, we need
not to imagen that he would specifye a certain place: but only the Joy and
felicity which they have that live with him. This is plain that Jesus Christ
does not send this poer sinner to the day of resurrection: but does assign
him the self same day, to live eternallye in his company.

The Anabaptists to trifel out this place do allege that which is said in a
another place, that a thousand years are as one day before the Lord. Which
thing we grant unto them, but this must we consider, that when God speaks
unto men, he frames his speech, according unto their capiacitye. In such
wise, that you shall never find in the scripture, that God has at any time
said: I will this day do this, meaning that he will do it a thousand years
after.

In such manner when Jonas showed the Ninevites, that after fortye days their
City should perish, it had been great folly for them, to have
understood fortye thousand years.

Likewise when the Lord said, that he would rise again the third day, we
know he speak after the common manner of men. But I will sease from this
matter, for as much as all men do see how much the Anabaptists have been
begyled in using of such euasions. They have yet a another cauilation.

To day does signifye the time of the new testamente. And to prove this,
they abuse this sent^nce, which is in the Ep^stell to the Ebrues, that Jesus
Christ which was yester day, is to day, and shall be for ever.

But they se not, that if we should so expound the word this day, ye word
yester day should signifye the time of the old Testament, and so should it
follow that the Lord Jesus did begin to be, which were a great absurdite, for
as much as we know that he is our eternal God, and also touching his
humanity, he is called the Lamb sacrificed from the beginning of the world.

Moreover after their saying, we might conclude yt they, whole sins Jesus
Christ has forgeuen, ought to enter into heaven before the day of the
resurrection. For the Apostle speaks of three times, of the which the one, as
I think, sygnifieth the day of the old testamente, and the other signifies
the time which shall be from the renewynge of the world. Therefore it rests,
that this word to day, must signifye the time in which we be, which is between
the death of Jesus Christ and his last coming. And that they may the better
know their beastlynes. If Jesus Christ had promised heaven unto the these for
the day of Judgment, he ought to have said in the world to come, and not this
day. For that is the scriptures manner of speaking. Who thinks them not
overcome by this clear reason? Yet is their impudency such, that they bring
yet an other replycation, which is: that heaven is promised unto the thief, in
like sort as death was pronounced to Adam and Eua, in what day so ever they
should eat of the fruit which was forbidden them. Now is it certain that
they dyed not the same day, but long time after. I answer that in the same
instaunce that Adam traunsgressed the commandment of God, he dyed as
touching the soul. For as much as he was alienate which was his very life,
and was made subject to bodily death. And thus, though we should receive
their gloss: yet spyte of their teathe, shall we have won this much of them,
that in the self same day, the thief was delivered from the misery, in which
Adam was fallen by his offense. In summ^, we conclude, that even as death
began to raygne in Adam, from the day of his traunsgression: even so the
thyefe, the same day in which the promise was made unto him: began to be
restored into the beatitude of heaven.

We se yt S Paul lived in this hope, when he said, that he desyered to be
losed to live with Christ. First he uses an apt speech, in saying that the
fayethfull man through death is delivered from the bands of his body, as in
an other place he does more clearlye express it. Further he adds, that his
desire is to be with the Lord Christ, when his soul shall be separated from
the body.

And in deed, if it be not this, these words which he speaks in an other
place can not be true that there is neither life nor death which can separate
us from the ^oue which God has unto us. For if we perish by death, or that
our soul lose her life, how can the love of God consist toward us? but
this is more playnelye deduced in an other place where he says. We know that
if our earthly house of the tabernacle of our body were destroyed, we have a
buildynge in heaven by God, which is not made with hands. Therefore being in
this tabernacle, we morn as being greaued, not that we desire to be unclothed:
but clothed again, that our mortality might be swallowed up of life.
Notwythstandynge we be always of good courage, knowinge that whylse we be in
our bodies, we be as strangers from God, because we walk by fayeth and not
by syghte,

But we have this confidence, and desire to be seperat from the body, and to be
present with God, because there is made mention there, of the day of
judgment. The Anabaptists do their endeavor to wrape up al there, that they
might draw all the words of the Apostle unto that day. But they can not do
so much, but that the truth will be yet more stronger, to maintain it self
against their false accusations.

For the Apostle does say expressly, that the fayethfull man departing from
his body goes to God, from whom he was absent in this world. After that he
adds, that as well absente, as present, we do our endeavor to please God,
because we mu^^e al come before his judgment seat. That man is very
obstinate, and more then hardened, against all reason, which will not
consent unto these words. Now is it so, that the Anabaptists, in place
where saint Paul says, that by death we approach to God, do make us believe
that we retule and be further of then in this present life.

That so it is, it is written that he which believes in the son of God,
shall not come into condemnation: but is already gone from death unto life. If
life everlasting be already be gonne in us, what absurditye is it to say,
that in death there is interruption If we be already entered into the kingdom
of God, for what cause should we be made go out again by death, or at the least, made go backewarde as the sea Crabbes?

The kyngedome of God is in you, says the Lord Jesus, what means this, but
that we have already the rote of life, which can not be extynguyshed? And that
is it which in an other place he says. This is the will of my father, that
whosoever does believe in the son, shall not peryshe: but has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up the last day.

Also, who so ever eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood, has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Note this that he does promise
unto us.ii. things, everlasting life and resurrection

The Anabaptists do take the one of these members, and leave the other: as if
they might be divided.

He speaks yet more plainly in an other place, saying. I am the
resurrection and life, he that believes in me though he were dead, he shall
live: and who so ever lives and believes in me, he shall never dye.

Also, who so ever keeps my word, shall never se death I prai you, is it
possible to speak more plainly the^ this. And should a christian man desire more
stronger testimonies to settle his conscience with? Peradventure some man will
obiecte, that this is not true but only of faithful men. I grant that, and
for my part, it suffices me to instruct the children of God, what shall be
their condition after death. How be it hereafter will I speak of the reprobate.

But here we se what Jesus Christ does promise unto us, if we be his. That in
the middell of death, our spiritual life shall not be interrupted. But that
more is, saint Paul declares that it is even then, that it begins to be in
his most strength. As our outward man, says he, is corrupted, so is the
inward man renewed from day to day. By these words he declares, that as
this present life does declyne and become corruptible, so the life of the
soul increaceth and is fortified more and more. Therefore it is contrary to
this sentence, to esteem that the soul is quenched when the corporal life
takes end.

I will yet deduce this argument further. We must daily increase and profit
in the Lord, auauncynge our souls always to approach unto him, as if we
stepped this day one pace, and to morrow an other. Or as if we did ascend by
steps.

Now is it said for this present time, that we do walk in the bryghtnesse
of his face. Also, that his spirit does bear us record, that we be his
children. If it so be, that in death, we do lose this bryghtnes, and confidence
which the holy Ghost gives unto us, how shall we then advance our selves?
Likewise Saint Paul says, that thought we have our conversation in this
world, yet is our habitation in heaven,

Let us se if death may drive us out of the kyngedome of God, wherein we had
our abydyng before, through hope It is true that this mortal body is to us
as a prison, to thruste down our soul so low, as captive to earthly things.

Therefore is it mete that when she is gone forth of such a servitude into
liberty, that she be more disposed to conte^plate God more familiarly. And
when she is lyghtened of such a burden, that she be more chereful to lift
her self up unto God. It is therefore to great a beastelynes to lay them
down soft, as do the Anabaptists, to make them sleep unto the day of the
resurrection. Howbeit their error is yet better convinced, by that the
scripture does declare touching our regeneration.

For when it pleases God to call us into the participation of his grace: he
says that he makes us new creatures. How is that? In that by the virtue of
his word and of his spirit, he mortifyeth the corruption of our nature,
making us to be borne again to live in his kingdom. Let us now heart what
is the operation of the one and the other in us. Saint Paul going about to
conforte us says, that though the body he dead because of sin, yet the
spirit of the Lord Jesus dwellinge in us is life, because of reghtuousnes, I
know that this life is never perfitte, whylse we are in this world, but seeing
that the spirit of God, is a spark of life, which is given unto us to quicken
us more and more till we come unto perfection: it follows that our life can
never be quenched.

As touching the word, Saint Peter speaks yet more clearlye, saying that
it is a sede of immortalitye, yea an incorruptible sede, which God has put
into us, to exempte us from that condition wherein we be by nature, which is
as Esaias says, that all flesh is hay, and all the glory of man is as the
flower of the grass, because that when the spirit of God does blow on man,
he is by and by wythered and dried, and falls wholly down.

Now, after that the Prophet had thus spoken of us, he added by and by, the
contrary, that the word of God abides for ever. Saint Peter does aledge
this place, and shows that this eternity of the word of God is showed in
us, because that by the same we are borne again, having it in our souls for
an incorruptible seed the which never rolleth nor withers. What is it that
may be replied against this, which shall not be things apparent, and
already resolved, for we being regenerate by the grace of God, are brought
into his kyngedome, to live in cleauynge to him without end.

To resolve this matter, there is nothing more mete not more certain, then to
consider what coniunctio^ and unity we have with our Savior Jesus. First we
know that in Baptism we be entexed into his body, to be verily his members,
and to feel in us such an effect of his virtue, as the branches of a tree do of
their rote. For we are so united unto him, that we are made one self
substance. And we need not aledge any other probatio^ then that which he
has spoken with his own mouth.

As I live says he, so shall you live. Now we know that the life of Jesus
Christ is not temporal, nor yet by interposition of time. Therefore if we
live as he lives, it follows that it must be without end. For it was
necessary that he should dye with us. And this is it that he spoke before: He
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he dwells in me, and I in him.
If Jesus Christ dwell in us, it follows that forthwith life dwells in us:
according to ye which he spoke before, as the father has life in him self:
so has he given unto his son, to have life in him self. It is easy to se that
the Anabaptists never tasted how we be joined to our Lord Jesus.

For the one principle is suffitiente to overthrow their false and pernicious
opinion, touching this fantastical sleep which they do attribute unto the
souls.

For we se the deductio^ which.s. Paul has made to the contrary, where he
says, that we be already citizyns of heaven, being set in heavenly places
with the Lord Jesus. Therefore let us hold us fast by that which Saint Paul
has said, that we be dead touching the world, and that our life is hyd with
Christ in God.

Now, by this he signifies that which in an other place he says. I live no
more, but Christ lives in me Let us hold I say, this resolution, that we
having one inseparable conjunction with our Lord Jesus Christ, be partakers
of the life which is permanent in him. And let us have in remembrance, that
he being raised up, dies no more, and that death has no more power over him,
not only touching his person: but also touching his members.

It is true, that there is this difference, that in him death is wholly
vanquyshed, in us only in part. Notwythstandynge so much is she vanquyshed
in us, that she ca^ never exercise her power. And thus while we abide the
accomplyshment of our redemption, let us not doubt but that the same beginnynge
which is in our souls shall continue ever.

Hitherto have we proved by sufficient testimonies, how the souls being
separated from the bodies, do notwythstandynge live in God, and have reproved
the error of the Anabaptists, which would make us believe, that they do
sleep, being dead without any fealynge.

Now to satisfye the request of all men, as much as in us is: there rests
that we do brieflye show what we ought to think touching the estate and
condition where they be. And first I protest, that I will speak thereof more
soberly then many would. For I know what curiosity there is in many which
would that a man should describe it unto them unto the vttermoste, even unto
the chambers and cabyns where the souls be, abiding the day of judgment.

They which would be fed with such fables, shall be deceived, if they seek
them at me. For I had lever keep my self to the simplicity of the scripture,
to show that which is expediente to know, then to wander abroad in the air,
to appear subtyle. Now the Lord forseynge that it was not needful for us to
have a more ample understanding of this matter, was content to teach us
simplye, that when our souls be departed from their bodies, they do
notwythstandyng live in him, abiding the accomplishment of their beatitude and
glory, in the day of the judgment, as shall be hereafter showed. Let us abide
therefore by this, and whatsoever declaration we shall make, let us not pass
this measure as touching this sentence.

But to proceed more plainly, let us begin at the distinction, which is
between the souls of the fayethfull, and the souls of the reproved. When the
Apostle said in the epistle unto the Hebrews, that unto the^ which had cast of
Jesus Christ, and had wyllingly turned from him, after they had known the
truth, there remains nothing but a lokyng for of terrible Judgment, it is
manifest that he speaks not only for this present life, but had a greater
respect unto the life to come. For the wicked do not always in this world,
conceive the Judgment of God, to be astonished, and to have horro^, but when
death comes, they can not escape but they shall be holden fast with this
fear and astonishemente, knowing the vengeance which is ordained for them.

And this is also testified by Saint Peter and S Jude, where they say, that
God has not spared his own Angels, which fell from their original: but
has cast them into darcke prysons, keeping them shut up, to preserve them
unto the great day. In declarynge unto us the condition of the deuylles, they
show unto us lykwyse, what is the condition of the wicked. For it is one self
reason. Thus we se that the soul of an infidele, being departed from the
body, is as a malefactoure which has already received the sentence of
condempnation, and obydeth the hour that he should be led forth to the
gallows to be put in execution

It is true, that also during this present life, the wicked are sometime
tormented with many remorses of their conscience, and the Judgment of God
does persecute them: but for as much as they do make them selves droncke
with vain cogitacions, as though they might flee and escape it, they are not
altogyther Gods prisoners: but are as vagabondes fleing the presence of the
Judge.

After death it is not so. For God holds them as in chains, in such wise
that they se well what punyshemente is prepared for the^ out of which there
is no way to escape. Therefore they be in extreme angwyshe, abiding the
execution of their judgment. It is not in us to determine the place where they
be, and we need not to care for it.

And on the other side, we may not Imagyne, that the Souls be like unto the
bodies that must have a certain space, for a place. Let it suffyce us to
know that they be in hell, as it is said of the wicked rich man: that is to
say, in tormente, and as it were in fire because they feel them selves cast
out from God, and do abide yet a further revelation of his great wrath.

By this it is easy to conclude what is the estate of the faithful souls.
Whylse we be in this world, it is true that our consciences have joy and
rest in God: but because they are continuallye agitate with dyuersse
temptatyons, this rest is vnquyeted with many cares.

More over because our health consists in hope, it is hid to us, in such
wi^e that we do not walk in visyon, as says Sayncte Paul: but after death,
because all our fight is ended, and that our enemies can assault us no
more. we are as in a place of greater suretye.

Moreover we do no more keep then, as we do now. that is to say, above and
against hope: but we do abide the felicity, which we do feel and se in part. It
is certain, yt after this manner the soul of Lazarus received Joy and
consolacion, and that in the middell of the miseries of this world he was all
his life long comforted in God. But the Lord does specifye a certain joy
which the fayethful soul has after death, in seeing her self delivered from
all fragilitie* from diffidence from all evil concupiscences, and from all
dangers of temtacions, which do dayelye happen unto us. Also, in having more
clear and certain knoweledge of her beatitude and immortal glory. So when we
would with one word express the condition of the fayethfull souls after
death: we may say that they be at rest, not that they be in perfete
beatitude or glory: but because they be countented with the joy and
consolation which God gives to them, whilst they do abide the day of the last
redemption.

If any man will that this thing be declared unto him by similitude, the time
in which we dwell in this mortal body, is like unto the time of war, when
we be unclothed of our flesh, the battle seaceth and takes end, and we
have the victory. But the day of triumph shallbe when Jesus Christ shall
apere in his majesty, that we may raygne eternallye with him. But because
such similitudes are only to make the thing plain, and be not of
authority: we will take one out of the scripture, which shall not only serve
to teach, but also to prove our doctrine true. We know how saint Paulle
does allegoricallye treat the issue of the people of Israel out of Egypt,
and their passing through the read sea. Following this, let us understand that
in baptyme our pharao is plunged in the sea: that is to say, our old man is
mortified, and we are buried with Christ, by that means made fre from the
bondage of syn. But from thens we go in to the deserte, in which we have our
conversation during this mortal life, For we are poor and indigente, but for
that the Lord gives unto us dayelye his graces, as he did cause manna to
raygne from heaven unto the people of Israel, when death commyth we do enter
in to the land of promyssion which thing is not done without great
difficultye. For it is then that we most suffer, the greateste and perilous
assautes. Now after that the children of Israel were entered into the land
of promyssion, it was a great while after er Jerusalem were buyldyd, and that
the Kyngedome of the house of Dauyd was ordained: after this manner the
fayethfull souls, have immediatelye after death a certain reioysyng, of the
heritage which is promised unto them: but because the glory of Jesus Christ
their king, does not yet apere, and that the heavenly city of God is not yet
establyshed in her estate, they abide unto the day in which the same shall be.
All these things are euidente in holy scripture, unto al such as will not be
rebels unto God, and this doctrine has not only good approbation of the
scripture, but also of the aunciente doctors: amongeste whom Tertulian faith,
as well the reward of the good, as the ponishme^t of ye evil, be in suspense unto
the resurrection. Nevertheless in diverse places he affirms, that the souls of
the fayethfull do there whilles, live in God. And therefore in another place he
says. Wherefore shall we not take the bofome of Abraham, for a receptacle of
souls, for a time, the which does represent unto us that there is a double
reward, the one immediatlye after death, and the other at the day of the last
judgment? And Ireneus says. Seeing that the Lord Jesus is entered into the
shadow of death, where the souls of the dead were, and afterward rose again
corporally, and assended into heaven: it is very true that the souls of his
disciples, for whom he did this thing, shall go after death into an invisible
place which is by God ordained for them, and shall abide there, waiting in
patience, the day of the resurrection.

Then shall they be joined to their bodies, to come before the face of the
Lord. For no Disciple is above his Master. Sayncte Chrysostom understood what
goodness and privilege this is to us, that Abraham and Sayncte Paul be set
down abiding the perfection of the church, that they may receive there
reward.

For the father showed unto them that he would not give them there reward,
until we be come thither to, as a father of an how-shoulde, would say at any
time unto his children coming from their labor, that they should abide
from eating until their other brethren were come.

Thou art not contented that thou haste not already received thy reward, what
shall Abell than do, which has won this price long time before the, and has
not yet his crown? What shall Noe and the other Patriarchs do, for they have
tarried for us unto this day, and shall yet abide the other that shall come
after?

They went before us in the battle, but they shall not be crowned before us.
For there is one day appointed, wherein all the children of God shall be crowned
to gether. Sayncte Augustyne writes that the souls of the Saynctes be in
secret receptacles, until they shall receive the crown of glory in the day
of judgment.

And contrarywyse the souls of the wicked, in abydyng there punyshement. And
in an Epystel which he wrote to Sayncte Hierom.

The soul, says he, after bodily death shall have rest, and than after
that shall take again her body, that she may have glory. S Barnard: the
swetne^ which the souls of the saints have at this present is great, but it
is not yet perfect: for it shall be made perfect, when they shall fit on seats
as judges: wha^ they have put of there bodies, they be forth with brought into
rest: but not into the glory of the kyngedome, And in his sermon following,
he prosecuteth still the same argument, saying that there be three estates of
the soul. The first in the body as in a tabernacle The second after death,
as in the porche of the temple. The third in heaven with his glorified body.
Who that would know more, Let him read the second and third sermon upon
Alhallon day.

Bryefely, this is the perpetual doctrine, which has always continued in
Christ's church, without any contradiction, that as we live in God through
fayeth, whylse we are in this mortal life. Even so after death we have Joy
and consolation in knowing more clearlye, and seeing, as it were, at the eye,
the heavenly beatitude, which he has promised unto us: the which we do
conte^plate here, as it were in a glass, and by a dark understanding.

This blind opinion of the Anabaptists touching she slepynge of souls, was
never herd of, but by a sort of heritikes called Arabiques, and by Iho^ pope of
Rome, which was not paste an hundred and thirti years agone. But because it is
a thing so contrary boeth to man's sense, and unto our christian fayeth, thus
to cast the souls into a slumber, in the time when they are more near to
God, to have more perfyte understanding of his goodness: al christendom has
had this fantasy in horror, Therefore all they which will yield them selves
conformable unto God and his word, do abide in that which I have already showed
by the scripturs, and do meditate this goodly promise, that the Just shall
blossom as the Date tree, and shall be multiplied as the Cedar of Libanus, yt
they which are planted in the house of the Lord, shall blossom and bring
forth their fruit, that they shall be fat and strong in their age.

Therefore seeing that we know that our age is renewed in us, through the grace
of god by miraculous strength, let us not fear when we se whole nature fail.
But rather let us sing with David. My soul, bless thou the Lord, which
fylleth thy mouth with good things, and makes the young again like the
Egle. And to this, we have the prayer which the Lord Jesus made to his father
for the same purpose, saying. Father I desire that those which thou haste
given me, may be with me to se my glory.

Now, as we have suffitiently proved the true doctrine, touching the
immortality of the souls, so on the other side is it necessary to answer to
those places, which the Anabaptists do bring forth to ground their errors
on.

First they aledge that the description which the scripture makes of ma^s
soul, agrees with the same of Beasts, as where it is said, that God has
created the great whales, and every living soul. Also that the beasts
entered by couples into the Arc, all that had spirit of life. And to confyrme
this, they help them selves with that which saint Paul says, that in this
life man is corruptible, mortal, and animal: But he shall rise again
incorruptible, immortal, and spiritual, as it is written, that the first man
was made in a living soul. I grant that this title of living soul, is
oftentimes attribute to beasts, because they also do live in their kind. But
there is great diversity between them and me^. For in man, the soul by
which he knows, Judges, and has discretion, is called living. The Soul
of beasts has none other faculty, but to give mouynge unto their bodies.

Therefore it is no maruayle, if the soul of man which has reason,
understanding, will, and other powers distinct from the body, do subsiste
being separate from the body, where as the souls of beasts do perish, for
as much as they have only but corporal sense.

For this cause Sayncte Paul alleges the testimonye of Aratus an Heathen
Poet, which says that we are the lynage of God, to declare the excellencye
of our souls. Touching that saint Paul puts difference between a living
soul, and a living spirit: is not done, to declare that the soul which we
now have, does peryshe, but only to declare, how much more power there shall
be after the resurrection, yt is fowete, that we shall be like unto the
Aungelles of God, living without meat, and drink, not being subject to
any mutation or fragilitie. They do yet further allege the v^sion of
Ezechyell, where the Prophet, writing of the resurrection, does say, that
God calls the spirit from the four wyndes to inspyre life into the dead
bones.

But the solution is easy: that Ezechyell after the manner accustomed of the
Prophets, uses an exterioure figure to signify the foul of man, as in his
first vision, speaking of the spirit of God, he calls him also wind. Who
so would upon that reason, that the spirit of God were not an essence, were
farrre wide.

Therefore it is great folly of these mad men, that they do not observe
this manner of speech, which is so commune through out all the whole scripture.

Their third Argument is, that though the soul were created immortal: yet
through sin she has last her immortalitye, as Sayncte Paul does say,
that the reward of sin is death.

But first I ask whether the devil have not received the same reward? And
yet is he not so dead, but that he always watches and buselye seeks whom he
may devour. Secondely I ask, whether this death take end or no?

For if it have no ende^, will they, nyl they, they must needs grant me,
that the souls through death, do not cease to feel the eternal fire, and the
worms that gnaweth them. It appears therefore, that the soul does not so
dye, but that she has fealynge of her evil.

Touching the body it is said, that it shall return to the earth, whence it is
come, there to rote. But the death of the Soul, is to be put from God, and to
be co^fou^ded with the feeling of his ire, as the Apostle declares saying.
Awake thou that sleapest, rise from death, and Christ shall illumine the. It
is euidente that he speaks not to the insensible body: but unto those which
being buried in sin, do bear Death and Hell with them. Moreover we have
already showed, that, that thing which we have lost in Adam, is restored in
Jesus Christ. For that thing which was showed before by the prophets, that he
should destroy death for ever and that he should swallowe it up: the Apostles
have declared that it is fulfilled. He has destroyed death says saint Paul,
and has given life through the Gospel.

Again if death have reigned through one man's fault, they which have
received abundaunce of grace shall raygne in life through Jesus Christ. This
one sentence is sufficient to stop their mouths. For seeing that the death
which is come through Adam is abolished by Christ, the whole question lies
in the comparison which Saint Paul makes there. Which is, that the virtue of
Jesus Christ is of greater strength to restore, the^ was Adams to destroy.
Which thing in that place he does well declare And following that which he
spoke, he adds further after, that there is no dampnation to them which are
in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh. And in deed if death
should have dominion over the Souls of the fayethfull, the grace of God
should not have his reign, which imports life, as he says: but rather the
law of god should exercise her power over them, which is contrary to the
whole doctrine of the scripture.

They do also abuse them selves with this that oftentimes this word sleep, is
token for death: as where it is said of saint Stephan, that he fell a sleep in
the Lord.

Again, Lazarus our friend slepeth. Again sorrow you not for them that sleep.
And in deed this manner of speech, is more frequent in the Hystories of the
Bible, then any other. I answer, that this sleep appertains nothing unto
the Soul, but ought wholly to be understood of the body. For there are two
speeches, which do understand in one self sense, to sleep with his fathers,
and to be with his fathers.

Now when it is said that a man is put unto his fathers, it is plain that it
is meant of his Sepulcher I would have no man believe this, except I can
prove my saying by good wytnes of the scripturs. When Job said: Behold, I
sleep in duste, he meant not that his soul should sleep there. So when he says
in an other place, that al men shall sleep in the duste together, and that the
worms shall cover them: it may not be understand out of the bodies. A like
meaning is in these words of David, where he says, that he was like unto the
dead sleapinge in then Sepulchers. And Esayas speaking to Nabuchodonosor
says. All other kings have slepte in their glory, and were put into their
places: but thou art cast out of thy Sepulcher.

Therefore in a some, we se that this word sleep, is by similitude applied
unto the bodies, which are without mouynge when the souls are separate from
them. And this is a manner of speaking, which the Painyms always used. And
thereoute comes also, that we call the place of burial, a Cimyterie, which
does sygnifye a place of sleapynge, not that our elders, did think, that the
souls were there a sleep, but because the bodies be there laid to rest in
their Sepulchers, as in beds. A like understanding must we have, of a
certain place in Job, where with they myghtilye defend them selves, where he
says, that after manne is once fallen a sleep, that he shall not walk, nor
rise up till the Heaven be changed.

They do likewise make them selves a buckeler, with a sentence of Solomon,
which makes more against them, then any other in all holy scripture. And in
deed I would not now bring it forth to serve my purpose, were it not that
they do so impudently use it as though it made for the^. The words be these.

I have said in my heart of the sons of men, that God has showed them
like unto beasts. Therefore the death of man is such, as the death of a
beast, and there condition is like. The one does breath like as does the
other, and they do dye after one manner, and man has nothing more then have
the beasts. Boeth are subject unto vanity, and do return into one place.
They come from the earth, and shall to the earth return. Who knows whether
the spirit of men does ascend, and the spirit of beasts does descend?

To this I answer, as I have before said that Solomon could not speak more
expressly for us. For going about to reprove the vanity of man's sense, he
says that man by his natural reason, and by that which he sees can not
comprehend wherein he does differ from beasts. And chiefly what excellencye
he has above the^ after death. For the immortalitye of Souls is a thing
which does surmounte his capacity.

Therefore saying that man is reproved as vain, because he knows not that
his spirit does ascend, that is to say, is immortal, where as the spirits
of beasts does go into corruption and peryshe: we must needs conclude that the
true wisdom is to comprehend the immortalitye of the Souls.

This text is like that which he adds anon after, that a man knows not
whyther he be beloved, or hated of God, but that this thing is secret and
hid, because all things come indifferentlye to good and evil. Now seeing al
things are uncertain, I are whether the fayethfull man, when he is in
adversity and tribulation, shall think that God does hate him? It is very
true, that he does not hate him. For this promise is made unto him, that it is
for his health, that he might conforte him self and rejoice, being sure that
tribulation is rather a sign of Gods fatherly love, then of his hatred But
Salomo^ speaks of the opinion which we might have after man's
understanding. Therefore are all men vanitye. We must therefore have recourse
to God and to his word. For a little after he shows what comes unto them
that be in this fantasye that is, that their hertes are filled with
ungodliness and contempt of God: because they have this proverb. That a
quick dog is better then a dead Lion. Now he him self in the end of his
book does show what we ought to think touching this matter That is, that the
body does return unto the earth whence it came: and the spirit does go to
God which gave it.

They do pryncipally ground them selves upon that the scripture says, that
we shall receive in the last day every manne according to his worckes. For
they do reason thus. Seeing that God, when he speaks of our beatitude, and of
the life everlasting does remitte us unto the last day: And contrary wise
when he threateneth the wicked he says that he will take vengeance in that
day, it is evident that unto that time the good shall not receive their
reward, nor the wicked shall be punyshed. Otherwise if were in vain said:
that there shall be saved all those that are written in the book of life.

Also that it shall be said unto the elect, Come and possess the kingedome.
Therefore do they conclude, that seeing we shall not enter into the possession of
our salvation unto the day of the last resurrection: that in the mean time
our souls do sleep, I have no manner of Joy of their beatitude.

I answer that it is not a good co^seque^ce For though the Soul be not in
glory: yet does it not follow, that they do not live in God, whylse they do
abide the revelation of the same

And for a more full solution of this place, I would the readers should
remember what I have before said, that is, that our beatitude is always in
the way, unto that day. We all agree in this, that the perfection of our
beatitude, is to be perfytelye Joined to God, And it is the mark whereunto all
the promyses of God do send us. For that which in times passed was said to
Abraham, is also directed unto us, That is, that God is our reward. This is
then the end of our beatitude of our glory and health, to be all wholly to God,
to possess him, and that he be altogyther in us.

Now is it so that this thing shall not be accomplyshed before the day of the
resurrection. Therefore it is not without a cause that it is called the day of
health. It is therefore said, that we shall then possess the kingdom of God,
not that we shall not in part possess it before as now at this present we
do possess it through hope, but because that then we shall have the full and
perfect Revelation.

But to make short, that which we have before said; might suffyce for the
solution of their argument. That is, that we are always in a wait and desire,
until Jesus Christ do appear in our full Redemption, to receive us into the
immortality and glory of his kyngedome. Nevertheless in the mean while, we
cease not to have our life hydd in him before God as says saint Paul.

It should appear that we had suffitiently answered unto them, touching the
day of the resurrection: were it not that they do prosecute the matter further,
bryngyng forth the sentence of saint Paul, where he says, that we be of all
men most miserable, if we shall not rise again.

They say that this can in no wise be true, if we be blessed before the
resurrection. I answer that Saint Paul had respect unto the end of the
hope of the fayethfull, that is, that at the day of the resurrection, they
shall receive that which God has promised unto them, and so if there were no
Resurrection, they should be void of all their hope.

We say also, that the Souls of the fayethfull are blessed in waiting for
that day, but that is through their lokynge and waytyng for it, which being
frustrate and vain, it must needs follow that they are unhappy. Seeing that
all the blessedness of the children of God proceadeth and hangs of this, that
in the day of the resurrection they shall be like unto God, and inioye their
heritage. It is no marvel if saint Paul do say, that they should be more
unhappy the^ the rest of the world, if there shall be no resurrection.

And in deed, in one manner sense, he puts these two things: that there is
no resurrection, and that our hope should be only in this world. I doubt not
but that every man sees playnelye, that this sentence of saint Paul is
nothing against us. For he says, that if we be deceived in our hope which
we have of the resurrection: that we be unhappy. And we say that the souls
of the fayethfull are right happy through the same hope, without which we
confess that they can have no Joy nor blessedness. In this there is no
contradiction.

They obiecte yet more against us, that which is written in the epistle to the
Hebrews of the Ancient fathers, how that they departed in fayeth, without
receyuynge the promises: but saluted them a far of, and confessed them
selves to be strangers upon the earth.

Now in saying thus, they do signifye that they sought their heritage and
natural country, in that they had no mind of that contrei from whens they
came: they might have returned: but they desired a better: that is to say from
heaven. This text is wyckedly depraved by them, through false gloses, in that
they do refer this to the present time: where the Apostell speaks of the time
when the Patriarchs were conuersaunte in this world. How be it touching the
purpose of our matter, I am right well content to allow their gloss. They
make their argument thus, if Abraham and the other fathers do desire the
heavenly heritage, than they have it not yet. I replye to the contrary, that if
they have a desire, than do they live, and have relynge of good and evil.
Where is their slepyng than? Thus we se that they be contrary to them selves
like litell children. Touching the rest, I will well the Apostle says
afterward, that all the ancient fathers, have not yet received that which in
this world they looked for, because God has ordained, that they w thout us
should not be made perfect. And this is it that we say, that all the
consolation which the fayethfull souls have, is reduced to this glorious
immortalitye, in which, we shall all at one time, be gathered together, when
Jesus Christ shall apere in judgment. These places which here after I will
recite shall declare, how these phantasticalles do keep together all the
cauillations that they can, and that impudentlye, to have some appearance to
color their error. If the souls (say they) being separate from their bodies
do live wih God, than did saynct Peter great injury to Cha^ita in raisyng her
up, seeing it was a wythdrawynge of her from the company of God, and from the
blessed life, when he brought her again in to this sea of miseries? I Answer
that this argument makes as much again them, as against us. For if she
slepte without feeling any evil, we may say that it was not for her
prophet, to come from such a rest, to enter into the fyghtes of this present
life. I might require of them the solution of this argum^nt. But I know that
it were vaynt to tarry for any good solution of the^ Touching us our answer
is easy, that which Sayncte Paul spoke of him self is common to all
fayethfull men. That is, that it is profitable for us to dye, and that it is
for our advantage to be with Christ. And yet notwythstandynge, he says that
God when he healed Hepaphroditus of his sycknes, and delivered him from death,
had pity on him, allthoughe he were of the number of the fayethfull. The
Anabaptists do say that this is a crueltye if the souls do live after death.

We say that it is a merciful dead wha^ it pleases God to be magnif^ed in
us in this corporal life, making us instruments of his glory.

Moreover it is not said that Thabitha was raised up for her own commoditye:
but at the request of the poor which wept for the losses that they had by
her death. Therefore let us bide fast by this, that the Lord does always
unto us a singular grace when he makes us to live, and dye to him.

Let us come to the testimonies which they aledge of David, although I be
asshamed to reherce them, because they do abuse them so chyldyshelye. But yet
must I rehearse them, because they go about to disceyue the simple with them.
They do aledge this sentence: I have said, you are gods and sons of the
most highest yet shall you dye like men.

They do expound, thus that the faithful are there called gods: but yet do
they dye like the reprobate, and that there condition is like until the day of
judgment. But we have the exposicion of Christ, that in that place, is
mention made of princes, and ministeres of Justice which have the title of
gods: because that in there estate, they are as his lyuetenauntes. And
though our savior Jesus Christ had spoken nothing thereof, yet the phrase
of scripture does declare it plainelye. And the text it self is so plain*
that it bears his gloss with it. For, there are reproved all such as
exercise tyranny and iniquiti, and it is said to them that they must dye, and
be deprived of that dignitye which they have, and must give an account to
God as well as the least of all.

They aledge also this text: put not your trust in men, the spirit of man
goethe, and returnethe into his earth, and in that day shall perish al their
cogitations. They take this word spirit for wind, as though there were none
other soul in man. Than do they make their argume^ce. Thus, if man's
cogitations do perish, it must follow that the soul does sleep, or else that
it is nothing I answer, that the spirit of man, does signifye an other
thing than breath, as I have ryghts well proved before. But were it so, that
this word in this place were taken in such a significacion, as it is taken in
some other places: yet should it not therefore follow that man has none other
soul but breath.

Touching that it is said, that the cogitacions do perish: that does
importe none other thing, but that the enterprises of men are dissipate by
death, and vanishe as smoke as it is said in a another place, that the desires
of sinners shall perish, to signify that they shall not come to there effect
Therefore David says not, that men shall thyncke nothing after there death: but
he means that all there delyberacions shall come to nothing They aledge an
other place all most like this: he has remembered that they are but flesh, a
spirit that goes and retorneth not again. Now I grant, that in this place
this word spirit does signify wind, or breath.

But I do deny, that this place does make any thing to the confirmation of
their error For by this manner of speech, the prophet would express the
fragilitye of our estate and condition, and the shortenes of man's life. It
is said in the hystorye of Job, that man is as a flour sprynging out of the
earth which in continente wythereth, and as a shadow passes away.

Esaias commands all preachers to cry, that all flesh is but grass. If
the Anabaptists do out of this conclude, that the soul wythereth away: they
do se more clearlye then did Saint Peter, which proves that the souls of
the fayethfull are immortal: because the Prophet immediatlye adds, that the
word of God abides for ever.

There is a like reason in this, which is spoken in an other Psalm. As a
father has pitye of his children, even so has the Lord had pitye of his
servants. For he knoweeth whereof we are made. He does remember that we be
duste, that our days be as grass whereof the flowers does quykcly wyther
away. That the spirit passes in us, and tarieth not, and knows no more his
place. In all these sentences, let us note that man is admonished of his
frayltye, chyeflye when God wythdraweth his hand, and his virtue from him:
that he should know that he is nothing, and less then nothing, if that God
do not keep and preserve him by his grace. And in deed when we say that the
souls are immortal. We intend not by that saying to derogate any thing
from Gods title, and the which as Saint Paul says, is only immortal.
But we rather think it a blasphemy so to attribute immortality unto the
soul, as if she by her propre virtue did subsyst. But in the mean while we
must consider what propertye and nature God has given to the souls: and
that is by his hand to subsiste, for to be in beatitude immortal, or in
malediction.

But they think that they have a very strong weapen, of this which is spoken
in an other Psalm: will thou do a miracle in raysynge up the dead, that they
may praysethe. Shall any man in the grave show forth thy mercy, or thy
ryghtuousnes in the Land of forgetfulness?

Again, the dead praise not the, oh Lord, neither yet all they that do
discende into the grave. But we that live shall praise God. Again, what profit
shall there be in my blood when I shall descend into corruption? Shall the duste
praise the, or shall it show forth thy veritye. Also that which Ezechyas
says in his song? The grave shall not praysethe, and the death shall not give
glory to the They which discende down shall not look for thy verity. The
living, the living shall confess. The father shall declare unto his son thy
veritye. For solution hereof, there are two things to be noted: the one is,
that by death, we may not simple understand the commune death by which we
must all pass: but a death which is a punishemente expressed, and sign of
the wrath of God, and which does emporte a reiection of men, for destroy
them utterly. The second where it is said, that the dead shall not praise
the, it is mente of that praise of God, which is done among those men which
have felt his grace.

As touching the first, it is true that this word hell does often times
signify a grave as we have also translated it. But they which are exercised in
the scripture, are not ignoraunte but that which I have said, is signified by
these words death and grave. And that chyefly in the Psalms. Therefore those
whom God has reiecte, and whom he chasteth in his wrath, not only touching
their bodies, but much more touching their souls, are called dead, and the
angwyshe which they feel is called a grave, as when it is said. Let the
death come upon them, and let them descend a live into the grave. Again,
Lord God if thou cease to help me, I shall be like unto them that go down
into the grave.

Again, Lord thou have drawn my soul out of the grave, and have delivered
me from them which are laid in the grave. Again, let sinners be cast into
the grave, and all people which forget God. Again if God had not helped me,
my soul had dwelled in the grave. Again, our bones were scatered nere to
the grave. Again, he has placed me in an obscure place like the dead.

As contrary wise it is said they live, to whom God shows his mercy.

The Lord says David, in an other place, has ordained benediction and
everlasting life, among his people. Again, deliueryng their souls from
death, and nourishyng the^ in time of famine.

Again, God shall pluck the from thy tabernacle, and thy rote from the
Land of the living. Again, I shall please the Lord in the Land of the
living.

But there is one text among the rest, which does so well express boeth
meaninges, that it shall suffice us, for altogyther. Shall man pay a price for
his Soul, that he may live ever? Shall he not se death, seeing that wise men
do dye? Foles and wise men say I, shall dye together: they shall be laid in
grave like sheep, and death shall devour the^. but the ryghtuouse shall have
rule over them in the morning: their strength shall peryshe in the Sepulcher,
and their glory shall vade and the Lord shall draw my soul from the power of
the grave.

The some of this Phalme is, that al such as put trust in their richesse or
strength shall all dye, as well the poor as the rich. as well the fool as
the wise: but he that trusts in God, shall be delivered from the grave.
These things well marked, we have a solution for all the places which the
Anabaptists do allege.

It is is therefore declared, how the Saints being astonished for the
apprehention of death, do desire God to wythdrawe them.

How comes it that they have such an horrous? Let us behold all the
ensamples of the fayethfull: we Read not that they did make any great
complayntes or lamentations, when the time was come, yt they should dye, but
did submit them selves, to the good will of God, in patience, I say also David
and Ezechyas, Wherefore then have they used such complaints in the places
above aledged? But only because in death they did conceive the wrath and
seueryte of God, the which did astonyshe them, and not without a cause.

Now there is no doubt, but that the man which fealeth the rygour of God,
and is persecuted by his vengeance, can not praise him: for as much as we
can not give him herty thanks, except we feel his goodness Secondelye, where it
is said in these places, that the dead do not praise God, that is not mente
that they do not praise him in in their mind: but is meant, that they cannot
tell his praises unto other. Which thing the words which are there put, do
import For to show it, to tell it, and to declare it to their children, does
signifye with the mouth to celebrate the benefits of God, yt the world may
not understand them.

They bring yet more two verses ^^te of the Psalms, the one is. I will praise
the Lord in my life. I will sing to my God whylse I am. Again, go from me
that I may take courage, until I go hence, and be no more. In place of the
first text, I will bring them forth five other, to prove the contrary of
that which they pretend. Lord God I will confess the euerlastyngly. Again, I
will bless the Lord always. His praise shall be ever in my mouth. Again, I
will praise the euerlastingelye, for those things which yt have done. Again,
I will ever praise thy name, and in the world of worlds. Again, I will ever
singe Psalms unto thye name, and in the world of worlds. Daued says not
that he will praise the Lord only during this present life: but he promises to
do the same without end. What means he than in the other places? some man
will answer that he does promise to praise the Lord whylse he lives. I
answer yt, yt does not exclud the praises which ye sai^tes do give after their
death: because the manner of their praisi^g of God, is other the^ ours. Touching
the second place, they be the words of a man pressed with anguyshe of
conscience, the which desires of God, if he have deserved to be thruste down,
that he may be but once, as we have a like exemple of Job, where he says to
God. Let me alone that I may a little bewail my sorrow, and whylle I go to the
region of darkness, where there is nothing but confusion, and eternal horror.
This makes nothing to ye purpose, to prove that the souls have an end.

There be yet other places in the history of Job which they do wreste to
their purpose, which I will brieflye touch as they shall come to my memory,
the first is. Wherefore did I not die in the matrice, or why did I not perysh
co^ing out of my mothers womb? For then should I now sleep in silence, and
should rest in my sleep, where I should be as a child borne before the
time, and as those which being conceived, do not come to perfection of life. I
should be in the place where both great and small do rest. But if I should
allege against them the xiiii. chapter of Esaias, where he describes the
dead, coming before the King of Babylon to mock him, what would they
answer unto me? But I will pass that over, and content my self with the simple
exposition of Job, which is this. He being pressed down to the vttermoste,
and almost overcome with his burden: had no respect, but only to his
present myserie: and therefore he makes it greater then all other things.
Therfo^e he had not death in horror, but rather desired it, as that which is
the end of all myserie, having no respect to that which does follow after
death. And this is the manner of all such, as be compassed with great anguyshe
and doloure. For if in the great heates of the somer we desired a great froste,
and again in winter, having forgotten how much the beat did grieve us, would
desire that it might be very hot, it were no great marvel though a
vehement passion did drive us to such a desire. Let us now therefore se, what
a man, persecuted by the hand of God, may do: that is, whether he may not in
such wise be transported that he forget altogather by reason of his doloure.
There is alike reason in many other sentences which he afterward speaks, as
be these which do follow. Remember, Lord, that my life is but wind, and that
mine eye shall not return to see his good. Again, there remains nothing for
me but the grave. Again, all that belongs unto me, shall descend in to the
depth of the pytte, and such like places. For we see here, that Job being
compassed with the dystresse which he felt, because that God did persecute him
in his wrath, had nothing before his eyes but confusion, and took death but as
an abolishme^t of his hoale life, having no respect to that which does follow
after, ss we have said.

Wherefore to conclude by this, that the soul of man perishes with the body,
is not only a most shameful beastlynes, but also a most shameless boldenes
Wherefore in this, and in all the rest, I think I have so euide^tlye rproued
all that which the Anabaptists do pretend, to give color to their wicked
opinion, that I may well make an end of this matter.

I protested in the beginning, and not without a cause, that mine intent was
not to in treat of all the opinions which the Anabaptists do hold: for that
were to enter into a Foreste which has none end. And besides that it shall
not greatly need. It were an enterprise more curiouse then profitable: to
heap together all the folyshe phantasyes which every folishe head among the^
has imagined. I thought it therefore fufficie^t, briefly to treat, as
faithfully as I could those articles, that they commonly bold which have the
most subtle wit, or at the least be be least brayneles among the hoale
sect. For touching those which name them selves Lybertynes, which are holy
mad and without wit, I will reserve them to a another treaty Now for
conclusion, I beseech all christen readers, to examen this wholye by the
scryptures: as by yt which is the true touchston to examen all doctrynes. I
doubt not but that whosoever will suffer himself to be led by the truth of
god, and will submit him self to reason, shall find sufficiently where with to
be satysfyed, touching the articles which I have here entreated of.

Besides this I have endeavored my self as much as I could to accomodate my
self unto the rudenes of the simple, for whom chieflye I travel. So the
Anabaptists cannot make cauilacion, as they are wont, that I would overcome
them by subtlety, or oppress them by craft of man's eloquence: seeing I have
used as homelye and as simple manner as can be desired. Yet is it meet that I
do aduertyse all fayethfull men of their malice, because they cannot make their
matter apeare good but in mingling al together: in such wise as all their
doctrine is a confuse m^ss^ne, as a body without head, arms, and legs:
they use oftentimes folyshe and strange manner of speches, and without a
deliberate purpose, still leapyng from the Lock to the Ass, do interlace
diverse matters, and bring in diverse places of scripture cut and broken: and
so pleasyng them selves in this matter, make men believe that there is much
more majesty to speak so brutyshelie, then well to disgeste the matter by
order, Now to confound them, there is no better way, then to expound and
deduce the matters distinctly, and by a certain order to bring forth one
matter after a another, well weighing and marking the sentences of the
scripture, to draw out thereof the true and natural sense, and to use a
simplicity and playnenes of words, which is not strange from the common
speech, Which thing if a man do, they cry out, that men go about to disceyue
and circumuente them by humayne subteltie and sophystrie: as though it were
the custom or intent of sophysters, to make dark things clear. For my
part I confess, that as much as in me is, I do study to dispose by order
those things which I speak, that I may give the more clear and easy
understanding. If the Anabaptists may not abide thus: I wotte not what to
say, but that he which does evil, hates the light.

And to give the better color to their doctrine, they have imprinted with
their resolucion, the history of the death of one Michael, their complyce, and
maynteyner of their sect: and in deed they are wont to make a great
buckeler, of that many have suffered death, to maynteyne their opiniones: and
would not recante although therebye they might have escaped death, and have
redeemed their life. And to say truth, it is a fair apparaunte wytnes to
authorize a doctrine, wha^ a man consta^tly and without difficulty gives over
his life, for the confirmacion of the same. As when there are set before us
those things which the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs have suffered for the
mayntenaunce of the truth of God: we be the more strengthened to cleue unto
the faith which we hold, the which they have sealed by there blood. I confess
therefore, that we ought not vily to esteem the death of Gods servants,
saying it is precious in his sight: and that their constancye and stedfastnes
is no small help to succoure our infirmytye. But because we might often times
be deceived by this, if we looked no further: therefore must we come to the
foundation with out which we can have no sure judgment, nor yet certaintye in
this behalf. It is true, that the death of a man what soever he be, ca^ not
be so precious, that it may or ought in any thing do prejudice to the verite
of God, or can be auaylable to prove eronious and perverse doctrine. Let us
therefore stycke fast unto this, that as the good and wholesome doctrine, founded
upon reason, takes his confirmation after the death of his witnesses and
confessors, by who^e it is mayntayned: even so if all the me^ on the earth
should dye, they ca^ not thereby approve a lie. And to dye for a just cause, is
that which does decerne the martirs of God from the devils martirs. Therefore,
even as it is a praise worthy co^stancye, to suffer deeth, if need be, for
witnessinge of the truth: even so is it amadd obstinacy to suffer for to
maintain a naughty matter. So that he which sufferith most, is so much the
more to be dispraysed. So far is it of that under the color of that, we
should suffer our selves to be carried away, depryuynge our selves of all
judgment and consideration. If it be nedeful to have certitude of Gods
verity which we do preach, we have it more then sufficient in the death of our
lord Jesus, the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, as well of ye primative Church
as of this preasente time. And as for that which is repugnaunt unto it:
whether it be sealed with blood or with wax yet shall it always be false.

Finis.
Anno. M.D.xlix. xvi. day of April.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling at Aldersgate, and William Seres,
dwellinge in Peter College These books are too be sold at the new shop by the
little Conduite in Chepeside.

Cum gracia et Preuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


