THE FOUNDATION OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. With a Catalogue of the
principal Founders and special Benefactors of all the Colleges, and the
total number of Students, Magistrates and Officers therein being, Anno 1622.
The the Right Honorable and his singular good Lord, THOMAS, now Lord Windsor
of Bradenham: Ioh. Scot wishes all increase of felicity.
Anno Christi, 630.
blazon or coat of arms

THe learned in Antiquities have diversely written about the time of the
Foundation of the University of Cambridge, some affirm that it was founded by
Cantaber a Prince of Spain, brother to Partholomus King of Ireland, son in law
to Gurguntius King of great Britain, many years before the Incarnation of our
Savior Christ; of whose name according to the Spanish Language, it was first
called Cantabriga and Cantabrige, after of his son Grantinus (who walled it
about) Grantbriga, and Grantbrige. Others say that Cass^^lanus Prince of the
Troynobantes, King Octauius, Arthure King of great Britain, and Ethelbert King
of Kent, were each of them Founders or Restorers of the same. But the chiefest
conclude and agree, that Sigebert King of the East Angles was the princip^ll
Founder thereof; about the years 630. and 636. who assigned diverse Hostles and
Houses for Students and Scholars to inhabit in; giving them large Privileges
and Charters, whereof some are yet extant; procuring also great immunities from
Pope Honorius the first, which Sergius the first confirmed: since which time,
by reason of many incursions and continual Wars between the Britains,
Romans, Saxons, the Kings of this Heptarchie, Danes and Normans, the Light and
Glory of this Academie was not only of old much eclipsed; but even since the
Conquest (in the Barons wars) also obscured and defaced: And it is most
certain, as the destructions were many, so the restorations thereof shortly
ensued by one Prince or other: so that at length recovering it self, it is now
most worthily reputed o^e of the most famous Universities in the world. Much
Honor this place has received by the Sons and Nephews of Kings, in being
Earls thereof (viz.) William brother to Ranulph Earl of Chester, John Earl
of Henault Uncle to Philip le Beau, Queen and wife of King Edward the third,
William Marquis of Iuhars, Edmund of Langley Duke of York, Edward Duke of
York, Richard Earl of Cambridge, Richard Duke of York, and at this present
James Marquis Hamelton Earl of Arren, Baron Hamelton of Chattelrault, etc. And
howsoever the Hostles, Halls, Innes, Schools, and Religious Houses, whereof
this University since the Conquest did consist, and which now are wholly
defaced, or in part converted into some of the present Colleges, were for
their number, and for the number of Students in them, much above all that now
are extant, yet at this present it consists of sixteen goodly Colleges and
Halls, erected and maintained with the Lands and Revenues of their several
founders (one of the Chapels whereof founded by King Henry the sixth, and the
College of another founded by King Henry the eight, no University in the
world can in all points parallel) these are the Nurceries of Gods true
Religion, and Seminaries of good Literature, that by the special favor and
gracious protection of our most dread Sovereign Lord, James, by the grace of
God King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, do now enjoy all peace and
happiness.

Acad. Cantabr. 630.
Cambridge coat of arms

S. PETER'S COLL. or House. 1280.
St. Peter's College coat of arms

HVgo de Balsham, Prier of Ely, in the year 1256. founded this College,
dedicating the same to the honor of S. Peter, in the place where the two Houses
or Hostles (the one, de Poenitentia Jesus Christi; the other, Fratrum Hospitalis
S. Iohannis) stood; but the endowment was given by him when he was Bishop of
Ely, in the year 1284. at what time he translated the Friars Seculars from the
Regulars, by reason of their daily variance in the Hostle of S. John, where
they lived then together and herein established one Master, 13. Fellows, and
two Bible Clerks: since by the liberality of John Hotham, Simon de
Mount-acute, Simon Langham, and John Fordham Bishops of Ely, Thomas Lane, John
Warkworth, and Tho. Burgomi Masters thereof, M. Lund, Rob. Shorten Doctor of
Divinity, sometimes Master of Pembroke Hall, Edm. Hanson Doct. of Divinity,
Will. Martin Doct. of Divinity, Rob. Gilbert, Master Skeleton, Elizabeth
Woolfe, Margaret Fulnetby, Rob. Smith, Edw. North Baron of Chartley, Hen.
Wilshaw, Andr. Perne Doct. of Divinity, Deane of Ely, late Master; the Lady
Mary Ramsey, Rob. Warden, Tho. Warren, John Whitegift Archb. of Cant. Margaret
Dane, Rob. Slade, John Sampson, Will. Heron; the worthy Companies of
Cloth-workes and Iron-mongers of the City of London, with other Benefactors.
This College or House (being the first of all that now are standing) is much
enlarged with Buildings, Books and Revenues. So as there is at this present in
the same one Master, 17. Fellows, 21. Scholars and Bible Clerks, besides
Officers and Ser^ants of the Foundation, with other students. The whole number
being 138.

UNIVERSITY House or Hall, now CLARE Hall. 1326.
Clare Hall coat of arms

RIchard Badew Chancellor (and the University then being) founded this
College or Hall, by the name of University House or Hall, on two Messuages
and a parcel of ground, which was purchased of one Nigellus de Thornton a
Physician, situated then in a street, called Mylne street, near S. John
Zacharies Church; wherein the first sixteen years the Students lived at the
Universities charges: Afterward Walter Thaxted Master of the same, with the
consent of Rich. Lyng then Chancellor, and the University resigned the first
foundation into the hands of Elizabeth Countess of Clare widow, sometime the
wife of John de Burgo, Earl of Vlster: which Elizabeth had formerly given the
perpetual Patronage of Littlington, and bestowed many other favors upon them;
she then (under license from King Edward 3.) altered the first name, and
called it after her own name, Clare Hall. In which College now by the gift of
this honorable Foundresse, and of Tho. Stoyle, and Edm. Naturesse Masters
thereof; Rich. Thaxton, Edith Green, Will. Ducket, Walt. VVorleigh, Will.
Martial, Ralph Scriuener, Thom. Cave, D. Leeds late Master, Tho. Cecill now
Earl of Excester, and the Lady Dorothy his wife (who g^ue 108l. per annum) of
Will. Butler, sometimes Fellow and President of this House the famous
Physician (who gave in Plate, Books, etc. above 500l.) of John Freeman Esquire
(who gave 2000l.) of Doct. Scot Deane of Rochester, Sub-deane of Wels,
Sub-Almoner Vice-chan. 1619. late Master (who gave in Money, Plate, and Books
above the sum of 300l.) and diverse other Benefactors. The students are so
increased, as at this present there is in the same one Master, 18. Fellows,
36. Sch^lars, besides Officers and servants of the Foundation, with other
students. The whole number being 140.

PEMBROKE HALL. 1343.
Pembroke Hall coat of arms

MAry de S. Paul (daughter of Guido de Chastillion, Earl of S. Paul, and Mary
de Britannia his wife) Countess of Pembroke, etc. after the death of Adomarius
de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke and Wishford, Lord of Montiniac and Governor of
Scotland, etc. whose third wise she was (but for one day as it is thought)
betook her self wholly to devotion, bestowing the greatest part of her estate
on Churches, Religious Houses, the Poor and her Servants. Having built Denny
Abbey, procured license from King Edward ^. to found this House, by the name of
the College of Mary Valence, after called Pembroke Hall (within the compass
whereof, as now it stands, are the ancient Hostle of the University, S. Thomas
H^stle, Kn^ptons, Boultons, and Co^sing Places, with part of the Chaunterie
House of little S. Mary's) endowing the same with diverse Patronages,
Impropriations, Lands, Rents, Plate, Jewels, and other ornaments, and
established therein one Master, 6. Fellows, and 2. Scholars. It has been
since enlarged by the gifts of holy King Henry 6. Edw. Story Bishop of
Chi^h^st. Gerard and Nicholas Sk^with, D. Atkinson, Sir Will Hussy Knight,
Charles Booth Bishop of Heref. Sir Roger Strange Knight, D. VV^ts, Will.
Marshall, Will. Smart and Alice his wife, afterward married to Ralph
Scriuener, Jane Cox widow, all these besides, D. Sudbury, John Langhton Bishop
of S. Dauis, Laurence Booth, and Tho. Scot alias Rotheram, both Bishops of
York, Rich. Fox Bishop of Winchest. D. Shorten Deane of Stoake, Edm. Grindall,
and John Whitgist, Archb. of Canterb. Doct. Fulke, Lancelot Andrews Bishop of
Winchest. which were all Masters of this House, have by gifts of Lands, Money,
Plate, Books, etc. augmented the same, wherein there is at this present one
Master, 18. Fellows, vnus tanquam, 33. Scholars of the House, besides Officers
and Servants of the Foundation, with other students. The whole number being 145.

KATHERINE HALL. 1475.
Katherine Hall coat of arms

RObert Woodlarke, borne at Wakerley in the County of Northumberland, third
Provost of the Kings College of our blessed Lady Marie the Virgin, and Saint
Nicholas, Chancellor of this University, founded this College or Hall, in a
place called Milne-street, over against Queens College orchard; formerly
known by the name of the Carmelite Friars, of four tenements which he
purchased, dedicating the same to the honor of Saint Katherine the Virgin and
Martyr. The foundation whereof King Edward the Fourth confirmed to the said
Robert Woodlarke and his Successors by his Letters Patents for ever, for the
endowment whereof he also obtained the same Kings License of Mortmaine, to
purchase forty Marks per annum, wherein he established one Master, and three
Fellows: Since it has been enlarged by the liberalities of Isabell
Canterbury Widow, William Tailor, Katherine Miles, Robert Simpton, Hugh
Pemberton, the Lady Elizabeth Barnardiston, John Leach, Richard Nealson,
Robert Shorton Doctor of Divinity, Master of Saint John's College, after
Master of Pembroke Hall; Hugh Garret, John Chester, Doctor Green, Doctor
Thimbleby, Doctor Middleton, Rosamond Pain, Widow, John Cholmley, John Duke,
Sir John Claypole Knight, and many other Benefactors. So as at this present
there is in the same, one Master, six Fellows, eight Scholars, besides
officers, and servants of the foundation, with other Students, being in all 60.

JESUS COLL. 1496.
Jesus College coat of arms

John Alcocke borne at Beauerly in Yorkshire, Doctor of the Civil Laws, Deane
of Saint Stephens in Westminster, Master of the Rolls, Bishop of Rochester,
after of Worcester, lastly of Elie, and Lord Chancellor of England, procured
License of King Henry 7. in the eleventh year of his Reign, to convert into
a College an ancient Nunnerie, (the Nuns whereof all but two then were dead or
dispersed, and the House much wasted) formerly consecrated to S. Rhadegund, and
endowed by sundry Benefactors, whereof Malcolme 4. King of Scotland, and that
whole race of the Earls of Huntington with their Families, were the chiefest,
who gave unto the Prioresse and Nuns for their better maintenance, and to build
a Church upon the Scyte of the Manor of S. Rhadegund, and ten acres of Land
lying round about this College. He also obtained license under the Great Seal
of England, that all the lands belonging to the same Cell should be
appropriated to this his College, dedicating the same to the honor of the
blessed Virgin Marie, S. John the Evangelist, and the glorious Virgin Rhadegund
commonly called Jesus College. Wherein after he had builded and endowed the
same, he established one Master, and six Fellows, six Scholars: Since by the
liberality of Sir Robert Read Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
John Andrews, Doctor Royston, and Doctor Fuller, Masters of the same; Thomas
Thirlbie Bishop of Elie, Richard Pigot, Godfrey Foliambe, Will. Marshall, Ioane
Woods, Thomas Sutton of Balsham Esquier, and other worthy Benefactors it is so
increased, as at this present there is in the same, one Master, sixteen
Fellows, twenty two Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation
with other Students, the whole number being 130.

CHRIST'S COLL. 1505.
Christ's College coat of arms

MArgaret Countess of Richmond and Derbie, daughter and sole heir of John
Beauford Duke of Somerset, Widow of Edmund of Hadham Earl of Richmond, son
of Owen Tud^r of Wales Knight, and of Queen Katherine his wife, Dowager of
King Henry the Fifth, (half brother to King Henry the Sixth,) mother of King
Henry the Seventh; in testimony of her love to learning, obtained license of
the same King, to erect a College without Barawell gates, in Preachers street,
of four messuages and gardens, belonging to the Abbot of Tiltie, and Prioresse
of Dennie, (where King Henry the Sixth had begun the foundation of a house
called Gods House, in liew of that which had formerly been builded by William
Bingham Rector of Saint John Zacharies Church in the City of London, but was
pulled down by him when he founded Kings College) dedicating the same to the
honor of our Savior Christ; which she endowed with lands and revenues for
the maintenance of one Master, twelve Fellows, forty seven Scholars, besides
Officers and Servants. The number of which has since been increased by the
liberality of King Edward the Sixth, Doctor Tompson, and Doctor Hawford,
Masters of the same; John Hawford, Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Richard Risley,
Doctor Patisson, Philip Rowlins, Master Iennings, Nicholas Coluerwell, Thomas
Laughton, Master Wentworth, John Collins, Edmund G^indall Archbishop of
Canterbury, Robert Isham, Richard Bunting, Anthony Watson Bishop of
Chichester, Richard Carr, and diverse other worthy Benefactors: So as there is
at this present in the same, one Master, 14. Fellows, 55. Scholars, besides
Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, the whole number
being 206.

COLL. COR. CHRISTI 1351.
Corpus Christi College coat of arms

HEnry of Monmouth, surnamed Torto Collo (son and Heir of Henry of
Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth and Pomfret, Earl of Lancast. Leicest. Derby, and
high Steward of England) succeeded his father in all these Honors, and was by
King Edward the third created Earl of Lincoln, one of the Knights of the
first foundation of the most noble Order of the Garder, Duke of Lancaster, etc.
of the Fraternity or Guild of Corpus Christi and blessed Mary the Virgin,
near unto Lu^hborne Lane, and the Hostle of S. Bernard in the East (whereof
himself was then Alderman) ordained this College in the year 1351. amongst
other things, appropriating unto the same the perpetual Patronage of S.
Benedicts Church. This College since has been much beautified with
buildings, and increased revenues; by the liberality of the Lady Elizabeth
Brotherton Duchess of Norfolk, Thomas Cambridge Esquire, Sir John Cambridge
Knight (who gave a place called Stone-Hall, toward the augmentation of the
same) John Meeres Esquire-Bedle, Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir
Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England; Roger Manors, late
Earl of Rutland, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Beluoir, and Trusbut, etc. Roger
Manors his great Uncle, William Benedict, and Leonard Causton (who gave
eighteen pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence, for the maintenance of
three Scholarships, besides diverse other Benefactors. So as there is at this
present in the same one Master, twelve Fellows, 37. Scholars, besides Officers
and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students: The whole number being 145.

TRINITI HALL. 1353.
Trinity Hall coat of arms

WIlliam Bateman, borne in the City of Norwich, Doct. of the Civil Laws,
Archdeac. of Norwich, after the 18. Bishop of that See; for exchange of
certain Parsonages obtained and ancient Hostle, near adjoining to the
University House or Hall, butting upon Mylne street and S. John Zacharies
Church east, where in former time Students lived at their own charge: which one
John de Crawden Prior of Ely, had purchased for the Monks of that Priorie to
inhabit in, and made thereof a College or Hall for Students of the Law,
dedicating the same to the honor of the holy and blessed Trinity in the City
of Norwich, indowing it with Lands and Possessions: To this Hostle, before it
was by him purchased, Richard Lyng Chancellor of this University, Archibald of
Norwich, Simon de Rekenhall, and Walter Eluedon, gave four Tenements, Rob.
Stratton, John Trunch, Walter Baketon, Walter de Aldersey, and Peter de
Bittering, gave two Messuages and seven pieces of ground, one of the Messuages
being called Drakes Entry. This College has since by the bounty of Simon
Dalling, and Walter Huke, Masters of the same; Rob. Goodnap, John Maptid,
Gabriel Dun, Rich. Nix Bishop of Norwich, Steph. Gardener Master of this House,
Bishop of Winch. Matt. Parker Archbish. of Cant. D. Mowse, D. Haruey, M. Busby,
M. Hare, D. Cowell late Master, Sir George Newman Knight, and other
Benefactors, been much enlarged. So as at this present there is in the same 1.
Master, 12. Fellows, 14. Scholars besides Officers and Servants of the
foundation and other Students. The whole number. 61.

GONE. and CAI. COLLEG. 1353.
Gonville and Caius College coat of arms

EDmund de Gonuill, Rector of Terrington and Rushworth in Norfolk, obtained
license of King Edward 3. to erect this College: the first foundation thereof
he laid in the year 1348. where the Orchard of Corpus Christi College is now
standing, dedicating the same to the honor of the Annuntiation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, naming it Gonuill Hall; wherein he established one Master and 4.
Fellows. But being prevented by death in the year 1350. he gave by Will a
great sum of money in trust to Will. Bateman, Bishop of Norwich, to endow the
same with competent Possessions, which William, in the 1353. procured the said
Master and Fellows, to remove to a place near unto his own College or
Hall, where he purchased diverse Messuages and Tenements on which he erected the
same, by the former name of Gonuill (...) a place called Henny, in the Parish
of S. Michaels near S. Mary's Hostle in the South, and a place called Flex
(...) North. After John Caius Doct. of Physic a learned Antiquarie, both
increased the number of Fellows and (...) also the buildings of the same,
obtaining leave of King Philip and Queen Mary, to be a co-founder, who named
it (...) and Caius College. Since the Ladies Pakenham and Scroope, Elizabeth
Clear, D. Baly, Steph. Smith, Will. Willison, W^ (...) Tho. Atkins, Tho.
Willowes, Will. Gale, D. Wendy, Peter Huet, D. Knight, John Whitacre, Hum.
Busby, Matt. Parker Arch^ (...) Cant. Rob. Traps and Ioane his wife, Joyce
Frankland, Will. Cutting, Sir Will. Paston Knight, D. Haruey, D. Leg, and D.
(...) late Masters, Doct. Perse late Fellow, and others, have been liberal
benefactors. So as there is at this present in the same one Master, 25.
Fellows, one Conduct, 65. Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the
foundation with other Students. The whole number being 195.

KINGS COLL. 1441.
King's College coat of arms

HEnry 6. called Henry of Windsore, King of England and France, etc. (son and
heir of King Henry 5.) and of Katherine daughter of Charles 6. King of France)
began this Royal foundation, dedicating the same to the honor of S. Nicholas,
consisting then of one Master and 12. Scholars, in or about the places where
the Churches of S. Nicholas and S. John Zachary, S. Augustines Hostle, and
Gods House, had formerly been situated. But within two years after he
enlarged the first foundation, dedicating the same to the honor of our blessed
Lady Mary the Virgin and S. Nicholas. In which College at this present is
standing one of the fairest Chapels in the world; conformable whereunto he
intended to have made this his College, which by his untimely death he left
only begun, and unperfected, for some of his Royal Successors to finish.
Afterward, K. Henry 7. finished the stone work (in part) of the said
Chapel; and K. Henry 8. caused the same to be glased, seated, paued and
perfected. To this College, the Founder under his great Seal by Act of
Parliament, confirmed this Coat of Arms which here they bear, of purpose
placing in chief a Flower of France, and a Lion of England, that it may
appear to be the work of a King. Since Roger Goad D. of Divinity, late
Fellow and Provost, Adam Robins, Rich. Day, and D. Cowell late Fellows, D.
Smith late Fellow and Provost, Will. Henson late Fellow, and diverse others,
have been thereunto liberal Benefactors. In which College at this present is
one Provost, 70. Fellows and Scholars, three Chaplains, one Master of the
Choristers, six Clerks, 16. Choristers, sixteen College Officers, thirteen
Seruitors to the Senior Fellows, six poor Scholars of the foundation, with
other Students. The whole number being 144.

QVEENES COLL. 1448.
Queens' College coat of arms

MArgaret Audegauensis, daughter of Reyner, Duke of Aniou (titularie King of
Cicilie, Naples, and Jerusalem) wife of King Henry 6. obtained license of the
same King to build this College, and purchased Land of the yearly value of
200l. for the endowment thereof, dedicating the same to the honor of S.
Margaret and S. Bernard, but she dyed and left it vperfected. Afterward,
Queen Elizabeth, wife to King Edward 4. obtained license to finish the same,
which she accomplished. This College since by the liberality of the Ladies
Margerie Roos, Jane Ingoldesthorpe, and Jane Borough, Geor. Duke of Clarence
Cecily Duchess of York, Rich. Duke of Gloucester, the Lady Anne his wife, Edw.
Earl of Salisburie, Maud Countess of Oxford, Marmaduke Lomly Bishop of
Lincoln, Chancellor of this University, Andr. Ducket Rector of S. Botolphs in
Cambridge, sometimes Principal of S. Bernards Hostle, and the first President
of this College (who had formerly been a Friar, and gathered of well-disposed
persons so much money as purchased a (...) of Ground, called Goose green, in
the Parish aforesaid, whereon this College stands) Hugh Tro^ter D. of
Divinity, John Drewell, and Will Weyld, Canons of S. Paul's in the City of
London, Sir Thomas Smith Fellow of this House, principal Secretary to Queen
Elizabeth, Hen. Wilshaw, D. Stoakes, John Chetham, Hen. now Earl of
Huntingdon, John Ioslyne, George Mountaigne late Bishop of Lincoln, now Bishop
of London, together with many other noble and worthy benefactors is so
increased: As at this present there is in the same, one President, 19.
Fellows, 23. Scholars, 8. Bible Clerks, and 3. Lecturers of Hebrew, Atrithme.
and Geomet. besides other Officers and Servants of the foundation, with other
Students. The number. being 230.

S. JOHN'S COLL. 1508.
St. John's College coat of arms

THe said Margaret Countess of Richmond, etc. obtained license of her Nephew
King Henry 8. to convert an Hospital, or House of Regular Canons (founded by
Nigellus, the second Bishop of Elie, in the year 1134. afterward translated
to a Priorie, and dedicated to the honor of S. John the Evangelist in the
Jury, by Hugo de Balsham the tenth Bishop of Elie) into a College, by the
ancient name of S. John the Evangelist: the Perfecting of which work she left
to her Executors, Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, Charles Somerset Lord Herbert, and others; who did most justly
perform the trust she reposed in them. This College has been since enlarged
by the liberality of John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal, the
Lady Anne Rookesbie, Doct. Fell, Doct. Keyton, Hugh Ashton, Doct. Lupton, D.
Thimblebie, D. Downham, John Constable, Rob. Simpson, Rob. Ducket, Tho. Lane,
James Berrisford, Rob. Holitreeholme, John Replingham, Doct. Linacre, Ioh.
Baily, Doct. Tompson, Walter Sawkins, Katherine Duchess of Suffolk, John
Thurlston, Stephen Cardinal, Sir Ambrose Cave Knight, Tho. Cunnie, Doct.
Goodman, William Cecill Lord Burleigh, the Lady Mildred Burleigh, Sir Henry
Billingsley Knight, Doct. Guyne, the Lady Iermyne, Henry Heblethwaite, William
Spalding and William Spalding Brothers, Rob. Booth, Henry Aluey, Ioh. Watson,
Ioh. Waller, Marie Countess of Shrewsburie, Geor. Palyn, Will. Lord Maynard,
Baron of Wicklowe etc. and other good Benefactors: So as there is at this
present in the same, one Master, 54. Fellows, 84. Scholars, besides Officers
and Servants of the Foundation with many other Students, the whole number being
370.

MAGDALENE COLL. 1519.
Magdalene College coat of arms

EDward Stafford last Duke of Buckingham, Earl Stafford, Hereford, and
Northampton, etc. (son and heir of Henry Stafford second Duke of Buckingham,
and Constable of England) founded this College by the name of Buckingham
College: In a place where the Priorie of S. Gyles had formerly been situated,
it was after an Hostle or Hall inhabited by diverse Monks of several
Monasteries to reside and study in, and therefore, of old, called Monks
College (the backsides whereof at this present still retain the name of
Monks Corner.) Afterward in the year 1542. Thomas Audley Baron of Walden,
Lord Chancellor of England, obtained license of King Henry the Eight, to alter
the former name, and call it S. Marie Magdalene College, in the fair
University of Cambridge, unto which he gave both Lands and Revenues. The right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Chancellor of this University, being now
(by inheritance) Patron thereof: Which College by the gift of King Henry 8.
the Founder and Patron, John Spenliffe, Sir Christopher Wrey Lord Chief-Iustice
of the Kings Bench, Edmond Grindall Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas
Parkinson Rector of Wiuelingham, William Roberts, John Hughes, Thomas Sutton of
Balsham Esquier, and others, who have been Benefactors, and increased the
same, has at this present one Master, ten Fellows, and twenty Scholars,
besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation with other Students, being in
all 100.

TRINITY COLL. 1546.
Trinity College coat of arms

KIng Henry 8. etc. united Kings Hall, founded by King Edward 3. Michael
House, founded by Heruicus de Stanton Chancellor of the Exchequor to King
Edward 2. and Phiswicke Hostle, founded by Phiswicke an Esquier Bedle, into one
College, by the name of the holy and undivided Trinity, which he endowed with
1640l. per annum, In or about the places where formerly (besides these three
Houses) had also been situated, S. Gregory's Hostle, S. Katherines Hostle, S.
Margarets Hostle, S. Gerards Hostle, Tylers Hostle, and Owens Inn, Since King
Edward 6. Queen Marie, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, have been most
gracious Benefactors. Also Tho. Allen Clerk, John Whitgift Archbishop of
Canterbury, D. Cosins, Doct. Bill, and Doct. Beaumont, late Masters; Sir
Edward Stanhop Knight, Doct. of Law; Isaac Barrow Doctor of Physic, Doct.
Skeffington, William Cooper Esquier, George Palyn, Peter Shaw, William Sidley
Knight and Baronet, Sir Tho. Lakes Knight, John Suckling Knight, Doct. Fortho,
the Lady Anne Bromley Widow, Thom. Neuill Doctor of Divinity, late Master,
Deane of Canterbury, who expended above the sum of three thousand pounds in
building the back Court, which is now called Neuills Court, Robert Bankeworth
now Fellow, Sir Ralph Hare Knight: besides diverse other Noble and Generous
Benefactors have so increased the same with buildings, books, and revenues: As
at this present it is one of the most goodly and uniform Colleges in Europe,
and has been twice, within the space of three months, the Court Royal of
our Sovereign Lord King James, and of his dearest son Prince Charles, etc.
In this College is one Master, 60. Fellows 67. Scholars, 4. Conducts, 3.
public Professors, 13. poor Scholars, 1. Master of the Choristers, 6.
Clerckes, 10. Choristers, 20. Almes-men, besides officers and servants of the
Foundation, with many other Students, being in all 468.

EMANVEL COLL. 1584.
Emmanuel College coat of arms

SIr Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor and Treasurer of the Exchequor, Privy
Counselor to our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth; in testimony of his
love to learning obtained license of the said Queen, to found and erect this
College, for the maintenance of one Master, 30. Fellows and Scholars,
(nomine plurium) as the Revenues should ever be able to maintain: In the place
where in times past inhabited the Black Friars, otherwise called Fratres
Praedicantes, in the street (of them) called Preachers street: and therein
established one Master, three Fellows, and four Scholars, for the increase of
which foundation, the said Queen Elizabeth gave 16l. 13s. 4d. per annum, out
of the Exchequor. Since it has been much augmented by the liberality of
Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington etc. Sir Francis Hastings his brother, Sir
Robert Iermyn, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Killegrew, Sir Wolstan Dixie,
Sir John Heart, Sir Samuel Leonard, and Sir Thomas Skinner Knights: Doctor
Alexander Noell Deane of S. Paul's in the City of London, Doctor Leeds, Doctor
Haruey, Doctor Branthwait: Robert Tailor, Customer Smith, Nicholas Fuller,
Robert Snegg, Francis Chamberlain, Master Ellis, John Spenliffe, William
Neale, and Edmund English, Esquires: Alderman Radcliffe, John Morley, Richard
Coluerwell, Robert Johnson, John Bernes, the Lady Marie Dixie, Martha Iermyn,
Alice Owen, Joyce Frankland, Elizabeth Walters, Widows; and diverse other
Benefactors: So as there is at this present in the same, one Master, twelve
Fellows, fifty Scholars, ten poor Scholars, besides officers and servants of
the Foundation, with many other Students, the whole number being 320.

SIDNEY SUSSEX COLL. 1598.
Sidney Sussex College coat of arms

FRances Sidney Countess of Sussex (sister of Sir Henry Sidney Knight of the
Garter, L. Deputy of Ireland, and President of the Counsel of the Marches of
Wales) Widow of Thomas Radcliffe third Earl of Sussex, etc. founded this
College, by the name of the College of the Lady Francis Sidney Sussex, in a
place called the Gray Friars, builded by King Edward 1. which Friarie was at
the suppression, in the year 1546. by King Henry 8. amongst other lands given
to his College of the holy and undivided Trinity in Cambridge, and since by
Act of Parliament conuayed from the said College to the Executors of the said
Countess in Fee Ferme. For the building and perfecting whereof, she gave by
her last Will and Testament 5000l. over and above all her goods vnbequeathed,
which her Executors Henry Gray fifth Earl of Kent etc. and John Lord Harington
of Exon. perfected; endowed the same with lands and revenues for the
maintenance of one Master, ten Fellows, and twenty Scholars, since by the
bounty of the same Executors, Sir John Heart Knight, Peter Blundell, John
Freeston, Leonard Smith, James Mountague Doctor of Divinity, late Master,
Bishop of Winchester, etc. John Harrington Esquier: the Lady Lucie Countess
of Bedford, the Lady Anne Harrington, Edward Lord Mountague de Boughton, Sir
William Wilmore, and Sir George Goring, Knights; Doctor Aldrich late Master,
Doctor Fludd, Robert Rhoads, Master Iennings, Edward Cambell, and other
Benefactors it is so increased, as at this present there is in the same, one
Master, twelve Fellows, twenty eight Scholars, besides officers and servants
of the Foundation, with other Students, the whole number being 136.

The total number of Students of all degrees in this University, having Names
in every particular College with the Magistrates and daily Officers thereunto
belonging, are 3050. besides diverse young Scholars that are relieved therein,
which have no names in any College, as aforesaid.
Printed by Cantrell Leg for John Scot, by the license of the Right Honorable,
Thomas, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall of England, etc. and are
to be sold in Pope's Head Alley at the sign of the white Horse. Anno 1622.


