SERMONS OF JOHN CALVIN, UPON THE SONG that Ezechias made after he had been
sick, and afflicted by the hand of God, contained in the 38. Chapter of Esaias.
Translated out of French into English. 1560.

Newly set fourth and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London, over Aldersgate, by John Day.

And are there to be sold at his shop under the Gate.

Cum Gratia and priuilegio Regiae maiestatis.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND Christian Princess, the Lady Katharine, Duchess
of Suffolk.
IT often falls out in experience (my gracious and singular good Lady) that
some men being oppressed with poverty, tossed with worldly aduersitye,
tourmented with pain, sorenes, and sickness of body, and other such common
matters of grief, as the world counts miseries and evils: Yet having their
minds armed and fournished with prepared patience, and defense of inward
understanding, all these calamities can not so far prevail, as to make them
fall, nor yet once stoop into the state of men to be accounted miserable: but
they bear them with such constaunce, as if such afflictions were not of such
nature as other commonly do feel them, or as if those men were such upon whom
those troubles could not work their natural property. On the other side we
se some that flowyng in earthly wealth and suffisance, free from fortunes
cruelty, healthy in body, and every way to the worlds seming blessed: yet
with mind not well instructed, or with conscience not well quieted, even upon
such small chances as other can lightly bear, are vexed above measure with
reasonlesse extremity. Whereby appears that the greues of body and calamities
of fortune do so far only extend, to afflict, or make a man miserable, as
they approach to touch the mind, and assail the soul. Which proves that the
peines and diseases of mind and soul are not only the most grievous, and most
dangerous, but also they only are peinfull and perilous, and those of the
body and fortune are such as the mind uses, and makes them. So as to a sick
stomach of mind, all bodylie matters of delight and worldely pleasures are
lothesome and displeasant, as on the other side the power of a healthy soul
easily digesteth and gathers good nouriture of the hard peines, and bitter
torments of the body and fortune. He then, that cures the sick mind, or
preserves it from disease, cures or preserves not only mind, but body
also: and deserves so much more praise and thank, than the bodies Physicio^,
as the soul excels the body, and as the curing, or preservation of them
both is to be preferred before the cure of the body alone. But we se daily,
when skillful men by art, or honest neighbors having gathered understanding
of some special disease and the healing thereof by their own experiment, do
apply their knowledge to the restoring of health of any man's body in any
corporal sickness, how thankfully it is taken, how much the releued
patient accompteth him self bound to him by mean of whose aid and
ministration he finds him self helped or eased. What then deserves he, that
teaches such a receipt, whereby health both of body and mind is preserved, and
whereby if health be appaired, it may be restored, yea whereby sickness and
common miseries continuyng shall not have so much power to trouble a man as to
make him sick, or miserable? This receipte God the heavenly Physician has
taught, his most excellent Apothecarie master John Calvin has compounded, and
I your graces most bounden and humble have put into an English box, and do
present unto you. My thanks are taken away and drowned by the great excess
of duty that I owe you: Master Calvin thinks his pains recompensed if
your grace or any Christian take profit of it: because how much soever is
spent, his store is nevertheless. And for God, recompensed he can not be: but
how he is continually to be thanked, your graces profession of his word, your
abidyng in the same, the godly conversation that I have seen in you, do prove
that your self do better understand and practice than I can admonish you.

And that you may be assured, that this kind of medicine is not hurtful: two
most excellent kings, Ezechias and David, beside an infinite number have
tasted the like before you, and have found health therein, such health as
has cured them for ever, and not as common or natural reasons of Philosophy
do cure a sick or soore mind, which with easy and weak not well drawing
or cleansinge plasters, so ouerheale the wound that it festreth and breaks
out afreshe with renewed and doublye increased danger.

Such remedy as here is contained can no Philosopher, no Infidele, no Papist
minister. For what perfect help can they give to a dyseased mind, that
understand not, or believe not the only thing that must of needful
necessity be put into all medicines that may serve for a tourmented soul,
that is to say, the determined providence of almyghtie God, which ordreth and
disposes all things to the best to them that trust in him?

This Physic rests only among true beleuyng Christians, who are
persuaded that whatsoever betideth unto us, his hie wisdom that sent it, and
that sees all things, sent it of his good pleasure and decreed purpose, and
that for our benefit if we love and believe him, though our weak
understanding knows not how it should be profitable, but naturally judges
it hurtefull and unpleasant. And necessary it was that he which by
understanding of Gods hatred of sin and feeling of his justice, is subject
to fall into the most perilous peine and tourment of conflicte with sin and
desperation, should by conceyuynge of Gods mercy, and beleuyng of his
providence, have help of the most and only perfect and effectuallye working
medicine.

But in heavy case is he, that being afflicted with that dangerous disease
of the felyng of Gods wrath kindled against him, has not the co^serue of
belefe of Gods providence remainyng with him, or being ministered to him either
for feblenesse of stomach can not receive and brook it, or his oppressed
appetite being overwhelmed with gross faithless and papisticall humors can
not abide the taste of it. Woe is (I say) to them: for their disease is
dangerous and hard to be cured. For when the wretched man findyng all help of
man not able to uphold him from perishing, being stricken with the mighty hand
of God, feleth him self unable to stand, no soundnes in his body, no
strength in his limbs, no help of nature to resist the violence of that
disease that Gods displeasure has laid upon him, sees no sign of Gods grace
in his soul, but the deep wounds that Gods anger has left in his conscience,
perceives no token to argue him the elect of God and partaker of the death of
his Savior, hearing pronounced that the soul which sins shall die, knowing
him self to have sinned, and felyng him self dying: alas what help remains
in this extremity? If we think the help of papists, to beg and borrowe
others Virgins oil that have none to spare, to bye the superfluous works of
those men that say they have done more than suffiseth to satisfy Gods law and
to deserve their own salvation, to appease God with such extraordinary
devised service as he never commanded, and such like unwholesome stuff as
papisticall soulesleaers have ministered to Christian patientes: If (I say) we
think these good and sufficient medicines: alas, we do nothing thereby, but
plant untrue security, promise health, and perform death: the pa^ges whereof
when the deceived sick man feleth, he to late espieth the falshod of the
murtherous Physicia^. The pore damned soul in Hell tourmented with the
lamentable peines that turmoile him, from whom God the only author of joy and
comfort is absent, perceives to late how wandering the wrong way from heaven,
he is fallen into Hell. That selly wretch flaming in the infernal fire
feleth, alas, to late that they which gave him man's medicines to drink, have
slain his soul: they which taught him to trust of salvation by ma^s devises
have set his burning heart in that place of flames, where th'euerlasting Chaos
suffers no drop of Gods mercy to descend: they which taught him to seek
health any other where tha^ in the determined purpose of God, that has sent
his own son for our rede^ptio^, have spoiled him of all benefit of
redemption. He feleth at length all to late how by fault of ill diet and
through poisonous potions which his ignorant corrupted and traitorous
Physicion suffered him to use, and bad him to take, he lies dead eternally.

But on the other side, when the beleuynge Christian falls (as God has made
none to stand whereby they should not need his mercy to raise them when they
are fallen) he knows whither to reach his hand to be raised up again:
being stong with the stinge of the scorpion he knows how with oil of the
same scorpion to be healed again: being wounded with the justice of God that
hates sin, he knows how with the mercy of the same God that pardons
sin to have his peine assuaged and hurt amended. He knows that whom God
has from eternity appointed to live, shall never die, howsoever sickness
threaten: no misery, no tentation, no peril shall avail to his everlasting
overthrow. He knows that his safety is much more surely reposed in Gods
most steadfast and unchangeable purpose, and in the most strong and almightye
hand of the alknowynge and alworking God, than in the wavering will and feeble
weakness of man. This heals the Christians sickness, this preserves him from
death, this makes him to live for ever. This medicine is in this little book
brought from the plentiful shop and storehouse of Gods holy testament, where
Gods ever abiding purpose from beyond beginning is set fourth, to the
everlasting salvation of some, and eternal confusion of other. Beside that,
this book has not only the medicine, but also an example of the nature of the
disease, and the mean how to use and apply the medicine to the^ that be so
diseased. For when a man languishing in corporal sickness, hears his
neighbor report unto him, or himself has before time seen in an other the
same cause of sickness, the same manner of fits, passions, alteratio^s, and in
every point the same qualities of sickness, and the same disposition of body
that he knows and feleth in him self: it gives him assurance, and makes him
to know that he is sick of the same disease that the other was: whereby knowing
how the other was healed, what diet he kept, what Physic he took, he does
with the greater boldness, confidence of mind, and desire, call for, taste, and
gredely receive that healthful and lifefull medicine whereby he saw and knew
his neighbor healed, and with the greater care keeps the same diet wherewith
he saw and knew the other preserved. So here this good souls Physicia^ has
brought you where you may se lyinge before your face the good king Ezechias,
sometime chillinge and chattering with cold, sometime languishing and meltyng
away with heat, now fresing, now fryeng, now spechelesse, now crying out,
with other such piteous panges and passions wrought in his tender afflicted
spirit, by guilty conscience of his own fault, by terrible consideration of
Gods justice, hy cruel assaults of the tyrannous enemy of man's salvation,
vexynge him in much more lamentable wise than any bodily fever can work, or
bodyly flesh can suffer. On the other side for his help, you se him sometime
throw up his ghastly eyes, staring with horror, and scant discernynge for
peine and for want of the lively moisture to feed the brightness of their sight.
You se him sometime yeldyngly stretch out, sometime struglinglye throw his
weakened legs not able to sustein his feeble body: sometime he casts abroad,
or holds up his white and blodles hand toward the place whether his soul
longs: sometime with falling chappes, he breaths out imperfect sou^des,
gasping rather tha^ calling for mercy and help. These things being here laid
open to sight and remainyng in remembrance, (as the horror and piteous
spectacle can not suffer it to fall out of a Christian tender mind) if we
feel our selves in like anguishe, we find that the disease is the same that
Ezechias had, and so by conuenience of reason must by the same mean be
healed. The^ behooves us to remember or to be infourmed by our diligent
Physician or charitable neighbor, how we saw Ezechias healed, whom we
imagine in this Book to see, both dying, revived, and walking after health
recovered. There we se the heavenly Physician anoint him with the merciful
Samarita^s oil, purge the oppressing humors with true repentance, strengthen
his stomach with the wholesome conserve of Gods eternal decree, and expel his
disease, and set him on foot with assured faith of Gods mercy, and staieng his
yet vnstedy pace and foltring legs with the sweet promyses of Gods almyghtye
goodness. So learn we what Physicians help we shall use: and this medicine
being offered us, we are bold to take it, because we know it will heal us.
And being healed, knowing and hearing it confessed, that sin was the cause
and nourishement of Ezechias disease, we learn a new diet, and to feed as
Ezechias his Physician and ours apointeth, absteinyng from things hurtful
taking things healthful as he prescribes. So does the Christian atteine his
health, so being attemed he preserves it for ever. And as it is true that
second and returned sicknesses by surfit or misdemenour are most cruel and
dangerous, so holds he yet this also for truth, that to this Physicia^ with
this medicine, no disease never so long rooted, never so often returned, is
incurable. Being then thus much beholden to this Physician we must needs
confess that we owe unto him our life and health, and all that we be or have.
And for his faithful minister master Calvin, I beseech your grace with me, to
wish him Gods benefit of eternal happy life for his reward, even as I wish
your grace continual health of life and soul for your preservation, not only
for this new year, but also for the time that shall excede all extent of
years, besechinge you to accept both my work and prayer.

Concerning my translation of this book, it may please you to understand that I
have re^dred it so nere as I possibly might, to the very words of his text,
and that in so plain English as I could express: Such as it is, I beseech
your grace to take it good part.

Your graces humble A. L.

The writing of Ezechia king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness. I said in the cuttyng short of my days, I shall go
down to the gates of the grave. I have sought the residue of my years, I said
I shall not see the Lord, the Lord in the land of the living. I shall not
behold man any more, nor those that dwell in the world. My life is withdrawn,
and is changed like a shepeherdes lodge.
AS the name of God is immortal, and we ought to trauaill that they which
come after us, do call upon it, and that it be honored and glorified in all
times: So is it not enoughe, that during our life, we endeavor our selves to
honor God: but as I have said before, our care should extend it self to the
time to come, to the end we may have in store some continuyng seed of
religion, in such sort as the truth of God may never be abolished. But
speacilly they whom God has ordained in any estate to guide other, ought
therefore so much the more to apply themselves unto it. As also we se that S.
Peter declaryng his end to be nere, 2. Pet. 5.
and that he should depart out of this world: adds that so much as he
possibly may, he would make the doctrine which he preached, to remain
always in force and memory, that me^ might take profit after his death. Behold
now wherefore Ezechias was not contented to make this protestation which we
read here, with his mouth, but would also write it, that to the end of the
world men might know how he had been vexed in his affliction, and that the
same might serve for doctrine to all the world: so as at this day we may take
profyt thereof.

He says expressly that this wrytinge was made after he was recovered. For
oftentimes when we are touched either with sickness or any other ^od of God, we
make protestations enough, but we do nothing else but shake our cares (as the
proverb is) when we are escaped, and we by and by forget al those things which
we made a show as if we knew. But here it is showed us that the king Ezechias
being recovered, forgot not the correction which he had received at the hand
of god, nether the anguishes which he felt, but minded to make a memorial of
the whole, that those which come after might be enstructed thereby.

But it appears at the first show that this writing serves not for any
instruction of them that should read it, but should rather be an offe^se. For we
see the outrageous passions of a man as it were ravished in mind which so
abhors death, that he thought all to be lost when god should take him out of
the world, and in this we see nothing but the sin of infidelity. He
tormenteth and rages with himself (as it seems) with a rebelling, uncomely
for a servant of god: to be short it appears that we can gather nothing of
this song, but yt all the faith which Ezechias had was only in his prosperity
and quiet, and also that he gave the bridle to much unto him self in his
heaviness, in so much that he complained of god, as we see that he compared
him to a Lion. But when all shall be well considered, we shall see that there is
no instruction better or more profitable for us than this. For when we shall
have well examined all that is in us, then we shall know that the same is also
propre unto our selves.

But first let us note how the good king Ezechias did not here set fourth his
own virtues to be praised of the world, for he might have kept in silence that
which he has declared of his own waywardness, and in place thereof he might
have spoken of his request made to God, and the constance of his faith: So
then he says not that he was of valiant courage, that he overcame al
tentations without any stop or strife, he says not that he had a faith so
steadfast that it nothing trobled him to be corrected of ye hand of god:
nothing of al this* what then? we see a poor man tormented even to the
extremity, and so stricken down, that he wiste not what might become of him.
We se a man astonished with rear of the wrath of God, lokyng on nothing but
his own affliction. Then seeing Ezechias does discover him self, and sticks
not to confess his own faults, in this we perceive that he was not led of
ambition, nether of any vain glory to be praised of me^, or to get reputation,
but he rather was willing him self to be co^fou^ded with shame, ye god might be
glorified. What is then his purpose? It is in one part to make us know how he
had been afflicted then, when he thought that God was against him: and moreover
that therein men might know somuche the more how great the goodness of God was,
when he received him to mercy, and would not forsake him in necessity.

We have then to behold here, as in a loking glass, our own wekenes, to the
end that every man may prepare himself against the time when his faith shall be
proved as the faith of Ezechias was, and when God shall show us some tokens of
his wrath, so as if then we seem in manner destroyed, yet we cease not therefore
to trust that God will give to us an end of our troubles, as he did to this
good king. Next to this, that we may learn to give al praise of our safety to
the mercy of God, knowledging that so sone as he forsakes us, we are utterly
undone, and that then we become more then miserable.

And now we see how, and wherefore the good king Ezechias was thus tourmented,
that is, because he saw death so nere at hand. It seems at the first face,
that such passion besemeth not a faithful man. True it is that of nature death
is dreadful to us al. For there is no man but (as they say) desires to be,
and in death we think that we perish, yt we be brought to naught, and cease
to be. Thus of nature we fly from and abhor death* 2. Cor. 5
and therefore also S. Paul says in the v. chapter of the second epistle to
the Corinthians. that we do not desire to be unclothed of this body for it is
impossible for man to desire to change his estate, I mean as concerning this
life. And those that do kill them selves have no natural affection, but the
Devil so carries them away that they are altogether blinded. And such are to
be rekened as unnatural monsters, in whom all the order of nature is changed.
To be short it is most assured that death shall be always to us terrible, and not
only because we are inclined to desire to to live, but also for so much as
God has left a certain mark, in such sort that the Heathen the^ selves
and the unfaithful are constrained to feel that death is a curse of God, which
was pronu^ced upon Adam, and al his lineage. For as much then, as death is come
upon the world by sin, and that it is a witness of the wrath of God, that by
it we are as it were cast of from him, banished from his kingdom (which is the
kingdom of life) it must needs be, although we have no light of faith neither
ever had any one word of doctrine, that this be imprinted in our minds, that
it is naturallye unpleasant unto us. Behold then by what means we are brought
to fly death, and to withdraw our selves from it so much as we possibly
may. First because we are desirous to be: secondly for that we conceive death
to be a certain sign of Gods wrath: yea although we hard thereof no
certain instruction, yet God has printed a certain natural instinction and
feling thereof within our hertes. Yet notwithstanding it is also true that
the faithful do overcome those fears, and do prepare them selves to die when
it pleases God, but not (as the place speaks which we have alleged out of
S. Paul) in such sort that they simply and without other consideration desire
to die, for yt were ye doing of me^ in desperatio^, but they prepare the^
selves, for as much as they know, yt after they have been unclothed they shall be
clothed again, yt this body which is but a ruinous lodgyng, is nothing but
rotte^nes, and yt they shall be restored to ye kingdom of god. For as much as the^
we behold this hope yt is given us, thus we overcome the fears of death. Besid
this on ye other side, we know yt our lord Jesus Chrst has repared this
desolatio^ and ruin yt fell upon us by ye sin of our father Ada^. So because
we take hold of life in the midst of death, yt makes us yt we are not afraid
to wtdraw our selves hence when god calls us to him, for we know yt death is
but a passage to life. moreover we know what is our true being: It is not to
dwell in this world, for this is but a through fare, and we must alwai have in
remembrance, yt which is spoken yt god places men here only to ma^nage the^,
and to make the^ to fetch their co^passes (as they say) and suddenly to turn
again. The^ when we are taught yt our life is nothing else but a course, and
the the world is but a shadow, which passes and vanishes away: we know yt our
true being, and our permane^t estate is in heaven, and not here by low. Thus se
we how we ought not to fly death: but (yt more is) we have occasion to desire
it, because on the one side we are frail, and being holden under the bondage of
sin, we se so mani corruptions in our selves yt it is woeful, and when we
desire to serve God we draw up our legs, and when we lift up one foot thinking
to set forward one step, we slip backward, and often it comes to pass yt we
stu^ble or fall. Se now how just a cause we have to lament our life, not in way
of despeir, but because we ought to hate and abhor sin, We ought also to
desire god to draw us out of this so miserable captivity wherein we are, as s.
Paul shows us example. Romans 7.
He confesses him self to be unhappy, because he dwells in his bodi as a
prison. He asks how he shall be delivered. On the other side, we know yt we
ought to desire death ye more yt we might come nere to our God. 2. Cor. 5.
For (as it is said in this place yt we have alleged) while we live by faith
we are as it were absent from God. The^, where is our felicity and perfect
joy? but in this yt we cleave to our God in perfection. Far as much the^, as
by death we come nere to him, it is a thing to us happy, and which ought to
make us joyful. And therefore he says in the first chap. to the Philip.
Philip. 1.
that as touching him self, it should be more auau^tage to him to die then to
live, and although his life was profitable to the church, yet in having no
other regard, but to his own person, he was desirous to be drawn away from
this place by low: mark the^ what ought to be ye affection of ye faithful. Now
let us come to king Ezechias. It seems yt he had lost al manner taste of ye
goodness of God, yt he knew nothing of ye resurrection, yt he was ignorant yt he
should be restored by mean of ye redemer, he conceived nothing but the wrath
and curse of God: where is his faith? where is his obeidie^ce: where is this
co^solatio^ of the holy Ghost, and this joy inestimable, which we ought to
receive when God certifieth us of ye love which he bears us? In deed if he
had had this persuasion deply roted in hi^, yt he was one of ye children of
god: does not ye adoption bring ye i^herita^ce? to what end has god chose^ us
for his children, but yt we should be partakers of ye heavenly life whereunto he
guides us* but we se none of all this in Ezec. It seems the^ that he was
altogether distraught from sense and reason, that he has forgotten God: that
all the good doctrine that ever he heard before is utterly blotted out, and
that he thinks no more of it. These things at the first show, seem very
strange. True it is that at that time he had no such revelation of the
heavenly life, as we have at this day by the gospel. But yet Ezechias and all
the other holy kings and Prophets, and all the rest of the faithful did well
conceive that God had not chosen them in vain. For though this se^te^ce of our
lord Jesus Christ was not pronounced, Math. 22
yet was it engraued in the herts of all the faithful that God is not the God
of the dead. All they then that are comprised in the number of his people have
been assured to have an abidyng life, and that shall endure for ever. And on
the other side it is said that God calls him self the God of Abraham, of
Isaac and of Jacob long after their death. It must needs be the^ that they then
lived. So therefore the faithful have this assurau^ce that God did not
nourishe them in this world as brute beasts, but he gave them a certain taste
of his goodness, until such time as they might have full enioyinge thereof
after their death. Number. 23
Even Balaam himself which never knew any thing of the law, yet he failed
not to say: I wish my soul to dye the death of the righteous, and my end to
be such as theirs shall be. He desires to join him self with the race of
Abraham, and yet he was a wicked and refused man And who makes him to speak
thus: eue^ this, that he is there as upon the rack, and God wringeth out of
him this confession. Now if Balaam which was possessed of the Devil, and gave
out his tongue to hyre, to curse the people of God, has been constreined to
say thus, what shall we think of them that had trewlye profyted in the law of
God? But howsoever it be, true it is that thold fathers had not so clear and
manifest knowledge of the heavenly life as we have at this day in the
Gospel, and in deed the same was reserved until the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And with good reason: for we have a good gage of our life in our
savior Jesus Christ, in that he is risen again, and that it was not for him
self alone but for all his body. This is the full assurance that God has
given in the parson of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we pass through this world
to come to the life that lasts ever. The ancient fathers came not to such
degree, they were not so auaunsed. But howesoeuer it were it is so that the
taste which they had of the heaue^lye life so suffised them, that they rendered
them selves peaseably to God. And we read not that they were greatly
tourmented in their death, as when Abraham departed, he made not lamentations,
wayling and complaints, as the king Ezechias did: but he was filled and
satisfied with life, says the scripture. Gene. 25.35.49.
In like manner was it of Isaac and Jacob, who rendering the last groan says:
I will put my trust in thy salvation, my God. Though Jesus Christ had not yet
appeared unto the world, yet Jacob had in him self a steadfast and undoubted
hope, and made him self as sure of his salvation, as if he held it in his
hand. So then we see that the holy fathers were not in doubt or such mistrust,
that they did not always aspire unto the heavenly life, but that it was their
chief desire to atteine thereunto.

Now let us return to the king Ezechias. We must conclude that he had some
special reason in him self, why he so complained of death, which we shall
better see in the person of David. David is sometimes in such anguyshes that
he cries, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 30.
alas my God, who is he that shall acknowledge thee in death: And when I shall be
a poor rotten carrion, what profit shall thou have? when thou shall have
brought me into ashes, what is it that thou shall have gained? 1. Reg. 2 1.
Par. 29.
He made there his complaints, nevertheless in the end he dyed peaseably. For no
man saw that he was so passioned in his departing, but that he rendered him self
mildly into the hands of God. How came it then to pass that he wrote thus?
It is because he conceived the wrath of God, whether it were in sickness, or in
any other affliction, and that is as much as if the very hels were presently set
before him. The affliction then that he conceived, was not of simple death, but
yt God gave him some sign that he punished him because of his sins. Now
seeing yt we se, this same disputation in the parson of David, it shall be easy
for us to co^clud touching the king Ezechias yt he was also grievously vexed in
his death, but that was not for that he was loath to depart out of this world,
neither that he was tourmented as the poor Infidels which aspire not to a
better life, which are also as it were drowned in their delites, and bring them
selves on sleep in such sort that they set nothing by the heavenly life. We
see that Ezechias was not so stricken down, and yet he thought that God was
against him, as we shall se yet more largely. And in deed it was not without
cause that the Prophet Esaias was sent unto him, for he was as a Heralde of
arms, to make him defiaunce, and to declare unto him: Behold God is thine
enemy: thou must sustain his extreme rigor, for thou haste offended him.
When Ezechias heard that, he had no regard to ye simple death, by the which he
must of necessity pass, but he has an other end of consideration, yt he
should be cut of from the world as an accursed creature, as one unworthy, who^
the earth should bear. And when God stroke him, that gave a toke^ to him that
the land should be made desolate, for he knew what should be the estate of the
people: he saw that all should be destroyed after his death, if God did not
remedi it by miracles. And he thought thus: My death shall not be only to
send me into the throat of hell, but it shall be to bring a general
ouerflowyng over all, so that in all the land there shall be nothing but
desolation. Shall the service of God then be thrown dowen, and shall all this
be cast upon my neck because I have offended my God? Alas, and what shall this
be? Let us not now think it strange if Ezechias speak thus as we hear, but
let us hold this always that it is not the simple death which did affraye him
so. What then? the wrath of God, when he beheld his sins, and that God took
away from him all savor of his goodness, and turned his back unto him as if he
had seen him armed against him, and lifted up his arm, as if he would bring
him to naught.

When Ezechias saw that, he was so confounded that his mouth was stopped, and
not without cause.

Now this is right worthy to be noted, for there are many blockish persons
(and the most part) which fear death, but it is not because they feel the
curse of God appear to them. It is true as we have said before, that God
leaves always this point in the conscience of man, but they have not all alike
consideration thereof. Wherefore is it then that death is dreadful unto them?
because every one will say, I desire to be. Truly when they speak in this
manner it is as much as if they said I would be a calfe, or an ass, or a dog,
for the being of brute beasts is in this world, and the being of men where is
it, but in this that they are joined to their God? But now we are as it were in
prison, for in stead that this world should have been unto us as an earthlye
paradise (if we had continued in the obeidience of God) now we are as in a
strange country, wherein we be as locked up and banished. It is true that yet
we se many times some, yea many trackes of the goodness of God, but how so ever
it be, yet we do but languish here. But there are but few that know this. So
much yt more the^ ought we to note well this doctrine, which I have here before
touched, that is to wit, that both in death, and in all other afflictions we
are more accombred and troubled with the wrath of God than with the evil that
we can feel. If one be afflicted with poverty, so that he has hunger and
thirst, an other be stricken with sickness and suffer great tourmentes, another
be persecuted of men so as he has no time of rest, and more if in the end
death come before our eyes, we ought to know that there is nothing so much
to be feared as the wrath and vengeance of God. But men do clean contrary.
And this mark, why I have said that we must note this doctrine the better:
because a man may se that the pore sick persons, and they that are afflicted,
in what sort soever it be, will cry Alas, one will cry the arms, another will
cry the legs, the one here, the other there: but yet they come never to the
ground of the evil. And that proceeds of the leprosy that is in us. For we
are so dull witted that we can not atteine to know the judgment of God. So
much the more ought we to learn when we shall be beaten with such rods as I
have said to make us look upon the cause whence this evil proceeds: which is,
that God will have us to feel our sins, and that he sommoneth us to the end
that we should there come as it were before our judge, and that we should not
come there with sleyghtes and means of excuse, but with frank and free
confession, and that the same be not only made with mouth, or assent by
writing, but that we be wounded eue^ to the bottom of the heart, feeling what
it is to have done against the will of our God, to have styrred him up against
us, and to have made war against his justice. This is it that we have to
hold in mind when we see that the king Ezechias was in such extremity of
anguish, because God did punish him for his sins.

Yea and this we ought to mark well, that though before he have protested that
he had walked in purity and uprightness of life, and that he had studied all
his life long to obey and please God, nevertheless he rests not his mind
upon his virtues, nor his own merits, he enters not into plea with God, for
he sees well that all that could nothing profit him nor bring him and
relefe. Therefore he sets not fourth what his life has been, but he
knowlegeth that rightfullye he is afflicted.

So then we learn, when it shall please God to correct with his rods, not
to grudge at it, as if he did us wrong, as if he had no regard to our
merits, or as if he used greater sharpnes with us than we had deserved. Let al
such blasphemies be beaten down, and let us confess that he has just cause to
punish us, yea not only to expulse us out of the world, but also to throw us
down into the gulf of hell. See then how we deserve to be ordered if we
look upon all our own life.

Moreover let us not think it strange that god sends us afflictions which
seem grievous and sharp unto us, seeing we see that Ezechias has walked
before us to show us the way. Men when they have had any good affection and
desire to serve god, do much marvel if god punish them more then the wicked,
and they suppose that they have lost their labor. This tentacion is to common,
as we see, that eue^ David was also tormented with it when he says: what
means this? for I see the despisers of God prosper and be in iolitie, Psalm.
73.
and make their triumphs, and in the mean time I do nothing but sup up the
drink of sorrow, from the evening to the morrow I have no rest. It seems
then that it is time lost to serve God: Behold how at the extremity he is
beaten down, if God by his wonderful virtue had not vpholden him. And because
the like may come unto us, let us make us a buckler of the example that is
here set before us of the king Ezechias: for we have seen here before how he
had framed all his life to the law of God: he had a zele which is not to be
found in many people, to purge al his land of all superstitions and
ydolatries: many alarumes were stirred up against him, to make him somewhat to
reuolte: but that nothing stayed him but that he set up the true and pure
religyon, and in his private life he sought nothing but that god might be
gloryfyed in, and through all: and yet look how God comes to assail him:
yea, and that of a strange fashion, for he is as a lion that breaks his
bones: So when we see that Ezechias, is thus handled, ought not we to learn to
bear patiently the corrections that God shall send us. Lo this is it that
we have to conceive of this place.

Now to the rest of the passions that Ezechias endures, and although he slipped
here of the henges yet still in the midst thereof he declares the love that he
had to God, and that he desired not this present life after the manner of them
that are therein become brutish, and which seek for nothing but to eat and
drink, and know not for what end they are created, but only to pastime here
for a while. But Ezechias shows well that he was guyded by an other spirit.
He sayethe I have said in the cutting short of my days. I shall go down to the
gates of the grave, I shall not se any more the Lord: even the Lord. He
speaks here of his life, that it shall be cut of in the mids of his course:
But yet he shows that he desires not here to live to be at his ease. He was
a king, and might have fared well, he moughte have had great store of
delicates, and pleasures in this world, shortly he might have made him self
dronk with all sorts of things of delight. He mourns not for want of all
these: but he says, that he shall no more see the Lord, and he is not
contented to have pronounced this word once, but he repeteth it again to
express a greater vehemency: The Lord, even the Lord, says he: By this he
shows that he desires not so much his life, as to exercise him self here
beneth to know that God was his father, and to confirm him self more and
more in that faith.

Let us then mark well whereunto our life is to be directed, that is, that we
should perceive that God already in part shows him self a father toward us.
I grant it true (as I have already said) that we are absent from him, for our
salvation lies in faith and hope, it is hydden and we see it not with
natural sense. Yet in the mean while God fails not to se^d down certain
beams hither by low to lighten us so, as we be guided to the hope of the life
everlasting and perceive that God is not so far estraunged from us, but that
yet he stretches fourth his hand hither by low to have care of us, and to
show us by experience that he has us in his safekeping. For when the sun
rises in the morning, se we not what a fatherly care God has for us? After
when it goes down at euenyng, see we not that God has an eye to our wekenes,
that we may have rest, and be somewhat releued? Does not God then in so hydyng
the sun in the night time, show him self our father? Further, when we se
the earth bring forth her fruits for our nourishement: when we se the raynes
and all the chaunges, and alterations that are in nature: in all this perceive
we not that God has his hand stretched out to draw us always unto him, and how
he already shows him self a liberal father unto us, and that we enjoy the
temporal benefits which he does for us, to the end that by this mean we may
be drawn up hyer, that is to say, to know that he has adopted and made us
his children, that we may come to the fulness of joy and of all felicity, when
we shall be fully joined with him? Behold now whereunto we ought to apply all
our life, if we will not that the same be accursed, and that as many years,
months, days, hours, and minutes as we have lived here by low, all the same
be put together in account, for ever to encrese, and inflame the vengeance of
God upon us. And therefore let us know that we ought here to study upon the
works of God. For even therefore also are we set in this world, and therefore
in the v. chapter, Esaias. 5.
when the Prophet minded to rebuke the Jews of a certain vile brutishnes.
They have not (says he) beholden the works of God. He speaks of their
drunkenness, of their gluttony, and of their dissolute lives, but the lump
that makes up the heap of evil is this, that they have not beholden the
works of God. So now the good king Ezechias shows us, that it were better
for us all to have died before we had been borne, and that the earth should
have gaped when we came out of our mothers womb, to swallow us, tha^ to live
here by low, if it were not for this, that we do here already see our God:
not that we have a perfect sight. But first he shows himself unto us by
his word, which is the true lokyng glass. And next, we have above and beneath
so many signs of his presence, and of the fatherly care which he has for
us, that if we be not to much dulwitted, and altogether vnfornisshed of
understanding and reason, we must needs see him. For all the world is as a
lively image, wherein God sets fourth unto us his virtue and highness.

Moreover, this that we are governed under his hand, is a more familiar witness
of his justice, of his grace and of his mercy. Let us then learn to live to
this end, to practice our selves to worship God as him that has created and
fashioned us. Next, that we bear to him honor and reverence as to our father,
and that in the tastinge of good things (which he now deals among us) We
may be confyrmed in the faith of the Heavenly life. And further, for as much as
he vouchsafes to extend his providence even hither by low, for this intent to
govern us in this transitory and frail life, that we doubt not, when we shall
come unto him, that then we shall behold face to face that, which we now see
darkely and in a small portion.

And so the king Ezechias remitteth all to God, as if he should say: Alas it is
true that I am here, as to behold clearly the graces of God. But now I see
that all this is as it were plucked from me: For it seems that God is minded
to spoil me of all that he has given me before: and now there rests no more
for me but to despair, for as much as he has given over and forsaken me. He
has sent his prophet with this message, that I am undone. Alas, and when I
perceive no more sign of the goodness of my god, neither that he extends this
strength to comfort me in my afflictions: no not when I am in the anguishes of
death: Lo is not this a woeful thing that our Lord has forsaken me there, and
that I am cut of from him? Now of this we have to gather, that be it in life,
be it in death, this grace only should always suffice us: that is to say,
that God gives us the feeling of his goodness. And when he shows us that he
is favorable unto us, let us go on boldly, and if we la^guish in this life,
let us leave it patiently. True it is that we may well groan and sigh that we
are captives, in this prison of sin: and besid we yt may also bewail seeing
these afflictions yt God does send the^ upon us. And yet ought we not to cease
always ^s bless the name of God, and to rejoice in the myddest of all our
sorrows. When we shall feel that he will be our father, and that he will know
us for his children, in death we shall behold everlasting life, which shall
make us forget all lamentations, so as we shall no more say: Alas what shall I
do?

How shall I behave my self? Whither shall I go? We shall cut of all these
things, and we shall say no more: Shall I drink no more? shall I eat no
more? For such is the manner of brut beasts. But now I se that my God draws
near unto me, I go now to throw my self down before him, I go to yield my
self into his hands, and to join my self with him, as with mine own father.
When (I say) we shall shall be thus dispoied, Psalm. 31. Luke. 23.
we may say with David. Lord I commend my spirit unto thee. David said this
during his life, but our Lord Jesus Christ shows us that we must so say when
God draws us out of this world. And last of all, when we think upon all the
benefits of god, let us learn to glorify him, as these be things
inseparable. According then as God makes us partakers of his graces and that
already in part he shows us yt al our felicity is to be of the company of
his children, so ought every one of us to endeavor to honor him as our father.
Jonas. 2.
This was the cause why Jonas being drawn out of the whales throat, says: I
shall bless my God. He says not, I shall live to eat and drink: But I shall
come to the temple the sanctuary of my God, and there I will give him praise
for this redemption, that is to wit, for that he has plucked me back from
the death. Behold now what it is that we have to do.

Now concerning that which Ezechias speaks of the cuttynge short of his
days, Psalm. 90.
he speaks as having respect to the natural course of man's life whereof is
made mention in the song of Moses, for he began to reign at the age of xxv.
years* In the xiiii. year of his reign, Jerusalem was beseged, and then he
fell into this sickness, as we se. Thus was he xxxix. years old. Now he says
that his life is cut short, because he is not come to old age. True it is yt
Moses speaks of the frailty of men, and says: What are men? After that God
has let them walcke here their days, then they are gone again. And in deed
when man comes to lx. years, he is al decayed, and if ye add x. years
more, there is nothing but lothsomnes and werines, he is nothing but a burden
unprofitable, and life it self is combersom unto him. He shows the^ that
this lif being short and frail, ought not to hold us. But howsoever it were,
this king Ezechias was as in the flower of his age, he was not yet come to the
age of xl. years. And in this respect he says that God has cut short his
days, not that we have any time determined. For do not children die sometimes
before they come into this world, and so sone as they be come, does not death
already besege the^? But he was not yet come to that old age, which is
according to the ordinary course of man's life. Ezechias than beholds this:
and above all things has his eyes fastened upon this message of the Prophet
Esaias, that is, that God has punished him because of his sins. And it is
as much as if he should say talking to him self. I see well that God will not
leave thee in this world, for the assault is very violent. And whereof comes
that, but of thy offenses and sins: as we shall see that he adds
afterward. It is true that he attributes al unto God as unto his judge, but
he took the fault upon his own parson, confessyng him self only to be
culpable. Lo how he understands that his days were cut short.

When he says that he shall come to the gates of the grave, that he shall se
no more the living:

That was because he should be conversant no more among men, to exercise him
self in the service of God. But now this is not without cause that in it also
he conceived the wrath of God. Although he were subject to dwell as it were
confusely myngled among many rascalles, as in deed there were many Hypocrites
in Judah, and many wicked and dissolute persons mockers of God, and of his law.
And among the Heathen there was nothing else but ungodliness, and rebellion. Now
when Ezechias saw that, I know now (says he) that I am unworthy to dwell
upon the earth, because these tarry still in the world, and God has cut me of,
yea with a strong hand, as if he would come armed to make open war against me
as my enemy.

Then when Ezechias had such imaginations, it is not to be marueyled though
he made such complaints. But howsoever it were, all comes to this end that
God did persecute him. This same was to him a burden so heavy that he as it
were foltred under it. So much the better ought we to note this doctrine,
that if God at any time shall afflict us, more hardelye than we would that he
should, we should not cease for all that hear to acknowledge that he loves
us, and that this persuasion which we shall have of his goodness should make us
to overcome al temtations which otherwise might overthrow us.

Furthermore, if he reprove us, and cause us to feel our sins: that we run
unto him, and take the condemnation upon us: For we shall gain nothing by all
our startynge hoales: if we will plead, of necessity the case must pass
with him. Then when we see that God is just in punisshynge us for our sins,
let us come with head bowed down, that we may be releued by his mercy: and
let us have no other confidence, nor trust of salvation, but in this that it
pleases him in the name of our savior Jesus Christ, to receive us to
mercy, for as much as in us there is nothing but cursednes.

Now let us throw our selves down before the majesty of our good God, in
the acknowledgynge of our sins, besechynge him, that more and more, he will
make us to feel them, and that he will in such sort cleanse us from all our
fylthynesse, that we being perfectly awaked from our dull drowsinesse, may
groan and sobbe: not only for the miseryes that we see in the world through
our sins: but also because we cease not so much as in us lies, more and
more to augement the same.

And yet always let us run to our God, and although it seems that he
persecuteth us, and that his hand be very roughe and dreadful unto us, yet
let us not cease to approach unto him, and magnify his goodness: being
assured that it shall very well surmount far, and exccade all our faults
and offenses.

And though we feel no rigor in him, yet nevertheless let us acknowledge that
it is much better for us to draw home to his house, and under his safegarde,
than to run away from him as wretched despering persons, and let us beseech
him to give, not only unto us this grace, but also to all peoples. etc.

THE SECOND sermon.
My life is withdrawn, it is changed as a shepeherds lodge. I have cut of my
days as a weauer, he has oppressed me with sickness. From morning until
night thou shall consume me. I made rekenyng to go until morning, but he has
bruised my bones as a Lion. Thou shall destroy me from morning to night, and
shall make an end of me. I chattered like a Crane, and swalow, and mourned
like a Dove, my eyes were lift up on high, and they failed me. Trouble
oppresses me, Lord refresch me. What shall I say, it is he that has spoken
it, and it is he also who has done it.
EZechias continuynge the matter which yesterdaye was entreated of, says
here that his life was changed as a shepherdes lodge. By this similitude he
shows that there is no rest in the life of man, which he had proved in him
self, for as much as he was as it were at rest, and in one moment God took him
out of this world. When we make a comparison of our bodies with our houses
where we are lodged, it is likely that the body of man which is more than the
house, should have some rest: For what is ye house, but a place for the body
to resort unto? For they are builded for the use of men. Math. 6.
He then which dwells in any buildynge, ought to be preferred to the house,
as the body to the gown, and other garments. But Ezechias says here, that
he dwelt in this world as a shepeherd: who has his little cottage which he
draws and carries hither, and thither. He speaks after the custom of that
country, because men there keep their foldes, and a shepeharde will carry his
lodgyng as easily as a man would carry any light thing: he shows them in
sum, that his life was none other thing then a wanderyng, and that God
changed him by and by. He speaks after the opinion which he had conceived:
for he was as it were upon the brinke of the pit. And in deed it was necessary,
that he should dispose him self to die seeing God had sent him such a message
as is said. To be short he speaks as if the thing were already come. Now
afterward he comes to the cause of his sickness, and confesses that he is
culpable. He says that he him self had cut of his days: even as a weauer
having a piece of clothe upon his Loome should cut it all of. I may not then
(says Ezechias) accuse any parson: for this evil ought to be imputed to me
only: for I have provoked the wrath of God, and have deprived my self of his
blessyng, therefore must I now blame my self of all this.

Now though he do speak here but of one man alone, yet we have thereby a
good admonition of the shortness of our own life also. Truth it is, that it
is a thing well enough known unto us, and yet we do very seldom thyncke of
it. For although we do confess this present life to be nothing else but a
shadow: yet are we so wrapped therein that no man thinks upon any other
thing, but to make provision for a hundredth years. And to be short, it seems
that we should never depart from this world, we are so occupied on things of
the world. So much the more then ought we to call that to mind which the
scripture shows us of the frailty of our life, as s. Paul also says that
now we are lodged in a cabine: 2. Corin. 5.
the body of a man is not a house worthy to be called a goodly dwelling, or
buyldyng: for in it is nothing but tra^sitory, wherefore let us mourn waiting
till we may be fully restored, and let us not be tied so to this world but that
always we may be going forward. For the unfaithful how so ever it be, they
shall come to their end: but by no means come they near unto God, but rather
they are settled in this world, and in the stead of going forewarde, they do
drown them selves more depelye in it. Let us then learn to go forward, that
is to say, let us learn to be so dysposed to follow God when he calls us,
that death may never come to us before his time.

Touching this that Ezechias says, that he was cause of his own evil, let us
also practice well this doctrine. So often, and when soever it shall please God
to afflicte us, we se that we are given to murmurynges: and although it be so
that we be found gyltye of our faults, yet cease we not to vex our
selves, as if God passed measure. So then, that we may confess with a true
humility that God does punish us justly in all thafflictions which he sends
us, let us say after the manner of Ezechias: it is I that am cause of this
evil.

It is true that by and by he attributes that to God: but they both agree very
well, to wit, that man be author of all the miseries yt he endures, and that
God nevertheless works as a Judge. For when an evil doer shall be punished, he
ought not to complain of his Judge: but rather for as much as he sees him
self to have offended the laws he should condemn him self, and also he
should know that God by thauctoritie of justice brought him to that just
punishment, eue^ so must we do: that is to say, that first we acknowledge that
if God do afflicte us, it is not because he takes pleasure in tourme^ting us:
but that he must reward us as we have deserved, though yet he has not
altogether regard to our offenses: For what a thing should that be? we
should be an hundred thousand times overwhelmed if he would use rigor toward
us: but according to that, which he knows to be good for us, he chasteneth
us, although we have our mouth always closed, and that no murmuryng escape
thereout.

And now to the rest, when we shall know that we have provoked his anger, let
us understand that we may not go fourther than our selves, to say who is ye
cause of this? but let us simply accuse our selves. Lo now in su^me what we
have to learn of this matter. Now it follows, From the morninge to the
night, thou shalt bring me to naught.

In which words Ezechias shows how horrible the displeasure of God is, for
he means that god need not devise this policy, or that, when he would be
revenged on me^: but if he speak the word, the thing shall forthwith be
done. To be short he shows here what the power of God is, on the one side,
and what the frailty of man is on the other side. And that is to pull out of
us all the folish imaginations that we conceive, in making our selves believe
that we may escape his hands. And wese how men draw back always: and
although God handle them streighly, they think they may find some way how to
flee from him. To be short, we thrust out time with our sholders (as the
proverb is) and promise our selves, leisure enoughe, and though the cord be
strait, yet we conceive still some vain hope. And what is ye cause thereof?
that we have not respect to our frailty: for there is no minut of time, when
death threateneth us not: And if we are now standing upright, at the turning of
a hand, behold we are fallen. On the other side we are ignorant of the
infinite power of God: For if he do but once lay his hand upon us, he need
not do it the second time, it shall suffice that he only blow on us, and lo,
we shall be brought to nothing. It is not without a cause that Ezechias
says here, that from morning till night, he shall be brought to naught.

For we hear also that we are not sustained, but in this that God gives us
strength: Psalm. 104.
but if he withdraw his spirit, it must needs come to pass that we being
troubled, must immediately fail. But if he show him self to be against us,
and that he persecuteth us, then must we be yet more stricken down.

Following then the admonition of Ezechias, let us after consider how feeble we
are, and let us acknowledge what we be of our selves: To wit, that every
minute God sustaineth us: but that death nevertheless besegeth us, and that it
need not make any great assaute to overthrow us: for one blast only were
enough. And lo straight ways we should be withered like grass: Esaias. 40.
as we shall se in the forty Chapter of Esaias.

Moreover let us acknowledge what the wrath of God is when it is armed against
us. For God is not like unto creatures, so that he should need to arm him
self, and to make great preparation, for so sone as he speaks the word, we
shall fourthwyth be destroyed by his only word. Seeing it is so then, let us
learn to walcke in carfulness, committing our lives into his hands, and
let us know that we are nothing at all, but in so much as we have our
being in in him: And so much rest as it pleased him to give us, let us
attribute it whollye to his grace, and so when he prolongeth our life: for we
should be as men without strength, if he would show but one only drop of
his power against us.

Note then what we have to mark upon this place, where he says:

From morning until night.

Now he adds that he chattered as a Crane or as a swallowe, and that he
mourned like a Dove.

Wherein he means that anguishe held him in locked in such sort, that he
had not so much as a word fre to express his passions. If a man cry and
lament, and make his complaints, and declare his evil, it is then to be said
that he is sore troubled: but when a man is so stricken down that he can not
declare what he ayleth, when he stammereth so in him self, that he can not
draw forth one only word to declare how vehement his passion is: when he
now sygheth, now brings forth half a word, and the rest kept in, as if
one had his throat locked up: this is a great extremity. Ezechias then says
that he was so. Now there is no doubt, but that he had his respect unto God
cheifely: As if he should say, that men perceived well enough the
heaviness that he was in: But when that he would frame any request unto God,
he was as it were dombe, and that on the one side the sickness troubled him,
and yet he could not plainelye express what he ayled: so that he was in two
extremities. The One, yt he was in such sort locked up within, yt with great
pain could he fetch out any complaint. The other yt he was oppressed with so
vehement passions, that he wyste no wheare to begin to make his Prayer. But
this may be thought very strange, that Ezechias who before had in him self
so great strength, should now be so faint hearted yea, as it were brought to
naught: but that was because he had a spiritual conflict, feeling his sins,
and knowing that God was his judge: for (as we touched yesterday) this trouble
surmounteth all the other. It is very likely that Ezechias had an extreme
pain, wherewith he was thoroughly strike^ down: And also it may be coniectured
that it was some burning pestilence. Behold then that his pain was great in
it self: but that was nothing in comparison of the conceiving of Gods wrath,
when he beheld his sins, and knew God to be armed against him as his
adversary, and that it was he that persecuted him. This was it that in such
sort affraied him: And in deed, when a man is brought to that point, all his
courage and iolytie must of necessity fail: for what is the constancy of a
man to stand against the wrath of God? It must needs be more then a frenzy
and mad rage, when a man will think to do so. It is true that a man may be
constant to endure afflictions when God shall send them: but how? so far
forth as he shall be strengthened of God. Again if men trouble or molest one,
he will consider that he has to do with creatures: if he suffer any trouble,
well, he biteth on the bridle: but when God summoneth us to appear, and makes
us to feel that we are guilty before him, and that presently we must render an
account, that our sins threaten us, and that in the mean time we perceive
eternal death to abide us: there (as I have said) can we not think that we
have any strength to make our party good, except we were more then in a mad
rage. Let us not then think strange if Ezechias be so stricken down, for he
has not to do with resistyng sorrow, neither with withstandyng injuries done
unto him on men's behalf: neither b^yng down his sholders to endure any
affliction, but he has to fight against God. and how could he perform that?
than must he needs be as a water that is powered out and spilt. See now what is
the cause that he could frame no manner of complaint to express his grief, and
yet could he never keep silence. Se also why David said that sumtymes he held
his peace, and by and by after he set on crying and roaring out, Psalm. 23.
and yet felt no release. We se that the passions of David were like to these
of the good king Ezechias: as in deed he also adds that his sins troubled
him, and that he was affrayed of the wrath of God, he kept not then any certain
rule or measure, but sumtyme he cast out sighs, he lift up him self, and
anon after he was so cast down that he could not recover his breath, and yet
still the pain continewed. Psalm. 39.
And in an other place he says yt he held his peace as if he had been bridled,
and had concluded in him self to utter not one word more: no (says he) I will
be as a dome creature. I will not speak, I will not bring forth one
syllable: yet notwithstanding (says he) I felt the grief increase, and kindle
more and more, even as a fire that is long kept very close, if it be opened
then the strength increases and shows greater force, and breaks out in a
flame, so David protests that in his anguishe, when he had determined to keep
silence and to say never a word, even then was he deceived, and showed all that
was hyden in his heart, although it were not by words well ordered and placed.
And to be short, they that know in deed what the wrath of God is, will
speak and cry, and yet they know not on which side to begin: and again when
they hold their peace they wot not why they do it: but they are always in
anguish. And we se a notable example of al these things in ye good king
Ezechias.

It is true that God does not examine al me^ a like with such extremity: for
if he exercise us it shall be according to our weakness: he sees that we shall
not be able to endure such tormoiles and assualtes. He spares us the^: but
when it shall please him to prove us in such sort as we read here in the
example of king Ezechias: We must then be armed with this doctrine. This it is
then that we have to bear away. Now to the rest: let us learn what is all the
constantie of men. They may well show some token of valiantnes when God does
not show forth his force against them, but so sone as he shall call us to
account, the^ needs must all that lustines which we think that we have within
us, droupe and vanishe away. This is it that we must practice for our
instruction to learn true humility, for we know that men do commonly rest in
their own presumption and trust in them selves. And what is the cause of that?
but for that every man has an eye to his fellow, and therefore think we our
selves to be strongly fournished. But we ought to lift up our wit to God, for
there should we find, that so sone as he sets upon us we become as nothing.
Let us then learn to know what it is to plonge our selves down to the
bottom in one minute, so sone as God makes us to feel his wrath: Let us also
learn that until we be spoiled of all confidence in our selves, we can not be
set in ye array of right humility. For so long as me^ have any opinion of
themselves, and think yt they ca^ do this or yt, it is certain yt they rob
god of yt which belongs unto him, and so when they lift up themselves without
stay to rest upon, it is to break their own necks. This it is the^ yt we have
to hold in memory, that all the imagination of me^ when they trust in their own
strengthes is nothing but a dream, because they look not upon God, and do not
there stay themselves, yt they might be spoiled of all vain ouerwening of
the^ selves. Now when we hear speak of such a chattering, and that Ezechia
confesses yt he could not bring forth one word, but yt he sta^mered, not
wottyng what to say: let us know that when our Lord shall press us in such
sort that we are not able to frame one request, or to have one formal prayer,
the gate yet shall not be locked against us, but yt we may have access unto
him: Which I speak because this tentation is very dangerous. It is true that if
we perceive not in our selves a zele to pray unto God, and also a disposition
to way depely the promises which he gives us, to take boldness to approach
unto him, yt ought to displease us, and we ought to think yt we are far
from him on our behalf: but yet we must overcome this tentatio^. The^ when a
man shall feel himself in such troble yt he can not bring forth one word to
pray to God, that he shall be there throwe^ down and that he shall not know at
what end to begin, yet must he pray how so ever it be, and in what sort: at ye
least, let us chatter, yt is to say, let us cast forth groans* and sighs*
which may show some excessive passion, as if we were eue^ there upon ye rack,
and God hears eue^ those groninges: as also we se yt s. Paul says, yt the
holy ghost moves us to unspeakable groans, such as can not be expressed. Roma. 8.
Therefore if one would make an art of Rethorick of ye prayers of ye faithful,
it is a great abuse: for our lord hu^bleth us to this end, yt we should not
imagine to obtain any thing at his hands by any fair tale: he had rather yt we
were so confused, yt we had not only one word a right in our prayers, but that
now we should cast out puffynges, and blowinges, and anon that we should
abide still with silence: alas my God, alas what shall I do? and when we shall
mourn so, that we should be so wrapped in, and tangled, that there should
neither be beginning nor ending. The^ when we shall be brought to that point,
our lord knows this kind of language, although we understand it not, and
although our perplexities hinder us, that we can not bring forth one perfect
sentence, so that men also understand not what we would say: yet God (as we
have said before) will hear us well enough. Se then what we have to learn at
this time: that if troubles oppress us, so that Satan by means thereof go
about to exclud us that we should not pray to God, but yt we should be as it
were afraied of him, yet let us not cease to present unto god these gronings,
although they be co^fuse. Now Ezech. after says: That he made rekening until
evening, and that God brake all his bones, as if he were in the throat, and
between the claws of a Lion. In saying that he made reckening until night, he
means that he cast his account, well then I will se what will happen between
this and night: but (says he) the evil increased: for I knew not yet
sufficiently the terrible and dreadful might of God, when he sets him self
against a pore creature. Now then we have yet to learn, that by the word of
God, we have been taught what is his force, and that we have also fealte it by
experience, although we conceive thereof but a portion only. For God shall
exalt him self in such sort, as we shall perceive that all that we thought
of him before was but a small shadow. So the^ let us learn to consider what is
ye power of God, and thereunto to apply al our wit and studies, and to be
desirously minded to walk in his fear, and to dread his majesty, knowing yt
he does let us feel but a small taste of his strength. For if he would lay hard
to our charge, we should find yt which we before thought was as a far of,
and as it were in a dream. This was it that the good king Ezechias meant to
express, that we should learn by his example not to reckon without our host,
but yt we should know ye marvelous are the judgments of God, and the
corrections which he sends to punish the sins of men, and yt then we should
think that we have not yet co^prehe^ded all, for our capacity is to scle^der.
But that we are guided unto it a far of, yt is to say, that if so be, yt
when God does chastise and correct us, we be forthwith taken with fear, and
though we be dull witted, yet he makes us to feel what and how mighty is his
majesty, we may imagine that it is a hundred thousand times more tha^ our
spirits can conceive, and that thereby we may be always so much the more
styrred up to fear him.

Now as to the similitud of the Lion, it seems that Ezechias does here a wrong
to God, for this is not to speak of him with such reverence as he deserves
to compare him to a cruel beast, yt deuoureth, bruseth, destroieth, teareth
and breaks al. Esaias. 103.
And we know yt the scripture preaches unto us of God, clean contrary
thereunto, yt is to say, that he is kind, pitiful, pacient, full of mercy, full
of equity and mildnes: briefly that he bears such love to men, yt he
desires nothing but to handle the^ deintely as his own children. Seeing the^
it is so that God declares himself to be such a one, it seems that Ezechias
speaks blasphemy in comparing him to a lion: But the good king meant not
here to protest against God: but only he has declared his passions, and he
did it not to preach his own praises, as we have already seen, but he had
rather to receive this shame, eue^ to ye end of the world, yt men might know
what his frailty was, and that we should have such instruction thereby as
might profit us. And thus Ezechias has not spared himself, but has set him
self out unto us for an example yt we might se how he was taken with fear and
thereby learn our selves to fear God, and also to arm us with his promises when
we shall come in such troubles, to thend yt we may co^tinew to call upon him: and
though we fail in all this, and become altogether co^fused, yet let us still
hold this point to offer our selves to god, to se^d forth unto him our sighs
and groninges. And this is it yt we have hereby to learn. Now is it not without
cause yt Ezechias co^pareth God to a lio^, for (as we have seen before) all the
peines yt we shall feel in our bodies, and al ye greues yt we may conceive are
nothing in comparison of this co^ceuing of the wrath of god, and this is ye
cause yt we say yt the spiritual battles are much more hard tha^ al other
te^tations yt we can have. We call spiritual battails, when god co^pelleth us to
cast an eye unto our sins, and on the other sid so awaketh us yt he makes us
have in mind what his wrath is, and to co^ceue yt he is our judge, and yt we be
su^moned to appear before him, to render acco^pte. This is a battle which we
call spiritual, which is much more heavy, and much more terrible the^ all the
sorrows, anguishes, fears, torments, doubts and perplexities yt we may have
as in the world. Now when we shall be come thus far, we may not marvel if god
be unto us as a lio^, as to yt we feel of him, for this word is not here spoken
as touching the nature of God. And when he has thus turmented the king
Ezechias, it is not for yt he has forgotten his goodness and mercy, which on
thothersid he shows unto him. But it was needful yt Ezechias should first
know himself to be in the hands of God, as between the paws, and in the throat
of a lio^, and so must it be that we come to the same point as I have already
said, for otherwise God can not win us. There is such an arrogancye in us
yt we always think our selves to be strong and mighty, and that we can never
be beaten down but with a great thonder and lightening. And forasmuch as we can
not magnify the power of God as it ought to be, we talk of it, and we think
somewhat of it, but we do not give unto it an infinite greatness so as we be
ravished when we think of it, and so as it occupy all our senses in such sort
as it ought. It behooves therefore yt our lord do (as a man would say)
tra^sfigure him self, yt is to say, make himself terrible more tha^ all ye
lions in the world, and that he declare himself unto us with such a power yt we
be utterly afraid with all, eue^ as if we espied a hundred deaths. For the wrath
of god is not only to make us die: but we se the gulfes of hell open when god
shows himself as our judge. It is therefore no marvel if we be the^ so
astonished, as if a lio^ should tear us in pieces between his paws, and break
our bones with histeth, and if we conceive such horror when god is against us:
from hence the^ proceed al these complaints yt we see in the Psalms. They yt
are not exercised in these batails and perplexities, think yt David meant to
make his trouble greater tha^ it was, or they think it likely that he was very
delycate? but when we come to the proof, we feel yt there is not one word to
much for the storms that the faithful feel when God searches them earnestly
and to the quick, surmount all that may be expressed with mouth. Let us not
think then that this similitude that is here put forth by the king Ezechias is
superfluous, for we shall find the majesty of God a great deal more
dreadefull then all the words here contained can express, when it shall
please him to call us to account, and make us feel that he is a judge: for if
the mountayns tremble before him and melt away, how may we that are nothing
stand before him? So then let us note well when sometime god takes fru^ us ye
taste of his goodness, and we shall thynk our selves to be cut of from his
kingdom, and perceive nothing but our sins which are as great heaps of
wood to kindle the fire of his wrath, and when we consider only that forasmuch
as he is aimyghty, it must needs be that he stryke us with lyghtning and
ouerwhelme us. When we feel these things we must needs be altogether oppressed
until he releue us. And in deed in one minute of time we shall be plunged even
to the depth of hell, were it not that he held us fast by the hand, and that
we were after a secret manner stayed by him, although we see not how. Lo this
is a doctrine which ought to serve us on the one side to humble us that we may
forget all the strength which men think to have in them selves, and rest
our selves upon the majesty of God, and that we be altogether thrown down
under that majesty, and yet nevertheless that we may know the end and
necessity that we have of him to uphold us, even after an incomprehensible
manner. And when we shall think that he has altogether forsaken and forgotten
us, let us be assured that yet he will hold us by the hand, we shall not
perceive it, but yet he will do it, and we can never get out of such a maze
unless by his infinite mercy he draw us out: as it is certain that Ezechias
had never been releued, if God by his holy spirit had not sustained him within,
and enlyghtened him while he was in these great troubles. Now after he has so
said, he added. Lord, the pain vexes me sore, comfort thou me. But what
shall I say? It is he that has done it eue^ as he has said it. Here Ezechias
confesses in sum that (as touching him self) he is vanquished, and that
there is no remedy without God help, and set him self as pledge. The word
that he uses signifies some time to answer for, which me^ term to be
surety, it may then be thus expressed. Lord be thou my surety in this
extremity, for I can no more. Thou see that there is no more power in me,
then must thou answer as suertie for me in my place. And this word also is
often among the complaints of Job. But it signifies also to refreshe, and all
come to one point, to wit, as we have touched before, that Ezechias knew that
he had no strength and that he must needs perish as touching him self: as if
a man should declare that he has nothing to satisfy his creditour that which
he owes, he comes then to God for refuge. Now have we here yet an other
good admonition which is that we can not call upon god as we ought except we
be led to this reason to make our selves as nothing. For while me^ keep I wot
not what remnant, it is sure that they shall never call upon God but by halfes.
We must then be so brought in subjection that being altogether stripped naked
of our selves, our folly may constrayne us to seek in God that which wants
in our selves. Lo this is one thing to be noted: Yet in the mean time we are
advertised not to be discouraged when God shall so have spoiled us that we
shall be void of all strength. For we may yet move our matter unto him following
the steps of Ezechias. Lord I can no more, so I beseech thee that thou wylt
ease me. Lo this it is that we have to learn of this place. But it is true
that we are not always pressed as Ezechias was, but how soever it be, though
the constraint be not so violent, yet ought we to be spoiled and void of all
false persuasion of our own strength that God may be glorified as he is
worthy. And in the mean time as I have said, let us follow with our prayers
and requests unto God, though we be so vanquyshed that we have not one whit of
strength in us, let us nevertheless have our recourse to our God, and he shall
give us that which we want, for as much as in him lies all the fullness of
good things.

Now he further adds, and what shall I say? for he that has spoken has
also done it. Here some think that Ezechias would now rejoice felyng the
delyueraunce which God had sent him that he breaks all his complayntes
which he used, and that now he has his mouth open to confess the goodness
of God. But the natural meaning of the text bears it not. Rather Ezechias
breaks his matter to show the anguishe which suffered him not to continue
as he would gladly have done. And we see many such examples in all the
Psalms where there is some declaration of the chastisementes which God sent
either to David or to his other servants. Then when God has so sharply
afflicted his people, there have been such like requests as now and then the
faythefull enterlace always, I wot not how, as if they were utterly cast
away. So does Ezechias now. Psalm. 39.
And there is an example very like in the nine and thirtye Psalm, which we
have already alleged. For there David also acknowlegeth that he had to do with
God. It was then much to know that men persecuted him, but when he saw the
hand of God to be against him, I may not (said he) come to plede here, nor to
pursue actions, there is nothing better for me than utterly to keep silence and
take the condemnacio^ upon me. And in Job we see many such like complayntes.
Now let us come to the meaning of Ezechias. What shall I say? it is he which
has said and he also has done it. He lamented not as they which found no
hope, for such people will cry alas, but all their sighs vanishe away on
the air. Contrariwyse Ezechias shows us here that if we will have God to
hear us, we must open all our passions and sorrows before him, that we may be
unburdened, as it is said in the Psalm. Ezechias hitherto has followed this
order, yt is that he has opened al his perplexities and cares which he
endured as if he laid them abroad round about God. But now he reproves him
self. Alas says he: what should I do? for it is God himself which has
said it and done it. He has sent me this message by his Prophet, that there
was no hope of life, it is then in vain that I pray unto him. What shall I
avail the^ in all my prayers?, what shall I do? And I wot not whether he will
have pity on me. We se now how Ezechias outraged against him self. It is
true that such disputacion proceeded of infidelity, but it is necessary that
there should be in fidelity in us to the end that our faith might the better
be proved. Yet this is not meant to speak properly that we should be
infideles, when we are so tossed with unquietness, but that we have a feeble
faith and that our Lord exercise us in such manner that we in the mean time
may know what we are, and that without him we should be a hundred thousand
times vanquished every hour. Lo in effect what Ezechias meant to declare here.
What shall I say? For I feel not that the prayer and entreating which I can
make, does profit me, and why? God afflicts me and I feel no manner of ease. I
am afraid to present my self before him. Yet nevertheless I trust that my
request shall not be rejected of him, although that I know for a truth that
when he speaks by the mouth of his Prophet, he has forthwith stretched out
his hand, and I feel by proof that this message is not as a threateninge of
little children, but that God has published and proclaimed war against me,
which he has done as it were with fire and blood, and it appears that there
is no more remedy.

Now have we here a good place to show us that we ought to despise Satan and
al unfaithfulness, when we have to do with prayinge to God, so that when we
shall have a hundredth thousand disputacions, yet we shall not let to conclude,
so it is that I shall overcome all manner of lettes in the strength of my God,
and I will seek him although he repulse me, and though it appear that he has
an hundred armies to thruste me far from him, yet will I come unto him. Thus
have I told you how we ought to be armed when we are to pray unto God. For
as we have need in all extremities to run unto our God, so must we know that
Satan applies all his power to stop us that we have no access unto God.
And there is none of the faithful which does not feel this more than he
would desire. But in the mean time let us learn to know the sickness, that in
need we may take such remedy as is here given us of God. When then the devil
shall set before us: What should thou do to pray to God? And what think
thou that in so great wretchedness as thou felest in thy self, he will aid
thee? And what think thou miserable creature? to whom preparest thou to go?
Is it not God himself that does persecute thee? But let us pass forward,
this notwithstanding, and force our selves to break through al stays treadyng
under foot such wandryng discourses.

Moreover it chances that being yet in some rest if we lift up our wit to
God, by and by this comes in our fantasy. Alas what are we? shall we dare to
approach unto God? How often have we offended him? And hereupon we sometime
conclude to hold us there still. But yet such disputacions are very ill, and
they are even so many blasphemies, if God would lay the^ to our charge, as when
we make question or doubt whether we be heard or no, certain it is that this
is a deadly offense, and if God did not uphold us in our feblenesse, we could
not but be drowned. But howesoeuer it be, after we have been condemned, after
we have felt that our spirit is wrapped in many dispayres, and that we are in
a maze: Yet for all that let us take good courage, and after we have said,
alas what shall I do? let us break that stroke and say: I must yet pray and
seek for my God. And why? for he has said that he will hear them that seek
unto him, even from the depest bottomes. Now then lo, this is the fit time
when I must go to him. This it is that we have to learn of this doctrine of
Ezechias, when we see these broken vnprofit tales, and that he has chattred,
and we see his passions so excessive that they torment him. Let us know that
it was Gods pleasure to show here a mirror wherein we might behold our own
feblenesse and the temtations whereunto we are subject, that we should fight
against them, and still to follow on till we feel the relefe that he does
promise us, even as we shall feel in deed, so that we have a true continuance
and fail not by our own slacknesse and slothfulness in the mydwaye.

Now let us throw our selves down before the majesty of our good God,
acknoweledging our faults, praying him, that more and more he will make us to
feel them, until such time as we be utterly spoiled. And though he have always
much to reprove in us: Yet let us never cesse to hope in his mercy, and that
he will make us so to taste the same in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that it may give us a true patience in all our afflictions, and that we may be
so holden in his obedience that we desire nothing but to offer our selves unto
him and by him to be thoroughly sanctified. And that not only he grant this
grace unto us, but also to all peoples and nations.

What shall I say? he who has said it has also done it. I will walk
leasurly all the days of my life in the bitterness of my soul. Lord, to all
those that shall live hereafter, the life of my spirit shall he notable among
them, in that thou have cast me in a sleep, and have revived me. Behold in my
prosperity the bitterness was bitter unto me: And thou have loved my soul, to
draw it out of the grave, because thou have cast my sins behynd thy back.
WE have already herebefore declared that the good king Ezechias complaining
that it is God that persecuteth him, is more confused for that, than if he had
all the men in the world his ennemies, and if they all had conspired to
tormente him, as of truth it is a case much harder and that ought to amase us
more without comparison if God lift up him self against us, than if all
creatures did make war upon us. Behold then the cause why Ezechias stands
co^fused and in trouble, because he well feleth that the thing which God
declared unto him by his Prophet Esaye, is now fulfilled in him, and this it
is that most touches us to the quick when we make comparison, between the
word of God and that which we feel of his judgments. If God did simply but
strike us, we might well be thrown down wythall: but when he adds also his
word to reprove us, to make us know that it is he that does chastise us, yea
and that for our sins, lo this is a cause of much greater confusion.
Expressly then Ezechias says: According as he has spoken he has also done
it, and therefore he does thereupon conclude that he has nothing to reply
against it. For if we had to do with men, we might well make our complaints
against them, but when we are to accuse God, the case must pass on his side.
We may plead for a time, but he shall always be justified, when we shall be
condemned. Therefore it is lost time to think to amend our harm when we shall
not escape comdemnation before God, but when we desire to stand in our own
defense, and use murmuryng and complaint, all this does nothing but enforce our
evil, even so far as to drown us altogether. And therefore let us keep our
mouth close as it is said in Job: for that is it which the good king Ezechias
meant in this place.

Now further he says: That all the time of his life he will walk in fear,
and go on easily or softly as a man whose pride is abated, and draws his
legs after him. Yea in the bitterness of his soul.

Here Ezechias declares that God has so engraued in him the felyng of this
correction, and has so printed it in his heart, that the remembrance thereof
shall never be blotted out. It may many times come to pass (and we find it
in proof ofter than we need) that when God presses us, we be altogether
astonished, and then we groan, and if we be to confess our faults with
humility, it is marvel to here us. Brifly we be not niggardly in words,
either to show ye greatness of our grief, or to declare our faults, or to bless
the name of god. But we do nothing but shake our ears by and by after* and by
the next morrow after god has given us release or rest, we think no more of it.
Lo in what sort men be, and how they seek God (as it is said unto the Prophet)
while he does draw them unto him by force, then they call upon him, and confess
the det as we have said, but so soon as God spares them, they are as they
were before, they lift up their heads like stagges, they do nothing but
rejoice, where before they were so stricken down as nothing cold be more, their
face was all amazed with fear, shortly, there was even now nothing but
sorrow, and fourthwith they make great chere, they return to their delites,
and (that more is) they fare as if they meant to despise God openly. We se
then this inconstancy, this change, this lightness in manner in all men. On the
contrary side Ezechias says here that it is not only for the time present that
he knows that God has chastised him, but for so long as he shall live in this
world he shall always have mind of the correction that he has received, and
he shall go as with a trembling pace, for the word which he uses, does
some time signify to go softely, and sometime to remove. Now in effect, he
means to say that he shall never have steadfast pace, but he shall be so
much enfebled, that he shall be as a man drawn out of the ditch, or as he
that has a long time ben sick* he does with great pain draw his legs
after him, and though he show him self abroad in the streets yet men see
well that, that is all he can do, and when he stands up he seems still
ready to rele and stagger. Now see we in a sum what Ezechias meant to say.
Hereby we are put in remembrance not to think strange if God sometime afflict
us more rigorously than we would. For we have not sufficiently profited by his
rods until we be truly humbled for all our life after. Who is he that
shall find this in him self* Let every one now look, if a month after that
God has showed him mercy he has reknowleged his faults and tremble thereat.
But contrariwise (as I have already said) we seek nothing but to blot out
all remembrance of them, for we think it to be matter that moves
melancholy. Sith then we so easily forget the rods of God, let us not
marvel if after we have been once chastised he return again the second time
and show him self so sharp that we shall not know where to become. Wherefore
behold what we have to do^ that is, that during the corrections, and when we be
in trouble we bear patiently the rigor of god, knowing that it is not
without cause that he uses so excedyng great sharpenes against us, and that it
is because he knows we have need of it: take this for one note. And also for
another note, that we endeavor to awake, because of the great slothfulness
that is in us, for we are so sluggishe and so coolde, that it is a pity to
see. Let us then during the time of our affliction thyncke upon all our
offenses, that we may have a feeling and conceauynge thereof engraued even in
the bottom of our herts, and when God has delivered us, Let us still think
upon it, and let not the feling of our evil be only for one day or for a small
space, but as we pray God to supporte us, and to give us leisure to bless his
name and to rejoice in him, let us so do it that he be not compelled
continually to stryke us like asses, seeing our carelessness and the slownesse
that is in us. Let us preuente the rods of God unless we will have them
always tied at our backs. And now let us note that Ezechias trembled in
such sort, that he cessed not to be holden up by the hand of God, and to
seek for comfort in God, knowing well that he was merciful unto him. But
these two things agree well, that on the one side the faithful are always in
care fearing to stomble the second and third time when they have once paste a
deadlye fall. And yet nevertheless they take courage and trust in God to walk
freely, for as much as they know that he will never fail them. Lo this it is
yt we have to practice, on the one side to think upon our sins and offenses,
and to be moved with horror, seeing that we have deserved yt God should set him
self against us, and that this do so cut us that it make us to walk
tremblyngly, and as scant able to go. Lo how we ought to be thrown down
and humbled under the hand of God. For there is no question hereof being to
wild, but rather we must know that the chief virtue of the faithful when
God does affliet and punish them is to be as brought to naught, and yet always
drawing our legs after us to go on our pace sith it pleases God to show
us mercy. And that we know, that though we have offended him, yet he will always
continue his goodness toward us, he will give us courage, and that therefore on
the other side we become fresh again. Lo this is the sum that we have here
to learn of Ezechias.

After he adds that the bitterness became to him bitter in his prosperity.
Here he enforces ye evil that he has ^elt, because he was suddenly taken with
it, when he thought he was at rest and free from affliction. As on the other
side we see that ye thing which is forseen far of, may be more patiently
suffered. For what is the cause that discourageth us when we are in affliction,
but that every one during his prosperity makes him self believe that all shall
go well. If a man did think of the death of his father, or of his wife, or of
his children, if he did think that his own life were subject to calamities, it
is certain that he would be prepared with defense against all temtations, so
as he would not be found so amassed when they come upon him. But because every
man deceives him self in vain hope, that is it that troubles us out of
measure, when our Lord sends any adversity. Now Ezechias confesses that
it is so chanced unto him, and for this cause he says that his grief has
been so much the more bitter for that it happened unto him in his prosperity.
For we have seen here before, how God afflicted him even to the extremity,
that is to wete, when he was spoiled of his Realm, and that al his land was
wasted by his ennemies. He was beseged in the town of jerusalem, there he was
brought under, there they mocked him, there they spoke of him all shame and
reproach that was possible, yea, even the name of God was vilanouslye
blasphemed. Lo thus was Ezechias all confused. Hereupon God delivered him
miraculously, even as if he had come down from heaven to succor him. He seeing
that disconfiture so great which was done by the hand of the aungel,
reioysed, and not without good reason, for God gave him cause having declared
such a sign of favor toward him, as if he had reformed all the world at his
desire. But there was a fault, whersoeuer it was, that is that he thinks no
more of his affliction passed, and rests him to much, that is to say, he
becomes careless and negligent. Lo herfore now he says that his sorrow is come
upon him in his peace and in his prosperity. Now here we have a very
profitable warning, that is to say, when we know the graces of God, we must so
rejoice that yet we for get not the time passed, and that for the time to come
we always have our estate before our eyes, that is to say, that with the
turning of a hand our life shall be turned into death, our light into darkness,
as we see the diverse chaunges in this frail life. Briefly let us so magnify
the goodness of God, when he assures us that he will maintein us in peace and at
rest, that in the mean time we still consider what our frailty is, and let us
not be daseled when God shall bless us and send us all after our desire, let
not that (I say) make us fall to much on sleep, but let every man make him
self ready when it shall please him to send us any change to receive always
in fear, in humility, and in all patience that which he will send us. If we
do so, we shall not find the hand of God so grievous nor so heavy upon us as
we are wont to do. But when we are to sound on sleep, although we know the
grace of God, whereof we presently rejoice, he must awake us, yea and pluck us
hard by the ear, yea and lay great strypes upon us. Psalm. 30.
And here we have one example in the king Ezechias, as we have also an other in
David. For in the.xxx. Psalm he confesses that he was so drunk that
felicity had made him to forget his estate. I have said in mine abundance, I
shall no more be shaken. And how so? David had had so many pricks to prick
him forward, he had been exercised so many ways to have always in mind what
the life of man was, and he did profit right well therein, for he had been a
long time as in the shadow of death. He had been persecuted of the people,
being prisoner among his ennemies, and having no minute of rest. Then when God
had set him on the royal seat, he concluded that he should never stomble,
and that he should therein remain peasable. If David having the spirit of God
in such excellence as we know, having had so many profes that he was
altogether ravished unto God, yet nevertheless has so forgot him self: what
shall become of us? After he adds. It was of thy free goodness that I was
vpholden O Lord, thou have establyshed me as on a mountain, but thou turnedst
thy face, and lo I was troubled. Thus shows he his unthankfulness in that. For
although he had not altogether forgot the blessing which he had received of ye
hand of God, yet is it so that he did not think upon this, god has delivered
me once yt I should always have my recourse unto him: knowing yt my life ha^geth
as by a thread except y^ stay of it be on his goodness, and that from minute to
minute he works* confessing that by and by I should peryshe if he continued
not still to aid me. David thought not upon this* and he knew also that he
had failed, and so he adds after. Lord thou have hyd thy face and behold I
was troubled. So is it of Ezechias, he was in peace, and lo sodeinly God
wounded him so that the stripe was deadly, and he could not conceive any thing
but such an astonishment as if God had stricken him with lightning from heaven.
Therefore of necessity must it be that he received a terrible bitterness.

Now let us apply this doctrine to our profit, and let us not stay till God
make us with force of strypes to know our infirmity. But while he does yet
spare us and while he has pity of our feblenesse, let us not cesse to think
of him, and let us fear him, keeping our selves hid as it were under his
wings, knowing that we can not stand one minute without his aid. To the
rest, if sometime we be overtaken, let us know it was because we were to fast a
sleep.

He adds a little after that God has delivered his soul, but he uses a
manner of spech which emporteth more. He says thou have loved my soul, or thou
have had thy good pleasure in it to pluck it back from the grave. By this
circumstance he magnifieth the goodness of God so much ye more for that he is
come to seek him even to the grave. For if God do hold us still in our
estate, I grant we thereby know that we are beholding to him, but therm we
knowledge it but very coldly. But if he deliver us from death, then we better
perceive how good he is, for that in such extremity he as it were comes
down unto us. For it seems unto us that we are not much bound unto God, if he
preserve us in this life, because we take that to be but as an order of nature.
True it is that the more he spares us so much the more we ought to feel his
fatherlye goodness, but we do it not, and so by reason of our dulnes it is
become needful that God work of another fashion. Now then as I have already
said, if that God pluck us out of the grave, and that we have been as
forsaken for a time, that it seemed we were cut of from al hope, that even men
disdaigned to look upon us as if we were pore rotten carrions, if in this case
God have pity upon us, in this he shows us so much greater brightness to se
his mercy, and so much more we have occasion to acknowledge what and how
infinite his bountye is, in this that god has so plucked us back from the
death. Lo, this it is that Ezechias meant to say.

Lord (says he) thou have loved my soul: And how so? was there any thing in
it that might move God to love it. Alas, no: for it was nothing but shadow, a
dead thing. I was (says he) at the grave, and then thou declaredst thy love
toward me. when then we shall be altogether disfigured, and that God nevertheless
will vouchsafe to cast eye upon us, and to have care of us, in this we ought
much more to be enflamed to bless his name, and to give him such praise as
does here the good king Ezechias. Behold the^ in a sum what we have to learn
of this place: that is, for as much as God sees that we are not touched enoughe
with the good things that he has done for us, nor with his graces, and that
it is needful that we be so stricken down, and in such extremity that there
be in us no more hope of life, that when we shall be as forsaken of him and of
men, he may then take us to mercy. Thus are we earnestly touched and made to
give him thanks, knowing that he saw nothing in us but miseries when he showed
his mercy upon us.

Now he says also on the other side: Lord, they that shall live after, shall
know that the life of my spirit has been prolonged. This place because of the
shortness thereof is dark, for it is not a sentence laid out at length, but they
are as it were broken words. He says in sum: Lord they shall live among
them, and in them all the life of my spirit, thou have cast me on sleep, and
thou have revived me. Because he speaks not here of the years in the
beginning of the verse, that is the cause of the shortness. But when we look
nearer, we shall find that Ezechias meant to say that the miracle which had
been done upon his person should be known not only for a dai, but also after
his decease. Some men do expound it, yt God shall also prolonge the life of
other: but that exposition is not to purpose. For Ezechias meant to say, that
this was not a common or ordinary benefit, but rather he has felt that God
has wrought with him after an extraordinary fashion. Hereunto tends his
porpose, yt this miracle of God shall never be put under foot, but though he be
dead, yet we shall still talk of it. Before he said I shall remember all the
time of my life how I have been chastised, and I shall feel the strokes: for I
yet go staggering with all. Now he stretches forther and largelier yt which he
said before, that is to say, that not only he him self shall be humbled before
God, but also all the world shall have occasion to say: Behold here an act
worthy of perpetual memory that god has done for a man. For we ought to
desire yt all the good things yt God bestows upon us, be also known of
other, that they may take ensample thereof, and that they may serve for their
edification. And we se when David would be heard in his requests, he adds
commonly this reason* that every man shall think of it, yt the good shall be
edified, and the wicked confounded. Lord (says he) when men shall se that thou
so assistest thine, al they that call upon thee shall rejoice, and shall be so
much more confirmed in waitynge for the like: and also the wicked shall be
co^fou^ded and though they now mock at the trust yt I have in thee, seeing yt
thou have afflicted me, if they know yt I have not been disapointed when I
have had my recourse unto thee, they shall be abashed. Thus much then says
Ezechias, now yt this miracle of God shall profit not only him but also other,
as a thing known and notorious to all. And after he amplifieth it, saying yt
it shall not be for a small time, but also after his decease. For as much as his
lif has been so prolo^ged, it shall be talked of for ever. For (says he) thou
have cast me on sleep. This word to cast on sleep emporteth yt he was as it
were in the grave, and after was revived. As in deed this miracle is even yet
at this day celebrate in ye church of god, and shall be to thend of ye world. So
the^ we se yt it has not only profited one person alone, but has been a
confirmation generally to all ye faithful, in this yt they wait for God, to
have pity upon them in their necessity to succor them, and though he do not
prolong their life in such sort yet yt he shall keep them to the end, and that
if he se them stricken down, he shall lift them up again, he shall give the^
some token of his pity, so that in life and death they shall feel him always
their savior, and shall know that they have not been forsaken nor given over
of him. Lo whereunto this song is profitable, and to what intent it was made.

Now ought we to have such like affection, as Ezechias had, to endeavor so
much as shall lie in us that the graces of God may be known of all the world,
although they specially perteine to us. For when God does good to every one of
us, we ought not only in secret to thank him, feling our selves bound unto
him, but to endeavor to publish the same, that other may be confirmed and hope
in God, seeing such a proof of his goodness to the^ that call upon him: and that
praise may be given him in common as S. Paul says, when the faithful shall
all together praise God, that he has been delivered, and that this geuynge of
thanckes shall give such a sound, that this shall be a cause why God shall
always deliver him so much the more that praises may be given to him by many.
I grant we often do publish such graces of God as we have felt, but many do it
by ambition and hypocrisy, for making a show to magnify the name of God,
they draw a part of the praise to them selves. Let us beware of that, and let
us have an upright and pure affection, so as every one may learn to look unto
God, and to have his hope wholly stayed upon him, and let us have this zele and
this fervent desire that all creatures bear us company when we are to bless
the name of God.

Moreover when God shall as it were have stricken us dead, and revived us by his
grace, let this so much ye more move us to praise him. There is not so small a
benefit that deserves not thanks, and when we shall apply all our wits to
thank God only for this that he nourishes us, yet can we not aquite our
selves of the hundredth part of our det. But if God use a more excellent manner
to declare his favor toward us, and that the good things which he does for
us, are as it were wonderful and incomprehensible of men, our bond encreseth
so much the more, and we have so much the less excuse if we be not then
enflamed to praise him with full mouth, and to preach every where the goodness
that he has made us to feel.

After this Ezechias adds that God has cast his sins behynd his back.
Here he leads us back to that we saw before, that is, that al yt he endured
was but the payment that was due unto him for his faults. And that now this
that god has been merciful unto him, is for that he has hidden and buried
his offenses which brought all the evil upon him. This sentence is worthy to
be well noted. For (as we have before declared) although we know well that
adversities happen not unto us by chance, but that it is the hand of God that
stryketh us, yet so it is that we can not come to the true cause as we ought.
And that is partly because every one does flatter him self in his own
faults, and partly also because we enter not in judgment or examination of
our own life to know whether it has been well ordered: for wyllingly we are
very loathe to be disquieted. And yet must we come unto it, for that is ye true
sign of repentance when men of them selves search the depth of their sins,
and tarry not till God force them unto it, but they present the^ selves unto
him they sommon them selves so as they need neither sargeant nor officer, but
they examine themselves and say: Alas, how have I lived? how stand I with God?
When men of their own mind enter into this trial, in this they declare that
God has touched the^ by his holy spirit. But this is a rare thing as I have
said, on the one side hypocrisy stops us that we examine not our own
faults, and that we discover them not, seking always to flee from the shame
and to hide our own evil: yea and we say that the evil is well, and we make
our selves believe that we have not offended God, or at least we make our
faults less as if they were nothing, and as if we neded but only wype our
mouths. Lo how we are carried away by pride and ambition that is roted in our
nature when we come not rightly to God in knowledging what we are. On the other
part we are desirous to flee from sorrow, as naturally it is a thing that
greueth us. Now there is no sorrow so great as when we think that God is our
judge, and that we are evil doers before him, for there we feel yt which
before has been said, that he breaks our bones as a Lion: the wrath of God
is so terrible a thing that it is no marvel though we flee from it. And yet is
this a fault, for we ought not to make our selves like to them that are so
blockish that they will in no case think upon that which they have deserved of
God, that is the punishment whereof they are worthy. For this cause we ought so
much the more to note this doctrine where Ezechias leads us by his example
to know our sins, so often as the Lord does rygorouslye handle us, that we
may not only know that it is his hand which afflicted us, but also that then
he serves his process upon us, and accuses us of the sins that we have
committed, and because we would not of our own mind come to have our cause
tried before him, and to ask him pardon that he is driven to draw us
thereunto by force. This is the first thing that we have to learn of this
place.

The second point is that when God withdraws his hand which he had heuyly
laid upon us, that is a token that he is merciful unto us, and that he will
no more lay our sins unto our charge. True it is that sometime God after that
he has afflicted the wicked and reproved, leaves them there and they wax
lustier than they were before as I have already said. But here Ezechias shows
how we ought to feel the goodness of God when he sends us any release, when
he releueth us of any sickness, when he delivers us from any danger, when
he comfort us in poverty, when we have been in trouble and sorrow and he
draws us out. If then we be sad and sorrowefull, it is not enough for us to
feel the evil, but we ought to look unto the principal cause and to come to
the original spring thereof. So when a little babe cries, so sone as the teate
is given him he is appeased. And why? he sucketh and is content, for he has no
understanding to go further than to his own hunger, he knows not whence ye
meat comes, he has no skill to thank her yt gave him his substance, for he
has neither wit nor reason But when a man of the age of discretion shall see
his father angry with him, and shall here him say to him: away villein, get the
out of my house: it is certain that this sorrow more perceth him to the
quick to be thus cast of by his father than to endure hunger or thirste, and
all the pouerties that it is possible to think on. But if the father
afterward do pardon him at the request of his friends, or for that he sees
his son to be sorry that he has offended him, and says unto him, come home
again and dyne with me, if that child have any reason he will not so much
esteem his dinner as that he is returned into the favor and love of his father,
so as he had rather to fast and to abide hunger and thirst than ever to give
occasion to his father so to cast him of again, and is a great deal more
glad that his father has forgeuen him than of eating and drinking his fill.

Now let us apply this to our use. The most part are as little children: if
God be quickly appeased with them and pluck back his hand, so as they have
no more outward occasion to be sorowefull, by and by they wax joyful, and
praised be God (say they) which has helped me out of this sickness: but in
saying praised be God they think not upon him, they enter not into examination
of their sins, they look not upon the cause why God afflicted them, and so
sone as they be comforted they do not acknowledge that it is because God
loves them and is favorable to them. And yet thereunto ought all their joy to
be applied and not to say behold my mirth is returned. He that has been in any
danger, if he see himself delivered, he reioyseth that he is no more in
torment as he was, but in the mean time does he look upon the principal
benefit and sovereign felicity of men, to be reconciled unto God? No, that
comes not in his mind. So much the more ought we to take hold of this
doctrine, where Ezechias says not only, I am now up on foot again, and it
has pleased God to releue me, my life is prolonged, as he has said before:
but he rests all upon this: God has pardoned me my faults, he has taken me
to mercy, he lays not to my charge the offenses that I have committed, he
has so forgeuen me that now he is well pleased with me, he will no more call
me to account as my judge, for he has forgotten all my sins and has cast
them behind his back. Lo this it is whereunto Ezechias leads us by his
example.

So, as often as we shall be afflicted by the hand of God, let us learn to enter
into examination of our own sins: and when we pray God to deliver us, let
us not set the cart before the horse, but let us pray him to take us to his
mercy. And though we have deserved a thousand more afflictions tha^ he makes
us to endure, let us pray that yet he cesse not to be merciful unto us: and
when he has set us up again, let us give him praises not only for the good
that he has done us touching our bodies, but for that which is much more to
be esteemed, that he has forgotten all our offenses and so is agreed again with
us that he accepts us as his own children, because he tourneth his face from
our sins, for while God looks upon our sins he can not look upon us but
with indignation, and he does but abhor us.

Then that God may look upon us with a merciful and favorable face, it must
first be that he forget our sins, and think no more on them. True it is
that when we so speak, it is after the manner of men, for we know that all is
present before God. But when we say that he must forget our sins and look no
more on them, that is to express that he call us not to account, but love us as
well as if we never had offended him.

Moreover by this fashion of spech that Ezechias uses, we se what is the
remission of our sins, that is, that God cast them behind his back, and cast
them there in such sort that he punish them no more, nor ask vengeance on
them. And this is worthy to be noted: For the devil always trauaileth to
darken this doctrine because it is the principal point of our salvation, and
as it is showed us in holy scripture, there is no other righteousness nor
holiness, but this fre forgeuenes of sins. Happy is the man (says David)
whose sins are pardoned. Saint Paul says that hereby we see what is our
righteousness, and that David has made a brief sum thereof.

For this cause the devil has always travailed by subtle means to turn men
from this that they may not know what need they have of this forgeuenes of
sins, as in the Popes church we partly see they say it is not but with
penance and confession, and beside that, that we must bring some recompense,
and if God pardon us the fault yet that he reserueth the punishment as a judge.
And that this should be a derogation to his majesty, if we should say that he
wholly and fully pardons, and they say that he must needs show always some
rigor with his mercy, and that otherwise it were to spoil him of his nature:
Lo how the Papists have treated of the remission of sins, so that if a man
should say unto the^ that God pardons our sins of his mere goodness, this
should be to them as a blasphemi, for (say they) we must make satisfaction. And
what is yt? works above measure, which we do more tha^ god co^ma^deth us in his
law. It is certain yt these are detestable sayings. But howsoever it be ye pore
world has been so made dro^k with such sorceries. So much ye more the^ must we
note this place where it is said that God in receiuyng us to mercy, will enter
no more into account with us, as Ezechias says here. Thou haste cast my
sins behind thy back.

It is true that God has neither back nor stomach. For we know that his
offense is infinite and spiritual: but he uses this similitude to signify
that he pardons our sins like as when it is said that he casts the^ to
the bottom of the sea, yt is as much as if he would have no more remembrance of
them nor would have them more spoken or made mention of. We see then in sum
when God receives us in such sort yt he is at one with us, that it is not
only to pardon us the fault as the Papists have imagined and iugle without
reason, but it is to the end that we may feel his favor every way, and that he
will persecute us no more. And instead that we were afflicted of his hand,
and instead of yt he gave us by it a testimony of his wrath that contrariwise
he makes us to know yt he takes us for his children, and that he will use us
ge^tlye showing the love yt he bears us. Lo here in sumwhat Ezechias meant to
say, using this manner of spech yt god had cast al his sins behind his back.

Now true it is that many times though God does pardon us our faults yet he
will not cesse to chastise us, as it happened to David: but that shall not be but
for our commodity and profit, to thend that we may walk so much the more
warely in time to come. I said even now that God sends his punishment in
such sort that there remains always some mark to put us in mind. Then God
will surely punyshe us although he be merciful unto us. But these two things
are not contrariant, that is, to cast our sins behynd his back, and to
receive us by and by to mercy and make us prosper by his blessing, and yet in
the mean time not to nourishe us in our idleness, but to awake us and make us
feel some sign of his wrath to prevent us. Yet nevertheless if he mean to
declare unto us fully the remission of our sins, he will give us oftentimes
outward signs, that is to say he will give us such a taste of his goodness
that we may perceive assuredly that he has showed mercy unto us, and that it
is impossible that he should use us with such gentleness and favor, except
he would examine our sins no more, and that he fully and perfectly acquiteth
us, and that he requires nothing but that we should walk with him as being
made at one and truly reconciled unto his majesty. Lo thus God declares unto
us the remission of our sins not only by his word or inwardlye by his holy
spirit, but also by the fruits, that is to say, when by his blessing he makes
us to prosper, and when he handles us so favorably that we are compelled to
confess in our own conscience that he uses a fatherly bounty toward us.

Then when we shall have these signs, let us conclude boldly that God has
pardoned our sins and that he has cast them behind his back, never to
examine or think of them any more. So then so often as we shall be afflicted of
the hand of God, let us remember that he has showed him self good not only
to those whom he has taken out of this world where they sometime have endured
strong and grievous afflictions, but that he has also pardoned their sins,
and let us know that he will use the same goodness toward us. And in doing
this let us learn to humble our selves hereafter. Moreover the grace of God
shall so much the more brightlye shine, as he shall not only handle us with
all savor touching our bodies, but also in this that he would not have
respect unto our sins, and will show us that although we did provoke his
wrath and gave him occasion always to forsake us in our myseries, yet he will
not handle us with rigor but that he will draw us unto him by his infinite
mercy and goodness.

Now let us throw our selves down before the majesty* of our good God,
acknowledging our faults, beseching him that more and more he will make us to
feel them, and that it may be to humble us in such sort that coming unto him
we may bring only a pure and simple confession of our sins, and that in the
mean time he give us such taste of his goodness that we may not cesse to
run unto him although our consciences do reprove and co^dempne us, that we
may embrace his grace which he has promised in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and as often as he makes us to feel it by experience that we may learn
to turn it to our profit, and that we may be so armed against all
tentations, that we may never sink down under the burden, how heavy or
troublesome soener it be. And that he will not only grant unto us that grace,
but also to all peoples. etc.

THE FOVRTH SERmon.
For the grave shall not singe of the, and the dead shall not praise the,
nether shall they that are brought down into the pit wait for thy truth.
The living, the living shall sing of the, as I do this day: the father shall
make thy truth known to his children. The Lord it is that saves me: we will
sing a song in the temple of the Lord all the days of our life. And Esai,
commanded, that one should take a cluster of figs, and make a plaster of
them to lay upon the sore, and he should be whole. Then said Ezechias, what
sign shall I have that I shall go up into the house of the Lord?
IT is certain that if our life were ordered as it ought to be, we should
always shoot at this principal mark, to honor God so long as we be in this
world. And good reason it is yt we apply all our study thereunto seeing that
without end and cessing we prove the gracious good deeds that he does us. For
this cause now Ezechias after that he has knowledged that god prolonged his
life, and has given him a proof to witness his singular love toward him,
says yt with so much more courage he will magnify the name of God to confess
the receipt of so great a benefit. And expressly he says that this shall not
only be while he is in the world that he will travail to have the name of God
blessed, but he will endeavor also for his successors that it may for ever be
known how God has wrought for him. Finally for conclusion he says that
there is no savior but God: and if men rest them selves upon him their
salvation shall be certain and infallible.

But it may seem strange that he says that ye death nor yet the grave shall
not be to praise god, for it seems that he accounted upon and knows no other
goodness of God but when he preserves men in this frail life. In deed if we
look not but here below, our faith shall be but weak. And we know that we live
to no other purpose but to taste in part the goodness of God, to the end we
may be drawn by hier and altogether ravished to the heavenly life. It seems
then that Ezechias is to much given to the world, and that he has no
conceiving of the spiritual kingdom of God. For in saying that the grave can
not praise God, nor they yt be dead, it seems that he has no other regard
but to this present life. And we know that it is said in the first place,
that God will be glorified as well in our death as in our life. And S. Paul for
the same cause says, that he cares not whether he live or die, so the glory
of God might be always auaunced. There appears to be great diversity between
S. Paul and Ezechias, for the one flees and abhors death, alleging that
those which are departed shall not praise God, the other says it is to me al
one whether I live or dye, for God shall always be glorified in me. If we
behold the estate of those that are departed in that, that they are drawn
out of this world, and that God has taken them nerer to him, it is likely
that they should be better disposed, and more cheerful to bless his name.
Fourthly we be here heauely laden in this prison of our body, we can not half
(as a man may say) open our mouth to praise God, we go not with a free courage
nor with so vehement feruor of zele, as were requisite: now the dead are not so
encombred, 2. Cor. 5.
they are not absent from God as we are (as S. Paul speaks in the second to
the Corinthians) they may then so much the better agree with the angeles of
paradise in this melody. And we know what is said of the angels (as it is to
be seen in the vi. Cha. of Esaias) that without ceasing they cry, blessed be the
Lord of hosts, the holy, the holy, the holy. Then as far as we may judge,
those whom God has drawn out of this transitorye life, ought to be more
ready to praise his name. But let us first mark that Ezechias here had
respect to the cause why God placed us in this world, and wherefore he keeps us
therein. He asks not any reward of us. He is not like unto a man that sets
servants in his house: for that were to emprow his lands, and make profit
thereof, nether is he like unto a great prince which requires to have many
subjects, for that he is to be maintened and succored by them when he has
need. But God seeks no advantage by us, as he has no need: Only he will
that we do homage to him for all the benefits yt he gives us. For all our
life ought to be applied to this mark, (as even now we have touched) yt we
bless god, and render witness that his benefits were not cast away upon us as
they should be if we were like do^me men. Lo this it is that we have to
observe, that Ezechias (in saying that the living shall praise God) meant to
note, that men pervert the order of nature when they awly not themselves to
praise God, and that their unthankfulness is by no means excusable, when they
bury the graces of God and put them in oblivion. Seeing it is so the^ that our
Lord requires of us nothing but yt his name be glorified in the world, it is
not to be merueyled that Ezechias says: the living, the living shall praise
God.

We must also note what difference is between the state of the living and of
the dead. Though the dead praise god, yet we can not judge nor imagine that
they assemble after our manner to show an agreement of their faith. Each one of
them ca^ right well praise God by him self, and yet it means not that they are gathered together in one body, as we are now, for the scripture says
nothing thereof. And we may not forge fantasies of our own brain as we
think good. For we know that god reserueth this perfection to the latter day
that we should be all united and in such sort joined unto our God that his
glory should fullye shine in us. For as much then as they which are departed
have not such a manner of exercysinge them selves in the praysynge of God as
we, therefore it is said that, that is a thing properly perteynyng to us that
be living.

But there is yet more. For Ezechias speaks not here simply of death as we
have touched already, but he sets out his death to be such as if he had
been cut of from the Church of God, and from all hope of salvation, when this
judgment was come to be executed, or as if he had been before his Judge: Then
Ezechias prepared not him self to dye, as by nature we can not flee this
necessity: but he had this testymonye of Gods wrath, wherewith he was so
feared as if all were lost to him. Now we know that no man can sing the
praises of God except he have occasion and matter. For when our Lord shows
us a terrible countenance, our mouths are stopped, we are filled with such
anguisshe, that it is impossible for us to bless him. Rather contrariwise
there shall be nothing but gnashynge of teethe, when the wrath of God shall so
astonishe us. Lo thus stood Ezechias. On the other side, when God shows him
self merciful toward us, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 40.
and utters some sign of his favor toward us, he opens our mouths, as it
is said in the li. Psalm. Lord thou haste opened my mouth: therefore will I
sing thy songs. And in other places. Lord thou haste put a new song in my
mouth, by this the Prophet signyfieth when God makes them joyful for their
delyueraunce from some evil, that by this mean, he styreth them up to sing
his songs, and to bless his name, and to be myndefull of his benefytes. So
then, when we conceive nothing but altogether terror in God, we are in
aswounde, and then the gate is shut so that we can not praise God. So
Ezechias in this place, saying that the dead shall not praise god, means not
generallye all those that depart out of this transitorye life, but those
which are as it were cut of from God, and are confounded with his wrath, who
also taste not his goodness any manner of way, and are made naked and estranged
from all hope of health. It is then impossible that such should praise God.

There is yet another point to note. For when the faithful are holden down
and oppressed with any distress, they se nothing but their own grief, and
every man has experience of this in him self to much. When any evil has
cast us down altogether, we can not apply our selves to any other thing,
for we are there holde^ fast as in a straight prison. So was Ezechias, as also
it is said in the lxxxviii. Psalm. That the state of those that are dead, is a
land of forgetfulness: men know not there what God is. This seems to be a
blasphemy. But these manners of spech proceed of the unskillfulness and weakness
of men, that is because they can not withdraw them selves to judge with a
settled sense, and to have a well framed and ordered knowledge. But the trouble
so vexes and carries them away that they speak as at randon and confusely.
Behold, Job says that men being taken out of this world have no more
carfulness, but every one is at rest, Job. 3.
as if there were a confuse mixture, that the master and the verlet were all
one, and that the tyrant should cause no more terror. He speaks of the state
of those that are departed, as if death should destroy all things. Yet he had
not such opinion, but it was because that his sorrow suffered him not to speak as
a man at rest. For he was tossed with such unquietness that his words wa^dred.
So may we think of Ezechias. He speaks not of the estate and condition of
those that are departed as the scripture teaches us, and why? his heaviness,
and the horror which he had conceived bare rule over him in such sort that
he wiste not where he was: it is true yt this is not for excuse.

And thus therefore our Lord gives us mirours of our frailenes when we see
that the most holy, and most perfect speak so. Yet in ye mean time God
supported Ezechias, because the principal thing remained with him still, as we
have already seen, that he tended to this mark to glorify the name of God, for
he had rather die a hundred times than to be one minute in this world
prophaninge by unthankfulness the benefits that God has done for him. Lo than
Ezechias keeps this rule that men ought not to desire to live one day but to
that end that God might be glorified in it. But in the mean time this yt he
was tossed with so great troubles that he could not orderly speak as he ought,
proceeded of his weakness, which God holds for excused and supporteth. For it
is not a disobedience, though we have many ranging words in our prayer. It is
true that we ought always to frame our selfs to his rule, which is given us,
to thend that every man pray to God, not at adventure, and after his own
fancy. But how soever it be, we shall have measurable sorrows, and complaints
in us, and it behooves that god have pity of us in this behalf. Lo in a
sum what we have to learn, that above all, while we live, we always tend to
this end that God be honored. For therefore it is he yt has set us in this
world, to that end it is that he has chosen us to be of his flok, to wete,
that we might be assembled to singe his praises with one accord.

And we see this yet better in the 115. Psalm, where is a like sentence. And
it is not one man that speaks, but the whole body of the Church of the
faithful, which say that one can not praise God in death, but we that live
(say they) unto the end shall confess that god has preserved us. There it
is signified unto us that God will always keep his church, and that he will have
some people remaining unto the end of the world. Why? because he will be
known the father and savior among men. And although it be not of the greater
multitud, yet will he have some company that shall praise him. So then let us
learn to exercise our selves in blessing the name of God while he keeps us
here below, and while we be nourished by his liberalytie, and while (which
more is) he calls us unto him to tend always to the hope of the eternal
heritage. Sith then it is so, let us apply all our study thereunto, yea all
the days of our life. If we do otherwise, it were better for us that our
mothers had been delivered of us before our time, or that the earth had gaped
to swallow us up, tha^ to be here gluttons, as brute beasts, and to continue
unthankful for so many benefits as God has given us, and that his praise
should be buried by us. Take this for a note.

The residue: Let us always be ready following the example of S. Paul, to
glorify God, be it by life, be it by death. If at any time we be in trouble as
the good king Ezechias was, let us know that all our sorrows, complaints and
groninges, ought to be suspicious unto us, because we can not keep measure by
reason of the frailty that is in us.

So that this which is said here. The dead shall not praise God, may not be
drawn of us ^or a co^sequent proof, to plead with God when it shall please
him to call us unto him. Let us not make this excuse under pretext of Ezechias,
or David who spoke so in the vi. Psalm, or of all the people as we shall
aledge. For there was excess, because as well David as Ezechias, and generally
all the Church then when a horrible dissipation was near tempted as if god
would reject them, and utterly disclaim in them, and would have no more to do
with them. As they then were pulled back from God, so were they abashed. And
no marvel. Let us not therefore make thereof a rule, as if we might do the like:
but let it serve to make us know our own weakness. Moreover although God do
support us, yet let us not please our selves in such a vice. Lo this it is
that we have to learn.

Now we are taught for as much as God has made us to feel his graces, to
have our herts set at large, and our mouths opened to bless his name. And on
the other side that we can not pronounce one word to his praise, which
proceeds from a good hearty affection, except we be thoroughly persuaded in
this, that God is merciful unto us, and that we use to our profit the benefits
which we receive of his hand.

As touching the first point, let every one learn to stir up him self
according to that which he receives of the graces of God, for the number is
infinite.

There is none of us when he shall duly consider him self, but ought to be
ravished as it is said in the xl. Psalm, that if we will number the
testimonies that God has given us of the fatherlye care which he has for us,
and of his mercy, they are mo than the hears of our head, and we shall be
thereat as it were astonyshed. But according as God sets fourth the richesse
of his goodness toward every one of us, let us be so much the more moved to
bless his name, and let every one experuse and prick him self forward unto
that. Lo this is in sum that which we have to mark upon this place.

Now on the other side, let us confess that our life is cursed if we
gluttonously devour the good things that God gives us and do not therein
behold his goodness. For we unchristianly abuse all that which was appointed for
our use and salvation unless we be brought to this point that God shows him
self a very father unto us, and that by all means of gentleness he draws
us unto him, that we should not doubt that he takes us for his children. And
in this also we see how miserable is the state of Papists, for they will not
assure them selves of the goodness of God, but say that always we must be in
doubt of it. And so all their prayeng and thankesgeuyng to God, is nothing but
Hypocrisy and faining. For we can not call upon the name of God but with
affiaunce, we can not praise his name except we know that he is favorable unto
us. Then they are altogether excluded. Let us learn then that we can never
offer to God a sacrifice of tha^kesgeuing which he estemeth and sets by, and
that we can never attein to the right scope of our life, unless we be fullye
persuaded of his goodness. And so as often as we think upon all the graces and
benefits of God: let this come into our mind, that God does confirm and
ratify unto us his adopsion to the end that we may not doubt that he
compteth us as his children, and that we freely call upon him as our father: Lo
in a sum what we have to learn of this place.

Now we must also note this which Ezechias says. The living, the living shall
praise the? Yea the father shall declare to his children thy virtue. He had
said before that the dead shall not wait any more for the truth of God, that is
to say, they shall have no hope. And in this we see that which I have touched,
that Ezechias speaks not indifferently of all these whom God has taken out
of this world. For it is certain that the faithful do wait upon the truth of
God. When Jacob yeldyng up his spirit, said: I will wait for the salvation
of the Lord. He said not that for one minute, but he declared and protested
that he had this assurance imprinted in his heart, which should never be pulled
out, so yt though he passed through a hundred deaths yet always this treasure
should remain with him. Now then the saints and faithful although God called
the^ out of the world ceased not always to nourishe the hope of the
resurrection* and of this felicity which is promised the^. But Ezechias
speaks of the departed, which are as it were banished and estrau^ged
altogether from the kingdom of God whom also he forsakes. Now, he was even
in the same estate in his own conceit until god comforted him by his prophet.
For ye messag which was sent to him, was to show that God was his enemy, and
that he came as his adversary with armed hand against him. Than was Ezechias
driven to remain confounded. Then it is not without a cause that he said,
that those which are departed, wait not for the truth of God, that is to say,
that they are altogether shut out from the promises, so as they are no more of
the number of his children.

But now he says that the lyuinge which taste the goodness of God, shall
cause their children to knowledge his truth. Now here we se again how God
shall be duly praised and honored among us, that is, when a man shall know that
he is faithful to all his own, that he never forsakes them, but that his
help is ready for them in their necessity, and that they shall never be
disapointed which lean unto him. Lo this is the true substance of Gods
praise. So in a sum we se that it is nothing but falshede and lies when men
shall pray unto God, and shall make as though they gave thanks unto him, and
in the mean time they are not instructed of the love yt God bears them nor
certified of their salvation, and shall know of no promise. Then when that
wants, it is certain that all their praises of God, which may be sounded
in the mouths of men, are but wind^* and smoke. Will we then praise God as it
apperteyneth, in such manner as he allows the sacrifices which we shall
offer unto him of praise, and thanks geuinge? Let us profit in his word, let
us know what it is, to trust in him, which we can not do till he declared
his good will toward us, and have certyfyed us that he has received us, yt
we may freely come unto him, and that we shall never be forsaken, so we fle unto
him. If we have not such an instruction, we can never pronounce one word of
Gods praises as we ought. Lo hereunto it is to be applied* that Ezechias
says here, that the father shall make known unto his children the treweth of
God.

Moreover, where as he says, that the dead can not wait for it, nor lean
unto it. Let us know, that for as much as God declares himself merciful
and lyberall unto us, that is always the more to confyrme our hoope: That we
should take so much the more courage to run unto him, and not to doubt
that he has his hand always ready to help us at neade.

How then shall we use the graces of God as we ought? When we shall be always
confyrmed more and more in the says, when we can despise all temptations,
when we can resolve our selves, that in calling upon God, we ought in no
wise to fear the loss of our labor, for as much as our hope shall never
be confounded.

When then we shall be well satisfied in this ^o as we may fight against
Satan, to beat back all temptations, behold how we may wyselye apply the
benefytes of God to our own use, and how we may take profit of them: Lo
in a sum what we have bear to learn.

Moreover, when he speaks how fathers ought to behave them selves toward
their children we have to gather in general (as has been said here before) yt
it is not enough yt we procure that god be glorified during our life, but we
ought to desire as his name is immortal so that from age to age it may be
honored, and that those which shall come after us, may keep ye pure religion,
and that the service of God may never fall in decay. That it may be followed
and advanced always and that the goodness of God may be every where magnified.
They that have children, let them know that God has committed them incharge
to the^, and that they must render an account if they bestow not al trauaill to
teach them to serve God. For when it is said that the father shall show to
his children the truth of god, we must alwai come to this end. Why? to this
end that the children may trust in him, that they may call upon him, that they
may give to him the praise of all good things, yt they may dedicate and
consecrate the^ selves wholly to him, and to his obedience. The^ if fathers will
discharg, the^ selves of their duties, let them know that this is the
principal heritage that they ought to leave to their children. But if they
heap up goods and yet give them the bridle when they shall see them dissolute,
mischievous, wicked despisers of God. Woe be to them in that they shall take
peine to advance them in this world: for they lift them up very hye to make
them break their necks, and their fall shall be more deadly when they shall have
store of gooddes: and yet in the mean time they shall despise God in his
doctrine, there confusion shall be more horrible, because their unthankfulness
shall be less excusable. Let the fathers then think better of this the^ they
have been accustomed, that is to say, when God gives them children, he binds
them to this charge, that they endeavor so much ye more, that they may be
instructed in his truth, so long as as they live, as also we se thexample given
us in Abraham, which is the father of the faithful. For when God meant to show
that Abraham would govern his house, as appertened: Shall I hyde from my
servant Abraham (says he) that which I have to do? No. Lo how God makes him
self familiar with him. For (says he) he shall instruct his children in my
statutes, in my laws, and in my ordinances: Lo, this is the mark whereby the
faithful are known from the despisers of God. If then we will be numbered in
the church, let us follow this zele, and this affection of Abraham, that every
one according to the family that he has, travail that God be honored in
it, and that his truth be always known even to the end.

Now for conclusion Ezechias says: The Lord it is that shall save me. This
word does emport that he despises and throws away all other safegarde, as
if he should say, there is none but God. He might have said: The Lord has
saved me. He might have said: I hold my life of him and of his mere grace. But
he goes further, as if he meant here to maintain the honor of God, and to
beat down all the affiances that men conceive in their fantasy. For we are
wont to make our discourses when we mind to maintain our selves, and when
we seek to be assured, we take this mean, and that mean.

Now Ezechias forsakes all and declares that there is none but God, and that
he it is whom we ought to go unto.

True it is that God suffers us to use all the means that he offreth us, and
he has ordained them for that use, but yet he will not that his glory be
darkened, as it is no reason it should be. Nevertheless men be so wicked and
froward, that always they take occasion to minishe the glory of God under this
color that he helps them by his creatures. If God has not been content
only to make us feel his own virtue, but also applies al his creatures to our
use we ought to be so much the more styrred to praise him. But clean contrary,
we rob him of his right, we forsake him, and fasten our affiaunce here, and
there, and we think that our salvation proceeds from this thing and from
that. Lo how God is defrauded of his right. So much the more ought we to mark
this that is here said by Ezechias. The Lord it is that saves us. That is,
though the Lord do stretch his hand unto us, and gives us wherewith to be
maintained, yet let us confess that he is the fountain, and let the river that
flows from him unto us, not hinder us to know whence the river comes. Let
us then tend always to this welspring that God be glorified, and that he kept
his own wholly: and after, when we are made naked of all other means, let us
say: the Lord alone shall suffice. And for this cause says David. The mercy
of God is more worth than all lives, not meaning that the life of men is not of
the mercy of God, but he shows ye men ought not to be fast bound here
beneth, and that they are become brutish when they think to preserve,
maintain, or warrant them selfs by this, or that mercy, and that they ought
above all things to prefer the only goodness of God and to rest in the same.
So then behold here a saying of great doctrine, if we ca^ have skill to take
profit thereof. Let us then follow the example of Ezechias, and when God has
succored us at our need: let us give him the praise for our life confessinge yt
there is none but he alone to save us. Herunto he adds again. And we will
singe our songs all the days of our life in ye house of the Lord. Here he
repeteth again the saying that he spoke before, that is, that he will employe
all the residue of the life that god has given him to make to God
acknowledgement thereof, that he might not be found unthankful. For as I have
said it were better that we had never been borne, than to enjoy ye good things
that God has done for us, and yet to have our mouth close and to think no
more upon him. Let us then note well that this repetion is not superfluous when
Ezechias says so many times that since his life is prolonged, he will be so
much the more styred to praise God. Take this for one note.

Now, he further shows that this shall not be for a sodein braide, as many can
well praise God with a merely vehement affection, when they have had proof of his
goodness, but that droupeth away by and by, and the memory is lost of it, and
they think that it is enough yt at one time they have testified yt they tha^k
God for the good yt they have received. But Ezechias shows us yt we ought to
continue therein with a true perseuera^ce, for we are beholde^ to god no more for
one day of our life tha^ for another It must therefore be fully dedicate and
auowed unto him. So seeing the slouthfulnes and coldness that is in us, let us
learn to styre up our selves when we shall feel that our zele waxes cold for
fear lest it be wholly quenched. Let us awake. How? If I have once or twice
reknowledged the grace of God. What is that? must it be now forgotten? And if I
bless the name of God duringe one month, a year, or two, or three: And now I
think no more of it. To what purpose shall yt serve me? but to make me so much
ye more gi^tie of hypocrisy, and to show yt there was nothing but a fire of
stubble, that there is no constancy nor stedfastnes. If then we behold well
the example of this good king, we shall every one be the more pricked
forward, to feed our selves no more in this idleness which is natural unto
us, and whereunto we be to much inclined.

When he says, In the house of the Lord. He means not that the praises of
God should be enclosed within the temple, for every man in his own house may
and ought to praise God. But Ezechias shows that it is not enough that he
prayseth God in secret, but that he will styre up other, to have more
company. He speaks here of a solemn sacrifice of praise which he will make
to God in a great assembly. And for this same cause our Lord has wylled his
to gather together. For he was able enough to have taught the^ perticulerly if
he would, and to say: Let every man praise me in his chamber. But his pleasure
is that there be this policy, that we be knit together in one body, that we
call upon him with one mouth, and that we make confession of our faith with one
accord. And why so? True it is, that first we see that it behooves that all
our senses be applied to glorify him, but there is also a second point, that
every one stir up other as we have need, for there is none of us that feleth
him self disposed to praise God, but he has yet a prick forward when he
shall see the company of the faithful, and example showed him. For as much
therefore as this does stir us up, God wills that openly and in common we
sing his praises. And for this cause Ezechias says expressly that he will go
to the temple of the Lord to praise and bless his name, as we se also that
Jonas did the like. Jonas. 2.
He speaks of house of the Lord, and why? not (as I said) that the praises
of the Lord are there shut up and hidden but for that the people there
assemble together, and for that he knew that this should bring more profit
because there should be some that should be styred up by his example. Lo in a
sum the song of Ezechias.

Now in the end it is here recited that ye Prophet Esaias commanded to make him
a plaster of figs upon his wound, whereby it is likely that it was a
pestilence which he had. And after he by and by adds yt Ezechias also
demau^deth a token which is granted him, as we se when the son was drawn
back of his course upon the dial of Achas. A man might here move a question,
whether this plaster were for medicine, or a token that the Prophet gave him.
And it seems that if it had been for medicine, it should have diminished the
glory of God, for it behooved that Ezechias life should be miraculous. Why did
he not then heal him without any mean? But when all shall be well considered,
the sign or miracle that was given to Ezechias when the son stayed his
course, and when the shadow of the dyall was drawn back so many degrees, was
sufficient, and took away all doubt. Moreover although Ezechias used this
plaster it is not therefore to be said that his healyng was naturally wrought,
for since God had changed the order of the heaven, and showed a witness so
evident that this proceeded from his hand, and that it was an extraordinary
benefit, we ought to content our selves with that, and we see many times that
God is served with his creatures and yet he has sufficientlye declared that it
was his own power only.

They which think that Ezechias rather had this plaster as a sacrament to
confirm him, do think that the figs would more have hurt his wound than
helped it. But a man may make a compound of them to ripe a sore, and that is
commonly known. True it is that God sometime gives signs that seem clean
contrary, and that is to draw us the more to him, to make us forsake our own
fantasies and hold us content with that which he has spoken. As how? God
promises that the world shall never be destroyed with water, and what sign
gives he thereof? a sign that naturally threateneth us rain. When we see the
rainbowe, what token is it? it is such a drawyng together of waters, that
makes seem we shall all be overwhelmed and the earth shall peryshe. And how so?
This sign is given us of God to make us know that therth shall never be
destroyed with ouerflowynge of water. Yea but it is to make us learn to stay
upon his truth and to stop our eyes against all the rest, and against all that we conceive in our selves, and that the truth of God be of so sufficient
credit with us, that we receive it without gainsaying. So the^ God works well
in such sort: but as to this place, we may rather judge that the Prophet to
assuage the grief of Ezechias gave him this remedy, like to a fire that
burns a man. And so when GOD had prolonged the life to this good king* he
would yet of abundant grace add this goodness also, that the pain should be
mitigate. Then the prophet gave him this as it were an overplus that God had not
only prolonged his life, but also would not have him endure so much or suffer
the torments which he felt before.

Thus behold how in all and every way God has declares him self pitiful
toward this good king, how he would show him self pacified altogether after
that he had used such roughnes toward him and had stretched out his arm as if
he would have altogether overwhelmed him, but this means not yt God does ye
very same to every one of his children, to the end yt we should not ask that
in one minut of time God make us glad after he has drawn us out of the grave
and has given us throughlye to content us, but that it may be his pleasure by
little and little to give us ease of all our greues, in the mean time let us
be content with this.

And in deed we may gather that God hitherto has wrought by degrees in
Ezechias: for this miracle was done since the shadow of the son was drawn
back, and the message of prolonging his life was given him by the prophet.

It seems the^ that Ezechias was altogether delivered, and yet this plaster
was also requisite. So then when our lord after he has given us any ^ase in
our trouble shall leave some remnaunt of peine: let not that trouble us,
nether let us be weary of bearyng his correction, until he have healed us
altogether.

Now we have to declare why Ezechias demanded a sign, for although it were of
wekenes yet God heard him in such a request, and herein we se how loving God
is toward us, when he does not only grant the requests which we make of a
pure and right affection: but also though there be some infirmity mingled
withal, and that we bear passions somewhat excessive, yet God has pity on us
in this point. Certain it is that Ezechias when he had perfect faith he was
content to have heard the word from the mouth of the Prophet. Then when he
says alas shall I not have some sign: herin he shows that he gives not
full and perfect faith to the word of God. But yet he confesses his fault, and
in confessyng it, he asks remedy: and of who^? of God himself. Then when we
shall be so encombred, first let us acknowledge our own poverty, and let us not
go about to excuse the evil, but let us take upon us the sentence of
condemnation willyngly. If then we ask of God to help it by his goodness, he
will succor us, and hear our requests.

It is true that it becomes not us to require a sign or miracle when we
think good, for as it has been declared in that place where the prophet even
now made mention of the sign. Ezechias had a special motion unto it, Iudi. 6.
as Gedeon also had: Let us leave that to ye good pleasure of God, when we know
our infirmity, and pray him to help, and to confirm us to the end we may be
fullye satisfied in his word. Lo then how we must go forward, and in this
doing we shall feel that this is not written only for the parson of the king
Ezechias, but that God would give it for a common instruction to all his
church, that in our troubles when we shall be come to the extremity: yea, to
the bottom of hell, we may yet know that we ought to have our refuge to him
that has called us, and handled us so gently, hopinge that he will show
fourth his strength toward us, although for a time it be far from us, and
that we se no sign of it, and so that he will give us matter to glorify him,
and also we are taught to apply all our life to to bless the name of God,
and to sing his praises according as we have experience of his goodness
toward us.

Now let us throw down our selves before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledgyng of our faults, praying him, that more and more, he will make us
to feale them, and that this may be to beat us altogether down, and humble us
before him yt we may fight with the vices which make war against us, knowing
that our Lord has ordained us to this conflict, till we be fullye renewed and
clothed with his justice, and that there may be no stop to let us from the
obedience of his good will, and that he grant this grace not only unto us,
but to all peopes and nations. etc.

A MEDITATION OF A PENITENT SINNER: WRITTEN IN MANNER OF A Paraphrase upon the
51. Psalm of David.
I have added this meditation following unto the end of this book, not as
parcel of master Caluines work, but for that it well agrees with the same
argument, and was delivered me by my friend with whom I knew I might be so bold
to use and publishe it as pleased me.

The preface, expressing the passioned mind of the penitent sinner.
THe heinous gylt of my forsaken ghost
So threats, alas, unto my febled sprite
Deserved death, and (that me greueth most)
Still stand so fixed before my daseld sight
The lothesome filthe of my disteined life,
The mighty wrath of mine offended Lord,
My Lord whose wrath is sharper than the knife,
And deper wounds than doble edged sword,
That* as the dimmed and fordulled eyes
Full fraught with tears and more and more oppressed
With growing streams of the distilled bryne
Sent from the furnace of a grefefull breast,
Can not enjoy the comfort of the light,
Nor find the way wherein to walk aright:
So I blind wretch, whom Gods enflamed tree
with pearcing stroke has thrown unto ye ground,
Amidde my sins still groueling in the mire,
Find not the way that other often have found,
Whom cherefull glimse of gods abounding grace
Has often releued and often with shyning light
Has brought to joy out of the vgglye place,
Where I in dark of everlasting night
Bewail my woeful and unhappy case,
And fret my dyeng soul with gnawing pain.
Yet blind, alas, I groape about for grace.
While blind for grace I groape about in vain,
My fainting breath I gather up and strain,
Mercy, mercy to cry and cry again.
But mercy while I sound with shreking cry*
For grant of grace and pardon while I pray,
Even then despeir before my ruthefull eye
Spredes forth my sin and shame, and semes to say
In vain thou brayest forth thy bootlesse noise
To him for mercy, O refused wight,
That hears not the forsaken sinners voice.
Thy reprobate and foreordeined sprite,
For damned vessel of his heavy wrath,
(As self witness of thy beknowyng heart.
And secret gilt of thine own conscience says)
Of his sweet promises can claim no part:
But thee, caytif, deserved curse does draw
To hell, by justice, for offended law.
This horror when my tre^bling soul does hear,
When marks and tokens of the reprobate,
My growing sins, of grace my senseless cheer*
Enforce the proof of everlasting hate,
That I conceive the heavens king to bear
Against my sinful and forsaken ghost:
As in the throat of hell, I quake for fear,
And then in present peril to be lost
(Although by conscience wants to replye,
But with remorse enforcing mine offense,
Does argue vain my not auailyng cry)
With woeful sighs and bitter penitence
To him from whom the endless mercy flows
I cry for mercy to releue my woes.
And then not daring with presuming eye
Once to behold the angry heavens face,
From troubled sprite. I send confused cry,
T^ crave the crummes of all sufficing grace.
With foltring knee I falling to the ground,
Bendyng my yelding hands to heavens throne,
Pour forth my piteous plaint with woeful sound,
With smoking sighs, and often repeted groan,
Before the Lord, the Lord, whom sinner I,
I cursed wretch, I have offended so,
That dredyng, in his wrekefull wrath to dye,
And damned down to depth of hell to go,
Thus tossed with panges and passions of despeir,
Thus crave I mercy with repentant chere.
A Meditation of a penitent sinner, upon the 51. Psalm.
Have mercy upon me (o God) after thy great merci
Have mercy, God, for thy great mercies sake.
O God: my God, unto my shame I say,
Being fled from thee, so as I dred to take
Thy name in wretched mouth, and fear to pray
Or ask the mercy that I have abusde.
But, God of mercy, let me come to thee:
Not for justice, that justly am accusde:
Which self word Justice so amaseth me,
That scarce I dare thy mercy sound again.
But mercy, Lord, yet suffer me to crave.
Mercy is thine: Let me not cry in vain,
Thy great mercy for my great fault to have.
Have mercy, God, pity my penitence
With greater mercy than my great offense.
And according unto the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.
My many sins in number are encreast,
With weight whereof in sea of deep despeire
My sinking soul is now so sore oppressed,
That now in peril and in present fere,
I cry: sustain me, Lord, and Lord I pray*
With endless number of thy mercies take
The endless number of my sins away.
So by thy mercy, for thy mercies sake,
Rue on me, Lord, releue me with thy grace.
My sin is cause that I so need to have
Thy mercies aid in my so woeful case:
My sin is cause that scarce I dare to crave
Thy mercy manyfolde, which only may
Releue my soul, and take my sins away.
So soul is sin and lothesome in thy sight, Wash me yet more from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

So foul with sin I see my self to be,
That till from sin I may be washed white,
So foul I dare not, Lord, approach to thee.
Often has thy mercy washed me before,
Thou made me clean: but I am foul again.
Yet wash me Lord again, and wash me more.
Wash me, O Lord, and do away the stain
Of vggly sins that in my soul appear.
Let flow thy ple^tuous streams of clensing grace.
Wash me again, yea wash me every where,
Both leprous body and defiled face.
Yea wash me all, for I am all unclean.
And from my sin, Lord, cleanse me ones again.
Have mercy, Lord, have mercy: For I knowledge my wickedness, and my sin is
ever before me.
for I know
How much I need thy mercy in this case.
The horror of my gilt does daily grow,
And growing wears my feeble hope of grace.
I feel and suffer in my thralled breast
Secret remorse and gnawing of my heart.
I feel my sin, my sin that has oppressed
My soul with sorrow and surmounting smart.
Draw me to mercy: for so often as I
Presume to mercy to direct my sight,
My Chaos and my heap of sin does lie,
Between me and thy mercies shining light.
What ever way I gaze about for grace,
My filth and fault are ever in my face.
Against thee only have I sinned, and don evil in thy sight.
Grant thou me mercy, Lord: thee thee alone
I have offended, and offendyng thee,
For mercy lo, how I do lie and groan.
Thou with allpearcing eye beheldest me,
Without regard that sinned in thy sight.
Behold again, how now my spirit it rues,
And wailes the time, when I with foul delight
Thy sweet forbearing mercy did abuse.
My cruel conscience with sharpened knife
Does splat my ripped heart, and lays abroad
The loth^some secrets of my filthy life,
And spredes them forth before the face of God.
Who^ shame from deed shameless cold not restrain,
Shame for my deed is added to my pain.
But therey Lord, O Lord some pity take,
That thou might be found just in thy sayings, and may over come when
thou art judged.
Withdraw my soul from the deserved hell*
O Lord of glory, for thy glories sake:
That I may saved of thy mercy tell,
And show how thou, which mercy have behight
To sighyng sinners, that have broke thy laws,
Performest mercy: so as in the sight
Of them that judge the justice of thy cause
Thou only just be demed, and no more,
The worlds injustice wholly to confound:
That damning me to depth of during woe
Just in thy judgment should thou be found:
And from deserved ^la^es releuyng me
Just in thy mercy may thou also be.
For lo, in sin, Lord, I begotten was, For lo, I was shapen in wickedness,
and in sin my mother conceived me.

With sede and shape my sin I took also,
Sin is my nature and my kind alas,
In sin my mother me conceived: Lo
I am but sin, and sinful ought to dye,
Dye in his wrath that has forbidden sin.
Such bloome and fruit lo sin does multiply,
Such was my root, such is my iuyse within.
I plead not this as to excuse my blame,
On kind or parents mine own gilt to lay:
But by disclosing of my sin, my shame,
And need of help, the plainer to displaye
Thy mighty mercy, if with plenteous grace
My plenteous sins it please thee to deface.
Thou love simple sooth, not hidden face
With trutheles visour of deceiving show. But lo, thou haste loved truth, the
hidden and secret things of thy wisdom thou haste opened unto me.

Lo simply, Lord, I do confess my case,
And simply crave thy mercy in my woe.
This secret wisdom have thou granted me,
To se my sins, and whence my sins do grow:
This hidden knowledge have I learnd of thee,
To feel my sins, and how my sins do flow
With such excess, that with unfeigned heart,
Dreding to drown, my Lord, lo how I flee,
Simply with tears bewailyng my desert,
Releued simply by thy hand to be.
Thou love truth, thou taughtest me the same.
Help, Lord of truth, for glory of thy name.
With sweet Hysope besprinkle thou my sprite: Sprinkle me, Lord, with hisope
and I shall be clean: wash me and I shall be whiter then snow.

Not such hysope, nor so besprinkle me,
As law imperfect shade of perfect light
Did use as an appointed sign to be
Foreshewing figure of thy grace behight.
With death and bloodshed of thine only son*
The sweet hysope, cleanse me defiled wight.
Sprinkle my soul. And when thou so haste done,
Bedeawd with drops of mercy and of grace*
I shall be clean as cleansed of my sin.
Ah wash me, Lord: for I am foul alas:
That only can, Lord, wash me well within,
Wash me, O Lord: when I am washed so,
I shall be whiter than the whitest snow.
Thou shall make me hear joy and gladness, at the bones which thou have
broken shall rejoice
Long have I heard, and yet I hear the soundes
Of dreadful threats and thonders of the law,
Which Echo of my gylty mind resoundes,
And with redoubled horror does so draw
My listening soul from mercies gentle voice,
That louder, Lord, I am constraynde to call:
Lord, pearce mine ears, and make me to rejoice*
When I shall hear, and when thy mercy shall
Sound in my heart the gospel of thy grace.
Then shall thou give my hearing joy again,
The joy that only may releue my case.
And then my broosed bones, that thou with pain
Have made to weak my febled corpse to bear,
Shall leap for joy, to show mine inward chere.
Turn away thy face from my sins, and do away all my misdedes.
Look on me, Lord: though tre^bling I beknowe,
That sight of sin so sore offends thee,
That seeing sin, how it does ouerflowe
My whelmed soul, thou can not look on me,
But with disdain, with horror and despite.
Look on me, Lord: but look not on my sin.
Not that I hope to hyde it from thy sight,
Which see me all without and eke within.
But so remove it from thy wrathful eye,
And from the justice of thine angry face,
That thou impute it not. Look not how I
Am foul by sin: but make me by thy grace
Pure in thy mercies sight, and, Lord, I pray*
That hate sin, wipe all my sins away.
Sin and despeir have so possessed my heart, Create a clean heart within me, O
God: and renew a steadfast spirit within my bowels.

And hold my captive soul in such restraint,
As of thy mercies I can feel no part,
But still in languor do I lie and faint.
Create a new pure heart within my breast:
Mine old can hold no liquour of thy grace.
My feeble faith with heavy lode oppressed
Staggring does scarcely creep a reeling pace,
And fallen it is to faint to rise again.
Renew, O Lord, in me a constant sprite,
That stayde with mercy may my soul sustain*
A sprite so settled and so firmly pight
Within my bowels, that it never move,
But still uphold thassurance of thy love.
Lo prostrate, Lord, before thy face I lie, Cast me not away from thy face,
and take not thy holy spirit from me.

With sighs deep drawn deep sorrow to express*
O Lord of mercy, mercy do I cry:
Drive me not from thy face in my distress,
Thy face of mercy and of sweet relefe,
The face that fedes angels with only sight,
The face of comfort in extremest grefe.
Take not away the succor of thy sprite,
Thy holy sprite, which is mine only stay,
The stay that when despeir assaileth me,
In faintest hope yet moves me to pray,
To pray for mercy, and to pray to thee.
Lord, cast me not from presence of thy face,
Nor take from me the spirit of thy grace.
Restore to me the comfort of thy saving help, and stablishe me with thy free
spirit.
But render me my wonted joys again,
Which sin has rest, and planted in their place
Doubt of thy mercy ground of all my pain.
The taste, that thy love whilome did embrace
My cheerful soul, the signs that did assure
My felyng ghost of favor in thy sight,
Are fled from me, and wretched I endure
Senseless of grace the absence of thy sprite.
Restore my joys, and make me feel again
The sweet return of grace that I have lost,
That I may hope I pray not all in vain.
With thy free sprite confirm my feeble ghost.
To hold my faith from ruin and decay
With fast affiance and assured stay.
I shall teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sins shall be turned unto thee.
Lord, of thy mercy if thou me withdraw
From gaping throat of deep devouring hell,
Lo, I shall preach the justice of thy law:
By mercy saved, thy mercy shall I tell.
The wicked I will teach thine only way,
Thy ways to take, and man's devise to flee,
And such as lewd de^ight has led astray,
To rue their error and return to thee.
So shall the proof of mine example preach
The bitter fruit of lust and foul delight:
So shall my pardon by thy mercy teach
The way to find sweet mercy in thy sight.
Hyue mercy, Lord, in me example make
Of law and mercy, for thy mercies sake.
O God, God of my health, my saving God, Deliver me from blood o God, God of my
health and my tongue shall joyful lie talk of thy justice.

Have mercy Lord, and show thy might to save,
Assoile me, God, from gilt of giltlesse blod,
And cke from sin that I ingrow^ng have
By flesh and blood and by corrupted kind.
Upon my blood and soul extend not, Lord,
Vengeance for blood, but mercy let me find,
And strike me not with thy reuengyng sword.
So, Lord, my ioying tongue shall talk thy praise,
Thy name my mouth shall utter in delight,
My voice shall sound thy justice, and thy ways,
Thy ways to justify thy sinful wight.
God of my health, from blood I saved so
Shall spread thy praise for all the world to know.
Lo straining crampe of cold despeir again
In feeble breast does pinche my pinyng heart, Lord, open thou my lips, and my
mouth shall show thy praise.

So as in greatest need to cry and plain
My speech does fail to utter thee my smart.
Refreshe my yeldyng heart, with warming grace,
And loose my speech, and make me call to thee.
Lord open thou my lips to show my case,
My Lord, for mercy Lo to thee I flee.
I can not pray without thy mouyng aid,
Ne can I rise, ne can I stand alone.
Lord, make me pray, and grant when I have praide.
Lord loose my lips, I may express my moan*
And findyng grace with open mouth I may
Thy mercies praise, and holy name display.
Thy mercies praise, instede of sacrifice, If thou had desired sacrifice, I
would have given thou delytest not in burnt offringes.

With thankful mind so shall I yield to thee.
For if it were delitefull in thine eyes,
Or hereby might thy wrath appeased be*
Of cattle slain and burnt with sacred flame
Up to the heaven the vaprie smoke to send:
Of gyltlesse beasts, to purge my gilt and blame,
On altars broylde the savor should ascend,
To pease thy wrath. But thy sweet son alone,
With one sufficing sacrifice for all
Appeaseth thee, and makes the at one
With sinful man, and has repaird our fall.
That sacred host is ever in thine eyes.
The praise of that I yield for sacrifice.
The sacrifice to God is a trobled spirit: a broken and an humbled heart, o god,
thou will not despise.
I yield my self, I offer up my ghost,
My slain delights, my dyeng heart to thee.
To God a trobled sprite is pleasing host.
My trobled sprite does dread like him to be,
In whom tastlesse languor with lingering pain^
Has febled so the starued appetite,
That food to late is offered all in vain,
To hold in fainting corpse the fleing sprite.
My pining soul for famine of thy grace
So fears alas the faintness of my faith.
I offer up my trobled sprite: alas,
My trobled sprite refuse not in thy wrath.
Such offering likes thee, ne will thou despise
The broken humbled heart in angry wise.
Show favor, o lord in thy good will unto Sion, that (...) walls* of
Jerusalem may be bylded.
Show mercy, Lord, not unto me alone:
But stretch thy favor and thy pleased will,
To sprede thy bounty and thy grace upon
Sion, for Sion is thy holly hill:
That thy Jerusalem with mighty wall
May be enclosed under thy defense.
And bylded so that it may never fall
By myning fraud or mighty violence.
Defend thy chirch, Lord, and advance it so,
So in despite of tyranny to stand,
That tre^bling at thy power the world may know
It is vpholden by thy mighty hand:
That Sion and Jerusalem may be
A safe abode for them that honor thee.
Then on thy hill, and in thy walled town, Then shall thou accept the
sacrifice of righteousness, burnt offringes and oblations* then shall they
offer young bullockes upon thine altar.

Thou shall receive the pleasing sacrifice.
The brute shall of thy praised name resoune
In thankful mouths, and then with gentle eyes
Thou shall behold upon thine altar lie
Many a yelden host of humbled heart,
And round about then shall thy people cry:
We praise thee, God our God: thou only art
The God of might, of mercy, and of grace.
That I then, Lord, may also honor thee.
Releue my sorrow, and my sins deface:
Be, Lord of mercy, merciful to me:
Restore my feling of thy grace again:
Assure my soul, I crave it not in vain.
FINIS.

