A VEry profitable treaTISE, MADE BY M. IHON Caluyne, declarynge what great
profit might come to al christendom, if there were a regester made of all
Saints bodies and other relics, which are as well in Italy, as in France,
Dutchland, Spain, and other kingdoms and countries.

Translated out of French into English by Steven Wythers. 1561.

Set forth and authorized according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Prynted at London by Rouland Hall, dwelling in Goldyng lane at the sign of
the three arrows.

A very necessary TREATISE OF THE Bodies and relics of Saints and martyrs.
Saint Augustine in the book which he entitled: Of the labor of Monks,
complaining of certain trifle bearers, who already in his time did exercise a
most vilainous and filthy kind of cariyng hither, and thither relics of
martyrs, adds, yea if they be relics of marters. By the which word he
signifies: that even then the abuse and deceyt herein was committed in making
the poor simple people to believe that bones gathered here and there, were the
bones of saynctes.

But seeing the original of this abuse is of such antiquity, it is not to be
doubted, but that it has been in the mean while by so long continuance of
time greatly multiplied: especially seeing the world since that time, is
merueylouslye corrupted, and has declined from worse to worse, even until it
be come to the extremity in the which we see it.

Now the first vice, as it were the root of this evil, has been this, that
instead of seking Christ in his word and in his sacraments, and his
spiritual graces, ye world according to the old wont thereof has been
occupied in the renewing of his garments, shyrtes and other like cloutes: and
in so doing has left the principal to follow the accessory. In like manner
has it done concerning the apostles, martyrs, and other saints.

For in stead of imitating their lives, to follow their examples it has been
given wholly to contemplate and reserve as a treasure, their bones, shyrtes,
girdles, cappes and other like baggage and trifles. I know right well that
this has a certain kind and color of good devotion and zeal, whylest some
allege that they keep the relics of Jesus Christ for the honor they bear to
him, and for the intent to have a better memory of him: and so likewise of the
saints: but we must consider that which saint Paul says, that all service
of God invented by man's brain, what show so ever it has of wisdom is not
withstanding but vanity and folishnes: if it have not a better and more sure
ground, then our seming or judgment.

Moreover it behooved to weigh the profit that might comme thereof with the
danger: and in so doing it would have been found to have been very little
profitable or altogether superfluous and vain to have the relics in such
sort: and contrariwise it is very hard or altogether impossible that thereby
men should not decline by little and little to ydolatry. For man can not keep
himself in the beholding and handling of them, but he will also honor them: and
in honoring them, there is no measure but incontinent life that is attributed
unto them the which apperteyneth only to Jesus Christ. So then to speak
briefly as the thing is, the desire to have relics is almost never without
suspicion, and that worse is, it is the mother of ydolatry, which is ordinarely
connexed and joined therewith. Every man does confess that the cause that
moved our Lord to hyde the body of Moses, was for fear least ye people of
Israel, should abuse it in worshippyng of it. Now it behooves to understand
that, that which has been done in one saint is done in all the rest, seeing
that there is one self same reason touching all: although we leave to speak
of the saynctes here, yet let us mark what saint Paul says even of Jesus
Christ himself, for he protests not to know him any more according to the
flesh, after his resurrection: admonishyng by these words that all that is
carnal in Jesus Christ ought to be forgotten and set aside to the end to
apply and set our affection to seek and possess him according to the spirit.

Now then to pretend that it is a goodly thing to have some memorial as well
of him as of the saints, for to stir up to devotion. What is this else, but
a false cloak to paint out our folishe and vain desire, which is grounded on
no reason? And when this reason should seem to be sufficient, yet for so much
as it does manifestlye repugne to that which the holy ghost has pronunced by
the mouth of saint Paul, what would we have more? Although it be not now
needful to dispute long upon this poynct: to wit, whether it be good or evil
to have relics for to keep them only as precious things without worshippynge
them. For even as we have said experience shows that the one is almost never
with out the other.

In the oration of the death of Theodosius.
It is very true that saint Ambrose speaking of Helene mother to the Emperor
Constantine, who with great pain and great expenses sought the cross of our
Lord: says that she worshipped only the lord that had hanged thereon and not
the wodde. But it is a very rare thing to have the heart addicted to any kind
of relics whatsoever they be, and yt one do not by and by defile and polute
himself with some kind of superstition. I grant that men do not com
incontinently or at the first to manifest Idolatry: but by little and little
they com from one absuse to another, even until they fall to the extremity.
So much there is that the people that name themselves Christians, are come even
to this point that they have in this case committed as great ydolatrye as ever
did the heathen. For they have bowed them selves and kneled before the
relics, even as before god. They have lyghted candles and torches in sign of
homage and honor. They have put their trust in them: they have had their
refuge to them, as though the virtue and grace of God had been enclosed in
them. If ydolatry consist in transferryng the honor of God to others, shall we
deny this to be ydolatry? Neither must we excuse the matter in saying, that
it has been a disordinat zeal of certain rude and folishe people or of simple
women: For it has been a general disorder, approved of them which had the
guydynge and government of the church. And likewise they have placed the
bones of the dead, and all other relics upon the high altar, and on highest
and most evident places, to the end to make them with more authority honored.

Behold then how the beginning of this folishe curiosity that men have had
in times paste, to make a treasure of Relics, is come even to this most
manifest abomination, that not only men have turned the^ selves altogether
from god, for to occupy their minds on vain and corruptible things, but also
by a most execrable sacrilege, have worshipped dead and insensible creatures
in stead of the only living God.

Now as one evil is never alone, but that it draws another with it: this
mischeuous wickedness is crept in since that men have received for relics
as well of Jesus Christ as of the saints, I cannot tell what fylthinesse and
baggage wherein is neither rhyme nor reason. And the world has been so
blinded, that what title so ever were given to every trifle that was presented
unto it, ye same was forthwith received without all judgment or further
inquisition.

So that what bones so ever of Asses or Dogs, that the first mocker or
deceyuer would have had preferred for bones of martirs men have made no
difficulty to receive them very deuoutlye. As much has been of all the rest:
as it shall be hereafter entreated. For my part I doubt not it has been a just
punishment of god. For seeing the world has gone a maddyng after relics, to
abuse them unto a most perverse kind of superstition: it stood with good
reason that god should permit that after one lie another should follow.

On this manner was he wont to aduenge him self of the dishonor that has
been done to his name, when that men did transfer his honor to others.

Wherefore in that there are so many false and counterfeyte relics throughout
the whole world this proceeds from none other cause, but that god has
permitted that the world (for so much as it did delight in deceyte and lying)
should be double begyled and deceived. It had been the part or duty of
christians to have left the bodies of saints in their graves, for to have
obeyed to this universal sentence. That all men are dust, and to dust they
shall return. And not for to lift them up in pomp and sumptuousnes, for to
make as it were a resurrection before the time. This was not meant but to the
contrary against the ordinance of god, they have unburied the bodies of the
faithful, for to exalt them in glory, whereas they ought to have been in
their graves and restyng places, waityng for the latter day. Man has desired
to have them, and has put his trust in them, he has honored them and has
made all signs of reuence to them. And what has followed? The Diuil seeing men
so amassed, was not content to have deceived the world in one sort, but has
set forth this other deceit, to give titles of relics of saints to that
which was altogether profane. And god by his vengeance has taken away
understanding and judgment from the unbelievers: in such sort that with out any
further inquisition, they have accepted al what soever has been presented unto
them, putting no difference between white and black. Now for this present I
mind not to entreat what abomination it is to abuse the relics as well of
our Lord Jesus as of the saints, in such sort as men have hitherto done,
and as is yet done in the most part of christendom, for it would require a
whole book to deduce this matter But for as much as it is a thing notorious and
known, that the most part of the relics that are showed throughout al
places ar false and counterfaite, and have been set forth and preferred by
deceyuers, who impude^tly have abused the world: I have thought good to speak
somewhat thereof, to ye end to give occasion to every man to think thereon, and
to take heed thereto, for sometime we aproue a thing rashly, For so much as our
minds are occupied in such sort that we take not leisure to examine what it is
to the end to give good and right judgment: and so we fail for lack of
taking heed. But when one does admonish us, we begin to think thereon,
and are wondrous much amassed, how we have been so easy and light to believe
that which was in nothing probable. Eue^ so has it com to pass in this
matter, herein for lack of advertisement every one being preoccupied with that
which he hears said: behold the body of such a saint, behold his shows,
behold his hose, suffers himself to be persuaded that it is so. But when I
shall have euendently showed the deceyte that is committed therein, who so ever
has any spark of wisdom and reason will open his eyes, and give him self to
consider that which never before he thought upon.

Although I cannot do as I would in this little book. For it should be nedful to
have regesters from al parts, for to know what relics are said to be in
all places, to the end to make comparison of them And then men should know
that every Apostle should have more then four bodies, and every saint at the
least two or three and so many should be of all the rest.

To be short when one should have gathered all on a heap, there is no man
that would not be astonished, seeing a mockery so folish and absurd, the which
nevertheless has had power to blind the whole earth.

I thought yt for as much as there is not so little a cathedral church that has
not as it were thousands of bones and other such little trifles, what should it be
if one should gather together the whole multitude of two or three thousand
bishoprics, of twentye or thyrtie thousand abbeys, of more then fourtye
thousand couentes, of so many parish churchs and chapels? But yet ye chief
and principal should be to viset them, and not to name the^ only, for they are not al so known yt they can be named. In this town they had (as men say) in
times passed, an arm of S. Anthony ye which when it was enclosed in a glass
they kissed and worshipped: but at such time as it was taken out and showed
forth, it was found to be ye member of an Heart: there was also on the high
altar hangyng ye brain of Saint Peter as long as it was enclosed men did
not doubt thereof. For it had been blasphemy not to believe the superscription.
But when as the neste was pulled out, and that men did better behold it, it
was found to be a marble stone, I could recite many things by like examples,
but these shall suffice to do you to understand what great filthiness and
ordure should be disclosed if there were some good universal visitasitation
made of all the relics of Europa: Yea, and that with wisdom and prudence to
know how to discern them.

For many beholding a relic shut their eyes through superstition to the end,
that they seeing should see nothing at all: that is to say that they dare not
look in good earnest to consider what the thing is. Even as many that bost
them selves to have seen S. Gloudes body whole, or the body of some other
saint: and have never had this boldness to lift up their eyes to behold what
the thing was. But he that should have the liberty to see the secreat, and
the boldness to use it, should well know how to speak otherwise.

As much is of the head of Mary Magdeline, which is showed nere the town of
Marseilles with the morsel of past, or ware that is fastened upon her eye. Men
do make a treasure of her, as it were a god descended from heaven: but if a
trial were made of things men might clearly find the deceyt and craft. It were
then a thing to be desired, to have a certentie of all the trifles that men keep
hear, and there for relics: or at the least to have a regester of the^ to
show how many falshodes there are? But seeing this is not possible to be done, I
wish to have only the Inuentory of ten or twelve towns: as of Paris,
Thoulous, Raines, and Poiters: if I had but only these, (yet nevertheless)
men should see a marvelous great swarm, or at the least a confused heap. And
it is a wish yt I have many times desired that I might recover such an
Inuentory: nevertheless for so much as yt would also be hard for me to do, I
thought it much better in the end to give this little aduertysement which
follows: To the end to awake them that sleep, and to make them think what
may be said of ye whole number, when that in so very a little a portion, there
is found so much abuse. I mean, when there shall be found so much untruth
in those Relics which I shall name, the which is almost not the thousand
part of that which is showed and seen: what may one think of the residue?

Moreover, if it apear that those which were counted and esteemed for the most
certain have been fraudulently inverted and counter feyted: what may men
think of those that are more doubtful? And would to god that Christen
Princes would somewhat think upon this. For it were their office and duty not
to suffer their pore subjects to be so deceived, not only by false doctrine,
but visibly in making them believe (as the Proverb says) that Rams
bladders are lanternes: for they shall make accounte before God for their
dissimulyng, if seeing and beholding the same they keep silence: and it shall be
dearly sold them to have permitted men to mock God, where as they might have
remedied the same.

How soever it be, I trust that this little treatise shall serve al, giving every
one occasion to think with himself that which the title imports: that is,
if there were a regester made of all the relics of the world, that men
should clearly see how they have been deceived and blinded heretofore, and what
darkennes and ignorance has been throughoute the whole earth.

Let us begin then at Jesus Christ, of whom because they could not say
that they had the natural body (for concerning his miraculous body they have
found such means to forge it, and that in such number and at all times, as
often as seemed good to them) they have gathered instead thereof thousands of
other trifles, to supplye this want. Although yet not withstanding they have
not to let the body of Jesus Christ escape without retaynyng some little gobbet
thereof. For besides the teath and the hear, the Abbey of Charour in the
diosis of Poiters, vanteth it self to have the prepuce, that is to say: the
foreskyn that was cut from him in the circumcision.

I prai you from whence came this skin unto them? Saint Luke the Evangelist
recites very well that our Lord Jesus was circumcised: but that the skin was
locked up to be reserved for a relic he makes no mention at all: All the
ancient histories speak never a word thereof. And for the space of five
hundred years it was never spoken of in the Christian church. Where is it then
that it was hidden, for to be found again so suddenly? Moreover how could it
fly unto Charour? But for to prove it to be yt thing, they say that certain
drops of blood fell from it. This is their saying, which had need of
probation. Wherefore a man may well see, that it is but a plain mockery or
delution. Yet nevertheless although that we should grant them that the
skin that was cut from Jesus Christ was kept and that it might be either
there, or else where.

What should we sai of the foreskinne which is showed at Rome, at Saint John
of Latrans?

It is most certain that there was never but one. It could not be then at Rome
and at Charour both together. So then behold, a most manifest fashold and
deceit.

There remanieth afterward the blood, for the which there has been great
strife and much dissension: For many have said, that there was found no blood
of Jesus Christ, but miraculous blood, yet nevertheless it is showed natural
in more then an hundred places. In one place certain drops, as at Rochell in
Poitou the which Nicodemus (as they say) did gather in his glove. In other
places violes full, as at Mantone and else where, in other places gobblets full
as at Rome, at saint Eustace. Yea men have not been content to have blood
alone, but they must have mingled it with water as it did issue out of his side
when he was pierced on the cross. This merchandise is to be found in the
church of S. John of Latran at Rome. I leave the judgment to every man what
certentie may be had hereof. And namelye whether this be not a manifest lie, to
say that the blood of Jesus Christ has been found seven or eyghte hundred
years after his death, for to be showed throughout ye world: seeing that in the
ancient church there was never made mention thereof.

There follows after, that which did touch the body of our lord Jesus: or
rather all that they could gather together for to make relics of in memory of
him instead of his body.

First of all the Maunger, in the which he was put at the time of his birth, is
to be showed at Rome in the church called our Lady the greater. Also in S.
Paul's church the clothe wherein he was wrapped: although that there be some
little part of it at S. Saviors in Spain. His Cradle is also at Rome, with the
shyrte that his mother Mary the Virgyn made him.

Item in s. James church at Rome they do show the altar on the which he was
set in the temple, in the time of his presentacion: as though there had then
been diverse aulters, as they make in the Papistrie as many as they will. So
herein they lie without color or cloak. Behold what things they have had for
the time of Christ's childhode. It is now not need full to dispute much where
it is, that they have found all this baggage, so long a time since the death
of Jesus Christ.

For there is none of so little judgment that does not see their folly.
Throughout the whole history of the gospel, there is not so much as one
word mentioned of these things. In the time of the Apostles it was never
hard once spoken of.

About fyftye years after the death of Christ Jesus, Jerusalem was beseiged
and destroyed. Many ancient doctors have written sense that time, making
mention of things that were in their time: namelye of the cross and nails
that Helene did find. But of al these small trifles they speak never a word.
Moreover in the time of Saint Gregory, it is out of all dout that there was
none of all this at Rome, as may be seen by his writings. After whose death
Rome has been diverse times taken, pylled, and almost altogether wasted. When
all this shall be considered, what can one say else, but that all this gear has
been devised for to abuse the simple people. And in very deed the maskers as
well Priests as Monks, do well confess that it is so, in calling them Pias
frauds, that is to say honest deceytes, for to move the people to devotion.

There follows relics which appertain to the time that is since the
childhode of Jesus Christ until his death. Among which there is the pillar
whereon he did lean when he disputed in the temple, with eleven other like
pyllers of Salomons temple, I ask them who did reuele unto the^ that Jesus did
lean upon a pyller?

For the Evangelist makes no mention thereof, in rehearsing the history of
this disputacion. And it is not lykely to be true, that they gave him place as
unto a preacher seeing yt he was not in estimacion, nor in authority as it does
apear. Moreover, I demand although that he had leaned upon a pillar, yet how
is it that they know it to be the same? Thyrdlye from whence that they have
had these twelve pyllers which they say were of the temple of Solomon.

There follows after the cruses wherein the water was that Jesus Christ
changed into wine at the bride ale in Cana of Galilee, the which they call
Hydries.

I would gladly know who was the keeper of them so long a time, for to
distribute them. For we must note this that they were not found before.viii.
C. or a thousand years after that this miracle was done. I do not know all
places where they are showed. I know well that there are of them at Pise at
Rauene, at Cluny, at Angers, at S. Saviors in Spain.

But without making further discourse of the matter, it is very easy, only by
the eye sight, to convince them of a lie. For some of them do contain no more
but five quartes of wine at the most, other some less: and the others do
contain well nigh a firken. Let them make these floutes agree, if they can: and
then I will leave them their Hydries without making any controversies with
them. But they have not been content with the vessels only except they had
there with the drink also: for at Orleance they say that they have the wine the
which they name Achitricline. For because the Evangelist saint John recityng
the miracle, speaks of the Architricline, which is to say the master of the
house.

It has seemed to them that it was the proper name of the Bridegroom: and they
entertayne the people in this beastlynesse.

For once a year they make them that will bring them their offeringe: lick
the end of a sponne, telling them that they give them to drink of the wine
that our lord made in ye banquet. And the quantity never diminishes (provided
always that they fill the gobblet).

I can not tell of what bigness his shows are, which are said to be at Rome in
the place named Sancta sanctorum, nor whether they be those that he ware in his
childholde, or in his manhood. And when all is said a like worth is the one as
the other. For that which I have already said, does sufficiently show what
impudencye it is, to bring forth now the Shows of Christ which the Apostles
them selves had not in their time.

Let us come to that which does appertain to the last Supper which Christ
Jesus made with his Apostles. That Table is at Rome at Saint John of Latran.

There is of the bread at saint Saviors in Spain. The knife wherewith the
pascal lamb was cut is at Trier: note that Christ Jesus was in a borrowed place
when he made his supper. In departing from thence he left ye table there: we do
not read yt it was ever carried a way by ye apostles. Jerusalem wtin a certain
space after was destroyed: as we have said, what likeness is there yt this
table should have been found seven or eyghte hundred years after? Moreover the
form and fashion of tables were in those days clean contrary to that they are
now, for they did lie at their meals, and not sit as it is expreslye said in
the Gospel. The lie then is to much manifest.

And what lackes there more? The cup wherein he gave the Sacrament of his
blood to his Apostles to drink, is showed at our Lady of the I Will near to
Lions, and in Albegeios in a certain covent of Augustines. Which of the two
shall one believe? And yet is it worse of the platter wherein the pascall lamb
was put: for it is at Rome, at Genes, and at Earls. We must needs say that
the custom of that time was diverse from ours. For where as now we have diverse
messes they must needs have had for one mess diverse platters: Yea if one
would give credit to these holy relics, would any man have a more open and
manifest falshode?

As much is to be said of the linen cloth, wherewith Jesus Christ did wype his
apostles feet, after that he had washed them. There is one at Rome at Sanct
John of Latran: another at Aix in Dutchland at saint Cornelius with the sign
of Judas foot. It must needs be yt the one or the other is false. What shall we
then judge? Let us suffer the^ to debate the matter one against another, until
such time as one of the parties have verified the cause. In the mean time let
us think that it is nothing but disceyte, for to go about to make men believe
that the cloth which Jesus Christ left in ye house where he made his supper
should fly (five or six hundred year after the destruction of Jerusalem)
either into Italy or Dutchlande.

I had forgotten the bread wherewith five thousand were miraculouslye fed in
the Wilderness, whereof one piece is to be showed at Rome, in the church of
our Lady the new. And a little portion thereof at Saint Saviors in Spain.

It is said in the Scripture that there was a certain portion of Manna
reserved, for a remembrance that God had miraculously fed the people of
Israel in the Wilderness. But of the leauinges that were left of the five
loaves, the Gospel makes no mention that there was any reserved to such an
end or purpose: and there is no ancient historye that speaks thereof, nor
any Doctor of the church. It is very easy to be judged that this (which they
do now show) has been kned and made since that time.

So much is to be judged of the bow that is at Saint Saviors in Spain. For
they say that it is the same that Jesus held in his hands when he entered into
Jerusalem on Paulme Sunday, now the Gospel makes no mention that he did
hold any such, therefore it is an imagined thing.

Finally, we must place in this rank, another relic which seems the self
same: that is the earth whereon Jesus Christ stood when he raised up Lazarus. I
prai you who was it yt marked ye place so well, that after the destruction of
Jerusalem, when all was changed in the country of Judah, he could go so
rightlye to the place where Jesus Christ had once gone.

It is time to come to ye principal Relics of our Lord Jesus, to those I
mean that appertain to his death and passion.

And first of all let us begin to speak of his cross, whereupon he was
hanged. I know that it is holden for a certainty that it was found of Heline
the mother of Constantine the Roman Emperor. I know also what certain
Doctors have written touching the approbation hereof, for to certify that the
cross which she found was without doubt the self same on the which Jesus
Christ was hanged. Touching all this I report me to the thing it self, so
much is there that it was but a folish curiosity of her, or at the least a
folishe and unconsidered devotion. But yet put the case it had been a work
worthy of praise to her, for to have taken pains to find the true cross,
and that our lord had then declared by miracle that it was his cross which she
found: Yet let us only consider that which is of our time. Every one does
hold that this cross which Helene found is yet at Jerusalem, and none does
doubt thereof. Although the Ecclesiastical history against says the same not
ablye. For it is there recited that Helene took one part thereof to send to the
Emperor her son, who put the same at Constantinople upon a fine pyller of
Marble in the myddest of the market. Of the other part, it is said that she
did lock the same in a copher of silver, and gave it the Bishop of Jerusalem
to keep. So then either we shall augment the history of a lie or else that
which is holden at this day of the true Cross, is but a vain and triflyng
opinion.

Let us consider on the other part how many pieces there are thereof through
out the world. If I would only recite that which I could say, there would
be a regester sufficient to fyl a whole book. There is not so little a town where
there is not some piece thereof, and that not only in cathedral churchs, but
also in some parishes Likewise there is not so wicked an abbey where there is
not of it to be showed. And in some places there are good great shydes: as at the
holy chapel of Paris, and at Poiters and at Rome, where there is a great
crucifix made thereof as men say. To be short, if a man would gather together
all that has been found of this cross, there would be enough to fraighte a
great ship. The Gospel testifies that the cross might be carried of one man
What audacitie then was this to fill the earth with pieces of wod in such
quantity, that three hundred men can not carry them? And in deed they have
forged this excuse that how much so ever be cut therefrom, yet it never
decreseth. But this a mockerye so absurd and folyshe, that even the
supersticious men themselves know the contrary. I leave them to judge what
certentie a man may have of all the true crosses yt are worshypped here and
there. I leave to declare from whence, and by what means certain pieces are
come.

As some say, that ye which they have hereof, was brought them by Angels:
others say that it fell from heaven to them. Those of Poiters say that that
which they have thereof, was brought them by one of Helenes ladies who had
stolen the same: and as she fled she was found (being gone astraye) nere unto
Poitou. They ad to this fable that she was lame.

Behold the goodly foundations they have to persuade the poor people to commit
Idolatrye: For they have not been content to deceive and abuse the simple
people in showing common wodde instead of the cross, but they have resolved
that it ought to be worshipped, which is a deuylishe doctrine and saint
Ambrose namely has reproved it, as a Heathenesse supersticion.

After the cross follows the title which Pilate caused to be put thereon,
where he had written, Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. But it were
requisite that we should know both the place and the time, and how it was
found. Some will say to me that Socrates the historian of ye church makes
mention thereof. I grant it: But he makes not mention what was become thereof.
So then this witness is of no great value nor force. Moreover it was a writing
made in haste and without consideration, after that Jesus Christ was
crucified. Wherefore to show a table curiouslye made, as it were to be kept
for a show, is without all reason therein.

So then although there were but one only title, it might nevertheless be
counterfaite false and fained. But seeing the town of Thoulouse bosteth to
have it, and those of Rome say there against, showing it in the church of the
holy Roode: they falsecifie and belly one the other. Let them fight together
then so much as they will: in the end both of them shall be convicted of a lie,
if a man would examine the thing as it is.

Yet there is a greater combat of the nails. I will recite them only that are
come to my knowledge. Thereupon there is not so little a child but will judge
that the Devil has to much deluded the world in taking from it both
understanding and reason, that it could discern nothing in this matter. If
the ancient writers say true, Historia trip. lib. 2,
and namely Theodorite Historiographer of the ancient church, Helene caused
one to be nailed on her sons helmet, the other two she put in his horse
bitte. How be it Saint Ambrose says not fully so. For he says that one was
put in Constantins crown, of the other his horsebit was made, and the third
Helene kept. We se yt already more then twelve hundred years agone this has
been in controversy, to wit, what was become of the nails. What certentie can
be had of the^ then at this present time.

Now at Millan they boste that they have ye nail that was put in Constantines
horse bitte. To the which the town of Carpentras opposes her self, saying
that it is she that has it. Now S. Ambrose does not say that the nail was
knit to the bitte, but that the bitte was made thereof. Which thing can in no
wise be made to agree either with their saying of Milan, or with theirs of
Carpentras.

Moreover there is one in Rome at Saint Helenes: annother also in the church
of the holy cross, another at Seen, another at Venis^ In Germany two: at
Collyne one at the three Mary's: another at Triers, one in France at the holy
chapel of Paris, another at ye Carmes, one also at Saint Denis in France:
one at Burges: one at Tenaill, one at Draguigne.

Behold here fourtene, whereof account is made: in every place they allege
good approbation for them selves, as they suppose. And so it is that every one
has as good right as annother. Wherefor there is no better way then to make
them all pass under one fidelium. That is to say, to repute all that they
say hereof to be but lies, seeing that otherwise a man should never come to an
end.

There follows the Speare-head which can be but one: but we must needs say
that it has passed through the fournace of some alcumiste. For it is
multiplied to four beside those yt may be in other places here and there,
whereof I have not heard. There is one at Rome, the second at the holy
chapel of Paris, the third in the abbey of Tenaill, at saint Euge: the
fourth at Selne, near to Burges. Which of them now will a man choose for the
true? Wherefore the shortest way is to leave them al four for such as they
are. But presuppose that there were but one only, yet I would know from whence
it came: For neither the ancient histories, neither also all the other writers
do make any mention thereof. It must needs be then that they were forged a new.

Touching the crown of thorns, we must needs say that the pieces thereof
were planted again for to grow and wax green: otherwise I can not tell how it
could have been so augmented.

For an Item, there is the third part in the holy chapel of Paris there are
three thorns at Rome, in the church of the holy Cross: and in the church of
S. Eustace, of Rome likewise some little portion: at Seen I can not tell how
many thorns: at Venice one: at Bourges five: at Besanson, in Saynct John's
church three: at Muntroyal three: at S. Saviors in Spain, I can not tell how
many: at saint James in Galice two: at Albye three: at Toulouse, at Mascou, at
Charoux in Poiters, at Clear, at saint Flour, at Saint Maximin in Province,
in the Abbey of Salle: in the parish church of S. Martin at Noyon: in every
one of these places there is at ye least one. If one would make diligent
inquisition hereof, he might name four times as many. Necessarily it is seen
that there is much falsehode used herin. What confidence then may a man have
either of the one or the other? Herewith it is to be noted, that in the whole
ancient church they could never tell what was become of this crown.

Wherefore it is easy to be concluded, that the first plant thereof began to
budde long time after the death of our Lord Jesus Christ.

There follows after the gonne of Purple wherewith Pilate cloched our Lord in
dirision, for as much as he called him self a king Now it was a precious robe
which was not to be cast away: and it is not to be thought yt Pilate or his men
would let it be lost, after that he had once mocked our Lord Jesus therewith.
I would gladlye know who was the merchant that bought it of Pilate to keep
it for a relic. But the better to cloak their deceyt: they show some spots of
blood thereon, as if these wicked men would have spylte a princely robe, in
putting it by mockedge upon the shulders of Jesus Christ I know not whether
there be any more in any other place. But of the garment that was wouen from
top to toe without seem whereon lottes were cast, because that it seemed more
proper to move the simple people to devotion there has been diverse found: for
there is one at Argenteul near Paris, and at Trier another. And if the bulle of
Saint Saviors in Spain says true, the Christians through their rash
unconsidered zeal, have done worse then ever did the unfaithful soldiers,
for they durst not tear it in pieces, but for to spare it cast lots therefore:
and the Christians have torn it in pieces to worship it. But yet what will they
answer to the Turk, who mocketh their follye, saying that he has it in his
hands. Howbeit, it is not now nedeful to make them plede against ye Turk for
it suffiseth that they end the strife among them selves. The mean while we
shall be holden excused though we believe neither the one nor the other, for
fear lest we should favor the one part more then the other, without
knowledge of the cause, for that were against all reason. Moreover if they would
that men should believe their sayings. It is first of all requisite that they
would agree with the Evangelists. Now it is so that this garment whereupon lots
were cast, was a coat or a Iacket: which the Greeks call Clicoton and the
Latins tunica. Let one mark if the garment of Argenteul, or that of Trier have
such a form and fashion. One shall find it to be like a priests cope although
they should put out men's eyes, yet might they know their fashold by feling
with their hands. To make an end of this article, I would gladly ask a
little question touching that that the soldiers did. What moved ye soldiers to
divide amongst them the garments and coat of Jesus Christ as the scripture
witnesses It is most certain that it was to serve them selves for their own
profit.

Let them tell me if they can who was that Christian that boughte them of the
soldiers, I mean as well the coat as the other garments that are showed in
other places, as at Rome in the church of Saint Eustace, and else where. How
is it that the Evangelists have forgotten this? For it is an absurd thing to
say that the soldiers had taken in boutye the garments, without addyng that
they were bought of them again at their hands for to make relics of.

Moreover, how is it, that all the ancient writers, have been so ingrate to
make no mention thereof? I give them term to answer me to these questions,
when men shall have no moore sense, nor understanding to judge.

The best is that with the garment they would also have the Dise, wherewith
the lot was cast by the souldyours.

The one is at Trier, and two other, at Sayncte Sauyoures in Spain. Wherein
they have showed lively what is their folyshenesse: For the Evangelists say,
that the Souldyours did cast Lottes, which were then drawn out of an Hatte,
or out of sum such like thing. Even as when men choose the king of the Bean,
or when as men play at the Blancke, or at such other like games and pastimes.

To be short, every man almost knows what casting of Lottes means: it
is commonly used in deuydyng of parts.

These Beasts have imagyned that the casting of the Lottes, was to play at
Dise: When they were not in usage, at the least such as we have it now in our
time: for in stead of six and ace and other poynctes, they had certain
marks which they named by their names: as Venus or dog. Now let the^ that
will go kiss the relics in credit of so loud, plain, and manifest liars.

It is time to entreat of the head shete wherein they have yet more plainly
showed as well their impudency as their folyshenes, for besides the head shete
of the veronicque which is showed at Rome in Saint Peter's church, and the
kercher that the virgyn Mary, as they say: put about the privy members of our
Lord, which is showed at Saint John of Latrans: The which is also at the
Augustines of Carcossone. Item the cloth that was put upon his head in the
sepulcher, which likewise is showed there. There are half a dousen towns at
the least, that do boaste to have whole wyndynge shete of the sepulcher. As
Nice it was transported from Chamberie thither. Item Aix in Dutchlande. Item at
Traicte: Item at Besanson: Item at Cadoin in Limosine: Item a town of
Lorraigne, standing upon the port of Assois. Besides the pieces that are
disparsed from one side to another. As at Saint Saviors in Spain, and at the
Augustins of Albie. I leave out yet a whole windyng shete, which is at Rome in
a monestarie of women: because that the Pope did forbyde to show it solemnlye.
I pray you has not the world been merueylouslye enraged, to trot a hundred
or six score legues long, with great charges and great pains, for to see a
cloute, of the which they could have no certentie, but rather were constrained
to dout thereof? for whosouer estemeth or judges the windyng shete to be in
one certain place, he makes all the others false, which boste that they have
it.

As for example, he that believes that the cloth of Chamberie is the right
windynge shete, he condemns those of Besanson, of Aix, of Cadoin, of Trier
and of Rome, as liars, and as them that wickedly make the people commit
Idolatrye in deceyuyng them, and making them believe that a profane cloth is
the winding shete wherein their redemer was wrapped. Let us now come to the
gospel, for it were but a small matter for them to accuse one another of a lie,
but the holy ghost speaking against all, does confound them altogether
as well one as another.

First of all it is much marvel that the Evangelists make no mention of this
portrature that touched the face of JESUS CHRIST with a kercher: seeing they
make mention of all the women that did accompany him to the cross. It was a
right notable thing and worthy to be regestred, that the face of Jesus Christ
should be miraculouslye imprinted in a lynnen clothe: contrarywyse, it seems
that it is but a matter of small importance, to say that certain women did
accompanye Jesus Christ to the cross, without there had chaunsed some miracle
to them. How is it then that the Evangelists rehearse small things and of
little importance, holdyng their piece and making no mention of principal
things? Truly if such a miracle had been done as some make men to believe we
must needs accuse the holy ghost of forgetfulness, or lack of discretion:
that he could not choose prudently that which was most expedient for to be
reported. Thus much be spoken touching the veronicque shete to the end that men
might know what an evident and manifest lie it is which they would persuade the
simple in.

Moreover concerning the windyng shete in which the body was wrapped, I ask
them a like question, the Euengelestes recite diligently ye miracles that were
done at the death of Jesus Christ, and do leave nothing out that appertains
to the history: how is it then that this escaped them, that they speak never
a word of so excellent a miracle. To wit that the printe of the body of our
Lord Jesus did remain in the lynnen cloth wherein he was buried. This if it
had been so, was as worthy to be spoken of, as many other things. Yea the holy
Evangelist saint John declares, how that Saint Peter being, entered into the
sepulcher, saw the linen clothes of the sepulcher, the one of one side, the
other on the other side: but that there was any miraculous portrature, he
makes no mention. And it is not to be thought or presumed if there had been any
such matter, that he would have suppressed such a work of God. There is yet
another dout to be objected: that is that the Evangelists make no mention that
any of the disciples or of the faithful women, did carry away the shetes
(whereof the question is) out of the scripture: but rather they give us to
understand that they left them there, although they plainly express not the
same. Now the sepulcher was kept with the soldiers. Who afterward had the
shete in their own power. Is it to be supposed or thought, that they gave it
some faithful man or woman for to make relics of? Saying the Pharisees had
corrupted them for to make them forswear them selves, saying that the
disciples had stolen the body: I leave to reprove them of falsehode, even by
the very sight of the pictures that they show. For it is easy to be seen yt
they were payntinges made by man's hand. And I can not merueyll enough first,
how they were such blockheads that they had no better fetch for to deceive:
and much more, how the world has been so doltishe, for to suffer it self to
be blinded in such sort yt it could not see so evident a thing. Moreover they
have well declared that they had the painter at commandment. For when one
wyndyng shete was burned there was always another found the next day. They
would notwithstanding say, that it was the self same that it was before,
the which miraculouslye was saved from the fire: but the pryntyng was so
fresh, that the lie auayled nothing, if there had been eyes for to have seen
and to behold But yet to make an end with. There is a paremptorye reason, by
the which they are all together convinced of their impudencye. In all places
where as they say they have the holy winding shete they show a great shete,
which did conuer all the body with the head: and their in is to be seen ye
printe of a body together al in one piece. Now the Euangelyste S. John says,
that Jesus Christ was buried according to the manner of the Jews. And what
their manner was, one may, not only understand it by the custume that the
Jews observe yeat to this day, but also by their books, which sufficiently
declare the ancient custume that is to bind the body a part even to the
shoulders, after to wrappe the head in a kerchere, bindinge it at the four
corners. The which also the Euangeliste expresses, when he sayethe, that
saint Petter saw the linen clothes of one side wherein the body hade been
wraped: and of an other side the kercher which was put upon the head for such
is the signification of this word Suaire, to take it for an hankerchere or
couercheffe, and not for a great shete, that serves to wrape the body in. For
to conclud briefly, Either the Euangeliste saint John must be a liar or else all
they that boste them selves to have the winding shete must be convicted of
falshode, and it must euidentlye have apered yt they have, deaceaued the poor
people, by a most extreme impudency it should never be done if I would entreat
perticulerly, all the mockeries that they use: one does show at Rome at
saint John of Latran, the read that was put by mocking in Jesus Christ's hand
in stead of a septer when he was beaten in Pylates house.

Likewise at the church of the cross is showen the sponge, where the gall and
myrrh was put in his mouth. I pray you, where is it yt they recovered them?
It was ye Infidelses that hade them in their hands, did they deliver them
think we to the Apostles to make relics of them? Or did they the^ selves
look them up, for to preserve them for the time to come?

What sacreledge is this so to abuse the name of Jesus Christ, for to cloak and
cover fables so leude lie forged? As Much is of ye pence that Judas receued,
for betraying of our lord.

It is said in the Gospel, that he did render them again in the sinagoge of
the pharisees, and that after they bowght afylde therewt for to burye the
strangers. Who is it that has gotten those pence from the merchantes Hands.
If one should say that it was the desciples, that were to folyshe. Therefore a
better coulor must be sought to cloak the matter. If on say that it was done
long time after: yet yt were less apparente, forsomuche as the money might
have passed through many men's hands. They must neades show them that either
the marchante yt sold his possession to the pharisees for to make a buriynge
place, did it for to buy the pence, to make relics of them: or otherwise yt
he sold them again to the faithefull. Now hereof their was never news in the
ancient Church. It is a like gloss of the stayres of Pilates Judgment halle,
which are at S. John of latran at Rome with holes: where they say dropes of
blood fell from the body of our lord Jesus Christ.

Item in ye same place in ye Church of saint. Praxede, the pillar whereto he
was bound, when he was scourged, and in the church of the holy cross three
others round about the which he was lead when he went to his death.

I know not where they have dreamed on all these pellers: so is it that they
have imagened them of their own fantesyes for in the holle historye of the
Gospel we read nothing of them. It is said that Jesus Christ was whipped
but that he was bond to a peller that is of their gloss.

One may easily see then, that they have gone about nothing else but to heap
as it were a seae full of lies.

Wherein they have given them selves such lybertye, that they have not been
ashamed to make a relic of the asses tail whereon our lord Jesus rode: for
it is to be shown at Genes: but we have no more cause to be astonishede at
their iupudencie, then at the folishenesse and stupidite of the world who has
received with great devotion such a delusion. Some man might obiecte hear that
it is not like that they do show all the Relics which we have already named
autentiklye but that they ca^ also by and by, prove from whense they come, and
out of whose hands they have received them. To this I could answer in one
word, that in so evident lies it is not possible to pretend any aparances of
trewthe. For how so ever they arm them selves with the name of Constantine,
or of King Louis, or of any pope: all this aualith nothing, for to approve
that Jesus Christ was nailed with fourtene nails: or that a hole hedge was
consumed to make his croune of thorns with: or that one Spear blade should
have ingendrede since, three others: or that his cotte should be multiplied into
three, and have changed fashion for to become a pristes: coope or that of on
only windinge shete their should have spronge a brood as it were the
Chikennes of one Hen: that JESUS CHRIST was buried clean contraye to the
manner that the Gospel mencyoneth.

If I should show a Lump of lead, and should say. This Lump of Gold was
given me by such a prince, I should be esteemed for a mad fool, and for my
saying the lead would not change his color, nor his nature for to be changed
into gold. So when they say to us, behold what Godfrey of Bullon did send
hither, after he had conquered the country of Jude: and that reason does
declare unto us, that it is but a lie: should we suffer our selves to be
abused with the words, and not behold that which we see before our eyes?

But yet, to the end that we may know how sure it is to trust to all that
they aledge for the approbation of their relics: it is to be noted that the
principal Relyques and the most notable that be at Rome were brought thither
(as they say) by Tytus and Vaspasian.

Trewlye it is as plain a mockedge, as if one should say that the Turk
went to Jerusalem, for to seek the holy Cross of JESUS CHRIST to the end
to place it at Constantinnople.

Vaspasian, before he was chosen Emperor conquered and destroyed part of Jude
afterward, when he came to the Empire he left his son Titus to be his
Leutenant, who afterward won the city of Jerusalem.

Now these were heathen, who cared or set as much by Jesus Christ as by him
that never had been. So one may judge whether they durst not as freely lie in
alledgyng Godfrey of Bullon or saint Louys, as they have alleged Vaspasien.

Furthermore, let it be considered what judgment as well the king had (whom
they call saint Louys, as all other such like had. He had in deed (such as it
was) a devotion and zeal for to augment christendom: but if one should have
showed them goats dunge, and have said to them behold here be our Ladies
Beads: they would without any again saying have worshipped them, or would
have brought them hither in their ships for to have set them up honorably in
some place: and i^ very deed they have consumed their bodies and their goods and
a great part of ye substance of their country, for to bring over an heap of
small trifles, wherewith they were brought in a fools Paradise, thinkinge that
they were the most precious Jewels in the world. But yet to give more ample
understanding of this matter, it is to be noted, that in all Grecia and the
less Asia, and Mauritania, which we now commonly call the country of Jude,
they show with great assurance al these antiquities, which the poor
Idolatours that be about us think that they have. What is to be judged between
the one and the other? We shall say the relics were brought us from those
countries. The Christians that yet remain there, affirm that they have them:
and deride our folyshe bostyng. How should one decide this process without an
inquisition, which can not be made, nor never will be made? wherefore ye only
remedy is to leave the thing as it is, not caryng neither for the one part nor
for the other.

The last relics that appertain to Jesus Christ are those that they have had
since his resurrection: as a morsel of a broyled fyshe which saint Peter
presented him when he appeared to him on the border of the sea. We must needs
say that it was well spiced, or that it was merueylously well soussed that it
could be preserved so long a time. But without laughter it is to be thought
that the Apostles made a relic of the fish which they had prepared for their
dynner? Whosoever shall not see that this is a manifest and open mockedge of
God, I leave him as a beast, which is not worthy that one should teach him
any further. There is also the miraculous blood which issued out of the cake
Gods as at Paris in saint John's church, at Dion at Saint John the
Evangelists church and else where in many places. And to the end they might
make the heap more greater, they have joined thereto the holy penknife where
with our master of Querne was not content: but did reproach them that they were
worse then Jews: For as much as they did worship the knife, that had been an
instrument to violate the precious body of Jesus Christ. The which I allege,
because as much might be said of the spear, nails, and thorns. That is that
al they that worship them (according to our master of Quernes sentence) are
more wicked then the Jews, who crucified our Lord. Likewise they show the
form and prynt of his fete, where he marched when he appeared to certain of
his disciples after his ascension, as there is one at Rome in Saint Laurence
church in the place where he met Saint Peter, when he foreshewed him yt he
should suffer at Rome. Another at Poiters at S. Raguonde another at Soison, an
other in Arles. I dispute not weather Jesus Christ could have imprinted the
form and fashion of his fete on a stone. But I only dispute of the fact, and
I say, that seeing there is no lawful probation hereof, all this ought to be
counted for a fable. But the most beastly relic of this kind is ye form of
his hippes which is at Reins in Champania, upon a stone behynd the high
aultare. And they say that this was done at such time as our Lord became a
Mason, for to build their church porche. This blasphemy is so execrable that
I am ashamed to speak any more thereof. Let us then pass further, and let us
se what is said of his images: I mean not of them which are commonly made by
painters, stonegrauers or Ioyners, for the number of them is infinite: but of
those which have a certain special dignity for to be kept, and contend with
some singularity as relics. Now hereof there are two sorts: Some were made
miraculouslye: As that which is showed at Rome in Sayncte Mary's church, that
they call in Poeticu. Item another at S. John of Latrans. Item another wherein
is drawn his picture at the age of.xii. years. Item that of Lukes which the
say was made by the angels and which they call vultus sanctus. These are such
fond vain fables yt it seems to me it should be lost labor, yea and that
it should be rediculous and folishe if I did occupy my self therein. Wherefore
it sufficetth to have noted them by the way for men know right well that this
is not the exercise or vocation of angels to to be paynters: and that our lord
Jesus will otherwise be known of us and brought into our remembrance then by
carnal images. Eusebius in deed writes in the Ecclesiastical history that he
sent a lyuelye Printe of his visage to king Abagarus but this is as certain
and of as much credit as one of king Melusines commandementes in his
chronicles. (...) and folishe that ye most part count this as certain as the
Ghospel. I place also in this rank the crucifixes, that have spoken, whereof
the multitude is great but let us be content with one for an example. To wit,
with that of saint Denis in France. It spoke say they, for to bear witness
that the church was dedicated I leave it to be considered whether ye thing were
worth so much. But yet I ask them, how is it that the crucifix could be then
in the Church, seeing that when men will dedicate them they remove all the Images
how stale it then away or hide it self to the end it might not be carried
away with the others we must neades say yt they thought to deceive the world
at their pleasure, seeing that they have not cared manifestly to contrary them
selves but that it has suffysed them: to lie with open mouth not regardinge
what men mygth reply against them. There remains last of all the tears:
whereof one is at Vandosme, one at Trier one at saynct Maxymyn, one at saint
peter's in Orleans, besides them that I know not. Some, as they say, are
natural, as that of saint Maximin, which according to their Chronicles, fell
from our Lord Jesus whilst he washed his Apostles fete: the residue are
miraculous. As though it were to be believed, that the woden crucifixes were so
grieved or sorrowful that they should weape. But we must parde^ them this
faught. For they were ashamed that their Idolles, should not do as much as
those of the heathen. Now the heathen have fained that their Idolles did weep
certain times.

Wherefore we may right well put them together. As concerning the viergen Mary,
for so much as they hold that her body is no more in yearthe, the mean for to
bost themselves to have her bones is taken away. From them. Otherwise I
think, they would have made the world believe, that she had had a body
sufficent to fell a great poudryng fat. Moreover they have venged them selves
upon her hear, and on her milk for to have some part of her body. There is
of her hear at Rome at saint Mary's Church upon miuerne, at saint Savior
i^ Spain at Mascon, at Cluny, at Noers, at saint Flour, at S Iaqueries, and
in many others places: touching the milk is not now nead full to number the
places where there is of it neither should we come to any end thereof for their
is not so littell a town, nor so wicked a convent be it of monckes or be it of
Nones, where some percell thereof is not showed some more, some less not that
they were not ashamed to bost themselves to have had holle pot fulls, but for
as much as they thought that their lie should be the more covered. They have
therefore Invented to show only as much thereof as might be kept in a glass to
the end men might examen it no nearer. So that if the holy virgyne had been
a cow, or that she had been a norse al her life time, yet could she not
scarsely have given such quantetye of milk: on the other part, I would gladly
ask them, how this milk which at this present day is showed almost
throughout the world was geathered, for to be preserved until our time. For we
do not read that ever any had this curiositye. It is well said that the
shepherdes did worshype Jesus Christ, and that the wise men did offer to him
their presents: but it is not said that they did carry back milk for a
recompense? Saynct luke recitethe that which Simeon did foreshewe the virgin,
but he says not that he asked of her milk. If one should consider but only
this point, it should not be needful to argue any further for to declare how
greatly this folly is against al reason, and without all kind of conjecture and
cloak. And it is meruell (seeing they could have no other part of her body) yt
they have not been auysed of the paring of her nails, and of such other like
things: But it is to be thought that they have not had al in their
remembrance. The residue of ye relics which they have of our Lady, is of her
baggage or clothes. There is one of her smockes at Chartres, of the which one
does make an Idol sufficiently renomed. And there is another at Aix in
Dutchland. I leave them there, to wit, how they could have gotten them. For it
is a thing most certain, that the Apostles and the true Christians of their
time, have not been so doltishe as for to occupy their minds upon such vain
trifles. But let one behold only the form and fashion thereof, and I will
quite the play, if in beholding it one do not plainly see their impudency.
When one does show the smoke, (which we have said to be at Aix in
Dutchlande:) one does show at ye end of a pole, as it were a long white
surplice of a priest. Now if the virgin Mary had been a gyaunt yet could she
scarcely have worn so great a smok. And for to make a better show thereof, one
does carry straight ways after the little hose of Saint Joseph, which are little
enough for a little child or for a darfe. The proverb says that a liar ought
to have a good memory, for fear of tripping him self by forgetfulness. They
have al observed this rule, when they have not thought or invented to make
better proporcion of the husbands hose and the wives smoke. Let men now go and
kiss devoutly these relics, the which have no other appearance of truth. As
touching her kerchers I know but two: one at Trier in Maximins abbey: another
at Lisio in Italy. But I would that one should mark of what linen they
are, and whether they did wear that kind of fashion at that time in the
country of Judah. I would also that men should make comparison of them, for
to see how like they be the one to the other. At Reuline they have as it were
a browe. Some peradventure will ask me, if I think that this brow be a
cou^terfaite thing. I answer that I esteem it as much as her gyrdle, which is
at Prat, and as that which is at our Ladies of Montserret. Item of her
slypper, which is at Saint Iaqueries, and one of her shows, which is at
Saint Flour. If there were no other but this thing yet all men of mean
wisdom may know right well that it was not ye manner or use of the faithful
to gather in such manner and sort hose and shows for to make relics: and
moreover there was never mention hereof made, above the space of five hundred
years after the death of the virgin Mary. What need we then argue hereupon any
longer, as if the thing were doutfull? Yea, they would make the holy virgin
believe, that she was very curious to deck and trim her self. For they show
two of her comes. One at Rome, in saint Martyns church: and another in the
church of saint John the great of Besanson, besides them which might be showed
other where. If this be not to mock the holy virgyn Mary, I know not what
mockedge is. They have not also forgotten her weddyng ryng: for they have it at
Peruse. Because now the custom is, that the husband should give his wife a
wedding ring: they have imagyned that it was the use at that time. And
without making further inquisition, they have ordained and made a rich and
costly ryng to this use, not considering in what poverty the holy virgyne
lived. There is of her gounes at Rome at S. John of Latran. Item at S. Barbares
church. Item at saint Mary's upon Mineru e. Item, at saint Blase church. At
saint Saviors in Spain. At the least they say they have certain pieces. I
have hard of many other places: But they are not in my memory. To declare and
show the falshede hereof it is only requisite to mark well the matter, for
they have thought it as easy to them for to attribute such kind of vestments
at their pleasure to the virgin Mary, as for to clothe the images in such sort
as they clothe them.

It rests to entreat of images not of the common sort, but of the^ that are
in estimation above the others, by a certain singularity. Now they would
make S. Luke believe that he painted four of those they call inuiolata at Rome
in the place where now Saint Mary's church stands, one of them is showed
in an oratory: the which as they say he made in his devotion, with the ring
wherewith Joseph wedded her. There is another showed likewise at Rome at the new
saint Mary's, the which they say was also made by Saint Luke in Troades, and
that since that time it was brought to them by an angel. Item another at S.
Mary's Araceli, in such likeness as she was when she stood by the cross. But
they of saint Augustines boste them selves to have the chief and principal:
for it is it (if one believe them) that saint Luke carried always with him, even
until he made it to be buried i^ his grave I pray you, what blasphemye is this
to make a holy evangelist a manifest and perfect idolater? and likewise what
color or cloak have they for to persuade men yt S. Luke was a painter. S. Paul
well calls him a Physician, but of paynters craft I know not where they have
dreamed it. And though it were he had been skilde in the occupation: yet not
wythstandynge it is as lykely to be thought, yt he would have had painted the
virgin Marye as Jupiter or Venus, or any other Idol. It was not the manner of
Christians to have images? neither has it been of long time after, until
such time as the church was corrupted with superstitions. On the other part all the quarters almost of the world are full of Images of the virgin Mary, which
some do say he made, as at Cambery, and here and there. But after what sort
and form are they painted? There is as much honesty and comlynes as if one
would picture a dissolute woman. Behold how god has blinded them, that they
have had no more consideration then brute beasts. But I am not greatly
astonished in that they have imputed to S. Luke for to have made Images of the
virgin seeing they have been so bold to impute the like unto the prophet
Jeremy. I can witness the same in Auuergnie. It should be time (as I think)
that the world would once open her eyes, for to see that which is so
manifest. I leave to speak of S. Joseph, of whom some have his slippers, as in
S. Simo^s abbey of Trier. Other some (as we have already said) his hose: others
also his bones. The example which I have already alleged suffiseth me for the
discovering of the folishnes that is therein. I will place S. Mihell here, to
the end he may accompany the virgin Mary. Some will think that I do as it
were jest or mock, in rehearsing the relics of an Angel. Yea the abusers
them selves have mocked them: but they have not therefore let to abuse in
good earnest the poor people: For at Carcassone they bost to have certain
relics of him, and likewise at S. Iulians of Tours. They do show at great S.
Mihels (which is so well haunted of pilgrims) his sword which is like a
child's dagger, and his buckler likewise which is as it were the bosse of an
horse bitte.

There is neither man nor woman so simple, who may not judge what mockerye this
is. But because such lies are conuered under shadow of devotion, it seems
that it is not ill done for to mock God, and his Angels. They will allege yt
the scripture witneseth yt saint Mihell did fight against the Devil but if
it hade been requisite that he should have overcome the devil with the sword
it was neadfull that he should have had one more stronger, better pointed and
of a better blade, then that is. Are they such beasts to imagine that it was a
carnal combat which is foughte^ with ye material sword which as well the
Angels as the faithful have against the devils? But it is as I have said
in the begeninge: that the world worthelie deed deserve to be deceived in such
bestlinesse: for so much as it was so peruersse for to covet to worship vain
Idolles and maumettes in stead of worshipping the living God for keapeng of
order It is now requisite yt we should entreat of S. John Baptist: who
(according to ye Evangelical histori) after he was beheded, was buried by his
disciples. Theodorit an ancient cronicler of ye church mencioneth yt his
sepulcher being in Sebaste, a town of Siria was opened (a certain time after)
by ye paiens and yt his bones were burned by them and ye ashes esparssed in ye
air. Albeit that Eusebe adds, yt certain men of Jerusalem chau^sed to come
thither, and secrettly took some litel part, which was carried to Antioche and
there buried. As concerning his head, Sozomenus an other cronicler says, yt it
was carried away by Theodose ye emperor, near to ye city of co^stantinoble.
Wherefore according to ye ancient histories al ye whole body was burned except
ye head: and al ye bones and the ashes lost, except some certain litel portion
which ye hermites of Jerusalem stale from thense let us se what is now found.
They of Amiens boste themselves to have the visage and in the mask which they
show, there is the sign of the cut of a knife over whart the eye, which they
say Herodias gave him. But they of S. John of Angel say there against, and do
show the like part. As concerning ye rest of the head from the crown to the
forehead was at Rhodes: and is now at Malte as I think. At the least they
have made men believe that the Turk did render it them. The hinder part is at
S. John of Nemours: the brain is at Noyon. Besides all this, they of S. John
of Morien do not want some certain part of the head: his chawes are seen at
Besanson at saint John ye great: there is another part at S. John of Latrans
at Paris, and at S. Flour in Auuergne. They keep his hear at saint Saviors
in Spain, the brow and some of the hear: There is also some little jot
thereof at Noyon, which is showen very autentikly. There is also some part (I
know not of what place) at saint Lukes. Is all this done? Let one go to Rome,
and to the monestary of saint Siluester, and one shall hear besides said:
behold here is saint John Baptistes head. The Poets fain that there was in
time passed a king in Spain, named Gereon, who had three heads. If our
relic forgers could say as much of saint John Baptist, this would serve
well for their purpose, to help them to lie. But seeing this fable has no
place, how will they excuse them selves? I will not press them so near, as for
to ask them how the head was so hacked, for to be parted in so many places,
and so diversely: neither how they have gotten the same from Constantinople:
but I only say, that saint John must needs be a monster, or that they be
unshame fast abusers, for to show so many pieces of his head. And which is
more they of Seen boste to have his arm ye which is repugnant to all the
ancient histories. And yet nevertheless this abuse is not only suffered but
also approved as in deed nothing is found euel to ye kingdom of Antichriste
providing that it intertaine ye people in superstition. Now they have invented
an other fable that is, when all the body was burned that the finger wherewith
he did point and show our Lord Jesus did remain hole not being consumed.
This, not only, is not conformable to the ancient histories but it may also
easily be reproved by them for Eusebe, and Theodorite plainly say that the body
(when ye payens reueshed it) was already co^semed to bones. And they would in
no wise have forgotten such a miracle if their had been any thing at all for
they are but ouermuche curiousse in mencioninge of vain and trifeling things.

Not withstandinge although it hade been so, yet let us hear in how many
places this finger is. There is one at Besanson in the church of saint John the
great another at Lions, another at Burges, at Florence another, another at
Saint John of Adventures near to Mascon.

I say nothing hereupon except yt I pray the gentle readers not to harden
their hearts against such a clear and certain advertisement, and that they
would not shut their eyes, to such a clearness, for to let them selves
always to be deceived as in darkness

If that Iugglers should have had so blinded our eyes that we should think
yt there was six, yet should we be thus minded for to fear to be abused and
deceived.

But herein is no subteltie, for question is only made wheather we will believe
that Saint John's finger is at Flourence, and that they be also other where i^
five places, as at Lions at Burges and other places.

For to speak more brieflye, whether we will believe yt six fingers are but
one, and yt one finger only is six. I speak but only of that which is come
to my knowledge. I dout not but if that one should enquire more diligently,
there should be at the least found one half dousen more in other places. And
that their should not be found yet other pieces, which would amounte to the
bigness of a bulls head, yea besides those which I have named. But for fear of
leaving any thing behind, they have likewise bosted to have the ashes: whereof
one part is at Gines, the other part at Rome in S. John of Latrans church: Now
we have seen that the most part was cast into the air: yet nevertheless they
let not to have (as they say) a great part and chiefly they of Genes.

There remains now after the body the other appertenances, as one of his
shows, which is at the charter house of Paris: the which was stolen about
twelve or thyrtyne years ago: but there was a new one found incontinently.
And in deed until showmakers science fail, they will never want such
relics. At Rome at saint John of Latrans, they boste to have his iacketh:
whereof no mention is made in the gospel, except because it is there spoken,
that he was clothed with camelles hear, they would change a gown into a
iacket.

There likewise they say they have the Altar whereon he prayed in the
Desarte: as if in those days they did use to make Aultars for every purpose
and in every place.

It is meruayll they make them not believe that he song Mass. In Auignon is
the sword wherewith he was beheaded. And at Aix in Dutchlande is the lynnen
clothe that was spreadde under him. I would gladly know how the hangman was so
gracious and favorable, as for to tapistrie the pauement of the prison, when
he would put him to death. Is not this a folish inuencion? But yet, how is
either the one or the other com to their hands? do you think it to be likely,
that he which put him to death, whether he were a soldier or a hangman,
would have given away the linen cloth and his sword for to make relics of
them? Seeing they would make such a furniture of all pieces, they have failed
in leaving and forgettyng Herodias knife, wherewith she struck him upon the eye
lidde. Likewise all the blood that was spylt, and also his sepulcher. But I
may well err herein: for I know not if all those baggages be other where else.
It is now requisite that the Apostles should have their course: but because
the multitude might engender confusion, if I should place them all together:
we will first speak of saint Peter and saint Paul, then after we will
speak of the others.

Their bodies are at Rome, one half in saint Peter's Church, and the other
half at saint Paul's Church: And they say, that saint Siluester did part
them, for to distribute them in such equal porcions.

Their two heads are at Rome at Saint John of Latrans: although in the same
church there is one of sayncte Peter's teeth alone by it self. Besides al
this, they do not let to have every where their bones. As at Poiters they
have the chawe bone with the beard. At Trier diverse bones both of the one and
of the other: At Argenton in Bery one of saint Paul's shoulders.

But when should this be ended? For in every place wheare there is a Church
that does bear their names, there are also of their relics. If one do ask
what relikes? Let them remember the brain of saint Peter, whereof I have
spoken, which was on the great Altar of this town. For even as that was
found to be a marble stone, so shall men find many horse bones or dog
bones, that they do attribute to these two apostles. With the body there
follows the other appertenaunce. At saint Saviors in Spain they have one of
saint Peter's slippers but of the fashion, and the thing whereof it is made, I
can make no mention, but it is to be supposed that it is such like merchandise
as that which is at Poiters: The which are made of Satynne brodered with
gold. Behold how brave they do make him after his death, for to recompense
him of the poverty wherein he lived during his life time. Because ye bishops
in these days are so trim, when they deck them with their pontifical robes.
It seems to them that one should abrogate the apostles dignity, if he did not
make them as trim, for painters may well counterfaite them at their pleasure,
gyldyng and adorning them from the head to the fete, and afterward put upon
them the names of Peter and Paul: but we know what their estate was whilst
they lived in this world, and that they had no other then poor men's clothing.

There is also at Rome the po^tificall chere of saint Peter with his coope. As
if in those days the bishops had had thrones for to sytte in: their office was
to teach council, and exhort both publiklye and peculierly, and to show
good example of true humility to their flock: and not to make ydolles, as
those that are now a days do. As concerning his cope, it was not yet in those
days the fashion or manner so to disguyse them selves: for they did not play
the kind of Maskers in the Church as they do at this present.

So that for to prove that saynct Peter had a cope, it is first requisite that
they should declare S. Peter to be a Iugler, as our priests now a days do,
semyng to serve God. It is true that they may well have given him a cope when
they assigned him an altar. But as lykelye is the one as the other. Men do
know what Masses were song at that time.

The Apostles did celebrate simplye in their time the supper of our Lord: to
the which, it is not needful to have an altar.

They did not know yet at that time what beast this Mass was: Neither was it
known long time after.

One may euidentlye see then that when they invented their relics they never
douted that ever they should have any speakers there against, seeing they have been bold to lie so impudently and wantonly. Moreover as touching this altar
they agree not among them selves: For they of Rome affirm that they have it,
and they of Pise likewise say they have it, showing it also in their subburbes,
that stand toward the sea. For to make their profit of all, they have not
forgotten the sword wherewith Maulchus ear was cut of: as if it had been a
Jewel worthy to be made a relic. I had forgotten his Croisier the which is
shown at saint Steven of Grees at Paris: of the which is to be esteemed as
much as of the altar, or of the cope: for it stands with like reason.

There is a little more apperraunce of his weapon. For it may well be
presuppossed or thought yt he might (going by the fyeldes) be armed with such
a staff.

But they mar all, in that they can not agree: For they of Cologne fermeli
maintain that they have it, and likewise they of Tryer: so in beliyng the one
the other, they give good occasion that one should believe neither of the^ both.
I leave to speak of saint paulles chain, wherewith he was bound, ye which is
shown at Rome in his church. Item, of the peller, whereon saint peter was
marterede, the which is at saint Anastase. I leave only to the readers to
Judge. From whence this chain was gotten, for to be made a relic: Item, to
wit if in those days the manner were to put men to death upon pillars.

We will Jointly entreat of all the other Apostles for to make an end the
sonner. And first of al we will rehearse where there is holle bodies, to the
end that in conferring the one to the other, one may judge what sure hold may
be taken of their sayings. Every one does know that the town of Thoulouse
thinks to have the syxt: to wit, saint James the greater, saint Andrew,
saint James lesser, saint Philippe, saint Simon and saint Jude. At padue is
saint mathias body, at Salerne saint Matthewes bodi at Ortone saint Thomas
body, in the kingdom of Naples, S. Barthelmews body. Let us now mark which
of them have two, or three, bodies Saint Andrewe has a second body at Melphe:
saint Philipe, and saint James the lesser, each of them also an other body
at Rome in saint Peter's Church: saint Barthelmew also another at Ro^e in
his Church. And yet above all this, the skin of saint Barthelmew is at
Pise. Notwithstanding saint Mathias is above all the others: For he has a
second body at Rome, in the Church of saint Marye the greater, and a third
body at Trier. Besides this, he has a head and an arm, aparte likewise at
Rome. It is true that the lightell pieces of S. Andrewe, which are hear, and
there, If they were put together behalf as much: for at Rome in saint peter's
Church, there is a head, in saint Grisogone a shoulder, at saint Eustacea
side, at the holy ghosts church an arm, I can not tell what other part at
Blaise at Aix in province a foot. Whosoever should join these together it
would be enough for to make two whole quarters, prouidynge that one could well
proportion the^ Now as S. Bartelmewes skin is at Pise, so is one of his
hands there: At Trier there is I know not what membre, at Freius a finger, at
Rome in saint Barbares church, other relics. So yet he is not one of the
poorest, for the others have not so much: Albeit that every one has yet some
little part.

As Sayncte Phylyppe has a foot at Rome, at the holy Apostles, and at
Saynct Barbares I can not name what relics. Item more at Trier. In these two
last Churches he has Saint James for his companion. Who has likewise in
saint Peter's church his head, and an arm at Saint Grisogone, another at the
holy Apostles. Saint Mathewe and Saynct Thomas have remained the most
poorest.

For the first with his body has but only certain bones at Trier, an arm
at Rome, at saint Marcell, and at saynct Nicolas a head. Unless peradventure
some thing have escaped me, which may well be done, for in such a darkness
who shall not be confused? Because they find in their Chronicles that the body
of saint John the Evangelist did vanishe away incontinently after it was put
in the Grave: They could not bring forth any of his bones. But for the
supplyinge of this want, they cast themselves upon his baggage.

And first of all, they have been advised of the Chalice, in which he drancke
the Poison, being condemned by Domician. But for as much as two will have it,
either we must believe that which the alchumistes say of their multiplicatio^:
or that these with their chalice, have mocked the world. The one is at Bullin,
and the other at Rome at saint John of Latran. They have afterward invented
to have found his Iacket, and the chain wherewith he was bound when they led
him prisoner from Ephesus: with the oratorye wherein he accustomed to pray
being in prison. I would gladlye know if there were at that time, hired
Ioiners for to make him oratories. Item what familiarity or acquaintance the
christians had with his kepers for to withdraw the chain for to make it a
relic. These mockeries are over much folishe, yea if they were to deceive
little children with. But the most esteemed jewel is ye twelve comes of the
apostles, which they do show at our lady of the isle near Lions I think they
were placed there at the beginning, for to make men believe that they were the
comes of the.xii. fathers of France: but since their dignity has increased
and they are become apostolic. We must from henceforth hasten or otherwise we
should never go out of this forest.

We will then brieflye recite the relics that they have of the saints,
which were in the time that Jesus Christ lived: then consequentlye of the
ancient martirs, and of other saints. Hereupon the reader shall have occasion
to judge what estimacion they ought to have. Saint Anne mother of the virgin
Mary has one of her bodies at Apt in Province the other at our lady of the
isle at Lions. Besides this she has one head at Trier: the other at Turen,
another at Turinge in a town named after her name. I leave the pieces which are
in more then a hundred places: and amongst all others I remember that I have
kissed one part in the abbey of Orcaps near Noyon where they make great
feastyng. Finally she has one of her arms at Rome in saint Paul's church.
Let them prove the fou^dacion thereof if they can. There follows after Lazarus
and Magdeline his sister. As touching him, he has as far as I know but three
bodies, one is at Mersels, the other at Authum, the third at Aualon. It is true
that they of Authum have had great process against them of Aualon. But after
that both parties had spent much money, they have both of them won their
cause: at ye least they remain in possession of the title. For as much as
Magdeline was a woman, it behooved that she should be inferior to her brother:
therefore she has had but two bodies, whereof the one is at Vesele nere
Auserre: and the other which is of greater renome, at S. Maximins in Province:
There where the head is a part, with her noli me tangere, which is a piece of
wax, which some do think to be the mark that Jesus Christ gave her in
despit because he was sorry that she would touch him. I make no mention of the
relics that are disparsed throughout ye world, as well of her bones as of her
here: he that will have the truth of this, he should first of all enquire, to
wit, if that Lazarus and his two sisters, Martha, and Magdeline, were ever
comme into France for to preach.

For in reading the ancient histories, and in judging of the whole matter
with reason, one may euidentlye see that it is the most folyshe fable of the
world: and the which has as much appearaunce, as if one did say the clouds
are Calue skynnes: And nevertheless these are ye most certaynest Relics that
they have.

But yet if it had been so, it might have suffised to abuse a body to
Idolatrye, without making of one Devil two or three. They have also canonised
hin who perased the side of our lord Jesus on the cross, and they have
called him saint Longes after having so baptized him they have given him two
bodies, whereof the one is at Mantone, and the other at our lady of the i will
nere lions. They have done the like of ye wysmen which came to worshipe our
lord Jesus after his nativity. And first they have determined of the number,
sayng, yt they were but three. The Gospel makes no mention how many they were:
and certain ancient doctors have said, that they were fourtene: as he which
wrote the imperfect commentary upon saint Matthewe, which some does Entitle
of Chrysostom moreover in stead where as ye Gospel names the^ philosophers,
they have made them. Kings in haste with ought Country and subjects. Finally
they have baptisede them naming the one Balthasor, the other Melchior, and the
other Gaspar. Now although we did grant all their fables, so frivolous and
fond as they are, it is certain that the wise men retournede into the east
cou^trye. For the holy scripture so says, and one can not say any other
wise, but yt they died there.

Who is it that has carried them away sinse? And who is it yt knew them, for
to mark them to the end to make relics in such sort of their bodies? but I
leave it to Judge for so much as it should be but folishelye done of me for to
redargue so evident mockeries. I only say, that they of Colongne, and they of
Milline, must fight which of the two shall have them for they both pretend to
have them: The which ca^ not be, wha^ their process shall be void, and finished,
then will we auise, what shall be beast to be done. Amongst the ancient
Marters, saint denis is the most esteemed for some do take him for one of the
Apostles disciples, and the first Euangeliste of france. Because of this his
dignity they have of his relics in diuersse places.

Nevertheless, as they say, the body remains hole but only in two places: at
saint Denis in france and at Regesbourge in douchela^d.

Because the French men maintained to have him they of Regesbourge did make
their process at Rome. It is near an hundrethe years a go, and the body was
granted them by diffinitiall sentence, the french Ambassador being present,
whereof they have a feigned Bulle. Who so shall say at saint denis nere Paris,
that the body is not there, he shall be stonned, whosoever contrariwise shall
say that it is not at Regesbourge, shall be held for an Heritike for as much as
he should be rebellious to the holy sea Apostolic. So, it shall be most
expedient, to make nor medell with their quereles. Let them put out ye one ye
others eyes if they will and in so doing they shall win nothing at all, except to
discover yt their whole matter consists in liyng. They have in such sort
parted ye bodi of S Steven yt it is hole at Rome i^ his church. His head in
Arles, and of his bones in more thence. places. But for to show themselves to
be ye adhere^ts and successors of them yt murdered the^, they have canonised ye
stones wherewt he was stoned: one might ask where they found the^, and out of
whose hands and by what means they have gotten the^ I briefly answer yt this
question is folish for me^ do well know yt stones may be found every where, so
yt the carriage of the^ shall cost little or nothing: they do show the^ at
Florence, i^ Arles at ye Augustins, at Viga^ in La^gedoc. He yt will shut his
eyes and his understanding will believe yt they ar ye self same stones wherwt s.
Steven was stoned. He contrariwise yt will a little consider, will mock at the^:
and in deed ye carmes of poiters have found one wtin this.xiiii. years to ye
which they have assignd ye office to deliver women of childbed: ye Iacobins
from whom they had stolen one of saint Margarites sides serving to this use,
have made great brute, criyng against their abuse, but in the end they wan in
keeping good hold. I had almost determined to speak nothing of the Innocents,
because yt when I should have gathered an army, they would still allege that
this does not disagre to the history, because that the number is not
prescribed, I leave therefore to speak of the multitude. It suffiseth that one
note yt there is of them in all the regions of the world. I now ask how it is
that they have found their sepulchers so long time after, seeing that they were
not counted for saints when Herod put them to death: Moreover when it was
that they were carried away. They can answer me no other thing unless that it
was five or six hundred years after their death. I importe me to the most
simplest idiots what a man may find, if one should believe so absurd things,
put the case yet if perchance there had certain been found, yet how could
it be that they could carry diverse bodies into France, Dutchland, and Italy,
for to distribut them in towns so far of the one from the other? I leave
them this falshead as altother co^uicted. For as much as saint Laurence is of
the number of the ancient Martyrs, we will here give him his place. I know
not whether his body be in any more then one place, to wit, at Rome in the
church named after his name. It is true that there is beside a vessel of his
flesh broyled. Item two viols full, the one of his blood, and the other of his
grese. Item there is in the church surnamed Palisperne his arm and certain of
his bones: and at saint Siluester other relics. But if one would gather all
the bones together which are only in France: there would be sufficient for to
make whole large bodies. There follows after the Griderne I could well let it
pass: but they have other more notable things, of the which it is not
lawful for me to hold my peace. As coals which they do show at saint
Eustace. Item a napkyn, wherewith the angel wyped his body. Seeing they have
taken the leisure to dream such inuencions to deceive the world, let them also
that shall see this aduertisment take the leisure to think and judge of them,
for to keep them selves from being any more disceyued, and mocked. Out of the
like forge is come his coope, which they do show at Rome in saint Barbares
church: because they have hard say that S. Laure^ce was a decon, they thought
it mete yt he should have ye like garments as their decons have, disguising
their bodies in playing at the mass. But it was another manner of office in
those days in the christian church, then is now at this present in the
Papistrie. They were those that were appointed or chosen to distribute the
alms, and not to play Iugglers feats. So they had no need nether of sirplices
caps, tippets nor other folishe clothes for to disguise them selves with. We
will add to S. Laurence S. Geruais and S. Protais: whose sepulchers were found
at Milan in S. Ambrose time, as he himself testifies. Likewise also S. Hierom,
S. Augustine and many others. And so ye town of Millan maintains yt she has
yet ye bodies besides this not wtstanding they ar at Brisac in Duchla^d, and at
Besanso^ in S. Peter's church: besides other infinite pieces which are dispersed
in diverse churchs: so that it must needs be yt eueri one of them had.iiii.
bodies at ye least, or else ye one do cast al ye bones yt ar showed by false
signs and tokens into ye fields. For So Much as they have given S. Sebastian ye
office of healing ye plague this has been ye cause yt he has been more
required, and that me^ have been more desirous to have him This credit and
office has made him to be multiplied into four whole bodies: whereof one is
at Rome at S. Laurence church, the other at Soison, the third at Pillignie
near Nantes, the fourth near Narboune, in ye place where he was borne.
Besides he has two heads: the one at saint Peter's in Rome, and the other at
the Iacobines of Thoulouse. It is true, they are but emptye sculles, if one
have regard to the Graye freres of Angiers who say they have the brain. Item
the Iacobines of Angiers have an arm, and they of saint Seruin of Thoulouse
another, another likewise at the case god of Auergne, and another at Mombrison
in the forest, besides the small little pieces that are in many other churches.
But when one shall have well weyed the matter, then let one judge where saint
Sebastians body is. But they have not been satisfied with all this, but they
must also make relics of the arrows wherewith he was shotten: whereof they
show one at Lambest in province an other at Poiters at the Augustins, and the
others here and there. By this men may evidently se yt they thought never to
make account of their deceites. A like reason has auailed to S. Anthony for
the multipliyng of his relics: for because that he is a colerick and
dangerous saint, as they fain him, who does burn whom soever he is angry
with: by this opinion he makes him self to be feared and douted. The fear has
engendered devotion, the which has sharpened the appetite, for to make his body
to be more desired because of the profit. Wherefore the town of Arles has had
great and long combat against the Antoniens of Venis: but the issue and end
thereof was no other then has been accustomed to be in such a matter. To wit,
al remains still in confusion. For if a man would have tried out the truth,
neither of the parties should have any good cause. With these two bodies there
is a kne at the Augustines of Albi: there is at Burge at Mascon, at Dion, at
Chalous, at Ourour, at Besanson, relics of diverse members: besides that which
the abusers carry from country to country, which is no small quantity. Behold
what a thing it is to have an ill name: for with out this, the good S. should have
remained in his grave, or in some certain corner without any speaking of him at
all. I had forgotten S. Petronel ye daughter of saint Peter, who has her body
whole at Rome in her fathers church: Item more relics besides at saint
Barbares. But yet nevertheless she wants not therefore to have another body
at Maus, in the Iacobines covent: the which is there had in great solemnity,
because it does heal agues. For so much as there has been diverse sayncts
named Susan, I cannot well tell if their intention have been to attribute two
bodies to one. But yet is it that S. Susan has one body at Rome in the church
called after her name, and another at Thoulouse. Saint Helene has not been so
happy: for besides her body that is at Venise, she has won no more, then one
head only, the which is at saint Gerion of Colongne. Saint Vrsulye has
surmonted her herein: for first her body is at saint John of Angel: she has
moreover a head at Cologne, one portion at ye Iacobins of Maus, another at the
Iacobines of Tours the other at Bergerate. As concerning the company, which
men do call the eleven thousand virgins, they may well have of them every
where. And in deed, they have been much boldned herby, for to lie more largely
and liberaly. For besides an an hundred cartesful of bones, yt are at Cologne,
there is scarsly no town i^ al Europa, which are not furnished therwt, either i^
one church or many. If I should begin to e^treat of ye common sort of saints, I
should enter into a forest, whereas I should never find way to go out: wherefore I
will allege certain examples in bypassing whereby one may easly judge of all the
rest. At Poiters there are two churches which are at varience for S. Hilaries
body: to wit, the Chanons of his church, and the monks of Selle. The debate
or process remains, until visitation be made. In the mean time the Idolaters
shall be constrained to worship two bodies of one man: the faithful shall
leave the body at rest, where as it is, not caring for it. As concerning saint
Honorat his body is at Arles, and also likewise at the isle of Lyrens, near
Antibon. Saint Giles has one of his bodies at Thoulouse, and another at a
town of Langedoc, which bears his name. Saint William is in an abbey of
Langedoc, named S. William of the wilderness, and also in a town of Aussoy,
named Ecrichen, with the head apart: albeit yt he has another head in the
suburb of Turen in Iulle, in the abbey of the Guiliernites. What shall I sai of
S. Saphorin or Simphorien, who is in so many places, both i^ whole bodies and
in bones? likewise of s. Woulfe, who is at Asserre at Senes, at Lion, and also
some did make men believe that he was at Geneue. As Much of saint Ferreoll, who
is altogether whole at Vze in Langedoc, and at Brinde in Auergne. At the least
it is nedeful they should consult together for some good remedy, that their
lies may not be so much discovered: as the Chanons of Trier have done with them
of Lieg, touching the head of saint Lambert: for they have given a certain
sum of money, for the interest of the offerings, to the end they should not
publikly show them for fear least men should be astonished to see them in two
towns so near together. But it is as I have said in ye beginning they have
never thought or looked for to have any that should control them, who durst be
so bold as to open his mouth for to declare and show their impudency. One
might ask how these relic Iugglers, seeing that they have so vainlye and
curiously imagined all that has come in their brains, and in blowyng have
forged what soever has pleased them) have left behind them and forgotten ye
notable things of the old testament. To this I know not what to answer, but
that they have despised them, because that they hoped for no great profit of
the^. But yet they have not all together forgotten them: for at Rome at S.
Mary's above Minerue, they say they have the bones of Abraham, Isac, and
Jacob. At saint John of Latrans they boste to have the arcke of ye covenant,
with Aarons rod: and yet nevertheless, this rod is also at the holy chapel
of Paris, and they of Sayncte Saviors in Spain have a certain piece.

Moreover besides this they of Burdeaur affirm that the rod of saint Mertial,
which is showed there in S. Seuerins church, is the self same of Aaron. It
seems that they would have made a new miracle, to envy god with: for as this
rod was turned in to a serpent by his virtue, even so now they have converted
it into three rods. It may well be yt they have many other monakles of the old
testament: but this whereof we have spoken suffiseth to declare yt they have as
largely dealt with this part as with al ye rest. I now pray thee reader to be
mindful of that which I have said in the beginning. That is, that I have not
had commissioners for to visit the relics of all the countries which I have
here before mentioned.

Wherefore, that which I have said must not be taken or counted, as a full and
perfect regester or inuentory, of all that may be found.

For I have named but only about half a dousen Towns of Doutchelande. I
have named but three of Spain, as far as I know. Of Italye, about the number
of fyftene. Of France from thyrtye to fourtye: And yet of those have I not
spoken, all that is to be said in that behalf. Let every one then conjecture
in himself what a heap and nu^bre it should be if one should orderly place ye
multitude of relics yt are through out al christendom. I mean only the
countries that we know, and where as we use to trauail. For the principal is to
note that all the relics that they do show in these countries of Jesus
Christ, and of the prophets, men shall find them as well in Grecia and in Asia,
and in other regions where as there are Christian churches. But I now ask,
that seeing the oriental christian churches say that all that we think we have
here with us, is with them, what resolution or assurance one may have thereof?
If one should contrary them alleging that such a saints body was brought
away by marchantes, another by monks, another by a bishop: one part of the
crown of thorns was sent to a king of France, by the emperor of
Constantinoble the other part conquered by war, and so of all the other pieces:
they would nodde and lift their heads in mockage. How shall one avoid these
quarelles? For in a doutfull matter it is requisite to Judge by conjectures.
Now in so doing they should always win the upper hand: for that which they
have to sai for their part, is more like to be true, then all that one can
pretend of the party on this side. It is a troublesome and angry matter to
intermedel for them that would defend relics. For to make an end, I pray
and exhort all readers in the name of God to employ them selves to understand
ye truth, whilst yt it is so manifest and openly showed them, and acknowledge
that this is done by a singular providence of God, that they who would have in
such sort deceived the poor world, have been so blind that they have not
considred or thought how they might have had better hid and covered their
lies but as the Madianites who having their eyes pulled out, were at strife and
varience the one against the other. So we see that they make war against them
selves, and mutuallye belie the one ye others. Whosoever will not harden th^^r
hearts, to repugne against al reason, and truth. Albeit that he be not fullye
instructed or persuaded in him self, that it is execrable Idolatry, to
worship any kind of relic what so ever it be: yet nevertheless he seeing
so evident falsheade, shall never have the heart so much as to kiss any one of
them: and what devotion so ever he has had to them before, it shall be fullye
and altogether extinguished. The principal should be as I have said in the
beginning to abolishe amongst us christians this heathenly superstition, of
canonising the relics, as well of Jesus Christ as of his saints, for to make
idols. This kind of doing is a filthy polution ye which ought in no wise to be
suffered in the church. We have already showed by what reasons, and witnesses
of the scripture it should be so. If any be not content or satisfied therewith,
let him consider the use of the ancient fathers, to the end to confirm him
self after their examples. There has been many holy patriarchs, many
prophets, many godly kings, and other faithful in the old testament: God had
ordained more ceremonies in that time, then we ought to have in our time: Yea,
it was requisite that the buriyng places should be more gorgeouslye and fairer
made, then now, for to represent by figure and shadow the glorious
resurrection, for so much as it was not so clearly reueiled by word as we have
it: do we read that they have plucked the bodies of saints out of their
sepulchers for to make puppies of them? Abraham the father of all the faithful,
was he ever taken up? Sara also Princess in the Church of GOD, has she been
taken out of her grave? Have not they left them at rest with all the other
saynctes?

Moreover Moses body, was not it hid by the will of God, so that men could
never find it?

Has not the devil foughten against the angels as saint Jude says?
Wherefore is it that the lord has hyd it from man's sight, and the devil would
there again place it? It is as every one does confess that God would take from
his people of Israel the occasion of Idolatry: The devil on the contrary part
would establishe it. But some will say the people of Israel were inclined to
superstition. I ask what we are: is there not without comparison more
peruersitie amongst the christians concerning this matter, then ever was
amongst the Jews? Let us consider what was done in the ancient church: I
grant you the faithful, have always taken pains to withdraw the bodies of
Martyrs, for that they should not be eaten of dogs, or beasts, or birds, and
have honestly buried them: as we read both of S. John Baptist and of saint
Steven. But this was done for to bury them in the earth, for to leave them
there until the day of the resurrection: and not for to place them in man's
sight, for men to knele before them. This wicked pomp of canonisyng them was
never brought into the church, until such time as all was perverted, and as
it were profaned: partly by the beastliness of the priests and pastors,
partly by their covetousness, partly also because they could not resist the
custom, after yt it was received: And partly in that the people did seek to
be abused in setting their minds rather on childishe plays, then on the true
worshippynge of God. Therefore, that which has been ill begone and established
against all reason, ought to be clean abolished, who so will rightly correct
the abuse. But if one can not come at the first to this understanding, at the
lest let him come by little and little: and let him open his eyes for to discern
what the relics are that they do show. Now this is not hard to be seen, to
them that will understand. For among so many evident lies, as I have
mentioned where shall a man chose one true relic, of ye which he may be
certainly assured? Moreover, this is in a manner nothing which I have touched,
in value of that which remains. Yea in the mean time as this book was a
printing, one did show me of the third foreskyn of our lord Jesus, which is
showed at Heldeshem, whereof I had made no mention. There is an infinite number
of such like. Finally the visitation of them would disclose and uncover yet an
hundred times more then all that one could say or speak thereof. So then let
every one particulerly take heed that he suffer not himself as a beast to be
drawn or led after his own brain, not perceiving neither way nor means for
to have any ground. I remember that which I have seen done to the idols of our
country, being at that time a little child. When saint Steuens day drew nere,
one did as well trym the hattes and images of the tirauntes that stoned him (for
so they are called in common language) as his image The poor simple women,
seeing ye tyrants so decked and set in order, took them for Saint Steuens
fellows, and so every one of them had their candell. And moreover this was done
to the devil Saint Mibell. So is it of the relic: for all is so mingled and
confused, that one can not worship the bone of a Marter, but he shall be in
danger to worship the bones of some certain Murderer or thief, or else of an
ass, or of a dog, or of a horse, neither can one worship our ladies ringes,
or her comme, or girdell, but one shall be in danger of worshipping the ringes
of some certain hoore. Wherefore, take heed of the danger who so will for none
from hense forth can pretend any excuse of ignorance.

FINIS.

