THE SERMONS of M. John Calvin, upon the Epistle of S. Paul too the Ephesians.

Translated out of French into English by Arthur Golding.

Imprinted at London for Lucas Harison, and George Bishop. 1577.

To the most reverend father in God and his special good Lord, Edmund by the
grace of God Archbishop of Caun^^burie. etc. Arthur Golding wishes abundance
of all heavenly wisdom, grace, and health in Christ Jesus.
MY very good Lord, forasmuch as it is the dewtie of all them that publishe
things too the world, whether as first authors, or as translators, too deal in
such sort as most folk may reap profit and commodity by their dooyngs,
specially in matters of Religion, the knowledge or ignorance whereof, concern
the benefit and welfare, or the hinderance and peril, not of a few, but of
all men: I humbly beseech your grace, that with your clemency, favor, and
well liking, which I have always hithertoo through your goodness inioyed, I
may indeuer too benefyte others (specially the simple and ignorant sort, for
whom my care is, and ought chiefly to be) by the things which I have gathered
and conceived to mine own comfort, partly out of these present Sermons of M.
Caluins, and such other readings, but specially out of the very word of God it
self: that they may be as a brief abridgment of this whole work, and as an
entrance too the right concey^ing of the doctrine of Election and
Predestination, which being the chief groundwoorke of this Epistle to the
Ephesians, minisrtr^^h me just occasion to say somewhat concerning the order
and right use thereof: not that I intend too take upon me too discuss the
particular points thereof, or too answer the several objections and
blasphemies which the heathenish Atheists or worldlywise scorners are wont too
cast forth in derogation of that heauenl^ ^^octrine, because their- fleshly
reason cannot atteine too it: (for I confess that too be a matter too high
for me too meddle withal, and it were more than needs, considering how much
is said thereof in these Sermons:) But only too show the gentle reader what
way he may safely take, too deal therewith to his benefyte and comfort.
Whereunto I am the rather moved, because it commonly falls out, that the
unseasonable and vnaduyzed dealing therewith, (partly by such as of a certain
vaynglory do adventure too speak the things which they know not, and partly
by such as being otherwise godly and well minded, do notwithstanding enter
deeper sometimes intoo that profound doctrine, than common capacity (yea even
of good and sound Christians) can well reach unto, or ordinary skill can well
wade out of agein, or the present state of the hearers well bear:) does
oftentimes shake, and sometimes also wellneere overthrow the faith of the
weaklings, whom Gods word wills to be tendered with all myldnesse and
modesty, and for whose relief and edifying the things that are set down
there are chiefly written. Wherefore keeping as even a hand as I can, that
nothing may escape from me unawares, whereby the adversaries of the Gospel may
take occasion too slander the doctrine, or the simple sort, occasion to be
offended at it, or to shrink from it, or the perfect sort, occasion to find
just fault with me: I will no longer trubble your grace with delays, but (by
Gods leave) proceedeforthwith too the matter.

The substance and ground of this Epistle to the Ephesians is this: That being
once thoroughly instructed and rooted in the faith of Jesus Christ, we must
(for full confirmation and stablishment of our consciences in the loving
kyndnesse and favor of our God, against all assaults and temptations both of
body and soul,) stye up in mind above the world and all worldly things, too
the beginninglesse love of God, wherthrough he choze us too salvation, ^ Tim.
1. 9.
or endless welfare in his only begotten son, before the foundations of the
world were laid, freely of his own mercy, without respect of any desert,
work, or worthiness of our own: In consideration whereof, 1. Cor. 6. 20.
it is our dewtie on the other side, too glo^^^ God both in our bodies and in
our souls, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
by leading a holy and virtuous life proceeding from a pure and sound heart: 1.
Pet. 1. 21. 22. 23.
which acceptable obedience, together with the faith from whence the same
springs, is bred and brought forth by the only woorking of Gods holy spirit
in our minds, for Jesus Christ's sake.

This doctrine then belongs not at all too the careless worldlings, 1. Cor.
6. 9. 10.
which welter still in the dregs of the old Adam: that is to say, 2* Th^^^*
^. 8.
which be not yet come unto Christ, nor have heard of his Gospel: Titus. 1.
16.
or which being come in name and profession, do fight still against him in
life and conversation. Of which two sorts, these latter (if they amend not
upon dew admonition) are rather too be left up too the just judgment of God,
than too be persuaded by reason, which they themselves abuze, or too be
confuted by Gods word, which they will not regard, until they feel it
cutting sharper than a two edged sword: and the other sort are too be taught
first too know God and his son Jesus Christ, before they can be made
parttakers of the rich treasures of Gods wisdom, ryghtuousnesse, and
redemption, laid up in Jesus Christ for none but such as believe in his name.
H^br. 5. 12. 13*
Another belongs it properly and immediately to the weaklings and Nouice^ (if I
may so term them) which are but newly trained to the ^^^pell, or are but of
slender understanding and feeble belief: because their minds being yet unable
too discern so high mysteries for want of experience in matters perteyning too
God, 1. Cor. 3. 1. ^*
have need of milk still, rather than of strong and substanciall meat. And
surely there needs no better nor further proof of the infinite and
incomprehensible profoundnesse of this doctrine, than that even the Apostle
himself being after a sort astonished at the exceeding great hugeness of it,
was feign to knit up his discourse thereof with this exclamation, O wonderful
depth of the riches of Gods wisdom and knowledge. Romans 11. 33.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? H^b^. 5.
14.
But this doctrine belongs too such as being grown up too some rypenesse in
Christ, and having gathered strength in the knowledge of matters of salvation,
have through the longer working or greater measure of Gods holy spirit,
obtained light of understanding above the common and ordinary rate, and by the
same spirit subdewed their own wit and will, too the belief of God and his
word, that is too say, roo a right and steadfast persuasion of mind concerning
God and all his sayings and dooyngs, without any mistrust or doubting of the
same. I call that only a right persuasion, ^. Pet. 1. 19.
which is grounded altogether upon the Canonical writings of the old and new
Testament, and thoroughly warranted in all points by the same. And like as that
tree may well and justly be said too stand fast, not which has bin utterly
untasted or untouched of any storm, but which having borne out the brunt of
all wyndes and weathers, continues vnblowen down through the violence of
tempests, have shaken off all the leaves, broken off some branches, sliuered
diverse bowghes, riuen the bark, yea and enforced the top of it too stoop now
and then too the ground: even so that faith or belief, is too be counted
steadfast and well settled, which continues unvanquished too the end, though in
the mean time it have bin never so sore shaken and battered with the assaults
of temptations, adversities, and crosses both of body and mind. They therefore
which have atteyned to this grounded growth in Jesus Christ, may safely and
comfortably deal with the doctrine of Election and Predestination without
guide: and such may have need of exhortation, admonition, warning and
incoragement, by reason of the natural fraytlie which always follows, and
oftentimes ouertaketh eue^ the strongest, but not of instruction, otherwise
than by the word it self: ^. John. 2. 27
for (as says S. John) the inward anointing (that is to wit, the inlightening
of the holy Ghost) teaches them all things. But as for the other sort, which
are yet but as newborn infantes in Christ, whether it be in respect of ^yme,
or in respect of knowledge, or in respect of both: forasmuch as this doctrine
is of such nature as it cannot be learned by any precepts or persuasions of
wisdom, until the kn^wledge and love of God in Jesus Christ, be first well
felt and thoroughly digested by faith in the bowels of men's hearts: they have
need too be both cherished and trained forth by degrees, and as it were by
parcelmeale, too the right conceyuing and understanding of so great a mystery.
For although Gods free Election and Predestination, according too the purpose
of his own good will, even before all time, be in very deed the first cause
and only original welspring of our salvation or endless welfare, and of all
the things that further or accompany the same: yet is it not the first point
in doctrine whereby too bring men to salvation, nor the first Loadestarre that
men must look at, as soon as they be entered intoo the way of salvation.
Which thing appears sufficiently by the continual order of teaching used
throughout the whole holy scripture, where both the Prophets and Apostles and
Christ himself, Hebr. 6. 1. 2.
do always begin the ministration of salvation at the preaching of
repentance, and so proceeding too faith and free forgiveness of sins, too
newness of life, and the right use of Sacraments, too the rizing agein of the
dead, and the everlasting judgment: do finally deliver forth the doctrine of
Election and Predestination as a sheeld against all assaults, to make me^
persevere and hold out to the end in the way of salvation, through all
adversities, torments, and temptations, as shall appear more plainly
hereafter. This doctrine then is (as ye would say) the roof of Christianirie,
which being orderly, substancially, and workemanly reered upon the rest of the
building, is as a covering and safeguard too the whole, defending it from all
injuries and anoyances of wynd and weather, and giving it continuance with
perpetuity: so that whatsoever is added afterward, may well make too the
adorning and beautifying of it, but not to the safety and strength of it* And
therefore if it be set upon a false or ouerfeeble foundation, or while the
building is yet green and unperfected, before the stones be well clozed,
settled and dry: the weight of it bears down the whole house to the ground,
to the great loss, and (but if the more grace of God be) too the utter and
unrecoverable undoing, both of the buylder and of the building.

What then, will some man say? Is it not too be taught? Is it not to be
learned? Yis verily: and that with all earnestness and indeuer of mind:
howbeeit, not at al adventure, not in haste, not rashly, not presumptuously:
but with singular circumspection, reverence, warenesse and humility, as all the
godly have used to do: least while we take upon us too swim without a
bladder, before we have learned too bear our bodies upon the water, we be
carried away with the violence of the stream, or sink for faintness ere we
can recover too land agein: or least (which worse is) while we be ouercurious
in meddling with the secrets of Gods Majesty, we be overwhelmed of his
glory. How then may we wade safely in it too our benefit? Even by seeking of
our selves in Jesus Christ. Let us see if we can find our selves there. For
the scripture assures us, Acts. 4. 12
that there is no salvation but only in Christ Jesus, nor no damnation to them
that are in him. Now therefore, Romans 8. 1.
like as too know the original cause of our death and damnation, we must not
raundge beyond the fall of our first father Adam, Romans 5. 12.
because that by him sin entered into the world, and by sin, death: so to
find our recovery and salvation, we must not seek elsewhere than in Jesus
Christ, because he is ordained to be the only propitiation and atonement for
our sins, John. 2. 2. and. 4. 10.
and there is not any other name, (that is to say, any other person or mean)
given us whereby to be saved, Acts. 4. 12.
than the only name of Jesus. For he is the way, John. 14. 6.
the the truth, John. 8. 12. and. 9. 5.
and the life: He is the light of the world: John. 11. 25
He is the resurrection and the life: God is in him reconcyling the world unto
himself: 2. Cor. 5. 19.
In him dwells the whole fullness of the Godhead bodily: Colos^ ^. 9.
God has made him our Wisdom, Righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30
Holiness, Hebr. 10. 14.
and Redemption: And he through his once offering up of himself upon the
Cross, has perfected them for ever which are to be sanctified, Hebr. 5. 9.
and is become the author of everlasting salvation too as many as obey him.
Inasmuch then as Jesus Christ is both God and man, Hebr. 1. 1. 2. 8. 9.
and has all power both in heaven and earth, Math. 11. 27. ^ John. 3. 35.
and all knees must bow before him: whosoever seeks salvation out of Jesus
Christ, does but wander away after his own deceytfull imaginations, never to
find the thing that he seeks, because that (as says Saint John) he that
has not the son, 1. John. 2. 23. and 5. 12.
has not the father, Ephe. 2. 12.
and he that has not the father, is a stranger too the couenauntes and
promises of salvation, without hope and without God in the world, and so
consequently in stead of the substance he ketcheth but a shadow or a dream or
rather nothing at all. Nay rather he ketcheth everlasting damnation, according
to this saying: John. 3. 28. 3^
He that believes not in the son, shall not see light, but the wrath of God
abides upon him. John. 3. 1^.
And agein, this is damnation (that is to say, the cause of damnation) that
whereas light is come into the world, (which light is Christ) men have loved
darkness better than light: that is to say, they have loved the blind
imaginations and inventions of their own ignorant mynds, better than the
lightsome truth of Christ's Gospel.

Wherefore putting away all flattery and soothing of our selves, Hebr. 4. 1^.
and taking to us the touchstone of Gods word, which is quick and effectual,
and sharper than any two edged sword, entering in to the dividing asunder of
the soul and the spirit, and of the sinews and marie, and sifting out the
thoughts and conceytes of the heart: 2. Cor. 13. ^
let us examine our own consciences, whether we be in Christ, and Christ in
us, or no. Our own consciences (at leastwise if they be not blinded with
ignorance or hypocrisy) will certify us of the truth in that behalf. And if
any man have not the record thereof in himself, he wander^h yet still in
error, and knows not whyther he goes, Gal^. 4. 6.
no^ i^ what case he stands. For they that are in Christ, have Christ's
spirit in them, Romans 8. 16.
and that spirit assures their spirit, that they be the children of God. Now
let us see if we have this warrant in our selves: we shall discern it by
these marks following, ^. Cor. 5. 17.
and such other like. The scripture tells us, that those which are in Christ
Jesus, are become new creatures. Colos^. 2. 7.
That they be rooted, builded, and settled upon Christ by faith: 1. John. 2. 6.
That they walk as he walked, fashioned themselves after his example: Eph^. 5.
22. 23. 24. and Gal. 5. 16. and Coloss. 3. 5
That they have put off the old man, (that is to say, their own natural
disposition) which is corrupted with deceitful lusts: and being renewed in
the spirit of their mind, (that is to say, in the inward working of their
hearts,) they have put on the new man, Gal. 5. 22. and Col. 3. 12. and Ephe. 5.
9.
(that is to wit, a new disposition of mind, which is shaped like unto God in
true righteousness and holiness: Romans 8. 1.
That they walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh, that is to say,
that they live not after the lyking of their own wit and will, but in
obedience to the wisdom and will of God: Colo. 3. 5. and Gala. 5. 24.
That they have mortifyed their earthly members, that is to say, ouermaystred
and subdewed their sinful lusts and lykinges: That they be crucified too the
world, Call. 6. 14.
and the world to them, that is to say, that they be no more entangled with
the fond love and sinister affection of the world and worldly things, than if
they were already dead, and had no more need of them at all: 1. Pet. 2. 24.
And finally that they be dead unto sin, but alive unto righteousness. Of
all which sayings, and of a number mo tending to the same purpose, the pith and
effect is this, consisting of two members: Namely, that such as are rightly and
unfeignedly in Christ, have utterly renounced their own wit, will, wisdom,
strength, reputation, and righteousness: yea and quyte and clean forsaken
themselves, together with the world and all worldly things, and have given over
themselves (as it were in bondage) all wholly unto Christ, taking him for their
only God, Lord, Savior, Father, Master, Teacher, Guide, Defender, Stay,
Light, Righteousness, Holiness, Redemption, Wisdom, Strength,
Reconciliation, Sacrifize, Alter, Temple, high Priest, and all in all: and
therefore depending alonely upon him in all things, putting their whole hope,
trust and confidence in him, waiting upon him as the servant upon his
Master, or as the handmayd upon her mistress, or as the child upon his
father: seeking his only honor and glory in all caces, conten^ed to bear the
cross with him in suffering all manner of harms, wrongs, losses, despytes,
reproaches, myseries, and torments for his sake, that is to wit, for the truth
of his Gospel, and for the righteousness of his kingdom: and finally making
full account that as they on their part live not in themselves, but in him, nor
to themselves, but to God, so he on his part will most plenteously and
bountifully reward their labors beyond all that they can hope or conceive, and
never fail them or withdraw himself from them even in this world, at their
need. Out of the which root of true and lively faith, springs forth this
fruit (which is the second part or member that I spoke of) to the full
confirmation of our consciences, and to the open warranting of our being in
Christ: namely that for the love of him, we employ our whole life to glorify
God by indeuering continually to edefy, profit, and comfort our neighbors both
in word and deed, earnestly, faithfully, and cheerfully, without respect of
our selves or of our own commodities, ^ase, profit, pleasure, yea or life,
which is in deed the perfect charity. If we find this disposition of mind
thoroughly rooted in us: then may we boldly and certainly conclude, Gala. 2. ^.
that we be in Christ, and Christ in us: that the life which we live as now
in the flesh (that is to say, in this world) we live by belief in the son
of God, or rather that it is not we that live, but the son of God which
lives in us, that we be led by Gods spirit, and consequently that we be
his children and heirs of his blessed and everlasting kingdom with Christ, as
chozen and predestined thereto in him before all worlds.

Howbeit, forasmuch as we carry the old Adam continually about us, who cannot
be put quyte and clean away but by death. Gal^. 5. (...).
And the flesh not only lusts, but also wrestleth and fyghteth so myghtily
against the spirit, that oftentimes it weakeneth, wounds, overthrows, yea
and (as says Saint Paul) leads us captive to the law or service of sin:
Romans 7. 2^.
Insomuch that there is not so stout a souldyer in Christ, but he is compelled
to say with the same Paul, Romans 7. 19.
The good that I would do, I do not, but the evil which I hate, that do I:
by reason whereof the grief and anguish of his mind enforce him too cry out
(at leastwise in his heart,) Romans 7. 24.
(...) that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin^^. The weak
conscience of the frail sinner, fynding how far he comes short of the true
effects and fruits of perfect Christianity heretoofore described, is stryken
in great heaviness, and dwells in doubt whether he be yet in Christ or no.
By means whereof, he not only takes no comfort in the doctrine of Gods
eternal election and predestination: but also is the more abashed and dismayed
at it. In this case we must not resort for remedy too flesh and blud, that
is too say, too the persuasions of worldly wisdom, or of man's own natural
reason and understanding, but too Gods holy word, which being the very food
and healthful salve of our souls, alonely is able to pacify the vexed
conscience, and to cheer up the drooping and dying heart. This, besides other
comfortes, whereof mo shall be reherced hereafter in place more convenient,
tells us that there are ages and degrees in Christ and Christianity, 1. Cor.
13. 11.
and that our life is a continual warfare, Job. 7. ^.
wherein we must mainteyne battle, not only against the trubbles and
adversities of this world, but also against our selves, that is to say, against
the vices and affections of our own corrupt and sinful nature, Gala. 5. 17.
yea and (as says Saint Paul in this present Epistle too the Ephesians)
against principalities and powers, Ephe. 6. 14.
against the Lords of this world, which are the rulers of the darkness of
this world, even the wicked spirits that are above. To be s^ort, we must
endure continual conflict against the world, the flesh, and the devil. And
this warfare is to be sustained and borne out, not by our own strength and
policy, Phil. 4. ^3. and Romans 8. 37.
but by the power and wisdom of Christ in us. Agein, the scripture tells us,
that as long as we live in this world, (be we never so foreward, willing,
and circumspect in our doyngs) our knowledge is imperfect, 1. Cor. 13. 9. 20.
11. 12.
our love imperfect, our faith imperfect, and all our ryghtuousnesse is as a
defiled cloth: Esaias. 64 7.
so that even the godlyest (...) holiest men that ever were, are, or shall be,
must be feign (...) confess with David, Psalm. 32. 1. and Romans 4. 7.
that only those are blissed whose (...) are forgiven, and whose iniquities
are covered, and too (...) out with the Publicane, Luke. 18. 13.
God be merciful too me wret^^ed sinner: Psalm. 103. 3.
always yielding him this praise, that it is on^^ ^he which forgiueth all our
sins, and heals all our infyr^^^ities. 1. John. 1. 8.
For if we think we have no sin, or that we may ^ee quyte and clean rid
of sin, so long as we bear the ^arthly tabernacle of this frail body of
flesh and blud about (...): we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. Therefore we must hold fast the foundation too the end, which foundation
is the free forgiveness of sins through Jesus Christ, believing and hoping
to be justified, (that is too say, to be accepted for innocent and ryghtuous,
and to be indewed with power of the holy Ghost,) not by the deeds of the
Law, nor by our own works or inventions, but by the obedience and
ryghtuousnesse of Christ. And therewithal, upon assured trust of his strength
and assistance, we must fight manfully against our own lusts, and against
all manner of temptations and crosses, with the weapons of Gods word, continual
and hearty repentance, fervent prayer, often fasting, and earnest indeuer of
amendment, so as we suffer not sin to ouermayster us, Romans 6. 12.
and too reign in our mortal bodies, by our fulfylling of the lusts thereof,
Romans 7. 22.
but delyght in the law of God with the inward man, that is too say,
unfeignedly with the whole heart, Psalm. 51. 6.
for as God requires truth in the inward parts, so hates he the deceytfull
man. Psalm. 5. 6.
So then, we must another finne wilfully and presumptuously, nor despair and
shrink away from God when we have sinned: nor play the hypocrites in
justifying our selves toward God or the world. But like as we must
continually pray God to keep us from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19. 13.
and beware in any wise that they get not the upper hand of us: so when we
have offended, by what mean so ever it be, or how often so ever it be, (as
who is he that sins not? Psalm. 19. 12.
Or rather who can tell how often he offends?) We must rise agein continually
by repentance and faith: so as although our sins seem never so grievous and
heinous in our own eyes, yet must we yield God the honor, as well of
faythfulnesse and mercy in pardoning our often manifold and grievous falls, as
of ryghtuousnesse in sanctifying us with the fruits of true godliness, and of
strength in upholding and mainteyning us by the mighty power of his spirit, or
of Justice in correcting and punishing us for our misdeedes and offenses. ^.
John. 2. 1. 2.
For we be sure that if any of us do sin, we have a faithful advocate
with the father, even Jesus Christ the rightuous, who is the atonement maker
for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the
whole world. Insomuch that if it were possible for one man to have in him the
full gilt and grievous burden of all the particular sins of all men: yet
ought not the same man too despair, or to doubt of the clear forgiveness and
utter release thereof, upon his hearty repentance and unfeigned amendment, so
long as Christ lives and sits at the right hand of God, making intercession
for us. For like as God himself is infinite, so is his mercy infinite also,
toward all such as take hold of it by faith in Jesus Christ. And too the
intent we should take hold of it, he assures us of it with an oath, saying:
as truly as I live I desire not the death of a sinner, Ezech. 18. 21. 22. 23.
but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live: and in what
hour so ever he repents him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I
will put all his wickedness out of my rememberance, says the Lord. Moreover,
although we indeuer to keep a clear conscience toward God, and to lead a
blameless life through charity toward men, according to the prescript rule
of Gods law: yet our so doing must not be with intent too purchase grace,
favor, or ryghtuousnesse thereby at Gods hand, (for that belongs only unto
Christ, and no man living shall be justified by the deeds of the law) nor to
glorify our selves to the worldward, (for whosoever seeks the glory of men,
is destitute of the glory of God, and has received his reward already,) Math.
5. 16 and
but only to glorify God (...) showing forth the myghtie woorking of his
spirit in us, 1. Pet. 2. 12.
^o (...) benefit of our neighbors, to the stablishing of our own
^^^sciences in the faith, and to the confuzion and shame of (...) ^duersaries,
which do slanderously misreport the doc^^^ of salvation which we profess.

(...) we deal after this manner, then does Gods word put (...) of all
doubt, Romans 6. 14.
that sin shall not get the upper hand of (...) because we be not under the
law, but under grace. And (...) continual mainteyning and renewing of the
battle against (...), the world, and our own flesh, assures us, that
although (...) be never so full of infirmities, yet are we graffed intoo
christ, Romans 6. 4. 5. 6.
and grown into him by resembling his death, in that (...) have crucified, and
daily labor to crucifye the old man (...) him: Romans 6. 5.
by means whereof we grow up agein intoo the ^^^enesse of his resurrection,
through newness of life to the ^^ory of God for ever. Finally, it warranteth
us that we be (...) grounded and settled in Gods Election, so as we cannot
(...) any wise perish. For Satan is not divided against himself: (...)
worldlinges hate not the world, Math. 12. 26.
nor the things therein: ^^esh and blud mislyke no^ the corruption of the old
Adam: other can any man come unto Christ, except the father draw (...). Now
then, seeying that to strive against sin, and too (...) continually by
repentance after the manner before mention ed, and to do all things of mere
love, comes not of our (...), (for the natural man is not obedient to Gods
will, no^^er can be:) James. 1. 17.
but of God the father of all mercy, comfort, and (...), from whom every good
and perfect gift comes, who (...) of his own free goodness works in us
both the will (...) the performance thereof by the power of his spirit: Phil. 2.
13.
And ^^eyng that the sheading of his spirit after that sort into our ^^rtes
(being the earnest penny of salvation, and seal of our (...) option, to
strengthen our weakness, and to warrant and (...) us against all temptations)
is a sure and infallible proof (...) Gods love toward us, 1. John. 4. 1^.
according to ^his saying of S. John, (...) do we know that we dwell in him;
and he in us, that (...) has given us of his spirit: theruppon follows an
argument grounded upon the nature of God, which leads us directly and
comfortably to the point of Predestination, and is the very knot and conclusion
of that matter. I^mes. 1. 17.
For inasmuch as God is unchangeable, so as there is no alteration of mind or
purpoze in him, too fancy one thing to day, and another too morrow, or too
determine and repeal agein, and so consequently too hate and love by turns
and fittes: Romans 11. 29.
(for Gods gifts and callings are such, ash cannot repent him of them:) it
must needs follow, that he loved us before all worlds, and that the same love
of his caused him too chooze and predestinate us too salvation before we had
any being, yea even everlastingly before all time: and also that the same love
shall never leave us, until it have brought us too the endless fruition of
his heavenly glory, because that whom he loves, he loves to the end, Romans 8.
11.
and because that forasmuch as the spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwells
in us, he that raised up Jesus will also quicken our mortal bodies, through
his spirit which dwells in us* For when we be come so far forward as to
find our selves in Christ, and by Christ to take hold of Gods free love, and by
his love to clymb up to his eternal election: then resting upon the foresaid
argument of the vn^ariable and unchangeable nature of God, (which not even the
heathen, I mean the wyser sort of them, did ever deny, or in manner doubt of:)
we knit the eternity to come with the eternity past, and conclude
determinately in our selves, that there is now no damnation to us that are in
Christ Jesus.

Yea and out of this conclusion springs such inestimable comfort and inward
joy of mind, as inforceth us to burst out into this bold, but yet most godly
boasting on Gods behalf* which Saint Paul describes in the eight too the
Romans, saying: I am fully persuaded, that another life, nor death, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature can separate us from Gods love, which
he bears us in Jesus Christ our Lord. And seeing that God is on our side, who
shall be against us? Seeing he has not spared his only son, but has given
him for us all: how should he not give us all things with him? Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of us whom God has chozen? God has acquitted us, who
^hen can condemn us? Christ has dyed for us, yea and is rizen agein for us,
and also sits at Gods right hand and makes intercession for us. 2. Co^. 5.
15.
Now if he dyed for us, then are we sure that we dyed all in him, and
lykewyze that as he is rizen, Romans 6. 8.
so we are rizen agein with him, never to dye any more, for death has not any
more power over him, Romans 6. 9.
but forasmuch as we be his members, we do sit with him already in the
heavenly places by hope, only waiting for the day of his coming to judgment,
Coloss. 3. 3. 4.
at the which time, our life which as yet lies hidden with him in God, shall be
showed openly, and we shall appear with him in glory.

And this assured persuasion or belief of Gods love, grounded upon his
eternal predestination, kindles in us as it were a counter love toward God,
and a contempt of all worldly things, be they never so sweet or sower,
pleazant or peynfull: wherethrough we do cheerfully answer on our own
behalf accordingly as is set down in the foresaid eyghth Chapter to the
Romans: Who shall pluck away our love from Christ? Shall oppression, or
anguish, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or sword,
according as it is written, for thy sake are we slain all the day long, and
accounted as sheep appointed to the slaughter? No surely: in all these things
we be more then conquerours through him that loved us, that is too wit,
through God woorking in us. Hebr. 12. ^.
And therefore having our eye fast set continually upon the foreleader and
finisher of our faith Jesus Christ, who for the joys sake that was set before
him, did willingly abide the Cross, and the reprochefull misusages which he
was most spytfully put unto: 2. Cor. 4. 1^. 17. 18.
we do not faint or wexe cold, but although our outward man be consumed, yet
our inward man is daily remewed, insomuch that we rejoice ^uen in tribulations,
knowing that tribulation br^^deth patience, patience breeds experience,
experience breeds hope, and hope makes not ashamed. For we be sure that
our enduring of affliction for a short time, will yield us an incomporable
weight of unspeakable and everlasting glory. In respect whereof we make no
more account of all the adversities of this world, than of fleabytings, and
therefore we look not upon the things that are seen, but upon the things
that are not seen, because the things that are seen, are transitorye, but the
things that are seen, are everlasting.

Now then, the sum of the things aforesaid, is this. That whereas there is no
salvation, no election, no favor, no blessing, no benefyte to be had, hoped,
or sought for at Gods hand, but only in and by our Lord Jesus Christ: it is
showed for the comfort of the weaker sort, that in this spiritual battle
against the world, the flesh, and the devil, those are not counted to be out
of Christ, which being Baptized into him, and professing themselves to be
Christians, do notwithstanding fall through simple ignorance and infirmity of
nature, or are violently borne down, wounded, or carried away at times by the
force of ouermightie temptations: but either such as having their conscience
seared or benommed, do welter in sin without feeling of any remorse: or
which feeling the sting of sin and hartbyting of the law, do nevertheless
make such account of the filthy pleasures of the flesh, the vanities of the
world, and the fulfilling of their own wicked wills, that they continue in
sin wilfully and wittingly, or rather maliciously and presumptuously, even
against the continual testimony and exclamation of their own consciences: or
else which through a cerrein feintnesse of heart, and cowardly misbeleefe, by
reason of overmuch mynding of their own weakness, and of the horriblenesse of
their sins without the remedies that God has ordained for the same, do
utterly castaway their armor and weapon, and either out of hand give over, and
as it were betray themselves too the enemy of mankind without any resistance:
or soon after forsake the feeld upon despair of victory, without returning
any more into the battle, or without craving the help and ^^ccour of their
Captein Christ, as who would say, they looked (...) get the upper hand, and to
stand by their own strength at ^^eir own appointment, and not at Gods
appointment, ^^rough his power and mercy in Christ.

Of which kind of people the cowardlinesse is so much the more shameful and
blamewoorthie, because God has given them such a Savior and Captein, as is
both able and willing too minister strength too them be they never so weak
and feeble, health, be they never so sick or diseazed, soundness, be they
never so sore wounded or maimed, courage, be they never so faint and weery,
victory, be they never so much oppressed and ouermatched, ryghtuousnesse, be
they never so sinful and wicked, yea and even life though they be dead. For
Christ himself being the Physician of our souls, our health, our welfare,
our light, our resurrection, our life, and the very truth it self, which
cannot lie nor deceive, (to the intent we should be willing too resott unto
him, and have assured warrant of hope and comfort,) calls and allureth us in
this wise unto him: M^th. 1. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weery and ouerloden, John. 16. 33. and
and I will refreshe you: Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world, and so
shall you also by faith in me: 1. John. 5. 4. 5.
Although your sins be as read as scarlet, I will make them as white as
snow: John. 6. 37. 39. 40.
I will refuze none that comes to me, but though he be dead, yet shall he
live, for I will rayze him up at the last day: 1. Tim. 2. 12.
If ye suffer with me, ye shall also reign with me in glory: James. 4. 7.
and Math. 16. 18.
Resist the devil, and he shall flee from you, so that the very gates of hell
shall not prevail against you: Math. 18. 19. and John. 14. 13. 14. and 15. 16.
Ask what you will of my father in my name, and it shall be done unto you:
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, Math. 7. 7. 8. and Luk^. 11.
9. 10.
knock and it shall be opened unto you, possess ye your souls through
patience. Besides this, he puts us not too the doing of any thing which he
himself has not first done for our sakes, to give us the more comfort and
incoragement by his own example. If we be tempted, Math. 4. and Hebr. 4. 15.
so was he. If we be smitten for our sins, so was he: for he bare our
infirmities, Esaias. 53. 4. 5.
and the penalty of our transgressions was laid upon him. If we be tried and
nurtured with correction of the cross, so was he: insomuch that although he
was the son of God, Hebr. 5. 8.
yet learned he obedience by the things that he suffered. If we be abaced, so
was he: insomuch that whereas it was no robbery in him to be equal with God,
Phil. 2. 6. 7.
because he was in the shape of God, yet abaced he himself by taking upon him
the shape of a servant, and that so far, Psalm. 22. 6.
as he cries out in the Psalm, I am a worm, and no man, a very scorning
stock of men, and an outcast of the people. If the terror of Gods wrath for
sin do abash our hearts, so did it abash his: and that so sore, as he was feign
too cry out, Psalm. 22. 1. and M^th. 27. 46.
O God my God, why have thou forsaken me? If we suffer want and penury, so
did he: for he had not whereon too rest his head. Finally he became like unto
us in all things, saving only in sin, Heb. 5. 15. 16
to the intent that we having a High priest which could be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, might boldly preace to the throne of grace, to
obtain mercy and favor, 1. Pet. 4. 13. 14
to our relief and help in dew time. Assuring our selves that if we fashion
our selves like unto his image in sufferance, in patience, in humility, in
faith, in hope, in love, and in resistance of sin, we shall also be made
like unto him in glory.

Wherefore let us take his yoke upon us, Ma^h. 11. 30.
for it is sweet: let us stick to him in weal and woe, (...) he will not
forsake us: and let us fence our selves aforehand with the armor and weapons
that Saint Paul speaks of in his present Epistle, that we may be able to
stand fast in these evil days, wherein Satan the old serpent leaves nothing
unattempted that may destroy or impair our faith: and that we may be able to
bear out the brunt of afflictions which God justly may, and (I fear me)
shortly will cast upon us for our careless hearing, and more careless,
slow, and negligent following of his word so plentifully preached among us, if
we convert not by speedy amendment. Let such as are yet weak, learn to grow
from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge in Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 1. 5.
6.
Let them (as says S. Peter) indeuer by all means to add too their faith,
strength, to their strength, knowledge, to their knowledge, stayednesse, to
their stayednesse, patience, to their patience, godliness, to their
godliness, kind hartednesse, and to their kind hartednesse, Love. And while
they be proceeding too perfection by those degrees: I counsel them in the
mean season too reverence the mysteries which God has not yet revealed unto
them, another despayring of their own salvation for want of deep and exquisite
knowledge, (for to whom much is given, of him much shall be required, and to
whom less is given, of him less shall be required:) nor refuzing too learn,
least they fall intoo the sin of contempt: nor grudging at thoze too whom God
has given a greater light of understanding in such mysteries: nor yet
diffaming the doctrine it self, which is uttered by the holy Ghost for their
comfort, if they could conceive it aryght. Agein, on the other side, I counsel
the stronger sort (even for Christ's sake, who being the Lord of al power,
became weak for our sakes) too train foreward the weakelings with all
myldnesse of spirit, not with disputing, but with gentle exhortation and
incoragement, Hebr. 12. 12. 13.
and too cheer up the faint hands and feeble knees, each bearing so with
others infirmities, and helping too guide their feet in the right paths, as
God may be gloryfyed on all hands through Jesus Christ. And as for the
irreverent and wicked wilful scorners, we may let them alone unto God, Math.
7. 6.
without casting of our pearls before swyne, or without giving of our holy
things unto Dogs, least Gods name be blasphemed and rayled upon by our
occasion. But yet ought we (of christian charity) too pray for them, if
peradventure the goodness and long sufferance of God may win them too
repentance, 2. Tim. 2. 10. 25.
that they may acknowledge the truth, and scaping out of the devils snares
wherein they be hild prizoners, come too their right minds, and perform the
will of God. For we our selves also be compassed about with innumerable
infirmities, and have need of continual mercy at Gods hand, another is there
any of us all that stands by his own strength, or that can assure himself
too hold out one minute of an hour, but by the help of God through Christ.
Therefore let every one that calls upon the name of Christ, (that is too
wit, which professes himself a Christian) depart from iniquity. Let him that
seems to stand, 2. Pet. 1. 10. 11.
take heed that he fall not. And finally let us all indeuer to warrant our
calling and election by good and godly conversation, and so shall the way be
laid open for us to enter into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor, glory, and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

Thus much have I (presuming upon your graces good favor and sufferance)
adventured to write of this deep, but yet most comfortable point of Christen
doctrine, so far forth as might beseem the breefnesse of an Epistle, and as
too my poor skill has seemed necessary too give the simple reader an
entrance into the substance of this book, that he might the eazlyer conceive,
and the better understand and digest the doctrine of this Epistle, and of the
Sermons written upon the same. And therefore I have had a special care to set
down the matter as plainly and comfortably as I could, holding my self
always to the present case, without stepping aside into any bymatters, and
without auouching anything which is not warranted by Gods express word.
Agein, I have bin the sparer in words and sentences of mine own, because of
the great profoundnesse of the divine doctrine, which cannot be handled with
too great reverence: the rather because I see that the more godly and skillful
men are in matters of Religion, the warer and circumspecter they be is dealing
with the foresaid doctrine, either in familiar talk and conference, or in
giving it forth in their Sermons and writings. And as for the author of these
Sermons, I shall not need to commend him to your grace, because that you, whose
study is employed in matters of divinity and good government of the Church,
are better acquaynted with him tha^ I, and therefore cannot be ignorant of the
goodness of his writings, whereof this is not the first part, nor (I hope) the
last that has and shall be put forth both by me and others, (I trust) to the
benefyte of our common country. Wherefore omitting too trubble you any further
in that behalf, I beseech your goodness to bear with my boldness, and also
with mine ouersyghtes where any have escaped me in this translation, and to
further this my travel with your favor, as you do the like proceedings that
tend to the advancement of Gods glory, by the edifying of his Church. Surely
my purpose and desire was that it should have bin a first fruit, or at
leastwise among the first fruits, of such manner of presents as were offered
your grace, at your return into the South, to welcome you to your See of
Caunterbury, if the time would have served to have had it conveniently printed:
for it was fully translated and delivered out of hands a good while before.
Nevertheless, my trust is that a work so beneficial to the Church of God,
shall not be the less acceptable to you, though it come not with such speed
as I gladly would it should have done: which thing I beseech your goodness
with all reverend humility too grant, praying God too power upon you such
abundance of his heavenly grace and holy spirit, as the place of high
pre-eminence wherein he has set your most reverend fatherhood, requires: that
we may long enjoy your furtherance, to the continual benefyte of his Church.
Written at Clare in Suffolk the.vii. of January. 1576.

Your good graces most humble Orator always at your commandment, Arthur
Golding.

To all Christians baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, dwelling or abiding in France, greeting.
IT is a wondrous matt^r right deerly believed brethren, how all of us glory in
our Baptim, and yet consider not all with one accord what that mark imports
of i^ own nature, namely by following the intent of him that is the author of
it. For no doubt but if we did so, we should all join toogither in one holy
consent too woorship the only one God in spirit and truth, and to acknowledge
Jesus Christ for our only Savior, Advocate, Master, yea and Lord, as
touching the government of our souls and consciences: and we would take his
^nely word for our wisdom, guide, and rule of our whole life, and specially
of his service, without mingling of the inventions of man's brain with it, how
great antiquity or countenance so ever they seem too have. Yea, and for the
outward government and visible order of the Church, we would hold us to that
which our Lord Jesus Christ in whose name we were Baptized, has showed
thereof too his Apostles, and by them inioyneth the whole world too follow
even unto the last day. And certeynly then should the strange confuzion and
divisions cease which are too be seen in Christendom, whereof those are the
cause, which will not harken unto God, and yield full authority too his
word, which fault shall be laid too their charge at the judgment of God,
unless they turn a new leaf. The Lord and Father of mercy grant them grace
so too do, according as supplication is made too him for them, in all holy
assemblies where he is called upon according too his will, in the only name
of Jesus Christ. That is the thing which we desire: For here the case
concerns not the bringing in of some new deuyce, after the fancy of men,
another strive we too make the victory fall upon men's sides, whatsoever they
be, as some surmyze: but that God and his word may have the upper hand
against all abuses, superstitions, and lies of Satan, and (...) we may all
toogither give glory too our God, confessing that both (...) and our fathers
have ouershamefully forgotten him, insomuch (...) have not followed his holy
Law, but have bowed aside both (...) the right hand and too the left. And
truly whenever we read (...) word in a tung that we understand, or hear
it preached and (...) ^^clared purely: he allureth us too him, too make the
like acknow^^^gedment. And he has done so much in these late years by
stri^^ng with his mercy against the malice of the world, that diverse ^aue
returned intoo the ryghtway, whom others yea even of all de^rees do follow
still anew. But yet is not that enough, unless the residew which have
hithertoo bin deaf or asleep, do bethink themselves too awake in good
earnest, and too have ears too hear, a^ says Jesus Christ. Therefore we
entreat and exhort them too it (...) Gods name, that they may discharge
themselves of the promis whereuntoo their Baptim does secretly bynd them, as
has bin said. And too further them therein, besides the lively voices of the
true ^inisters, and other books containing faithful expositions of the
Scripture: we offer them here the Sermons of M. John Calvin upon the Epistle
of the Apostle Saint Paul too the Ephesians, where (as we hope) they shall
have matter too fare the better by, for the playner understanding of the
things, which they shall either hear preached, or read alone by themselves
afterward. Too make long rehersall of things that might be alleged in
commendation of the doctrine herein contained, or of the manner of teaching
used by the Author, which is both simple and familiar, and yet nevertheless
full of authority and force: it is not now needful. For we be sure that
such as seek Gods honor and their own salvation, shall in reading them,
perceive that the Author had none other meaning with him: and that shall even
the malicious sort themselves be driven to^ confess, spyte of their hearts.
Wherefore too conclude, right dear brethren which shall meet with this book^,
we pray you new agein, too give ear too our God and too his son our
Master, who by his servant and excellent minister of his Church, declares the
things which his holy Apostle had long ago preached with lively voice, and
afterward compyled breefly in writing for us, and all that shall com^ after us
too the worlds end. And of what degree soever you be or have bin, shrink not
back, forasmuch as it is God that speaks, who has loved us so d^arely, that
he has not spared his own son, but has given him too death too redeem us
from death, and from the vain traditions of our fathers: Come on therefore,
and let us all serve our God with one accord, walking in the ways which he
teaches us, and forsaking our own, (that is too say, all that disagreeth with
the rule of his word,) and making all his gifts too serve too his glory. And
in so dooyng we shall be Christians both in name and deed: we shall
discharge our selves of our promise made in Baptim: we shall see good
agreement in Christianity: and we shall serve for a good example too the
Jews and Turks, which are yet enemies too Christendom. So be it, So be it,
Amen.

Your brethren in our Lord, The causers of these Sermons too be brought to
light.

The Argument of Saint Paul's Epistle too the Ephesians.
IT is well enough known, that Ephesus was a City of the lesser Asia,
renowned for many causes. And S. Luke reports in the Acts, how our Lord got
himself a people there by the service of S. Paul, how the Church be^an there,
and what furtherance it had. As for ^ee, I will touch nothing here, but only
that which belongs properly too the argument of the Epistle. Saint Paul had
taught the Ephesians ^he pure doctrine of the Gospel. And when he was prisoner
at Rome, perceiving that they had ^eede too be confirmed, he wrate this
Epistle too them. In the three first Chapters he stands ^heefly upon the
prayzyng and magnyfying of Gods grace. For in the beginning of the first
Chap^^r, after his greetings, he speaks of Gods free election, too the end
they should know that they were now called too the kingdom of heaven, because
they had bin predestined unto life before they were borne. And heerin
shines forth Gods wonderful mercy, that the saving of our souls comes of
Gods free adoption, as of the true and natural welspring thereof. And
forasmuch as men's wits are too weak to conceive so high a secret: he prays
God to inlighten the Ephes^ans with the full knowledge of Christ.

In the second Chapter, the better too set forth the grea^nesse of Gods grace,
he puts them in rememberance how wretched they were till they were called
too Jesus Christ, by comparing their present state, and their former state
toogither. For we can never perceive sufficiently how greatly we be beholden
too our Lord Jesus, nor consider as becomes us how great his benefyts are
towa^ds us, except it be laid before us on the contrary part, how wretched our
state is without him. Also he amplifyeth the matter new agein, saying, that
they had bi^ Gentiles and strangers too the promises of eternal life, which
God had made alonly too the Jews.

In the th^rd Chapter he shows, that his Apostleship had bin appointed
peculiarly for the Gentyles, too the intent that they who had bin strangers a
long time, might now be graffed intoo the people of God. And for because it
was an unaccustomed thing, and such a one as trubbled many men's mynds with the
newness thereof: He calls it a secret, hidden from all times, saying
nevertheless, that the uttering of the same secret was committed unto him.
Toward the end he prays God agein too give the Ephesians the perfect and
lively knowledge of Jesus Christ, so as they may not covet too know any other
thing. By which words he not only goes about too make the Ephesians
acknowledge the great number of benefyts and gracious gifts that God had
bestowed upon them, and too show themselves thankful for (...) same, by
yielding themselves wholly unto him: (...) also intends rather too put them
out of all (...) of their own calling. For by all lykelyhood (...) ^aint Paul
was afraid, least the false Apostles ^ould step in to trubble their faith, by
making the ^eleeue that they had bin but half instructed. For ^heras they had
bin Gentyles, and had newly re^eyued the true Christen doctrine: they had not
^ear^ the Ceremonies nor Circumcision spoken of. But they that intended too
bring the Law (...) ure among the Christians, said, that all such as were not
consecrated too God by Circumsion, ^ere unholy. For it was their common song,
that ^one ought too be reckened among the people of God, which were not
circumcysed: and that all the Ceremonies commaunnded by Moses, ought to ^ee
kept. And for that cause they spoke evil of S. Paul, for making Jesus Christ
common too the Gentyles, as well as too the Jews, and affirmed ^^at his
Apostleship was an unhallowing of the ^eauenly doctrine, because he did after
that sort offer and set forth the covenant of grace to unclean people without
any difference at all. Therefore too ^he end that the Ephesians bein assailed
with such ^launders, should not change their mynds: he in^ended too give them
a remedy. And so, whereas ^n the one side he tells them so aduyzedly, that
their being called to the Gospel, was for that they ^ad bin chozen before the
making of the world: he warns them on the other side, not too think that the
Gospel came too them by haphazard at the apoyntment of men, or that it lyghted
in their lappes at aladuenture. For he tells them, that whereas Christ was
preached too them: that preaching was nothing else than the uttering or
publishing of Gods everlasting determination. When as he sets the vnhapie
plight of their former life before their eyes, he therwithal puts them in
mind, that their getting out of so deep a gulf, was through the singular and
wonderful mercy of God. And whereas he speaks of the Apostleship which was
committed too him toward the Gentyles: he does it too strengthen them in the
faith which they had once received, because their call^ng intoo the communion
of Christ's Church, was wrought by the will of God. Nevertheless, look how
many sentences here be, so many warnings are there to chere up the Ephesians
to acknowledge Gods bene^yts.

In the fourth Chapter he descrybeth the mean whereby our Lord governs and
maynteyneth his Church: namely by the Gospel which is preached by men.
Wheruppon it follows, that that is the very full point of perfection, and
that the Church cannot otherwise be kept up vnappayred. And therefore the
Apostles meaning is, to commend unto the Ephesians the ministry, whereby God
reigns among us. Afterward he comes too speak of the fruts of preaching,
that is to wit, of innocence, holiness, and of all duties of a Christen man.
And he not only teaches what ^he lives of Christians ought too be in
general: but also interlaceth particular instructions, which concern every
man's peculiar calling or vocation.

Sermons of John Calvin upon Saint Paul's Epistle too the Ephesians, gathered
by the ordinary writer, to the benefit and edifying of the Lords Church.
The first Sermon upon the first Chapter.
^. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, too all you holy and
faithful ones in Jesus Christ which are at Ephesus.

^. Grace be too you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

^. Blissed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ.


WHen we read the Epistles which S. Paul wrate abroad to diverse places, we
must always consider that God me^t they should serve not only for some one
time alone, or for some certain people: but for ever, and generally for the
whole Church. And truly if a man consider well the doctrine that is contained in
the^, it will be easy to discern, that Gods intent was to be herd in the
things that are spoken there, even to the ^^rldes end: and also that he has
had such a care of us, that he has ^^ot ouerslipped or forgotten any thing,
that might further our welfare and salvation. The slainne of this Epistle which
I have now taken in (...) and too expound, is that S. Paul confirms such as
had bin trained (...) the Gospel before, too the end they might know that
that is the ^^ing wheruppon they must rest, as upon the true lawful and
perfect wis^ome, and that it is not (...) too add anything theruntoo. And he
^^lleth us that the bene^^tes which are brought us by (...): Lord (...) christ,
and whereof we be (...), are so excellent, that we must needs be tootoo
unthankful, if we ^iske too and fro as folk that are never at rest nor
contented. And theruppon he shows us also what we have in Christ, too the
end we should so stick unto him, as not to presume too seek help any where
else, but assure our selves that he has bought us all. Again on the other
side he shows us, that Christ has so well provided for his church, that if
we have the wit to use the gifts of grace which he offers us, we shall
have full and perfect happiness. Therewithal he warns such as have bin
instructed in the truth of the Gospel, too lead a holy life, and too show
that they have profited as they ought too do in Gods school. Now, these
things serve not only for the City of Ephesus, nor for any one Country, ne
for any one age or time: but we had need too be furthered more and more,
seeing that the devil practizeth without end or ceassing, too thrust us out of
the way. And when he cannot lead us quite away from the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, he laboreth too bring it out of taste with us by some way or other, and
too entangle us in new curiosities, only too bring too pass that we may not
be constant in the faith that we have received, but stand always in a
mamering. Now, whenever our fancies are so ticklish, it is certain that
there is a gap opened too wype out the rememberance of all that we had learned
before, and too take in many folies, yea and erroneous doctrines, which serve
too corrupt and pervert all the pureness of our faith. We see then that the
doctrine which is contained in this Epistle, is directed and dedicated unto us
at this day, and that God has by his wonderful providence so dispozed
things aforehand, that we not only have had the foundations of the Gospel
whereupon too ground our selves, but also whereby our faith may from day too
day grow and increase, and we go still forward, till we come too perfection.
And first and formest S. Paul claymeth the authority unto him which had bin
given him of God, too the intent that men should not stop at his person, as
though it had bin but a mortal man's saying. For in very deed our Lord Jesus
Christ is the only master at whole hand we must learn: Math. 17. ^. 5.
for it is witnessed of him from heaven, that it is only he and none other
whom we must give ear unto. And it has always bin Gods will too have the
guyding of his own Church himself, and that his word should be received
without geynsaying, and he has not given that privilege too any creature. 1.
Tim. 3. ^. 16.
And whereas Jesus Christ is ordained in the room of God his father: it is
because he is God manifested in the flesh, and the infallible truth itself,
and his ^^sdome which was before all time. Furthermore when men speak, (...)
must not do it in their own name, nor allege aught of their ^^ne fancy and
brain: but they must faithfully set forth the thing (...) at God has
enjoined them and given them in charge. Thus ye see ^hy S. Paul does as it
were euerywhere use this preface, that he is (...) Apostle of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And so he holds it for a sure and ^bsolute ground, that if any man
thrust forth himself too speak in ^is own name, there is nothing but
rashness in him. Why so? For he takes that thing upon him, which belongs
alonely unto God. Ageine, forasmuch as our Lord Jesus Christ was purposely
sent, too be our last teacher, that we might have such wisdom as were perfect
and utterly without fault: therefore does S. Paul call himself an Apostle
sent of him. This presuppozeth two things: the one is, that S. Paul had that
charge committed unto him: and the other is, that he acquitted himself dewly
of it, by employing himself faithfully in ^he office that he was called too.
For were a man the best able and most ^xcellent in the world: yet if he thrust
forth himself of his own head, he trubbleth all common order. And we know
that God will have order, and not disorder among us, as S. Paul says in the
fowrteenth chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians. He then that
speaks (at leastwise too teach) must have calling: that is too say, he must
be admitted, and have his charge (given him,) so as every man may not put
forth himself of an vnaduized zeal, as I said before. Now too speak any
further of S. Paul's calling, Act. 9. c. 15.
it is not needful at this present. For we know how God gave record that he
auowed him for his Apostle. And in deed he disputes not much of it here,
because it was known well enough in the Church of Ephesits. But forasmuch as
the Galathia^s had bin trubbled by deceyuers, in so much that S. Paul's
authority, yea and the name of God himself had bin disgraced there: we saw
how he mainteyned his own state, telling them that the reverence dew too an
Apostle of Jesus Christ could not be taken from him, Gal. 1. c. 13. 14, 15.
etc.
without overthrowing the order of God. And therefore it is enough for him here
too have said in one word, that he is an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Let us come
too the second point which I touched, namely that it is not enough for a man
too be called, except he discharge his dewtie with a pure conscience and
upright dealing in his office* which thing S. Paul took upon him as a thing
out of all Qutesion and he had given sufficient proof of it. The deceyuers may
well boast themselves with full mouth that they be called, as we see they
do. For all they that fight against God and his word, and sow trubble and
darnell in his Church, would feign make a buckler of their calling, and also of
their zeal, for they will needs be called Christians, yea and more too. But
S. Paul had sufficiently proved that he came not of himself, ne sought any
thing else than too spend himself in the building up of the Church. And
forasmuch as the same was well known in Ephesus, Act. 19.
(as we may gather by the story of S. Luke) yea and that he had borne out
many a hard brunt: therefore he thinks it enough too say in one word, that
he is an Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ. And here we be warned, first too
hold our selves too the pure doctrine which we know too have proceeded from
God: for we cannot do amiss if we follow that rule. And because that in
our Lord Jesus Christ we have the performance of all that is requisite and
needful for our instruction, so as we need not too doubt whither we may
hold us too the Gospel, or add somewhat too it: Let us be contented too take
the son of God for our master, specially such he vout^afeth too stoop so
low as too take that charge upon him, and also protests that if we have
profited well in his doctrine, we shall come too the true mark wheruntoo we
should go. Ye see then that the first less^n which we have too gather upon
this text, is that our faith must not waver one way nor other, but have a sure
and immovable foundation too rest upon, that is too wit, Gods truth, even as
it is contained in the Gospel. And seeing that S. Paul is sufficiently auowed
unto us: let us not doubt but Gods spirit speaks too us at this day by his
mouth, another let us here the doctrine as though it were subiec^ too our
judgment: but let us imprizon our own vnders^^^ding and wits, and receive
it without scanning, except we will wilfully make war against God, and
advance our selves above him. And so, that is one of the things which we
have too mark upon this text. Furthermore too the end that this doctrine may
not only be reverenced among us, but also be amiable too us: let us mark
that S. Paul speaks in the name of Christ, who was sent unto us of God his
father, too bring us glad tydinges of peace: and also let us bear in mind how
he says in another text, ^. Cor. 5. ^. 20.
that he was ordained too bring the message of atonement, and beseeches men
in Gods name too be reconcyled too God. Now I told you that this was done too
make the doctrine of the Gospel sweet, that we might be desirous of it and
give our selves (...) too it. For whenever it is told us that God speaks
too us: (...) it is enough too authorize all that he shall speak: but yet
might (...) at his voice, and therwithall be weerie of it, according (...) see
a great mu^ber confess well enough that God deserves (...) obeyed, and too
have all men subject to him: but in the mean (...) they start away, and shun
him as far as they can, because his (...) makes them afraid. But when Jesus
Christ speaks too us (...) mediator between God and men: we may go too him
boldly. (...) (as it is said in the Epistle too the Hebrews) we be no more
(...) were at Mount Sinay, Heb. 12. d. 18. 19. 20. ^xod. 9. b. 12.
where the lyghtenings flashed in the air (...) the Law was published, in so
much that if a beast had come (...) it, it must have dyed. The voice therefore
which God uttered at (...) time was terrible. But now a days seeing he
incorageth us by (...) Gospel to receive the grace that he offers us, and is
minded too (...) away the rememberance of our sins: let us suffer our selves
(...) justified by his free goodness, and let us be peasable and (...) unto
him. For that ought well too move us too resort unto him (...) poor hungry
souls, to be fed with the heavenly food that he (...) give us. Thus ye see
in effect what we have too remember when (...) Paul calls himself the
Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Whereas he adds, that it is by the will of God: it serves too (...) off
all scanning, too the end that men should not blame him of pre^^^ptuosnesse,
as though he thought himself of more reputation than (...) men. For he
protesseth that it was not for any worthiness of his (...), but because it
had pleased God too chcoze him too that office. (...) surely it is no feyned
humility, that he says he was set in that (...) by Gods mere grace and
choozing. 1. Cor. 15. 9. etc.
For we see how he protests (...) other places, that he is not worthy of
such honor, but rather had (...) served utter damnation, 1. Tim. 11. 13. 18.
and therefore was too be taken as a (...) of Gods infinite goodness, in that
he had exalted him so high, (...) him that had bin a murderer of Christians,
that had shed the blud (...) the Martirs, and that had rayled against God and
his word, as he (...) reports it. We see then that there was no feynednesse
in (...) is confession of his, where he says, that he was set in that state
and (...) ^gree by the only will of God. And this serves us too great purpose
(...), too the intent we esteem not Gods word after the quality of (...)
that bring it too us. For one of the ordinary polices which the devil uses
too diminish the reverence of Gods word withal, is too outface us with the
persons that bring it. Now it is certain that we be frail vessels, and of
no value, yea and even as good as broken pots. What is there in them whom God
has ordained too be the ministers of his word? 2. Cor. 4. 7.
But it is the treasure always inestimable, notwithstanding the dyspizednesse
of the vessels. Then let us mark, that when men come too warrant us the
forgiveness of our sins, and the salvation which we ought too hope for: our
faith must mount up higher, and not stand scanning whether such a man be
worthy too be herd or no, or inquyring what manner of person he is. Let us
hold or selves contented, that God by that means intends too draw us too
himself. That is the way which we must walk: and if we st^p aside from it,
by and by we ^^^e astray, and are in the high way too destruction. Then let us
mark well, that we must submit our selves too Gods will and ordinance, and
receive without let, the doctrine that is preached too us by the mouths of
mortal men. For we must not be wyze after the manner that a great number are,
which demand whether God could not send his Angels from heaven, and teach us
by revelations: nor also after the manner of some buzibodies, which bear
themselves in hand that they have the holy Ghost in their sleeves, by means
whereof they hold skorne too receive the gifts as they be dealt abroad by God.
Too the end we be not bewitched by Satan after that manner: let us mark how
it is said here, that it is Gods will that the Gospel is preached by the
mouths of men, and that they be as it were witnesses of it unto us: and that
whosoever exempteth himself from that order, is in like case as if he did
thrust back Gods hand, when he offers him sure and infallible record of his
salvation. Thus ye see still what we have too mark upon this text.

Ageine, they that are called too bear abroad Gods word, ought too take
warning by Saint Paul's example, too walk in lowelynesse. For who are we if
we compare our selves with him? He shows us that he was not chozen for any
sufficientnesse or ability that was in him: but because it was Gods will to
have it so. Therefore let us assure our selves, that we hold all things of
him and of his mere grace, and that we cannot chalendge aught too our selves,
vn^esse we mind too rob him of his right. And we know that such
unthankfulness were not too be borne withal.

Hereuppon he says, Too all the holy ones that are at Ephe^^^, and too the
faithful in Jesus Christ. True it is, that the name (...) City is expressed
here, but yet (as I have touched alredie) the (...) is common too us all, and
God has ordained it too our use (...) day, and we must receive it as if S.
Paul were still alive, (...) among us: yea and we must not only have an eye
unto him, (...) the party by whom he is sent. For although he dyed when (...)
finished his race: Yet notwithstanding Gods spirit dies not. (...) ^ ^soeuer
the case stand, we must for our learning bear in mind (...) S. Paul means
here, when he speaks too the holy and (...) ones in Jesus Christ. Albeit
then that we be not of that time, (...) of the Country and people of Asia:
yet notwithstanding, seying it (...) pleased God too match us with those too
whom S. Paul wrate (...) time: let us assure our selves that it stands us in
hand at this (...), too be strengthened in the faith which we have received
by the Gorpell because it was the intent and purpose of the holy Ghost, too
incorage all those too hold out, which have bin entered in the Gospel, (...)
yet weak and have need of larger confirmation. But let (...) well in mind
these words, where it is said, the holy and (...) ones in Jesus Christ. For
S. Paul shows, that all the (...) of men is nothing else but feynednesse,
till God have applied (...) too his own service, and dedicated and consecrated
them thereunto (...) faith. For we are all unclean by nature, and there can
never any (...) come from us but vnclenenesse. True it is, that if men can set
a (...) glass and countenance upon things, they shall be taken for as righ^^us
as may be, and their virtues shall be commended euerywhere, ac^^^^ing as we see
that a man shall purchase the fame of great perfec^^^^, if he have but some gay
things in him. But we must remember (...) it is said in the fifteenth of the
Acts, that God clenzeth men's (...) by faith. And he had great need too do
so: for (as the Pro^^et Jeremy says) manmes heart is a dungeon of horrible
confuzion. Ierem. 17. 9.
(...) our selves perceive it not: but God has cleerer eyes than we.
^owsoeuer the case stand, let us assure our selves of this, that all the
ho^^nesse which men surmize themselves to have, is but corruption and vt^^^ly
abominable before God, till such time as they be made one with (...) by belief
of the Gospel. Therefore mark it for a school point, (...) none other
holiness is lyked and allowed at Gods band, than (...) holiness of the
believers. For except we first become Christi^^s, we be blind and can never
yield God his dewtie.

Although there were none other leadwnesse than this, were it not enough too
mar all the virtues that we could have besides? Again seeing that the spirit
of perfection, the spirit of the fear of God, the spirit of righteousness,
and the spirit of pureness abides and rests in Jesus Christ: it is certain
that all such as are separated from him, have nothing else in them but vice,
and all manner of vnclenenesse, how much so ever the world fawn upon them. And
on the other side let us mark also, that all such as boast themselves of
belief in the Gospel, and are not sanctified of God, do bewray their own
hypocrisy and lying, and dote themselves by their own life, whatsoever their
mouth sing or say, according as we see many now a days, which defyle and
vnhalowe the name of faith which ought too be holy. For every man will say
he is faithful, and they that have least faith, are boldest too say that there
is no faith but in themselves. And would God it were so but in the one half of
us. But we see even among all that bear the name of Christians, their whole
life is disordered and looce, in so much that they mock* God too the full, and
despyze all religion, and yet notwithstanding do in the mean while think (as
I have said already,) that they have great wrong if they be not taken for good
Chrirtions and Catholics. Yet for all this we see how S. Paul knitteth these
(...) things toogither in inseperable bond: namely that if we have the faith
of the Gospel, we must therwithall give over our selves wholly unto our God,
and separate our selves from the corruptions of the world, according as we
have seen how that in the Epistle too the Galathians, Gal. 1. 4. and. 4. 5. 6.
and. 7.
he says that the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) too the end we
should be sanctified by his blud, too yield obedience hensfoorth in all
pureness unto God his father. And as he says (...) another place, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 7.
we be not called too vnclenenesse, but unto right^ousnesse, too the intent
that Gods name should be honored and glorified by us. Thus ye see what we
have too remember in this preface, too the end we may be the better prepared
too receive the (...) contained in this Epistle, and the same may have such
authority among us, as it deserves, and moreover be made amyable too us, so
as we may understand, how it is for our singular benefit too learn at Paul's
hand, for so much as he witnesses the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ unto us,
and leads us too God too be reconcyled unto him, whereas we be naturally
the children of wrath, and furthermore that we may stand in his favor, so as
we may be hold too call upon him as (...) father, and be sure that he also
takes us for his children. Theruppon (...) a thanksgiving, too lift up a
men's hearts; too acknowledge (...) much they be bound and beholden unto
God, specially conside^^^^ that he has showed himself so bountiful toward
them, in (...) forth himself after all manner of sorts.

^^^essed (says he) be the God and father of our Lord Jesus (...), which
has blissed us with all spiritual blissings in hea^^^ly things, or in
heavenly places in Christ. Forasmuch as the chief (...) which God requires at
men's hands, is that they should ac^^wledge his benefits and be thankful too
him for them: S. Paul (...) ^sidereth first of all, how the same may provoke
them too do their (...): For we be so rechlesse, as it is* pity too see.
We can well (...) confess, that our chief study and indeuer ought too be
too (...) a well ordered life: that is too wit, to praise God. For if a man
ask us wherefore we be in this world, wherefore God has such a care of us,
wherefore his goodness feeds and cherishes us, and finally (...) he does as
it were put out our eyes with the great number (...) which he bestows upon
us: it is too the end we should (...) some acknowledgement of them unto him.
For (as it is said in (...) Psalm) we (...) our side cannot profit him at
all, another requires (...) else of us in exchange than thanksgiving,
according as it is (...) in the hundred and sixteenth Psalm, What shall I
render too the (...) for all the benefits which I have received of him, but
only too (...) the cup of welfare at his hand, and too call upon his name?
(...) see then that all that ever we can bring unto God, is but too
ac^^owledge our selves bound too him for all things. And yet for all that (...)
discharges his dewtie, no nor the hundredth part of it in that b^halfe, but
rather all of us from the greatest too the least do defraud (...) of it, in as
much as we cease not through our leawdnesse, to bury (...) praise, which
ought too ring (...) in our mouths. For this cause (...) Lord rebukes us for
our negligence, for whereas the holy scripture exhorts us too praise God, and
uses so many words too that pur^ose: let us not think that they be
super^^^ous: but let us acknow^edge them too be as many vpbraydings of our
churlishness and vn^y^dnesse for failing in the thing that is so requisite,
and (as ye would (...)) the principal point of our life. True it is that the
holy Ghost ^ooth oftentimes set forth other reasons why we shoud magnifye
Gods name, as the order of nature, the fruits which the earth yields the
aid and help which God gives us and such other things: and those are
sufficient matter wherefore too praise God. But S. Paul leads us higher
here, and will have us too glorifye God above all things, for because he
thinks it not enough too have set us in the world, and too cherish us there,
and too have provided all things needful for the passing of this transitory
life: but also has chozen us too be heirs of his kingdom, and of the
heavenly life. Then are we dubble bound unto God, and that much more streytly
than the ignorant and unbelieving wretches are. For although they be
sufficiently bonnd alredye: yet notwithstanding the good which he has done us
in Jesus Christ, is without all comparison more excellent and noble, because he
has adopted us too be his children. Truly inasmuch as we be men, we be
of the number of his creatures which he has fashioned after his own image:
but what for that: This image is defaced in us by sin, and by the corruption
wherewith we be atteinted by Adams disobedience. And now what other heritage
have we, than of his wrath and of endless death? Too be short, we be not
worthy too be reckened in the number of brute beasts, if we abide in the
state which we have of nature. Now then seeing that God makes us members of
his only son, and sets us in the array of the Angels, and prepares us too
become parttakers of his own nature and glory (as says S. Peter in his first
Epistle:) ^ Pet. 1. 12.
ought not we too perceive there so high and noble a grace, as should ravish
us wholly in love with it? Thus ye see that of the things which S. Paul meant
too say in this text, the first is, that we be here exhorted too apply our
whole indeuer too the praising of God, verily because we be too cold and
slothful in that behalf, if we be not driven and enforced thereuntoo.
Besides this, S. Paul had one other respect more: which was, too feed us in
such wise with the grace that we have by the Gospel, as we may no more covet
this thing and that thing after our ordinary manor. We see how fickle we be
of nature, and when God is so good unto us, as too set his word before us:
we will needs have some other things beside, and nothing can content us. And
what is the cause of it: It is for that we be dull, and never conceived nor
understood what God shows us by his word. (...). 3. 18.
For we shall see hereafter, that such as know the love which God shows us in
our Lord Jesus Christ, have all that they can wish upward and downward, far
and wide. Also S. Paul does now call upon us too bliss God, too the end too
hold us to the doctrine wherein consists the fullness of all felicity, at
leastwise if we (...) skill too use it too our profit.

^^thermore let us mark also, how not without cause he says, (...) is in
spiritual blissings. For although we cannot eat a bit of (...) nor drink a
drop of water without theft too Godward, except ^cknowledge and confess that
he therein shows himself a very (...) toward us: yet notwithstanding, the
things that concern this (...) and transitory life of ours, are nothing in
respect of the things (...) serve for the everlasting welfare of our souls.
And in very deed (...) Paul's exhorting of us here too praise God for his
heavenly blis^^s, is in such wise, that therwithall he gives us an incling
that we (...) be pacient if we be pinched in respect of the flesh, and have
not all ^^ges at will, but that God cutteth us short of our pittance, and
hand^^^ us not so tenderly as we would be. Two things therefore are con^^ed
here. The one is, that we should learn too know wherein our (...) and perfect
happiness consists: that is too wit, in the life (...) we hope for, and
which is hid from us as yet, too the intent we (...) not be tied too the
world: (Mark that for one point.) And se^^ly, that if this world shake us off
and dispize us, and men make a (...) stock of us, we must settle our selves
in patience, and while (...) despizers of God vaunt themselves with pomp and
bravery, and ^eemeth that we be unhappy in respect of them, in so much that
(...) of us suffer hunger and thirst, and othersome be trubbled and vexed
^^ongfully: we must look further. And why? Even because we (...) too content
our selves with the heavenly blissings which God (...) bestowed upon us. Then
must this so great, so high, and so inesti^^^^le prerogative, make us too
ouerpasse all incomberances that we can conceive, whenever God exercizeth and
tries us in this world (...) many afflictions, and will have us too endure
scarcity and pe^^rie (...) many things. This is the effect of the things which
we have too ^arke in this streyne.

Now before we go foreward with the rest, let us mark that this ^oord
Blissing, is taken in diverse senses, when S. Paul applies it (...) there too
God or too our selves. It is said that we bliss God, and how? (...) he
blisseth us? After what manner does he bliss us? We bliss (...) him as he
blisseth us, we come far short of that. For (as I have ^^^edged already out
of the sixteenth Psalm) all our services can do (...) no good: and agein we
must needs conclude, that (as I have also alleged out of the hundred and xvi.
Psalm) all that we can bring unto God is no more but this acknowledgement,
that we be beholden too him for all the good things which we have. Ye see
then that all our blissing is but too yield the sacrifice of praize unto God.
Let that serve for one point. But now when God blisseth us, is it but only in
words? No: but it is a filling of us, and a bestowing of all things upon us
which we want, so far forth as is needful. And why is this word Blissing
attributed unto him? Because he needs not too travel and take much pain
too help his servants, and too give them the things that he knows too be
expedient for them. If he do but say the word, that is too say, if he do but
utter his will, the thing is done. Forasmuch then as God having created the
world by his only word, has power also too do us good by his alonely
behyghting of it: therefore it is said that we become rich by his only
blissing, that is too say, by his showing of himself loving and favorable too
us. Now let us see if we be too be excuzed when we defraud God of his dew,
by disdeyning too open our lips too confess how much we be bound and
beholden unto him, after we have received so many benefits at his hand. Let
all the blissinges that all the men in the world can give unto God, be laid
intoo the balance against the only blissing wherewith he inricheth us: and
which shall outwey other? All that they can allege, is, but that they must be
feign too confess, that they can another do, nor say any thing that is aught
worth: whereas on the other side God shows us that he has all that is
requisite for our welfare. Therefore it is not without cause that S. Paul
says here, that the faithful must give and apply all their wits and
indeuers too bliss God, seeing he gives them so great cause: for else they be
unthankful and stark churles. Therefore he speaks two things: The father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blissed us in Christ.

Whereas he says, the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it must be
laid forth after this manner: namely, that the God whom we feel so favorable
unto us, is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. This circumstance deserves
too be well marked. For thereby S. Paul does us too understand, that Gods
benefits, and specially those that belong too the heavenly life, and too the
everlasting salvation of our souls, cannot come at us, except Jesus Christ be
as it were the cundit pype of them, so as we may be made parttakers of them
for (...) Therefore let us mark well that we be shet out from all (...), and
from all things that concern the salvation of our (...) Jesus Christ become
our mean. True it is that the (...) do eat and drink and glut themselves to
the uttermost, (...) shyneth upon them. But yet howsoever they fare, to speak
(...) they enjoy not any of all the things that God gives them, (...) they
vsurp them without any lawful title too them. For the (...) was made for Gods
children, yea and that in respect of their (...), which is our Lord Jesus
Christ. Too be short, it is not (...) that S. Paul showing how God has given
himself (...), says that it is because he is the father of our Lord Jesus
(...). But (as I told you even now) here the matter stands not (...) eating
and drinking, but upon far greater and preciouser (...): namely that God
has adopted us for his children. And so ye^ (...) effect what we have too
bear in mind.

^^wbeit, for the better profiting of our selves by this streyne: Let (...)
that we must bridle our selves, least we wander intoo (...) when we know God
the father of our Lord (...). And why? For the Papists have this word God often
(...) in their mouths, and likewise the word Jesus Christ, (...) the mean
while they have disfigured Jesus Christ, and (...) the doctrine of his Gospel
wherein he should be seen. So (...) they a God: howbeit but by confuzed
imagination: and in the mean (...) they know him not. And truly, they wo^e no
more what God (...) worship, than the Turks do. We know that our Lord Jesus
(...) (in the fourth of John) says, that they which have not the (...) too
rule themselves well, wot not what they worship, (...) continually forge
Idols too themselves. Therefore there is (...) one way too have good and
infallible access unto God: and (...) by beholding him in his lively image,
for his majesty is too (...), too far of, and too deep for us. But Jesus
Christ has (...) himself too us, and applied himself too our weakness, and
(...) us whatsoever was requysite too know, that we might (...) too God his
father. Ye see then that we must have our Lord (...) Christ for our way, too
the intent we stray not. For seeing that (...) is the father of our head and of
him that is made one with us, ye (...) we may have access too come
familiarly unto him. And (...) without that mediator, we are all shet out
from him, and the majesty of God must needs make the hears of our head too
stand up for fear. But when we consider that he calls himself the father of
him that is our head: we know that he also must needs auow us for his
children, because he has bought us.

Furthermore although S. Paul do set down here but the one word of
Spiritual blissinges: yet notwithstanding he shows that God has showed
himself bountiful toward us mo ways than one. And thereof he will make a
more large declaration hereafter, by laying forth the benefits particularly
which we obtain by the Gospel. For all this chapter is full of them. But
howsoever the eace stands, yet does he give us too understand in this
streyne, that Gods giving of his gracious gyfts unto us, is not by patches and
parcells, and that his making of us too taste them, is not with a wet finger
and away, as they say: but that he has given us them so diversely and fully,
that we have cause too magnify him in all respects. Therefore let us
understand, that seeing that Jesus Christ is so given unto us, in him we
obtain all that is auaylable too our salvation, and too make us happy,
according also as Paul speaks of it in the eight to the Romans. For if the
only son be given unto us, how should not all the benefits which he has
in him, be communicated too us with him and by his means?

But howsoever we fare, let us learn too favor Gods spiritual gifts in
such wise, as all our wits may be gathered home to make much of them. And
for the bringing thereof too pass: let us beware that we have not our minds
too much wedded too the world. For the very cause that draws us away, so as
we perceive not the hundredth part of the good that God has done us, nor can
apply his benefits too our profit: is our own vanity, because every of us
begulleth himself with his own fond and wandering lusts. Therefore let us
learn too shake off the things that stop us from coming too our Lord Jesus
Christ. And although our naughty nature provoke us too seek the transitory
things of this world: yet let us do our indeuer to withdraw from them, so as
we may yield our selves with a free heart unto God, and be earnestly minded
too obey him, and too give our selves wholly unto him, for so is it his will
too have us joined unto him. This is the thing which we have too mark upon
S. Paul, when having spoken of the spiritual blissings, he adds immediately,
in heavenly places or things: whereby he meant too show, that we be not
(...) receive the gracious gifts which are communicated too us in (...) Jesus
Christ, and which God would have us too possess: till (...) how there is not
any thing in this world, that ought too (...). Wherefore when we once know
that we be not (...) and made too dwell always in this world, but that we
must (...) as wayfarers in it, and that our everlasting heritage and (...) in
heaven: let us thereuppon make thitherwarde, and (...) our selves too it more
and more. And although we be feeble: (...) not faint, but pluck up a good
heart, and pray God too give (...) Moreover ye see that the cause why S. Paul
sets down (...) Blissings, is too do us too wit, that whereas the devil
(...) any traynes too thrust out of the way, God will provide ((...) them all.
And why? For he has such store of blissings, that he (...) and destroy all
that ever may be against our (...).

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, (...) of our
faults, praying him to touch us more (...) with them, that we may be
brought to true repentance, so (...) may condemn our selves, and seek to our
Lord Jesus Christ (...) that we want, and that not for one day or at a brayd,
but (...) and steadfastly too our lives end: and that whatsoever befall us,
(...) always assure our selves that we have cause too praise our (...), and
that if we be poor and miserable in this world, the (...) is enough too quiet
us, and to sweeten all our afflictions and (...), and too give us such
contentation, as we may nevertheless (...) mouths open too bliss God for
showing himself so kind (...) and liberal toward us, as even too adopt us
too his children, (...) show us that the heritage which has bin purchaced for
us by (...) of his only son, is ready for us, and we can not miss of it,
(...) go too it with true and invincible constancy of faith. That it (...)
please him too grant this grace not only too us, but also too all (...). etc.

The second Sermon upon the first Chapter.
3. Blissed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blissed
us with all spiritual blissing in heavenly things in Christ:

4. According too his choozing of us in him before the foundation of the world,
too the end we should be holy and unblameable before him in charity.


We have seen heretofore how S. Paul exhorted us too praise and bliss God,
because he has blissed us, and that not after an earthly manner, but after a
spiritual manner, too the end we should learn too hold our selves contented
with Gods showing of his fatherly goodness and love toward us, in opening the
gate of the kingdom of heaven unto us by hope, in so much that although we
be subject too much misery in this world, yet it is good reason that we
should content our selves with Gods choozing of us after that fashion, and with
his calling of us too him, according as it is witnessed too us by the Gospel,
Math. 6. b. 9. and. Luke 11. (...).
that he is our father, namely in as much as he has knit us too our Lord Jesus
Christ as members too their head. And now S. Paul brings us too the
original and welspring, or rather too the principal cause tha^ caused God too
take us into his favor. For it is not enough that God has uttered the
^reasures of his goodness and mercy upon us, too draw us too the hope of the
heavenly life by the Gospel: and yet is that very much. For had not S. Paul
added that which we see presently: it might have bin (...) that Gods grace is
common too al men, and that he offers it too all without exception, and
consequen^ly that it is in every man's (...) too receive it through his own
freewill, by means whereof the^e should be some deserving in us. For if there
were no (...) men, but that some receive Gods grace and (...) what might be
said, but that God has showed (...) to all mankind? But they that are
parttakers of the (...) Lord Jesus Christ, atteyne too it by faith. And so ye
see what might be deemed of it. But S. Paul, too exclude all deserving (...)
behalf, and too show that all comes of Gods only free (...) goodness:
says that he has blissed us according too his (...) of us aforehand. As if he
should say, that too exalt Gods (...) as becomes us, we must look upon the
difference that is (...) between man and man. For the Gospel is preached to
some, and (...) wot not what it is, but are utterly shet out from it, as if
(...) should make it too rain in one coast, and suffer another coast to (...)
dry. Now if it be demanded why God pitieth the one part, (...) forsakes and
gives over the other: there is none other answer (...) that it so pleases
him. Upon the preaching of the Gospel in a (...), some shall be touched with
lively faith in their hearts, and (...) go away ageine as they came without
faring any whit the (...), or else they harden themselves against God, and
bewray the (...) that was hidden in them before, whereof comes such (...)?
Even of this, that God amendeth the one sort by his holy (...), and leaves the
other sort in their natural corruption. Ye see (...) that the thing wherein
Gods goodness shyneth forth most unto (...) that by the preaching of the
Gospel too us, we have as it were (...) that he pitieth us, loves us,
calls us, and allureth us too him. (...) when the doctrine that is preached
too us, is received of us (...) effectually: that is yet a further and more
special token (...) we perceive that God intends too be our father, and
has (...) us too be his children. Not without cause then does S. Paul say
(...) this streyne, that we be blissed of God, even according too his (...)
of us aforehand. For we of our selves come not too him, we (...) selves seek
him not: Esai. 6^. ^. ^.
but the saying of the Prophet Esaias must (...) be fulfilled in all: namely
that God shows himself too such (...) sought him not: and that such as were
far of do see him near at (...), and he says too them, here I am, here
I am; although you (...) despyzed me, yet do I voutsafe too come too you,
because I have (...) care of your welfare. Thus we see what S. Paul amed at
in this (...).

Too be short we have to mark here, that we shall never know (...) our
salvation comes, till we have lifted up our minds too (...) Gods everlasting
purpose, whereby he has chozen whom he thought (...); and left the residew in
their own confuzion and fall. Now then (...) is no marvel though some men
think this doctrine too be strange and hard: for it agrees no whit at all
too man's natural wit. If a man ask of the Philosophers: They will always tell
him that God loves such as are worthy of it, and that forasmuch as virtue
pleases him, he does also mark out such as are given theretoo, too hold them
for his people. Ye see then, that after our own imagination, we will deem
that God puts none other difference between man and man, in loving some, and
in hating other some, than each man's own worthiness and deserving. But by the
way, let us remember also, that in our own understanding there is nothing but
vanity, and that we must not measure God by our meetyard, and that it is too
excessyue an ouerweening too bynd God too the stake, so as he should not do any
thing but that which we could conceive, and which might seem ryghtfull in our
eyes. The matter therefore concerns here the reuerencing of Gods secrets
which are incomprehensible too us, and without we do so, we shall never
taste the principles of faith. For we know that our wisdom ought always too
begin at humility: and this humility is as much too say, as that we must not
fall too weying of Gods judgments in our own balance, nor take upon us to be
judges and determiners of them, but that we must be sober, because of the
weakness of our wit, and that forasmuch as we be gross and dull, we must
magnify God, Psalm. 36. b. 6.
and say as we be taught by the holy scripture, Lord thy determinations are
as a great deep, and no man is able too reckon them up unto thee. Ye see
then, that the cause why some men find this doctrine hard and irksome, is for
that they be too much wedded too their own opinion, and cannot submit
themselves to Gods wisdom, to receive his sayings soberly and modestly. And
truly we ought too take warning by that which S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 2. d. 15.
namely that man of his own mother wit understands not Gods secrets, but
takes them too be stark foolishness. And why? For we be not of his
c^unsell, but must have things reveled too us by his holy spirit, or else we
should never know them: and we must have the^ in such measure as he gives the^
unto us. S. Paul speaks there of the things that we know by experience:
that is to wit, that we be Gods children, that he governs us by his holy
spirit, that he comfort us in our adversities, and that he strengthens us
through patience. We should not conceive any of all these things, unless we
were inlyghtened by his holy Ghost. How then shall we understand the thing
that is much higher, namly that God choze us before the making of the world?
Since the case stands so: let us learn too put away all that we conceive of
our own (...), and too lay it under foot, and let us receive whatsoever God
(...) us, discharging our selves utterly of all selfweening, and (...) our
selves that we cannot bring any thing of our own side but (...) beastlynesse.
Thus ye see what we have too bear in mind. (...) in good sooth we see how
S. Paul exhorts us to come too the (...) point. Romans 9. d. 20.
Who art thou o man (says he) which stand in (...) with thy God? After he
had set down many replies which we (...) to make, he says, who art thou o
man? By the word man he (...) to make us perceive our own fraylty: Psalm. ^03.
c. 14.
for we be but worms of (...) earth and rotte^nesse. Now then, what a
malipertnesse is it too open (...) mouths to dispute with God? Is it not a
pe^uerting of the whole (...) of nature: Is it in our power too pluck the
Sun out of the (...), or too latch the moon betwixt our teeth, as they say?
much less (...) it lawful for us too contend with God, and too allege reasons
too (...) his judgments, which we cannot comprehend.

(...) are that will grant this doctrine of Predestination too be (...),
whereof S. Paul treats here: but yet they would it were so (...), as it
might never be spoken of. Yea, but they show themselves (...) be but fools
in controllyng the holy Ghost, which spoke it by (...) Prophets and Apostles,
yea and even by the mouth of Gods only (...). John. 6. g. 70.
For when our Lord Jesus intends too assure us of our (...): he sends us
too this everlasting election, and likewise when he (...) too magnify the gift
of faith, John. 10. c. ^4.
the one in the tenth of Ihon, (...) the other in the sixth. And therefore
those kind of folk come too (...) too put God too silence, and too wype the
things out of the holy (...) which are showed there. For all the whole
scripture is (...). 2. Tim. 3. d. 16.
S. Paul spoke that of the Law and the Prophets. Therefore me also may
conclude, that there is no superfluity in the Gospel, nor any thing which
serves not too good purpose, and whereby we may (...) be edifyed both in
faith and in the fear of God. But this doctrine (...) contained there, and the
holy Ghost speaks it loud and shirle. (...) Therefore they must needs be
Manichies which intend too nip and (...) the Gospel. For look what lyketh not
them, they did set it aside, (...) forged a Gospel of diverse pieces, allowing
nothing but that (...) they themselves thought good of. Now if such manner of
(...) have showed a devilish stubbornness against God, in separating (...)
things which ought too go toogither in inseperable bond, then are they
malicious and froward also, which would now a days have the doctrine of
election kept in silence. For they would ouerrule God if it were possible, and
stop his mouth as often as he utters any thing that lyketh not them. Agein, a
man may evidently see their beastlynesse, in that S. Paul had not a better
proof whereby too magnify Gods goodness, than this. Then if there were none
other reason, yet were it better that the whole world should go too confuzion,
than that this doctrine should be suppressed with silence. For is it reason
that God should set the infinite treasures of his mercies before our eyes, and
yet that they should not be spoken of, but be thrust under foot? But there
are yet two reasons mo, which show that this doctrine is most needful too
be preached, and that we reap so great profit by it, as it had bin much
better that we had never bin borne, than too be ignorant of the thing that S.
Paul shows here. For there are two things whereat we must chiefly ame,
and whereuntoo it behooves us too apply all our wits and indeuers, and they
be the very sum of all the things which God teaches us by the holy
scripture. The one is the magnifying of God as he deserves, and the other is
the assuredness of our salvation, ^om. 8. c. 15.
that we may call upon him as our father with full liberty. If we have not
these two things, woe worth us, for there is another faith nor religion in us.
Well may we talk of God, but it shall be but a leazing. As touching the first
point, I have told you already that Gods grace is not sufficiently known but
by se^ting Gods election as it were before our eyes. For put the case that God
draw all men alyke, and that such as intend too obtain salvation, must come
of their own free will and selfmouing: if it be so, then is it certain that
we deserve too be received at Gods hand, and that he should handle every man
according too his worthiness. But wherein shall Gods goodness be magnifyed?
Even in this, that he preuenteth us of his own mere free good will, and loves
us nevertheless without fynding any thing either in us or in our works why
he should love us. If this be true, then must there needs be election, so as
God must take the one sort because he thinks it good so to do, and leave the
other. Thus ye see it is a most assured point, that Gods glory does not appear
and shine forth as were requisite, except it be known that he sheddeth forth
his goodness and love where it pleases him.

I said even now that the preaching of his word is a singular benefyte too us.
And that is the cause why it is said so often in the Law and (...), that God
has not dealt so with any other nation, as he (...) the lineage of Abraham,
Deuteronomy. 4. a. 7.
in that he voutsaf^d too chooze and adopt (...) the law was a sure record. So
then the children of (...) exhorted too praise God, because he had vo^safed to
give (...) law, and in the mean while had let the poor ^entyles (...) folk
that perteyned not too him at all. But it is yet a far (...) specialler
privilege, when he makes us too fare the better (...) word. For it is
certain that our ears might be beaten (...) with the things that should be
told us, and we be never the (...) for it, until God speak to us by his
holy spirit within us. Then (...) matter God shows a dubble grace. 2. Cor. 2.
d. 16.
The one is when he (...) up men to preach the Gospel too us: for no man is
meet and (...) too do it of himself. Needs therefore must they be of Gods
(...), which do call us too him, and offer us the hope of salvation. But yet
for all that, let us mark well that we cannot believe, except (...) himself
too us by his holy spirit, and speak too our hearts (...) holy Ghost, as well
as he has spoken too our ears by the (...) of man. Esai. 53. a. 1.
And that is the cause why the Prophet Esaias says, (...) believed our
doctrine? or too whom is the arm of the Lord (...)? He shows that there is
no faith in the world, till God have (...) in men's minds and hearts by the
power of his holy (...) And for the very same cause also does our Lord Jesus
say, John. 6. c. 44.
that (...) comes too him except he be drawn by the father: but (...) has
learned of my father (says he) the same submits (...) me. Too be short,
we see manifestly that God shows (...) too us, when he voutsafeth too
inlyghten us by his holy (...) too the end we should be drawn too the faith
of his Gospel. If the same were done commonly and indifferently too all men:
yet (...) we have cause too magnify God. But now when we see that (...) are
hardened, and othersome unconstant: and that some go their (...) without taking
any profit by the things that they have heard, (...) othersome be altoogither
blockishe: it is certain that the same (...) Gods grace more apparent too us,
Act. 13. g. 48.
according as S. Luke (...), that at S. Paul's preaching, as many believed as
were (...) too salvation. Uerily the number of people was great that (...) S.
Paul's Sermon: and out of all doubt he on his side had so (...) grace, as ought
to have moved even the very stones. And yet (...), a great sort continued in
their unbelief and stubbornness, and othersome believed. Now S. Luke says
plainly that the cause thereof was not for that the one sort were more forewarde
folk than the other, or for that there was any towardness of virtue more in
the one than in the other: but for that God had foreordeyned them too
salvation. Therefore at one word, we see that all man's deserving must
cease and be laid under foot, or else God shall not have his deserved praise.
Yea and we must understand, that faith comes not of our selves: for if it
did, then should there be some worthiness in our works. True it is, that by
faith we confess that there is nothing but wretchedness in us, that we be
damned and accursed, and that we bring not aught with us but only an
acknowledgement of our sins. But yet should our faith serve for some desert,
if we had it of our own breeding. We must therefore conclude, that it is
impossible for men too believe, unless it be given them from above. And
surely S. Paul declares here a thing well worthy too be marked, when he
says, blissed be God. And for what cause? Even for enriching us in such wise
in Jesus Christ, that our life is happy and blissed. And afterward he adds,
according too his choozing of us. Is not faith comprehended among the
spiritual riches whereof S. Paul makes mention? Yis, and (which is more) it
is the chief of them. For it is by faith that we receive the holy Ghost, it
is by faith that we become patient in our adversities, H^b. 11
it is by faith that we become obedient too God, it is by faith that we be
sanctified to his service. Too be short, faith continues always chief of
the spiritual benefits that God bestows upon us. Now let us remember well
S. Paul's order. He says that God has given us faith as well as any of all
the rest, according too his choozing of us. We see then that faith depends
upon Gods election, or else we must make S. Paul a liar. And so as touching
the first point, ye see that all such as cannot abide to have predestination
plainly and openly spoken of, are deadly enemies of Gods grace, and would
deface it too the uttermost of their power. For (as I said before) the hyding
thereof were the overthrowing of all religion.

The second point is the assuredness of our Salvation. The Papists say we
must dout of it, and that we cannot come unto God otherwyze than with an
opinion that he will receive us: but too assure our selves of it, that ought
we not too do, for that were too great a presumtuousnesse. But when we pray
unto God, we must call (...), at leastwize if we be the scholars of our Lord
Jesus Christ, (...) taught us so too do. Now, do we call him father at
(...)? or are we sure of it in our selves that he is our father? If (...) is
there nothing but hypocrisy in our prayers, and the first (...) we utter
shall be a stark lie. The Papists therefore never (...) it is too pray unto
God, seeing they say that they ought not (...) themselves of their salvation.
Ephesians. 3. c. 12.
But (as we shall see in the (...) chapter specially) the scripture shows
that if we will pray too (...) ryghtly, we must have belief in Jesus Christ,
which gives us (...) and upon that trust we by and by conceive boldness.
Then (...) the world go, we must not be in a mamering nor yet dout, but (...)
be thoroughly resolved and persuaded in our selves, that God (...) us as his
children. And how may that be but by embracing (...) through faith, as he
offers it us in his Gospel, and by (...) our selves also that we be
grounded in his everlasting (...) if our faith should depend upon our selves:
surely it would (...) from us, and it might be shaken of, if it were not (...)
above. And although we be kept or preserved by faith as (...) S. Peter: 1.
Pet. ^ a. 5.
yet is it God that keeps or preserves us. Then if (...) were not grounded
upon Gods eternal election, it is (...) that Satan might pluck it from us
every minute of an hour. (...) we were too day the constantest in the world,
Luke. 2^. c. 31.
yet might we (...) too morrow. But our Lord Jesus shows us the remedy too
(...) us against all temptations, in that he says, you come not (...) of your
selves, but the heavenly father brings you too me. (...) as I have taken you
intoo my keeping, Luke. 10. ^. 32.
be no more (...), for I acknowledge you for the inheritance of God my father,
(...) that has given me the charge of you and put you into my hand, (...) than
all. We see then, that besides the setting forth of (...) glory, our
salvation also is warranted by Gods eternal (...): which ought too be
sufficient cause too move us too consider (...) at S. Paul treats of it in
this place.

True it is (as I have touched alredie) that many men starkle at it (...) they
here that God has chozen whom he thought good, and (...) all the rest. For
we see that the number of them that come unto (...) is very small: and why
then has he refuzed the rest? Uerily as (...) would say that Gods will ought
not too stand for a rule toward (...) It behooves us too mark, Psalm. 16. a.
2.
first that God is not bound at all unto any person. For had we once that
foredeele at his hand, that he were never so little beholden unto us: then we
might well go too law with hun. But forasmuch as he on his side is nothing at
all bound unto us, but we altoogither unto him: let us see now what we
shall win by our contending with him. For if we will needs constreyne God too
deal alyke with all men, he should have less liberty than mortal creatures.
If a man be rich, he may do what he lists with his own goods: if he be
liberal too some one, is it reason he should be sewed at the Law for it, and
that every man should demand the like sum of him? Behold, a man of his good
will aduanceth one whom he loves: now if all poor folk should come and
require him too do as much for them, as it were of bound dewtie, were it not a
fond thing? Uerily a man may adopt the farthest stranger in the world too be
his child and heir, Math. 5. g. 45.
and it is free for him so too do. Behold, God is liberal too all men: for he
makes his sun too shine both upon good and bad. Only he reserueth a
certain part of men on whom too bestow the privilege of adopting them too
his children. What shall we now gain by murmuring against him? If any man
say, that then he should seem too be an accepter of persons: Coloss. 3. d. 25.
No, it is not so: for he choozeth not the rich, and lets the poor go: he
choozeth not noble men and gentlemen, 1. Cor. 1. a. 26.
rather than men of no estimation and bace degree. And therefore it cannot be
said that there is any accepting of persons before God. For in choozing those
that are unworthy, he has no respect but only too his own mere goodness:
another passes he whether one be more worth than another, but he takes whom
he lists. What would we more? Then is it good reason that we should hold our
selves contented with Gods will, and bridle our selves, and let him chooze whom
he lists, because his will is the souereine rule of equity and right. Romans
3. ^. 19.
And so ye see the mouths of all the world stopped. And although the wicked
and he athenish sort do grudge and repyne at God, yea or blaspheme him for so
doing: yet is he myghtie enough too maynteyne his own righteousness and
infinite wisdom: and when they have chattered their fill, yet must they be
confounded in the end. For our part, we see what S. Paul says here: for it
is no dark doctrine when he says that God has blissed us. Uerily inasmuch
as he has inlyghtened us with the faith of the Gospel by his holy spirit, and
made us parteners of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: even thereby (says
he) has he showed that he had choozen us (...) making of the world. And
therefore let us understand, that (...) Gods grace aryght, we must (as I said
before) come too (...) and original cause, that is too wit, unto Election.

(...) have we too pass further: for too the i^tent the better too (...)
respects and woorthynesse which men might pretend, (...) we be inclyned too
chalendge always somewhat too our (...) and cannot abide too be brought to
nothing: he says, before (...) of the world. So then forasmuchas through such
(...) we think our selves too have that which we have not: it was (...) that
S. Paul should here beat down all such fantastical (...). And for that
cause he says we could put our selves (...) when we were not yet borne. Nay
verily, God choze us before (...) taking of the world: and what could we then
bring unto him? In (...) the Papists have a subtle shift in this behalf: for
they say that God chaze such unto salvation, as had not yet deserved it, but
yet he (...) such as he foresawe should deserve it. Thus confess they (...)
^eseruing at all went before election, either in order or in (...) but that God
(as too whom all things are open) knew who (...) be worthy of it. After
that manner do the Papists speak of it (...) they deny not Gods election. And
soothly, to show that these (...) which nowadayes cannot abide too have it
spoken of, (...) devils incarnate, and maynteyne a more outrageous and (...)
wickedness than the Papists do: we must note that the (...) God to have
chozen and predestined whom he thought (...) before the making of the world.
They stand unto that: (...) thing these devils deny, and would have Gods
majesty utterly (...), by ouerthyowing his ordinance after that manner. The
(...) leastwyze such of them as have walked vprightest, and I speak (...) of
the very Monks and Freers which are called school divines) (...) yet further,
that this election of Gods is free, and that he choze (...) man for any other
respect, than for that it pleased himself: but (...) and by after, they mingle
and turmoyle al: for they say that when (...) choze whom he listed, he did it
too make them deserve it. And (...) do they ground all their merits, insomuch
as they (...) that men may win the kingdom of heaven by their own (...) They
grant in deed that as touching election, it is a free gift: (...) ^lwayes
they return too their fantastical surmyze, that God (...) who should do
good. But how should he foresee that which could not be? For we know that
all Adams offspring is corrupted, and that we have not the skill too think one
good thought of doing well, and much less therefore are able too do well in
deed. Although God should tarry for us a hundred thousand years, if we could
continue so long in the world: yet is it certain that we should never come
unto him, nor do any thing else than increase the mischief continually too
our own condemnation. Too be short, the longer that men ^yue in the world,
the deeper do they plundge themselves in their damnation. And therefore God
could not foresee the thing, which was not in us, before he himself did put it
intoo us. How then come we unto God? How obey we him? How have we a quiet
mind that yields it self according too his faith? All these things come of
him. And so it follows that he is feign too do all himself. Wherefore let us
consider, that in saying that God choze us before the creation of the world, S.
Paul presuppozeth the thing that is true: namely that God could not see any
thing in us, save the evil that was there: for there was not one drop of
goodness for him too find. So then, seying he has chozen us, ye see it is a
very manifest record of his free goodness. And for the same cause, Romans 9. ^
11.
in the nynth too the Romans where he speaks of the two twins Jacob and
Esawe, at such time as they were yet in their moothers womb, before they had
done either good or evil, too the intent that all should come only of the
caller, and not of the worker: it is said, that the elder should serve the
younger. We see then how S. Paul declares there more at large, the thing that
he touches here briefly: that is too wit, that whereas God choze us before
the creation of the world, therein he shows sufficiently, that one man is not
more worthy or excellent than another, that he had not respect too any
deserving. Therefore seeing that the putting of difference between Jacob and
Esawe, was before they had done either good or evil: it came not of the
works, but of the caller. Then must all praise be yielded unto God, and
nothing at all be reserved too man. And so ye see yet once ageine what we
have too mark here, when as S. Paul says that we were chozen before the
making of the world.

He confirms the thing yet better in that he says, that the same was done
in Jesus Christ. If we had bin chozen in our selves, it might be said, that
God had found in us some secret virtue unknown too men. But seeing that he has
chozen us (that is too say, (...) (...) our selves: what shall we reply too
that? If I do a man (...) because I love him. And if the cause of my love be
sought (...) be for that we be like of conditions, or else for some (...).
But we must not imagine any lykelinesse in God, and (...) us expressly here:
for S. Paul says that we were (...) Christ. Had God then an eye unto us
when he voutsafed (...)? No: for then should he have utterly abhorred us. It is
(...) in respect of our miseries he had pity and compassion upon (...) us:
but that was because he had loved us already in our (...) Christ. Then must God
needs have had his pattern (...) glass before him wherein too behold us, that
is too say, he (...) have looked upon our Lord Jesus Christ, before he could
(...) us and call us. And so, too be short, after S. Paul has (...) we
could not bring any thing unto God, but that he (...) of his own free
goodness, in choozing us before the creation of (...) he adds yet a more
certeiner proof: namely that he did (...) lord Jesus Christ, who is as it were
the true book of (...) Gods voutsafyng to chooze us, that is to wit, his
voutsafyng (...) it before all euerlastingnesse, was as it were a registring of
us (...) of Record. And the holy scripture calls Gods election (...) of Life.
As I said before, Jesus Christ serves for a register: (...) whom we be
ingraued, and in whom God acknowledges (...) children. Seeing then that God had
an eye unto us in the (...) of Jesus Christ: it follows that he fyndeth not
any thing in (...) we might lay before him, too cause him too elect us. This
(...) is the thing that we have too remember further.

(...) afterward, that it is too the end we should be pure (...) before God,
namely in Love. This word Love (...) referred unto God: as if it were said,
that we shall find (...) reason why God voutsafed too take us for his
children, but (...) own free love. Or else (as it is very like) S. Paul
(...) what the true soundness and perfection of the faithful is: (...) too
walk in all righteousness before God. We cannot lay (...) the whole as now,
but it shall suffyze too tell breefly whertoo (...) had an eye. For he shows
here that although Gods (...) free, and do beat down and put away all the
worthiness, (...), and vertewes of men: yet notwithstanding it serves not to
(...) leave too do evil and too lead a disordered life, or too run at
rouers, but rather too withdraw us from the evil wherein we were plundged. For
naturally we can do nothing e^se but provoke Gods wrath, wickedness will
always reign in us, and we be hild down under the bonds and tyranny of
Satan. God therefore must be feign too work, and too change us: for all
goodness comes of his election, says S. Paul. Ye see then that the thing
wheruntoo he meant too bring the faithful, was to make them know, that like as
God choze them of his own free goodness: so he gives them not leave too
yield themselves to naughtiness, but intends too keep and preserve them
vndest^ed too himself. For Gods chozing of us and his calling of us
therwithall unto holiness, are things matched ins^perably together: ^ Thessalonians.
4. a. 7.
accordingly also as S. Paul says in another text, that we be not called to
vncle^enesse and f^^thinesse, but to be dedicated too God in all godliness and
holiness. Now forasmuch as we cannot lay forth the whole at this time, let us
look too make our profit of this Lesson. And seeing we be now about too
prepare our selves to the receiving of our Lord Jesus Christ's supper, which is
a pawn unto us as well of our election as of the hope of our salvation, and
of all the spiri^uall benefyts that come forth of this welspring and fountain
of Gods free goodness: let us consider that there he utters his riches unto
us, not too the end that we should abuse them, but rather of purpose too be
glorified for them at our hands, not only with our mouths, but also with our
whole lives. And forasmuchas we hold all things of him: let us also learn too
be his, and too give over our selves too the obeying of him, that he may enjoy
us quietly. And let us always shoot at this mark, namely too get a sure
warrant that he takes and auoweth us for his children, by bearing his marks,
and by showing in bery deed that we be rightly governed by his holy spirit,
in calling upon him as our father. Thus ye see in effect what we have too
mark in this text till the residew may follow.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God with acknowledgme^t
of our faults, praying him too make us feel them in such wise, as we may
continually profit in his fear, and be strengthened more and more in the same:
and in the mean while so to bear with our weakness, as we may always enjoy
his grace, even till he have set us in possession of all things, at such time
as he shall have done away our sins, and blotted them quite out for our Lord
Jesus Christ's ^ake. And salet us all say, Almighty God heavenly father. etc.

The third Sermon upon the first Chapter.
(...) has choozen us in Christ, before the foundation of the (...): too the
end we should be holy and unblameable (...) him, in Love.

(...) has predestined us too adopt us too himself by (...) Christ,
according too the good pleasure of his will.

(...) the praise of the glory of his grace, vvherethrough he (...) accepted us
in his well-beloved.


I Began too show you this morning that it is not lawful for us too take
liberty too loocenesse, under color that God has chozen us before the making
of the world: as though it were meet for us too give over our selves too all
naughtiness, because we cannot perish, seeing that God has taken us for his
children. Math. 16. a. 6.
For we must not put the things a sunder which he has (...) toogither. Seeing
then that he has chozen us too be holy, (...) in pureness of life: our
election must be as a root that (...) good fruits. For so long as God lettes
us alone in our own (...) we can do nothing but all manner of naughtiness,
because (...) so great corruption and frowardness in ma^^es nature, that (...)
they think or do, is contrary too Gods righteousness. (...) there is none
other shift but too be changed by God. And (...) ^ommeth this change, but
only of the grace that we spoke (...) for that he did elect and chooze us for
his children, before (...) borne intoo the world? Herewithall we have too
mark (...), that God lets his choozen ones go for a time, so as they (...)
too be strayd away and utterly lost, and yet brings them home (...) too his
flock when it pleases him. And that serves too (...) the more, and too make
his goodness and mercy so much the (...) known too the whole world. If God
should make all his (...) too walk in perfectness of conversation even from
their (...): it should not be so well discerned, that the same (...) of the
grace of his holy spirit. But when wretched folk that lived loo^ely, and were
given too all naughtiness for a time, are quite changed: that cannot come too
pass without Gods woorking and putting too of his hand. Thus ye see that the
cause why God delayeth the calling of those whom he had chozen, is (say I) too
touch them too the quick by his holy spirit, that he may make them too walk
in his obedience. For when we see them reformed upon the suddayne, and beyond
the common expectation and opinion of men: therein we perceive that God has
uttered his power in them, as I said before. And agein on the other part, every
of us is convicted by experience, that we be beholden too God for all the
good that is in us. For when we be naturally inclyned too any vice, and
afterward the same is corrected: we perceive well that God has looked
mercifully upon us. Ye perceive then that we have so much the more cause too
humble us, seeing we were in the way of perdition, till he had drawn us out of
it. And it stands us in hand too mark that well: For there are some
fantastical heads, which imagine that God does so guide his chozen ones by
his holy spirit, that they be sanctified aforehand, eue^ from the time that
they be borne intoo the world, as soon as they come out of their moothers
womb: but the contrary appears. And in good sooth we see how S. Paul in
another text speaking too the faithful, Romans 1. d. 29.
says, some of you were plundged in covetousness, some were given too
cruelty, some were scorners, some were whoremongers and looee lyuers, and
othersome were gluttons and drunkardes: and too be short, ye were full of all
vnclenesse: but God having changed you, and made you clean from such
filthiness and infection, has dedicated you too himself. Agein he says too
the Romans, you ^ught too be ashamed of the life which you led before he
drew you too himself. So then, whereas it is said in this text, that God
choze his servants to make them walk in holiness of life: it is not meant
that he is bound too govern them with his holy spirit eue^ from their
chyldhood forth. For (as I have said already) experience shows that he lets
them run astray, till convenient time be come for too call them. But yet
must we always bear in mind, that Gods choozing of us, was too the end too
call us too holiness of life. For if he should let us alone still as wretched
castawayes: surely we could do nothing but all manner of naughtiness,
according too the corruption that is in us. The good then proceeds of his
free bestowed mercy, which he has used already toward us before we were
borne, yea (...) the world was made. Thus ye see in effect what we have (...)
this streyne. And so the blasphemies of such as would (...) praise are
repressed, which make a jar, and as it were (...) Gods free election, and
indeuer of dooyng well. (...), Has God chozen us? Then let every of us do
what (...) we cannot petishe. And what should we pass of (...) good or
evil, seying that our salvation is grounded upon (...) grace, and not upon
any vertew. The answer (...) easy: namely that if Gods election were not,
look (...) thoughts and appetites there are in us, so many (...) should there
be against all ryg^^uousnesse: for we tend all (...) evil, and we be not
only inclyned too it, but we be as it (...) hot with it, and we run too it
with frentik (...) cause the devil possesses all such as are not reformed by
(...) spirit. And so we must needs conclude, that our giving (...) too do
good, is for that God guydeth and leads us (...) his holy spirit, and all
because of his election. (...) erewhyle) we must not separate the things that
God (...) toogither. For we be not chozen too take leave too do (...) list,
but too show by our deeds that God has adopted us (...) children, and taken
us intoo his keeping, too the intent too (...) by his holy spirit, and too
knit us too himself in all (...) ryghtuousnesse.

(...) let us mark also, that although God have reformed us, (...) in the good
way, and made us too feel that he has (...) us alredie, to subdew us to his
word and to make us serve (...) in all things: yet does it not therefore follow,
that we be (...) at the first day, no nor yet in all our whole lyfetyme. (...)
says not that God brings his chozen and faithful ones (...) point of
perfection, (...) he says that he draws them (...) And so are we but in the
way thitherward even until our (...) Therefore as long as we live in this
world, let us learn too (...) go foreward more and more, assuring ourselves
that there is (...) somewhat amiss in us. For they that imagine any (...) are
as good as bewitched with hippocrisie and pride, or (...) no feeling nor fear
of God in them, but mock him (...) face. For he that examineth himself, shall
always find (...) of vices, as he shall be ashamed of them, if he consider them
well. They then which say that we can come too any perfection while we dwell
in this mortal body, do well show that either they be utterly blinded with
diuelishe pride, or else that they be (...) folk void of all religion and
godliness. As for our part, (...) us mark (as I touched before) that God has
chozen us too the (...) we* should be blameless: Howbeeit, that we be not
able too be so, Romans 7. d. 24.
till we be quyte r^d of all our infirmities, and departed (...) of this
prison of sin, wherein we be hild fast as now. And therefore when we feel
any vices in us, let us fight manfully against them, and not be out of heart,
as though we were not Gods children, because we be not yet faultlesse before
him, but that our sins are always before our eyes, which make us guilty.
Although then that we find never so many miseries in ourselves too thrust us
out of the way* Yet let us go on still, assuring our selves that as long as we
live here beneath upon the earth, our way is never at an end, but we (...)
always go still forewarde, and we can never come too our resting place. Lo
how the faithful ought too harten and strengthen themselves, although they be
not perfect. And let the same also cause (...) too gro^e and sigh under the
burden which we be driven too feel. For the perfection of the faithful and
of Gods children, is too acknowledge their own weakness, and too pray God not
only too amend all their misdooings, but also too bear with them of his
infinite goodness, and not too call them too account with extremity and
rigor. Ye see then that the thing whereuntoo we must resort for succor, is
Gods mercy, whereby he covers and buryeth all our sins, because we have
not yet atteyned too the mark whereunto he calls us, that is too wit, too a
holy and faultlesse life. But howsoever the world go with us, let us go
foreward still, and take good heed that (...) step not out of the right way.

If the word Love be referred too men, then S. Paul meant too betoken the
true right^^^^ousnesse of Christians, that is too wit, to deal faithfully and
uprightly. For we know that the hypocrites would content God with ceremonies
and Gewgawes, as men term them: and in the mean while some of them shall be
given too catching and snatching: some shall be full of envy, malice, cruelty
and treason: some (...) drunkard^, and othersome shall be whoremongers and looce
(...) themselves the bridle too all naughtiness. And yet for all (...) al is
safe, if they may make a few moppes and mowes, (...) some countenance of
holiness by using a few (...) Paul too cut of all such stuff, says that
we must walk in (...) is the bond of perfection and the fulfilling of the
Law) if (...) too have our life allowed of God. And so ye see what we (...)
mark upon that strey ne.

(...) let us mark, that in this place S. Paul exhorts (...) acknowledge
our selves beholden to God for all the vertew and (...) that is in us. As for
example, if we have any good zeal, if (...) against our own vices, or if we
walk in the obedience of (...) whence comes it? Even of this welspring, that
he purposed (...) is to wit, that he choze us aforehand. Then let us consider,
(...) praise thereof is dew unto him, and let us not defraud him of (...). For
although we lived as perfectly as Angels: yet if we (...) fond as too think
that the same comes of our own free (...) selfmouing: we miss the chief
point of all. For wheretoo (...) our good works, but to glorify God withal?
And if we take (...) spring of our selves, we see they be marred by so
dooyng, (...) turned intoo vices, so as they be naught else than stark (...)
Ye see then that the thing whereat S. Paul amed in this (...) too bring us
always back too Gods free election, that we (...) know how all goodness
depends theruppon.

(...) adds immediately that we be predestined in adoption in (...) through
Jesus Christ, according too the good pleasure of (...) will. Whereas he says
that God has predestined us in (...): it is too show that if we be Gods
children, it is not (...) nature, but through his only grace. Now, this only
grace (...) respect of any thing that God foresawe in us (as I touched (...):)
but because he had erst marked us out and (...) too such adoption, yea even in
such wise as the cause thereof is (...) be sought elsewhere than in himself.
And that is the cause why (...) adds immediately, that he did it in himself,
and according (...) the good pleasure of his own will. Also he repeteth the
same (...) that I declared this forenoone, namely that all was done in (...)
Christ. Ye see therefore that the thing which we have too mark (...)
sentence, is, that none other cause makes us Gods children, (...) only his
choozing of us in himself. For we have no such (...) by birth or inheritance,
another comes it of flesh and blud, (...) said in the first chapter of S.
John: insomuch that all that ever can be sought in our our own selves, is
utterly excluded and abolished. And that is too show us, that if men be let
alone in their former plyght, they have no intercommoning at all with God, but
are utterly cut off from his kingdom. Genesis 1. c. 26.
True it is that our first father Adam was created after the image of God, and
that he was excellent in his first state: but after the coming in of sin,
we were all utterly forlorn. Insomuch that even Adam had not any stay of
himself, and his free will that was given him, served him too none other
purpose, but too make him the more vnexcuzable: For he fell wilfully and
through his ow^e malice. But hereby we see what manner of constancy he had in
him, since he was no sooner made, but he by and by fell and drew us down intoo
his fall with him. ^ph. 2. ^. 3.
Then as now we be all of us borne the children of wrath, and are cursed of
God.

And so, as long as we abide in our former state and plyght, there is nothing
but endless death in us. Therefore God must be feign too call us home to him.
For are we able too purchase such prerogative? Where is the goold or silver
too buy it withal? W^ere are the vertewes wherewith to recompense God for so
great and excellent a privilege? John. 1. ^. 23.
Too be short (as is said alredie upon this sentence) it comes another of
flesh nor of blud, that is too say, it comes not of any thing that we can
find in this world: but alonly of Gods adoption. For the word which S. Paul
uses, betokens an appoynting of children: like as when a man adopteth a
child, he choozeth him too be his heir, and all the goods that he has
afterward, do pass under that title. Even so are we heirs of the heavenly
life, because God has adopted and chozen us for his children. Yea, but S.
Paul is not contented too have magnifyed Gods grace so far forth: but he
says moreover, that God had also predestined us, and appointed the thing
aforehand. We see the^ that S. Paul g^t^ereth toogither all the things that
may beat down the fond imaginations, which we might conceive of bringing
aught unto God, or of auauncing our selves toward him, too make our selves
acceptable unto him. Therefore all such things mu^t be laid awater, so as
Gods only grace may be acknowledged in that behalf. And that also is the
cause why he repeteth, through Jesus Christ. Then if it be demanded why and
how we be predestined of God too be his children: it is because he
voutsafed too look upon us in Christ: for (as I have said before) he is as it
were the register, wherein we (...) too atteine too the heritage of life and
salvation. For (...) pity our miseries: yet should we always be hateful in
his (...) Jesus Christ came not before him, because that all of us (...)
descended of Adam, are all of one mould and making, and (...) none better than
other among us. Now then the one sort (...): and why is that, but because God
looking upon them (...) does mislyke them? But he choozeth us in our Lord
(...) Christ, and looks upon us there as in a glass that he lyketh (...).
And so ye see whereof the difference proceeds. (...) the thing yet better,
he says that Gods choozing of us (...) himself. True it is that God does all
good of himself. But (...) S. Paul meant too set out the thing which is not
seen in all the (...) works of God: that is to wit, that none other cause
moved (...) chooze us, than his own will. S. Paul therefore takes (...) all
respects, when he says that God choze us in himself. If he (...) any desert
or worthiness, if he had found any disposition (...) if he had found any
goodness or vertew, or (too be (...) had found any one drop of aught that he
might like and (...) he had not chozen us in himself, but we our selves
should (...) some partnership with him. Seeing then that S. Paul (...) all
things in Gods purpose which belong too our salvation, (...) that our election
also is shet up there: it is all one as if he (...) say, that men do fowly
ouershoote themselves, when they take (...) them too be any thing worth, or
too have bin furtherers or (...) of themselves too the receiving of such grace.
Therefore (...) be carried up aloft, if we will know whereupon our (...)
grounded, and what is the very original welspring and the (...) only cause of
the same. And so ye see what is meant by this (...), that God did it in
himself.

^ut S. Paul adds yet further, according too the good pleasure (...) own
will. If he had set down no more but only the word (...), it had bin
enough: accordingly as we have seen heertoofore, and (...) declared upon
Sunday last, that S. Paul was chozen (...) too the will of God. And why so?
Because he was another fit (...) to have such a prerogative, but that it pleased
god to choze (...). S. Paul therefore braggeth not that he had gotten the (...)
but with all myldnesse acknowledges it too be the free gift of (...). Thus
ye see what the word Will betokens, and that not in any one place only, but
throughout all the whole holy scripture. Therefore whenever Gods will is
mentioned, it is to show that men cannot bring ought of their own.
Nevertheless S. Paul sets down here a word of overplus, and says,
according too the good pleasure. As if he had said, truly seeing that Gods will
is the cause of our salvation, we should not fleet too and froo, and seek
other reasons and means thereof: Howbeit forasmuch as men are so unthankful
and malicious, that they would always darken Gods glory: and so puffed up with
fond ouerweening, that they continually chalendge more too themselves, tha^
belongs unto them: therefore if they be not sufficiently persuaded of Gods
will, let them understand that it comes of the good pleasure of his will: that
is too say, of a free inclined will which depends not upon any other thing
(than it self,) nor has any respect one way or other, but vou^safeth too
chooze us freely, because it lyketh and ly^^eth so too d^o. Now then we see
that such as search out the cause why God has chozen us, woold (if it lay in
them) overthrow his everlasting ordinance: for the one is inseperable from the
other. If God have chozen us as it is showed us here: then can nothing hang
upon our deserts, nor upon aught that we might have too comme, but God
wrought it according too his own free inclyned will, and found not any other
reason (to move him thereto) than his own good pleasure. If any me^ think this
to be strange geere, it is because they would be haylefellow with God. And
heerin appears their diulish malapertnesse, that they cannot suffer God to
rain freely, as the thing that he lyketh might be received as good, just, and
ryghtfull, without geynsaying. But let such folk bark like dogs as much as
they list, yet is this sentence definiti^e unable too be repealed, which the
holy Ghost has uttered here by the mouth of S. Paul: namely that it is not
for us to search any further cause of our election, than the good pleasure of
God: that is to say, than his own free inclyned will, whereby he has choze^ us,
though we were not worthy in none other respect than for that he listed too
say, so it pleases me. And so ye see in effect what we have too gather upon
those words of S. Paul's.

Now he says immediately, that it is too the praise of the glory of his
grace. Here he shows the final cause that God looked at in c^^zing of us:
namly that his grace might be praised by it, and that not after a common and
ordinary manner, but with a certain glory: for he has cuppled those two
things together, to the intent we should (...) when we see how God has drawn
us out of the bottom (...) open us the gate of his kingdom, and too call us
too the (...) salvation. Here we see yet again the thing that I treated
(...): namely that all such as woold put away Gods (...), or are loath too
here it spoken of, do therein show (...) be mortal enemies of Gods praise.
Too their seeming (...) and vanishes away. Yea, but who is the competent judge
(...) they themselves wyzer than God, who has spoken the (...) too that which
they allege? O (say they) that were the (...) to open the mouths of many me^
to blaspheme God. (...) the wicked, it is certain that they will always find
whereat to (...) they cannot be let so too do. Romans 3. a. 4.
But yet for all that God shall (...) wherewith to justify himself, Psalm. 51. a.
6.
and all they that do so spyte (...) his righteousness, shall be confounded.
Howsoever the case (...), it is not without cause said here, that God is then
dewly glorified* (...) his praise maynteyned, when we acknowledge that he has
(...) whom he listed, and that there is none other cause of (...) between man
and man (than only his will:) so that they who^ (...) do perish, because they
be woorthye of it, and they (...) calls too salvation must not seek the
cause thereof, elsewhere (...) the said free bestowed adoption.

(...) by those two words, S. Paul meant also too stir (...) a greater and
feruenter earnestness of praising God. For it (...) enough for us too confess
coldly, that our salvation springs of (...) good will: but we must be as it
were inflamed too (...) selves wholly too his praise, as if we were wholly
wedded to (...) as S. Peter shows, 1. Pet. 2. b. 7.
that forasmuch as we be drawn (...) darkness of death, it is good reason
that we should be (...) the unutterable praises of God. Psalm. 107.
And hereby he does us too (...), that when the faithful have streyned
themselves too the (...), Luke. 17. b. 10.
too discharge themselves in praising Gods goodness: yet (...) never compass
it, because it is a thing incomprehensible. (...) well therefore what we have
too bear in mind. And so, upon (...) or grace whereof he speaks, it behooves
us too gather (...), shall never yield God his dew glory, till they be utterly
(...), so as there remains not any thing at all in them for too glory (...)
us put the ca^e that Gods election were never thought of: (...) he therefore
cease too be praised? No: but he should have some piece of his praise still.
For if men should say no more but that God causes his daysunne too shine upon
them, Math. 5. g. 45.
that were a cause too praise him. And when we open our eyes too look upward
and downwarsd upon the wonderful works that he shows us, the same is a
large provocation too exercise us in his praise all our life long. Moreover,
when his Gospel is preached unto us, there also we have whereof too praise
him, though no mention at all be made of his election: I say there is enough
as in respect of us, but then should he be robbed of his chief pra^se, and
we should yield him but a piece of that which is dew to him. And why so? For
the faithful should think that they have faith of their own selfmouing and
free inclyned will. I told you this morning, that faith is a fruit of
election. For there is none other odds between us and the unbelievers, but
that God reached us his hand, and drew us too him by a secret mean, at such
time as we turned our backs upon him, and were strangers too him. Romans 5.
b. 10.
Too be short, it is not for naught that S. Paul says here, that Gods
praise shall never be glorified as it ought too be, till we acknowledge his
election too be the cause of all the benefits which he bestows upon us,
and that if he of his infinite merry adopted us not of set purpose from
everlasting, we should have a piece of the praise too our selves which is dew
unto him. And so should God be diminished and abridged of so much of his
right. Too be short, we see well enough how it is said here, that men must
be utterly abaced, too the end that God may have his right, and no man be
made copartener with him, but all men confess that he is both the beginner and
the accomplisher of our salvation.

Also we must mark well how S. Paul adds, that of his own grace he has
accepted us in his well-beloved. By this he utters yet much better, why our
salvation is grounded upon Gods mere election and free bestowed goodness. For
men will never give over their foolish ouerweening, if they be not so
vanguished as they have not one word more too reply. S. Paul therefore too
bring us too such reason, tells us that we be damned and lost in our
selves. Now when such a thunder bolt lights upon our heads, it is not for
us too stand checking any more. Then if men will be so foolish as still too
hunt about with wyndlasses too have somewhat always belonging and reserved too
themselves besides the only grace of God: there needs no more but this
saying too turn them from it, namely that (...) not in Gods favor, till we
were in Jesus Christ, because (...) damned and accursed in our own selves.
This matter (...) declared already, if we were not ouer^^owe in (...) thing
that is so needful, and which ought too be so clear (...) And in good sooth,
even experience ought too teach us in (...). And surely if hypocrisy blinded
us not too much, (...) well perceive that there is nothing but wickedness
(...) Gods wrath would strike us in such fear, that we should (...) wits
end with it. But God must be feign too compel us (...) by strong hand, or
else we cannot find in our hearts too (...) all praise unto him. Therefore
let us mark well what is (...) this speech, where it is said that we were
taken too favor (...) Christ, Math. 17. a. 5.
because he is the well-beloved. And why is Jesus (...) Gods well-beloved,
according as he is termed in the xvii. (...), and in other places, and also is
showed too be so in the (...)? Esai. 43. a. 4.
Thereby it is showed us, that God does justly hate (...) us, so long as we
abide in our own natural plyght. For (...) were not peculiar too Jesus
Christ, then was it said in (...) is my well-beloved son in whom I am well
pleased. Luke. 3. f. 22.
But (...) too Jesus Christ, then can none other creature claim (...) that
although. God love his Angels, yet can they not be (...) beloved of him, but
by the means of Jesus Christ. And as (...) is a far other respect. For (as I
have said already) we (...), and Jesus Christ is the mediator or spokesman too
set (...) at one with God, insomuch that there should be no (...) constancy
in them, Coloss. 1. c. 20.
if they were not vphild by him. And (...) their righteousness should not be
perfect, but that they (...) and chozen in him. Let that serve for one point.

(...) for us, seeing we be estraunged from God through sin: he (...) take
us as his enemies, and be an adversary too us. (...) therefore is the only
well-beloved among men: and as for (...) of us, God utterly mis^yketh and
disclaymeth us, yea even (...), G^n. 6. b. 7.
that he says he repents him that he made man. Which (...) of his imports
that we be not worthy too be of the (...) Asses, Dogs, and other
beasts. For they continue still Gods (...) in the same plyght that he made
them: but we be so leawd (...), that we deserve too be razed out, and too
have our (...) cursed and hateful before God. Now let us go brag and boast
and seek arms too innoble our selves: for we see how the holy Ghost
disgradeth all such as think themselves too be aught worth. Wherefore let us
consider that if we be enemies unto God, we be in woorser taking than if
we had never bin created.

Heeruppon S. Paul tells us, that God has accepted us in his well-beloved.
Seeing then that our Lord Jesus Christ is received of God his father too be the
beloved, not only in his own person, but also in respect of the love that is
extended too all the members of his body: by that means we be called home
agein, and God imbraceth us for his children, whereas erst we were his enemies
and utterly hated of him. But howsoever the world go, we must always come
back too the election that we have spoken of before. For the grace that is
communicated too us by our Lord Jesus Christ, does issewe likewise out of the
same spring. Theruppon going foreward with the matter that I have touched
alredie, he shows us how great need we have too be well-beloved in Jesus
Christ. For if it were not proved too our faces, we woold never grant (I
mean unfeignedly) that we be beholden too God for all things. For we be
always laboring too advance our selves some way or other, and every of us
seeks how he may reserve somewhat too himself, though it be but the
mountenance of a pinnes point. But contrariwyze S. Paul tells us, that God
must be feign too love us out of our selves, and that if he like well of us, it
must not be in respect of our own selves. And why? For we be prisoners and
bonds^aues of sin, we be hild down under the yoke and tyranny of Satan, and
finally we be shet up in the bondage of death, till we be raunsomed by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Now then we see that the sum of this lesson is, that men
are admonished too depart out of themsel^es, and too seek their salvation in
Gods only goodness, even by holding the mean that is showed us here, which
is too resort too our Lord Jesus Christ. For there are two evil extremities
whereof we must beware. Math. 8. ^. 8.
The one is, that in coming too our Lord Jesus Christ, we must not imagine
that there is any woorthynesse in us, why he should make us partakers of his
benefytes. And how may that vice be corrected? Even by being led too Gods free
election. For the very cause why men presume so much upon their own free
will, and the very ground also whereon they build the opinion which they have
conceived of their own deserts and worthiness, is that they know not how
they be nothing in any other respect, than for that God has accepted them of
his own mere free goodness, because he had chozen them alredie in his own
everlasting purpose. Therefore we cannot by any means father the beginning of
our salvation upon God, except we confess that which is showed us here,
namely that we were utterly damned and accursed at such time as he adopted us,
and that the very original cause of his adopting of us, is for that he had
predestined us before hand, yea, even before the making of the world. Mark
that for one point. The other evil extremity whereof we must likewyze
beware, is speculation. Many fantastical folk will say, As for me I shall
never know whether God has chozen me or no, and therefore I must be feign
too abide still in my destruction. Yea, but that is for want of coming too
Jesus Christ. How know we that God has chozen us before the making of the
world? By believing in Jesus Christ. I said heretofore that faith sprinketh of
election, and is the fruit of it, which shows that the root is hidden
within. He then that believes, is thereby assured that God has wrought in him:
and faith is as it were the copy or counterpane which God delivers us of the
original register of our adoption. God has his everlasting purpose or
determination, and that he keeps always too himself as a chief president
or original record, whereof he gives us a copy by faith. I speak here
after the manner of men, for we know that God uses another paper nor
parchment too ingroce us in: and I have told you already, that too speak
properly, the register wherein we be enrolled, is our Lord Jesus Christ.
Nevertheless God reserueth too himself the knowledge of our election, as a
Prince would do an original President, Register, or Record: but yet he gives
us copies or counterpanes of it, autenticall enough, in that he imprinteth it
in our hearts by his holy spirit, that we be his children. Ye see then that
the faith which we have in our Lord Jesus Christ, is enough too warrant us our
election: and therefore what seek we more? I told you even now that Jesus
Christ is the looking glass wherein God beholds us, when it is his will to
like well of us. Likewise also on our side he is the glass wheruppon we must
cast our eyes and looks, when we mind too come too the knowledge of our
election. John. 1. b. 12.
For whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, 1. John. 5. c. 15.
is Gods child, and consequently his heir, as I have declared before. Then
does it follow, that if we have faith, we be also adopted. For wherefore
does God give us faith? Even because he choze us before the creation of the
world. This therefore is an infastible order, that inasmuch as the faithful
receive Gods grace and embrace his mercy, holding Jesus Christ for their head,
too the intent too obtain salvation by his means: they know assuredly that
God has adopted them. True it is that election is of it self secret: it is
so deep and hidden a determination, as it beh^ueth us to honor it. Yet
notwithstanding God shows it too us so farrefoorth as is requisite, and as he
knows it too be for our benefit and welfare: and that does he when he
inlyghteneth us with the belief of his Gospel. Thus ye see why that after S.
Paul had spoken of Gods everlasting election, he sets forth Jesus Christ,
as the party too whom we must resort, too be assured that God loves us and
auoweth us for his children, and consequently that he had adopted us before we
knew him, yea and before the world was made.

Moreover we have to gather upon this sentence that the doctrine of
predestination serves not too carry us away intoo wandering speculations: but
to beat down al pride in us, and the fond opinion which we conceive always
of our own worthiness and deseruings: and too show that God has such free
power, priuiledg, and souereyn dominion over us, that he may refuze whom he
lists, and chooze whom he lists: and that by that means we be led too
gloryfye him, and therewith too acknowledge that his choozing of us is in Jesus
Christ, too the end we should be hild fast under the faith of his Gospel.
For if we be his members and take him for our head, according too the
covenant and holy union that is betwixt him and us, which can never be broken
so long as we believe his Gospel: we must repair too him too be made sure
of our salvation, because we see and feel by experience, that God had adopted
and chozen us, and that he presently calls us, and tells us that the
assurance which he has given us and daily gives us by his Gospel, namely
that he will be our father, and specially his ingrauing of it in our hearts by
his holy spirit, is no deceytfull thing. For the Gospel may well be preached
too all men, yea even too the castawayes: but yet for all that God is not so
graciouse too them, as too touch them too the quick. Therefore when we have
Gods adoption engraven in our hearts, then (as shall be declared further
herafter) we have a good and vndeceyuable gage, that God will guide us unto
the end, and that since he has begun too lead us intoo the way of salvation,
he will bring us too the perfection wheruntoo he calls us, verily because
that without him we could not continue so much as one day.

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us perceive them more and
more, that being utterly ashamed of them, we may hate our vices, and al our
whole life, with the naughtiness and frowardness thereof, and resort to him
who alonly is able to remedy the same, and not swerve one way or other from
him, as he communicates himself too us in our Lord Jesus Christ: but keep
on right forth too him, acknowledging that as we be chosen in him, so also we
be mainteyned and preserved for his sake, and that he will utter his power
more and more in us, until we have finished our race, and be come to the
heavenly heritage, wheruntoo we be going: beseechyng him that although we be
yet far from it, yet he will voutsafe too give us a stedie and invincible
strength to hold out continually, till we have fully renounced the world, and
being quyte consumed in our selves, be so renewed in the image of God, as the
same may shine perfectly in us, until we be made parttakers of the glorious
immortality, which he has bought dearly for us. That it may please him too
grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people and nations. etc.

The fourth Sermon upon the first Chapter.
God has accepted us in his well-beloved.

7. By whose blud we have redemption, that is too wit, forgiveness of
sins, according too the richesse of his grace.

8. Whereof he has sheaded out abundance upon us in all wisdom and
understanding,

9. By making us too know the secret of his will, (according too his good
pleasure which he purpozed in himself.

10. Too the intent too deal it forth when the time were full come,) that is
too wit, too gather all things toogither by Christ, as well the things in
heaven, as the things on earth, in the selfsame.


I Have declared alredie that we cannot be beloved of God, but by the means
of his only son. For if the Angels of heaven be not worthy too be taken
for Gods children, but by the means of a head and mediator: what shall become
of us that cease not too provoke Gods wrath daily by our wicked doings, as
folk that do in deed fight against him? God then must be feign too look
upon us in the person of his only son, or else he must needs hate us and
abhor us. ^sai. 59. ^. 2.
Too be short, our sins do set God and us so far at odds, that we
cannot so soon come toward him, but by and by we feel his majesty utterly
against us, and as it were armed too put us too utter confuzion. But now
remains too see, how God receives us intoo his favor by means of our Lord
Jesus Christ. That is the thing which Saint Paul means in adding, that in
him we have redemption through his blud, that is too wit, forgiveness of
our sins, according too the riches of Gods grace Here we be first of all
done too understand, that the enmity which God bears us, is not in respect
of our nature, but in respect of our corruption. I say, it is not in respect of
nature: for as in respect that God has creased us, it is certain that he
cannot hate us. But inasmuch as mankind is utterly marred and given over too
all naughtiness^, God must needs be as a mortal enemy too us, and as an
adversary against us, till the rememberance of our sins be buried out of
his sight. For we be subject too everlasting death, till we be restored
agein: by reason whereof, God being the fountain of all justice and
right^ousnesse, does vtte^ly hate and abhor the evil that he sees in us.
Therefore until such time as our sins be blotted out, it is impossible for
us too hope that God should either favor or love us. But let us mark here
how S. Paul uses two words, too express how we be reconcyled too God:
First, he sets down the Raunsom or Redemption, which is all (...): and
afterward the forgiveness of sins. How comes it ^^en too pass that Gods
wrath is pacifyed, that we be made at one ^ith him, yea and that he accepts
and au^weth us for his children? ^t is by the pardoning of our ^umes, says S.
Paul. And further^ore, because redemption is requisite thereuntoo: he matcheth
that ^ith it also. True it is, that as in respect of us, God wypeth away our
^^mes of his own free goodness, and shows himse^fe altoogither ^^untifull
of himself, without respect of any recompense for it at our ^^ndes. And in
good soothe what man were able too make amends (...) the least fault he has
committed? Then if every of us should im^loy his whole life in making
satisfaction for any one fault alone, and (...) that means seek too win
favor at Gods hand: it is certain ^^at the same does far surmount all our
abilities. And therefore God ^ust be feign too receive us too mercy, without
looking for any re^ompence or amends at our hands. But yet for all this, the
attone^ent which is freely bestowed as in respect of us, did cost the son of
God very dear. 1. Pet. 1. d. 19.
For he found none other payment, than the sheading ^f his own blud, insomuch
that he made himself our borrowe both in ody and soul, and answered for us
before Gods judgment, too get (...) our discharge. Our Lord Jesus Christ (say
I) employed himself holly both body and soul. For it had not bin enough for
him to have ^^ffered so cruel and slanderous a death in the sight of men: but
it ^houed him also too abide such horrible anguishe in himself, as i^ God had
bin become a judge too him: for he came too that point, that (...) sustained
the person of all sinners too make full amends for them (...). And so ye see
why S. Paul has matched those two words ^ogither in this streyne.

Therefore we have too mark first of all, that we can obtain no (...) at
Gods hand, nor be received of him, till our sins be ^^yped (...), and the
rememberance of them clean put away. The reason ^hereof is (as I said before)
that God must needs hate sin wher^^euer he seeze it. So then, as long as he
considers us as sinners, he ^ust needs abhor us: for there is not any
thing in our selves, nor in (...) own nature, but al manner of naughtiness and
confuzion. Then are (...) enemies and adversaries unto him, till we come too
the reme^ie that S. Paul shows us here, which is, too have our sins
forgiven. Hereby we see that no man can be loved of God for any ^oorthinesse
that is in himself. For wherein lies the love that God bears us: I have
told you already, that he must be feign too cast his eye upon out Lord Jesus
Christ, and not too look a whit at us. But yet therewithal it is declared
further, that God does never like well of us, till he have released us o^r
dettes, and adopted us too be his children, notwithstanding that we be
worthy of death before him. Thus ye see that the assurance of our salvation
(as is said in the song of zachary) is that God be merciful too us and
forgive us our sins whereby we were become his enemies. ^uke. 1. 77.
Howbeit, let us also bear in mind, that the clear release of our sins
through Gods free goodness, is not done without the ransom that was paid by
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. d. 18.
not in gold nor silver (as says S. Peter in his first Epistle) but in such
wise that he which was the unspotted Lamb, was feign too serve that turn his
own self. Wherefore whenever we intend too seek Gods favor and mercy,
let us fasten all our wits upon the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may there find wherewith too appease Gods wrath. And furthermore
seeing that our sins are done away by such payment and satisfaction: let us
understand that we cannot bring aught of our own, for the which we should
be reconcyled unto God. Wherein we see how the devil has by his s^yghtes
cut of all hope of salvation from the world, by bearing men in hand that they
must every man ransom himself, and make his own atonement with God. And
that is the very thing which men ^all good works, merits, and vertewes in
Papistrie. For too what end tend all the inventions which they have forged?
Why martyr they themselves after so many fashions, so as men never make an end
day nor night, but are ever still making of new wyndlasses and courses: The
mark that all these things ame at, is too pacify God. And so all the good
works which are so counted in Papistrie, are nothing else but means whereby
too make amends for sin. Howbeit that is but a defacing of the ransom
whereof S. Paul speaks here. For there is (as ye would say) an inseparable
bond between these two things, namely that God puts our sins out of his
rememberance, and drowneth them in the bottom of the sea: and moreover
receives the payment that was offered him in the person of his only son.
Therefore we cannot atteyne the one without the other. Wherforeif we intend
too have Gods favor, let us consider that we be his enemies till he have
pardoned all our sins of his own free goodness: and yet notwithstanding,
that our Lord Jesus Christ must be feign too step in between him and us. For
the sacrifyze of his death serves too purchase us an everlasting atonement,
so as we must always flee thither for refuge. True it is that the whole life
but of Lord Jesus Christ is become our ransom* for the obedience which he
yielded too God his father in this world, was too make amends for Adams
offense, and for all the iniquities wherthrough we be run in arrerages.
Howbeit S. Paul speaks here purposely of his blud, because it behooves us
too resort too his death and passion, as too the sacrifyze which is of power
too blot out all our sins. And for that cause has God represented in figures
under the law, that men could not be reconcyled unto him but only by that
mean. Now it is true that Jesus Christ did not only shed his blud, namely at
his death: but also feel the fear and terror which ought too have lyghted
upon us. But S. Paul does here under one parrell comprehend the whole after
the ordinary manner of the holy scripture. Too be short, let us repose all our
right^^usnesse in Gods showing of himself merciful toward us of his own
free goodness: and let us not presume too face him with any vertew of our
own, thereby too bynd him unto us: but let it suffize us that he receives us
intoo his favor, freely without any desert of ours, only because the
rememberance of our sins is buried out of his sight. And agein, let us
understand, that the same canno be done but by the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that that is the thing wheruppon we must wholly rest.

Heeruppon S. Paul adds, that all is done according too the richesse of Gods
grace. No^ without cause does he here magnifye Gods mercy which he utters
in receiving us too favor. For we see on the one side how men do wilfully
ouershoote themselves through their foolish ouerweening: For most men have
always imagined, that they might make their atonement with God by their own
satisfactions, and I wot not what shifts besides. Seeing then that men are so
far ouerseene in their own imaginations, S. Paul too exclude all such
dealing, says that we must be ravished in love with the richenesse of Gods
goodness. He could have said simply that God does all according too his
grace: but he setteh down here his great treasures, too the intent that men
should not be so fond, as too bring as it were but a farthing, for the
discharge of ten hundred thousand crowns. And truly when the Papists prattle
of their satisfactions, they say not that they be able too do it thoroughly in
all points: but they are of opinion that with the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, they also are able too bring somewhat of their own, and too
do so much by patches and pieces, that God shall be satisfied and contented.
Thus ye see what a devilish opinion reigns in papistrie, for they will
needs found masses, they will needs babble many prayers, they will needs gad on
pilgrimage, they will needs keep this feast and that feast, they will needs
perform I wot not what deuotio^s, they will needs wear sack cloth next their
skin: and all too help forth the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ:
as who should say, it were not sufficient enough of it self. But S. Paul
tells us that Gods goodness as it is showed us in Jesus Christ, is so great
a treasure, that all other things must needs give over and be thrust under
fo^te. And seeing that God uses so great bountifulness as we ought too be
wholly ravished at it: is it not too outrageouse a presumptuousnesse, when we
will needs bring our own pelting trash, as though our going on pilgrimage, and
our doing of some other devotions were of any value or estimation? Is it not
al one, as though the blud of Jesus Christ were not a sufficient price, I say a
sufficient price and ransom for our salvation? Ye see then on the one side,
how S. Paul meant here too cut of all occasions of the fond imaginations that
men conceive in surmizing themselves able too pacifye Gods wrath by their own
satisfactions and paymentes: and on the other side how he purpozed too succor
our feebleness. For although we be given too believe wondrous well of our
own vertuosusnesse, and too bear ourselves in hand that God is greatly
beholden unto us: yet notwithstanding, when it comes too the calling upon
God in good earnest, and too the putting of our trust in him: then if Satan
egg us too despair, and that we be tossed with trubbles and temptations: we
be so dismayed, that all the promises of the holy scripture, and all that is
said unto us of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, cannot make us
too have any hope. S. Paul therefore too remedy this vice of unbelief which
is too deeply rooted in us, does here set before us the great treasures of
Gods goodness, too the end that all the distruste which we can conceive, may
be as it were swallowed up, seeing that God voutsafeth too use so great
bounteousnes toward us.

And heeruppon he adds, that he has made the same grace too abound toward
us in all wisdom and understanding. By these ^ords he does us too wit by what
means we come by the thing that he had specifyed before. Behold, all our
happiness and all our souerein velfare consists in being at one with God, so
as he may take us for h^s children, and it may be lawful for us too call
upon him as our father with full liberty. But how shall we obtain that
thing, from which we be so far wide? It is said, that although we be
naught w^orth, ne naught can do: yet we shall find all things in Jesus
Christ which are wanting in our selves, and that his death and passion will be
a sufficient sacrifyze, too put away the rememberance of all our misdeedes.
Howbeit does it follow therefore, that all men are parttakers of this
benefit which is purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ? No: for the
unbelievers have another part nor portion in it. Then is it a special
privilege for those whom God gathers too himself. Gal. 5. a. 4.
Also S. Paul shows, that either we must have faith, or else Christ shall
not boot us at all. Although then that Christ be generally the redeemer of
the whole world, yet does his death and passion advantage none but such as
receive the thing that S. Paul shows here. And so we see that when we
once know the benefits that are brought us by Christ, and which he offers us
daily by his Gospel: we must also be knyt unto him by faith. For the
Turks, Jews, and Papists, and all other like are cut of and estranged from
Christ, and rot away in their own filth, because they presume to work wonders
of themselves. For it is a common principle among the papists, Jews, Turks,
and all the Heathen men that ever were, that they must appease Gods wrath. And
how? By a great sort of means of their own devising, and of every man's
imaginyng in his own brain. Such men therefore have no part in Christ.
Wherefore if faith be the key that opens us the door to enjoy the treasure
whereof S. Paul spoke even now: then is that the next way too make us rich,
so far forth as shall be requisite for our salvation, so as we shall not want
any thing, if we be knyt unto Christ by faith.

Notwithstanding, it is not for naught that S. Paul has here set down this
two words of wisdom and understanding. For they do us too wit, that the
lerning of the Gospel is enough too bring us to all perfection, and that
whatsoever is added moreover, is but dung, filth, and rotte^nesse. Too be
short, S. Paul's intytling of the Gospel with those two honorable terms, is
too the end that every man should quietly give ear to the things that God
teaches him by the means of his only son, and that we should yield our
selves s^ teachable unto him, as not too take upon us to know aught, than tha^
which comes out of his mouth, but simply receive whatsoever he speaks, and
continue in the same to the end, though the whole word despyze us, and all men
set themselves against us, and not pass for (...) the sieyghts of the world,
as many men do, who have ^tching ear^s and are always desirous too here
sum new thing. Too the end therefore that we be not so wavering, nor ouerled
by foolish desire of knowing more than is lawful for us too know: let us
mark well how S. Paul says here, that if we have once profited thoroughly in
the Gospel, we shall find there all wisdom to the full, so as we may reject
all other things, not only as needless, but also as noisome, because that by
them we shall be turned from the pure doctrine, whereby it is his will too have
us knit unto him. Too be short, S. Paul meant to show here, that God does
us an inestimable good turn, when he voutsafeth to call us too the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ his only son, and that when we have him, we must
dispyze all other things, and not be trubbled with a foolish desire of knowing
this or that, because that (as I have said already) the full perfection of all
our knowledge is there, that is to wit, in our Lord Jesus Christ. And here ye
see also why it is said to the Colossians, Coloss. 1. d. 25.
that he had bin a faithful teacher, yea even too bring men too the perfection
of wisdom. 2. Cor. 11. b. 6.
Indeed he confesses that he was rude and homely of speech, and that he had
another the wisdom nor the eloquence that was hyghly commended in the world: but
yet he declares, that if his doctrine were received, there should be found a
full substance in it for the full ^^rrishment of men's souls, and that there
needs not any more too be added unto it. When we here these things now
adays, we must take warning to bridle our selves, and to repress the f^nd
over curiousness that is rooted too deeply in us, that we may hold us too the
pure doctrine of the Gospel, and rest wholly thereupon. Thus ye see in effect
what we have too gather upon that streyne.

Heerewithall let us mark the thing that I have touched alredye: namely that
as often as the Gospel is preached, so often is Gods grace spread out upon us. If
we acknowledge his goodness and liberality, which he makes us too perceive
by his moystening of the earth, too the end it should yield us fruits too the
sustenance of our bodies: much more may we understand, that when God sends
us the word of salvation, he not only waters us too the welfare of our
souls, but also gives us so largely thereof too drink, as we may be
thoroughly satisfied therewith. For S. Paul thinks it not enough too say, that
whereas we be barren we have some refresshing by the Gospel: but he says,
that it is as if God should pour down al undance of water upon us, and that
we might be so watered and refreshed with it, as we might gather substance
and lustiness of it too hold out to the end. And so ye see in what wise we
ought to esteem of Gods goodness, when he voutsafeth too draw us too him by
means of his Gospel, and that therwithall we enter into possession of the
benefits that have bin purchased for us by our Lord Jesus Christ, according as
he offers them too us by his word, and will have us also to receive them by
faith.

Now for a larger openyng of the matter, he adds immediately, That his so
dooyng is, because he has uttered the secret of his will unto us, even
according to his own good pleasure which he had purposed before in him self.
Lo here an other thing which ought to advance the dignity of the Gospel yet
more: which is, that there we have the secrets which were hydden heretofore
in God. And it is not here only that S. Paul speaks after this manner: but
we shall see yet a larger discourse of it in the second chapter. Romans 16. d.
25.
And not only in this Epistle, ^. Cor. 2. b. 7. and. 4. a. 1.
but also euerywhere else, he shows how we ought to be as it were ravished
at the preaching of the Gospel, because God does there open the things that
were incomprehensible to all men before, Ephesians. 6. d. 19.
and which no man would never have believed, or once thought of. For he seemed
too have chosen the only line of Abraham, Coloss. 1. d. 29.
in such wise as if he had cast away all the world besides. Therefore it was a
wonderful thing when he poured out his grace in common upon al nations. Yet
notwithstanding we know, that at such time as Jesus Christ came intoo the
world, the very self same people were grown out of kind, and Gods doctrine
was so corrupted, that there was nothing but superstition among the Jews. It
seemed then that all had bin past hope of recovery, when suddenly beyond the
opinion of al men, behold, salvation was offered too all nations. Behold,
Christ which had erst been hidden in deep darkness, yea, and in so deep
darkness, as there was not any hope that ever he should have comme out of
it, rose up as the Daysimne of righteousness, Es^i. 4. a. 2.
to give light to the world. For this cause therefore does S. Paul say, that
in the Gospel we be made privy too the secrets of Gods will. True it is,
that at the first sight there seems to be nothing but simple stuff in the
Gospel. And that is a cause also why many scoffers think that the things which
are contained in the Gospel, do serve but for idiots: and they bear
themselves in hand, that they are able too deuize many wyttier things in
their own dreams and dotages, than all the doctrine is that concerns Jesus
Christ. But such folk are unworthy to taste of the thing that is showed us
here: for their pride does utterly blind them, and make them stark doltes.
Notwithstanding, how s^euer they fare, yet the faithful perceive f^ll well,
that there is a divine majesty in the doctrine of ^he Gospel. And for that
cause S. Paul does give us to wit in this same text, that our coming thither
must not be to learn any common thing, but too lift up our selves above the
world. For we shall never be good scollers to Godward, nor never be in any
towardness to pro^it in his school, except we mount above the world, and
reverence the things that God speaks with his own holy mouth. To be short,
the beginning and entrance of our faith, is lowlynesse. But how can men well
humble themselves, unless they know that the things which God tells them,
do far surmount their own wit and capacity? Ye see then that the thing
whereat S. Paul amed, is, that we should reverence the Gospel, assuring our
selves, that it is not for us to judge whether God have spoken well, or ill.
For it becomes us too be fully resolved, that all that ever comes from him,
is infinite wisdom, yea and such wisdom as is utterly faultlesse. To the
end therefore that all glorying may be beaten down in our selves, and we
learn to reverence soberly and modestly the doctrine that is preached too us
in Gods name: S. Paul has purposely set down this secret.

And too the end we should know how much we be bound unto God, he repeteth
this word, According to his good pleasure, which he had set down before. And
that is done too put away, and too shet out all opinion which men might
conceive of their own worthiness. For Gods good pleasure can have no place,
unless men be barred from al deseruyng, and repair to him utterly empty. For
so soon as we presume too bring any thing at all unto God, surely it is an
aduauncyng of our selves too the defacing of Gods grace, so as it may have no
more beauty nor pre-eminence among us, as it ought too have. Too the end
therefore that men should forbear such presumptuousnesse, S. Paul sends us
still back too Gods good pleasure: as if he should say, that there was none
other cause of the preaching of the Gospel too the world, than the only frank
and free goodness of God. Yet notwithstanding, too repress all overboldness
of men, he adds, that God had purposed the said ordinance, and the said high
incomprehensible determination of his will aforehand in himself. For what is
the cause that men take so great liberty of questionyng, disputing, and going
to law with God, but for that (to their seemyng) they treat of matters which
ought to be open and manifest unto them? So then, S. Paul perceiuyng us too
be so foolish and rash, as to presume over boldly to be inquisitiue of Gods
purpose, says it is a sealed letter, and that God has his purpose in
himself, and that it is not lawful for creatures too mount so high, and that
if they do so, it is the next way too cast them down, and too break their
necks. True it is, that we may well apply our whole indeuer too know Gods
will: howbeit, that must be no further than he has uttered in his word: for
his word is our light. But if God do once hold his peace, he will have us
too bridle and as it were too imprison our selves, and not too start out any
further, for if we would needs know more than is granted us, that is too
say, more than we ought too know, and more than is imparted too us by his
word: it were but an entering further and further intoo a maze, or rather
intoo the bottom of hell. Therefore let us mark well, how S. Paul's meaning
in this text, is that whensoever God keeps his purpose to himself, it
becomes us to stoop, and too hold our selves contented too be ignorant of
it. For it is a cursed wisdom, and such a wisdom as sends us too the pit of
hell, when we take leave too know more than God has taught us. And
contrariwise we be wyzer in our ignorance than all the wyze men of the world,
when we take not upon us too know any thing further than Gods word guydeth
and governs us. True it is that there is not any mo than only one single
will in God. Nevertheless he utters the same unto us according too our
capacity, and so far forth as is expedient and profitable for us. As for
example, we have seen that the forgiveness of sins is a point that we
cannot ouerpasse nor forbear: and therefore zachary calls it the knowledge
of salvation. Agein, it stands us on hand too know where the forgiveness of
our sins is too be sought for. For if we have not Jesus Christ, Luke. 1. g.
77.
we continue still enemies unto God, we have no agreement nor rest in our
selves, and Gods justice must needs pursue us: but Jesus Christ is our peace.
Furthermore, when we know the things that are witnessed to us by Gods word,
we must therwithall reverence the mysteries that are hidden from us, as has
bin said already, and must hereafter be said agein, when we come too Gods
election. And S. Paul does yet agein set down here the word of
foreordeyning or forepurpozing, to ^hewe that God had predestined us before
the making of the world, and yet that the same was hidden. Yea verily: but now
is the same discovered unto us, says he. Thus ye see in effect, that the
thing which we have too bear in mind, is that we be not called too the
knowledge of the Gospel by our own towardness, nor for that any of us
puts forth himself too it of his own accord, nor for that we have bound
God unto us by any virtue of ours: but for that God of his own infinite
goodness listed too inlyghten us. And he has not done it because it came
sodeinly in his mind too do it, as men are wont too do, who are carried with
sodeine braydes: but because he had determined the same in his own purpose,
even from before all time. And if our wits be ticklish and provoke us too
be inquisitiue and too say, How so? Had God chozen us aforehand? And why then
did he not utter it unto us sooner? How happens it that it was not perceived
ere this? too the end we should not so ouershoote our selves, S. Paul says
that this purpose was after a sort locked up in God, till it was uttered unto
us. And so, too be short, it is not lawful for us too know any more than is
uttered unto us in the Gospel: and look what is showed us there, it behooves
us too reverence it. And for the same cause it is added, that his so dooyng
was too set forth the same in the fullness of time.

Now heerin he shows, that men may well vex themselves, but yet shall they
come short of their purpose, and all their wits and imaginations shall fail
them, if they go about too know more than God has given them leave to know.
For if any man demand why God hasted no rather too do it: therein he shows
that he would be wiser tha^ God. And is not that a devilish pride? Is the
creature worthy to go upon the ground, when it aduau^ceth it self so high?
For this cause S. Paul says, that the appoynting thereof belongs unto God.
For if a man may set order after this manner, in his own house and say: I will
have my folk to fare thus, I will have them to drink such drink, I will have
them too eat that kind of bread, I will have them lodged after this manner: how
much more ought we too let God do so? why should he have less privilege than
woormes of the earth? Therefore let us give God leave to dispose of his church,
and of the welfare of his chozen, as lyketh best himself. And as for the time,
let us take that for the full time which it shall please him too show us. For
it is not for us too be either judges or vmpers in this case, too measure the
times, years, ^oonethes, or days: but it ought too content us, that God
lists too ^aue it so. Some man will argew the case and say: what, I pray you?
Behold, four thousand years passed between the fall of Adam and ^he coming
of Christ: and could not God have remedyed the matter ^y sending the redeemer
of the world sooner? See what a number of ^retched folk wandered away in
darkness: behold the destruction ^f mankind as awaterflud that swalowed up all
things: and yet in (...) mean while Jesus Christ was hidden. Bysids this, a
small number ^f men tasted of him, alonly by figures and shadows. For none but
the ^^ewes waited for the redeemer, to obtain salvation by his means: (...)
yet even they were feign to use calves and sheep and other brut beasts, to
asserteyne them selves of the forgiveness of their sins, and that God was
merciful to them. If a man ask how this comes to pass: let us repair too
that which is said here in one word: namely that the time was not yet fully
come. And why? Because God had so appointed it. And this is the very selfsame
thing that we have seen already in the Epistle to the Galathians, where S. Paul
repressed all the foolish ga^ings, Gal. 4. a. 4.
wherthrough men wander away in mounting up higher than is lawful for them to
do. Therefore let us conclude, that it is Gods peculiar office too appoint times
and seasons, and that we must not think any other too be the dew, than that
which he appoynteth. For albeit that winter and summer be ordinarye with us
every year: yet if summer come over late, we must bridle our selves, and not
grudge against God. We may well say, alas, if it pleased God too send us
heat, it should be well welcome. But yet in the mean while we must fully
resolve our selves thus: It belongs too God too govern, and all souereintie
and authority perteyne too him. If we ought too behave our selves so modestly
as in respect of the order of nature which is common among us, and wherein God
shows himself familiarly unto us: what ought we too do when we come too
the scanning of ^he heavenly secrets, as of the everlasting salvation of our
souls, and of this high mystery that the son of God is come too set the
things ^n their state agein which were lost and perished? Does it not become
us too stoop in that case, and humbly too take in good worth whatsoever God
tells us, and too like of that which he lyketh? Thus ye^ see why S. Paul
spoke here expressly of the fullness of time, as if he should say, that we can
never profit in the Gospel, till we yield God so much honor, as too hold our
selves contented with his only will, so as we step not forth too reply
against him, nor face him with our iangling, but glorify him by acknowledging
his will too be the rule of all wisdom, of all right, and of all equity.

And for the better declaration hereof, he adds immediately, that it was too
gather all things toogither, as well in heaven as in earth, by Jesus Christ,
in himself. As touching this word gather, S. Paul meant too show us thereby
how we be all of us horribly scattered, till such time as our Lord Jesus
Christ set us in array agein: and this is verifyed not only of us, but also of
all other creatures. Too be short, it is all one as if he had said, that the
whole order of nature is as good as defaced, and all things decayed and
disordered in the sin of Adam, till we be repaired again in the person of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For although we behold Gods wonderful wisdom,
power, goodness, justice, and righteousness in all creatures: yet
notwithstanding there are marks of sin both above and beneath, and all
creatures are subject too corruption, and all is disordered by reason that God
hates and rejects us. Rom (...).
Needs therefore must a restorement be made by Jesus Christ. And that is the
thing that is meant by the gathering toogither that S. Paul speaks of here,
too the end we would learn too mislyke of our selves, and too be ashamed of
the disorder that is in our selves, and wherewith the whole world is filled
through our sinful life: and moreover learn also too magnify Gods goodness
so much the more. Then on the one side the holy Ghost warns us in this text,
that not only we our selves are out of order, but also that we have brought
the whole world too the same point, and do keep it still at the same stay
daily by our sins, and that there is none other remedy thereof, but that
Jesus Christ must be feign too amend all agein, and make such a gathering and
union, as we may be knit agein too our God. And so ye see the first point
that we have too mark upon this text. Truly this thing is spoken in few
words: but it had need too be muzed upon more at length. For it is the thing
wheraboutes we ought too occupy our selves both early and late, that when
we look intoo our selves, we might bethink us in this wise: who art thou o
wretched creature? for thou see thou art separated from thy God even from thy
birth: behold, thou art his enemy and inheritour of his wrath: and on the other
side there is nothing in thy self which tends not too naughtiness and
frowardness: and thou ought not only too feel this disorder in thine own
person, but also too perceive that all things else are out of order through
the whole world by reason of thy frowardness. Therefore let us sink down and
be ashamed of it, and therwithall confess how much we be indetted unto
God, for his voutsafyng too gather us toogether in the person of his only
son, even us that have so torn a sunder the things that he had set in so
goodly order.

And for the same cause S. Paul speaks here, not only of men, (which were
estraunged from God before by reason of sin): but also of all things that are in
heaven and earth: Coloss. ^ c. 20.
wherein he comprehends even the very Angels. For although Gods glory shine
forth in them, and that they were never yet separated from him: yet
nevertheless it stood them on hand too be^ gathered toogither by our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that after two sorts. For albeeit that they never swarued
aside, ne fell from that they were at the first, and that Gods ryghtuousnesse
do always show it self in them, insomuch that they be as it were mirrours
and paternes of it: yet notwithstanding, if God li^ted too look upon them
with rigor, they should find themselves far short of the perfection of
ryghtuousnesse that is in him, as it is said in the book of Job. Job. 4. d. ^8.
Furthermore, there is yet one other reason too be matched with this: which
is, that the Aungells should not hane such constancy and stedinesse as were
requisyte, unless Jesus Christ had so stablished them as they might never
fall. Thus ye see one way how they were gathered together. But this gathering
whereof S. Paul speaks here, is in respect of their uniting agein unto us.
For we know that inasmuch as we were banished out of Gods kingdom, we were
cut of from all hope of salvation, so as the Angels were by and by feign too
become our enemies, and should be so still, were it not for the atonement
which we have with them agein, by means of the head which is common too us
both. And here ye see also why that in the ladder that was showed unto
Jacob, Genesis 28. c. 12.
it is said that God stood upon the top of it, and touched both heaven and
earth, and that the Angels went up and down on it. Now our Lord Jesus Christ
is the true living and everlasting God which touched both heaven* and earth,
because that in his person God has knit his own divine being (or substance)
and the nature of man toogither. Thus therefore ye see that heaven is open, so
as the Angels begin too acquaynt themselves with us, Hebr. 1. d. 14.
yea and too become our servants, as is said in the Epistle too the Hebrews,
because the care of our souls is committed unto them, and they (as is said in
the thirty and four Psalm) incamp about us, Psalm. 34. ^. 8.
and watch us, and are our keepers. Ye see then how we be united agein too
the Angels of heaven by our Lord Jesus Christ. ^uke. 21. ^. 27.
And that is the cause also why he said, from hensfoorth ye shall see the
heavens open, and the son of man coming down in his majesty with his
Angels. Whereby he does us too wit, that heaven was shet against us, and that
we also were unworthy too find any favor at Gods hand, and that yet
notwithstanding, now that he is come too be our head, and has made the
atonement between his father and us, Coloss. 2. ^. 10.
and taken upon him the office of mediator, and is become the head, not only
of the faithful, but also of the Angels: he has gathered all toogither agein
in such wise, that whereas the devils make war against us and practice our
destruction without ceassing: the Angels are armed with infinite power too
maynteyne us. And although we see them not with our eyes: yet must we
certeynly believe that they watch for our welfare. Otherwise what a thing were
it? For we know that the devil is as a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5. ^. 8.
and seeks nothing else but too devour us. We see what a number of ^^yghts
he has too wynd about us with. Needs then must the Angels have an infinite
power too defend us withal. Also it must needs be, that we be preserved
under the protection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is both their head and ours
too. Thus ye see briefly that the thing which S. Paul meant too tell us in
this Text, where he says that we are gathered together agein, is, that we
were scattered asunder before, and that we be not only reconciled to God by
the death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also now henceforth knyt
ageyn unto the Angels, so as they are become our brethren and fellows, and
God has given them charge too guide and mainteyne us in all our ways, and to
watch over us, Psalm. 90. (...).
and to be in continual battle for the withstandyng of all the enemies that
make war against us, till we be gathered all together intoo the rest of
heaven.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as it
may draw us too true repentance, and make us to continue the same all the time
of our life, and that yet notwithstanding we may not cease too trust in him,
and too offer our selves boldly in his sight, forasmuch as our sins are
scoured out by the blud that was shed for the washing of them: and that we may
so frame our selves too this doctrine, as we may all the time of our life
acknowledge, that seeing he has purchaced us so dearly, we ought too give our
selves wholly too his service: and that seeing he has showed himself so good a
redeemer toward us, we may not doubt but he will continue his goodness from
day too day, too the full finishing of the thing that he has begun, and
strengthen us in all assaults, till he have delivered us from the cruelty of
Satan and of all his vpholders, yea, and quyte and clean taken us out of the
world, too make us parttakers of the happy blissednesse whereuntoo he calls
us. That it may please him too grant this grace not only too us, but also too
all people and nations. etc.

The fifth Sermon upon the first Chapter.
13. You also do trust in Christ, upon the hearing of the word of truth, that
is too say, of the glad tidings of your salvation, by believing whereof you
also are sealed with the holy spirit of the promise.

14. Which is the earnest penny of our inheritance, unto the redeeming of the
purchaced possession, too the praise of his glory.


We have seen heeretoofore how S. Paul has declared, that there is none
other ground of our salvation than Gods free goodness, and that we must not
seek any where else for the cause why he choozeth the one and forsakes the
other. For it becomes us too hold our selves contented with his only will,
purpose, and unchangeable determination. And whosoever goes any further, must
needs stumble intoo such a dimgeon through his own rashness, as he shall
feel that such as cannot honor Gods majesty and everlasting ordinance with
all lowlynesse and reverence, must every one of them (say I) come too shame.
Therefore whenever we come to the serching of the cause of our salvation, let
us learn too father it altoogither upon God. It is true that too be Gods
children and heirs it behooves us too be of the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which thing is done by faith: but yet can we not believe the Gospel
except God draw us theretoo by his holy spirit. Now we see that he deals
not alyke with all men. For he could very well inlyghten all the world, and
bring too pass that there should be no unbelievers at all: but we see the
contrary. Therefore let us assure our selves, that be choozeth whom he lists.
For if a man should ask the reason why he does it: it were too lofty a
presumptuousnesse, and that is the very cause that makes so many ouerweening
folk too break their own necks, for that they cannot find in their hearts
too grant, that God governs men according too his own will, as of good
right he may full well. Furthermore also S. Paul has heretofore set the Jews
and Gentyles both on one even ground, and that is a thing that requires yet
longer discourse. For seeing that God had chozen Abraham's offspring, it might
have bin thought that there had bin some worthiness in them. Surely if we
have an eye too the specia^l favor that God showed too the Jews, they be
well worthy too be preferred before all the rest of the world. But if a man
take them as they be of themselves: he shall find them void of all
ryghtuousnesse. For we must always come back too this point, that God is not
bound nor beholden too any man at all: and his receiving of the Jews by free
adoption, is not for that they were better worth than other men, or for that
they might make any manner of vaunt at all of themselves. Therefore ye see why
S. Paul says expressly, that they which believed in Jesus Christ in times
past, are comprehended under Gods election, as well as the others, and that the
others cannot boast themselves too be more worthy, or too have deserved more
than they, but that all must come too this point, that as well of the Jews as
of the Gentyles God choze whom he lyked and listed, too the end that nothing
should be considered in that behalf but his only mercy, and that all mouths
might be stopped, and no man be able too allege that be brought any thing of
his own. Howbeit, when S. Paul enters intoo this comparison between the
Jews and the Gentyles, he says that if a man have an eye too Gods accepting
of the Jews for his own peculiar heritage, they were a holy lineage, and he
had given them his Law and promises, by means whereof they were in more
excellent and high degree, than all the residew whom he had forsaken and shaken
of. But if we have an eye unto God, all man's glory must needs be laid
awater. But S. Paul in that place speaks alonely of the forgiving of our
sins, and of our embracing of Gods grace by faith: which things he shows
cannot be fathered upon any other cause, than only Gods pitying of us. Also
we have ^eene heretoofore in the Epistle too the Galathians, Gal. ^. c. 15.
how S. Paul ^ayd unto Peter, we be Jews by nature. For inasmuch as it
was a common opinion, that the Jews were a holy lynage, because they were
descended of Abraham's race: very well (says he), howsoever ^he case stand,
we have none other refuge nor assurance of salvation, but too believe in Jesus
Christ: for he wist well that men are utterly fordoone and lost in themselves,
because they bring nothing with them but Gods wrath and curse. Therefore like as
in those textes S. Paul has showed that men beguyle themselves, if they
imagine that they have any desert or worthiness in them: so now for the better
confirmation of the same doctrine, and too take away all disputing, and too
beat back all replyings, he brings us too this welspring, namely, that God
not only gives faith too whom he lists, but also has elected and chozen us
before the making of the world. Ye see then that the thing which we have too
mark in effect, is that all men from the most too the least are indaungered
unto God, and there is none so holy or excellent, that can exempt himself
from that general state of men.

Now hereupon S. Paul magnifieth Gods goodness, in that the Ephesians were
gathered toogither, and made all one with those that were hild and accounted
before for Gods people, and for the household folk of his Church. Before the
Ephesians believed the Gospel, there was great diversity between them, as
shall be declared yet more at large in the second Chapter. But notwithstanding
that the beleuyng Jews which had already bin converted to our Lord Jesus
Christ, were as brethren too the Angels of heaven, for so much as they were
members of the head that was common too them both, whereas in the mean while
the Ephesians were poor wretches, shet out from al hope of salvation, enemies
of God, and plunged in all cursednesse: behold, God took away that
diversity, and raundged them both in one array. Gods goodness therefore was so
much the more manifest, in that he did so (...) them back which were drowned
in the bottom of hell, to match them with his own children, and too make them
fellows and heirs of his heavenly kingdom. That therefore is the cause why S.
Paul having spoken of such as had believed in Jesus Christ before, tells us
expressly, that God has gathered and stablished his Church in such wise, as it
well appears that the greatest depend wholly upon him, and have not any other
thing to rest upon, than his only mercy: and that those which were after a sort
cast away, yea and abhorred, have cause to glorify him, seeing he has
delivered them from the confuzion wherein they were. And herewithal S. Paul
shows, that the thing which he had said before, is verified unto us by the
effects of Gods grace. For (as I have said before) our election is a secret
thing, yea and incomprehensible. When men have inquired of it as much as is
possible, surely they must needs quail in their own imaginations, if they
mind to enter intoo the said everlasting ordinance of God. And therefore it
is not lawful for us too seek any further than the Scripture guides us, and
shows us the way. Ye see then that Gods choozing of us, is hidden in him
self: but yet he yields us records of it by the gifts of grace which he
bestows upon us, as by faith, which is a gift of the holy Ghost. Mark that
for one point.

Now, were it but such a gift, as when he makes his Sun to shine both upon
good and bad, or as when he causes the earth to bring forth fruit
indifferently for all men: the same ought also too be reckened among the
gifts and benefits of God. But faith is a singular gift, which is not
bestowed commonly upon all men, but is reserved of God as a Jewel for those
whom he likes well of. And what is the cause of it? We are all of us the
children of Adam, and we are all of one mould. Why then inlighteneth he the
one sort, and lets the other alone in their blyndnesse? There is none other
cause but his own choice. So then although we can not conceive another by wit
nor by reason, how God has chozen us before the making of the world: yet we
know it by his showing of it unto us, and experience it self avouches it
sufficiently, in as much as we be enlightened by faith. What is the cause that I
receive the Gospel, and stick to it, and in the mean while others abide still
in their beastly blockishnesse, or rather bear a spiteful rancour against the
doctrine of salvation? If I imagine that it comes of mine own towardness, I
am a traitor too God. For we must always come back to that which we have
seen already, 2. Cor. 4. b. 7.
and say, Who is he that has made thee to excel others? S. Paul then does
in that saying pull down all loftiness of man, to the end that no man should
advance himself, nor allege that he has ^ught of his own. We must not
think (says he) that we have any woorthynesse of our selves, but that every
whit of it comes of God. Therefore in this Text S. Paul shows by
experience, how the E^^esians had been chozen of God, and that it behooved them
to have their ^^ole faith grounded thereupon, that is to wit, upon Gods free
good^^sse. And for proof thereof (says he) ye have heard the doctrine of
(...) Gospel, and believed it. But how commes that to pass? He she^^th that
it must needs be that they were confirmed by the holy Ghost. Now, if they
were confirmed, it was of necessity that the holy ghost must needs have
wrought beforehand. And so it is to no purpose, to enter intoo so deep a maze
as Gods everlasting ordinance. For he shows us as it were with his finger,
how he has chozen us, at least wise if we play not the churles with him, but
acknowledge the good that he has done us, and be fully persuaded and resolved
in our selves, that there is none other cause of it, than for that he had
given us his mark from before all euerlastingnesse: that is too say, for that
he had reserved us too him self, as his own children. Now then we see S.
Paul's meaning: and therefore let us learn too leave making of long raunges,
when the case concerns our imputyng of all things to Gods only mere mercy.
For the faith that we have, does show it well enough* because that (as I have
said before) the same comes not from our own moother wit, but as a gift
that comes from above, and such a one as God communicates not too all men
without exception, but only so such as he lysteth.

Furthermore here are many words well worth the weying. For on the one side
S. Paul intends too magnify the grace of the holy Ghost, by showing that
we can have no part nor portion in our Lord Jesus Christ, nor in any of all
the benefits that he has purchased for us, except God put us in possession of
our salvation by his holy spirit. That therefore is one point. And yet
notwithstanding S. Paul fails not too show therwithall; the ine^timable
benyfite that we have by the Gospel, in that he terms it the word of
truth, and the glad ^ydings of salvation. For first of all he meant too assure
us, too the in^ent we might have an infallible warrant too call upon God
without doubting or grudge of conscience. For so long as we be in doubt
whether God love us or hat us, it is impossible for us too pray truly unto
him. And so by that means ye see how our salvation is utterly defeated,
according too that which is said by the Prophet Ioell. Joel. 2. f. 32.
And it is a common doctrine in the holy scripture, that we cannot obtain
salvation, but by fleeing unto Gyd with prayer and supplication. But we
should be shet out from that, if we had not the said warrant, as we shall see
more fully in the third chapter. Therefore it stands us (...) too be thoroughly
assured, that God is our father, and that he accepts us for his children. And
how shall we be warranted that unless the doctrine of the Gospel be so
certain in all points, as it be not lawful for us to bring it in question?
That therefore is the cause why S. Paul says that it is the word of truth. No
doubt but there are other truths also: for even when God threatens us, he
does it not in ^est nor yet in vain: for as well his threatninges as his
promises have their execution sure and certain. Howbeeit forasmuch as the
present case concerned the correcting of al distrust in us, as whereunto we be
to much inclined: S. Paul has termed the Gospel the doctrine of truth: as if
he should say, my friends, God is a faithful witness unto you of his own
will: for the Gospel is as much as if he laid forth his heart unto you: and
therefore settle your selves upon it. Moreover also he says, that our
salvation lies enclosed in the Gospel: and that it is too make us too love
it, and esteem it. For should we be so wirlesse, or rather stark mad, as to
hold scorn of our own welfare? But yet notwithstanding he says, that all this comes of Gods mere mercy, and of his everlasting election, which as in
respect of our selves is far of, and unknown too us, but we have knowledge
of it by the Gospel, which is the means and instrument thereof. For too what
purpose were it that our Lord Jesus Christ has offered him felfe in sacrifice
too reconcile the world to God his father, unless we were made partakers of
it by faith? Now, faith is not an opinion of man's conceyuyng in his own
brain: but a settled belief, that God cannot lie nor deceive us, and that it
is not to be feared, that our hope shall not come too good end, if we wayt
upon him. So then, too be short, S. Paul's intent was to show, that if we have
the skyll to make our profit of the doctrine of the gospel, we shall no
longer stand in a mamering and perplexity, but shall be able to call upon God
with open mouth, acknowledgyng our selves so bound and wholly indetted unto
him in all things, as we fear not but that he auoweth us for his children,
and are accepted at his hand, and that he hears us in all the prayers that
we make unto him. Thus much concerning the first point. Therefore according to
S. Paul's exhortation* let us learn to rest in such wise upon the doctrine
of the gospel, that it may be as much too us, as if God showed himself,
visibly unto us, and that the heavens were opened unto us: Math. 16. c. 19.
and let us always bear in mind, how it is anouched by the mouth of our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, John. 20. c. 23.
that when soever sins are (...) by the preaching of the gospel, the same is
out of hand ratified in heaven. Thus ye see what certintie we ought to have,
that we be no more doubtful whether God will hear us, or no. But like as
the gospel teaches us to believe, so also S. Paul shows us that we ought
too esteem it as an incomparable treasure, for so much as it is the power of
God, tendyng to the salvation, of all that believe, as he speaks of it in
the first Chapter too the Romans. Romans 1. b. 16.
Seeing then that we be forlorn and undone of our selves, and there is none
other means too call, us back ageyn too God, but by the gospel: let us set
store by that treasure, and be well aduized too make our profit of it. And in
so doing let us hardily despize both the Devil himself, and all his
temptations which he practizeth against us, seeing that God calls us, and
has given us a sufficient record of his fatherly love and good will toward
us.

But let us come too the second part which I glaunced at. For S. Paul shows
that besyds Gods voutsafing no have the Gospel preached unto us, it behooves
him also too wooke by his holy spirit and by a special grace. And in very
deed we shall find many that will well enough grant that God was not moved
to send us his Gospel upon any other cause than his own, mere free
goodness. But therwithall they surmyze, that the cause why some receive it and
some receive it not, is for that their own free wills do^ rule the roste^ and
by that means Gods grace is diminished. For God offreth us not his grace, as a
man should offer an apple too little (...) so as he that could run best,
should come and have it. If God should cast it out so, it is certain that the
greatest part of our salvation should proceed of our own power and policy,
and the commendation thereof should redound too our selves. Now then, after S.
Paul has showed that God has called, and daily does call us too the
inheritance of his heavenly kingdom, and that his so doing proceeds of his
own mere free goodness. He adds further, that it behooves us of necessity
to be touched with his holy spirit. In deed he sets down but the one part
of the grace of the holy ghost: and that is because he had set down the other
part before: for he has not in this discourse forgotten aught that belonged to
his matter: but he began with Gods free goodness wherewith we be all filled,
and showed that faith springs out of the said fountain of free election. And
now for the second part he adds, that Gods inlightening of us by his holy
spirit, so that whereas we were blind, he has printed his grace in our hearts,
and bowed and bent them to the obeying of him, is not enough for us: but that
moreover he must be feign to confirm us, and strengthen our faith, by geuyng
us an invincible constancy too hold out too the end. Ye see then that the
thing wheretoo S. Paul brings us, is, that besides our receiuyng of faith at
the hand of the holy Ghost, and besides his inlightenyng of us by his grace,
whereof I have spoken already: he does also stay us in such wise, as we fall not
away. For the better understanding hereof, we must first call to mind the
thing that has bin treated more at length already: that is too wit, that so
long as God lets us alone in our own state and plight, we be blind
wretches wandering in darkness, and what soever is preached or spoken unto
us, we abide still as blocks in our brutishnes. For the sensual man shall
never understand any thing that belongs to God, 1. Cor. ^. d. 14.
or too his own salvation. Ye see then how we be utterly barred and
excluded from the heavenly light, till God pity us, and give us the spirit of
light and insight. Mark that for the first point. Howbeit, for as much as that
point has bin discussed heretofore: it suffizeth to do no more but too put
you in mind of it.

Now there is yet another point, which is that when we have once embraced Gods
grace by faith, so as we know that our Lord Jesus Christ is he in whom we
find all that is requisite too make us perfectly happy: it stands us on hand
too be stablished in the same. For why? let us mark how wavering men are. He
that is best dispozed too follow God, shall by and by fall, because we be so
frail that the devil will overthrow us every minute of an hour, if God hild
us not up by strong hand. And for that cause is it said that God utters his
power in mainteyning us, when he has chozen us, and given us too our Lord
Jesus Christ. For if he fought not for us, alas what would become of us? we
should be confounded out of hand, and we should not take one or two falls,
but infinite falls, as I said before. As soon then as we were in the way of
salvation, by and by should we surely be tu^ned out of it by our own
frayltie, lyghtnesse and inconstancy, unless we were hild back, and that
God wrought so in us, as we might by his holy spirit overcome all the
assaults of the devil and the world. Thus does Gods spirit work dubble in
us as in respect of faith. For he inlyghteneth us to make us understand the
things that else should be hidden from us, and too receive Gods promises with
all obedience. That is the first woorking. The second is, that the same spirit
is feign too continue in us, and too give us perseverance, that we quayle not
in the mids of our way. That then is the thing that S. Paul treats of as
now. As if he should say, my friends, ye have known Gods grace, and ye have
had experience of it, and that he has drawn you too the obeying of his
Gospel: For you had never rome unto it, if he had not showed himself
pitiful toward you. But yet assure your selves, that he dubbleth his grace,
in that he gives you power too hold out in the same. For had ye continued but
two or three days, or two or three years, yea or more: needs must it be
that God had helped you therein, for else ye should always have bin in a
mamering, yea, and as poor wretches at your wits end, without any
certeintie at all, but that God has promised too have a care of you, and too
guide you continually till you be come too your ways end, and have
accomplished your course. That therefore is the cause why he says here, that
they were sealed or signed by the holy Ghost. Now it behooves us to mark well
the similitude that S. Paul uses. For we know that evidences are made
authentik by s^ales: and that has bin in all times. True it is that men did
not set them too in such manner as they do now adays. But yet notwithstanding
in stead of signing them with their own hands, they delivered their seal or
a ring, and that was the manner of the publication of Testamentes, and of other
evidence, and of all bargaynes and covenants. In this respect S. Paul says
that we must be sealed in our hearts. True it is, that too speak properly,
he should have said that the Gospel was sealed. Howbeit, too the end too do
us too understand that the fault comes and springs from our selves, and
that the Gospel is a doctrine of sufficient authority of it self, he minded
too show us, that Gods sealing of his truth is in respect of our hard
hartednesse, and inconstancy, for that we be shaken with every wynd like
wouering reeds, until such time as he have strengthened us. But howsoever the
case stand, let us mark that the holy Ghost is as it were the scale wherewith
he ratifyeth and warranteth his truth unto us. Now I have told you already how
greatly we stand in need thereof. For although we grant that Gods word
deserves to be admitted without geyns^ying or reply: yet cease we not too
doubt of it, and that do we find well enough by experience. For whenever
any trubble or vexation comes, we ^e as folk dismayed, whereas if we were
thoroughly persuaded of Gods goodness in such wise as he assures us of it, it
is certain that we should not be in any such fear. All the tempta^^ons then
which shake us, do show well enough that we profit not as we ought too do
in the Gospel. And therefore God is feign too warran^ it on his behalf by his
holy spirit, and too print it so surely in our hearts, as we may be steadfast,
and as the same steadfastness may not be beaten down by all that ever the
devil can work or devise too ouerth^owe (...). But we shall understand this
thing yet better, by making continually such examination of our own
weakness, as I have spoken of before. For take we all the reasons of the
world, and yet shall we never be certifyed so fully and perfectly as is
requisite, that God will be merciful too us and defend us in the mids of
all the perils of this world. For we be here as it were in a sea, the
wyndes and storms assail us every minute, and we be still in danger of
swallowing up. How then may we despise Satan, b^ing as wretched sheep
unprovided both of armor, weapon, and all other means of help? How can we
be merye both in life and death, knowing that Satan might do any things
against us: if we were not well sealed, and after an authentical manner. So
then, besides that in this te^te we be warned too rid our selves of all
presumption and ouerweening, that only God may be prayzed and magnified: we
may also gather therewith upon S. Paul's words, that we have armor and weapon
wherewith too encounter and fight well, and that although our enemy be mighty
and sturdie, yet he shall never overcome us, so we take the advantage of that
which is said here, namely that Gods spirit seale^h the truth, and the
certeyntie of the promises of the Gospel in us.

And S. Paul adds yet one similitude more, saying that Gods spirit is as an
earnest pe^ny. And let us not think it strange that S. Paul has so myghtily
confirmed this doctrine, forasmuch as the devil has never ceased from the
beginning of the world, to puff up men continually with some fond opinion of
their own wisdom and vertew. The cause of Adams fall, was that he would
needs advance himself higher than was lawful for him, and be wyser than God:
which thing God gave him not leave to do. Even so stands the case with us,
and the devil pursues his chalendge still. For behold he overthrew mankind by
that sleyght, and all his endeavor yet still is to make us believe that we be
able too do this and that. Therefore it stood S. Paul on hand too rid men of
that false and cursed opinion of their own ^reewill and selfuertew, and too
show them that they are beholden too the holy Ghost for all. Mark that for one
point.

Secondly, we be so gross and earthly, that we had need too have the doctrine
chawed unto us, and we cannot conceive any more of Gods gracious gifts which
are invisible, than we see with our eyes, and touch with our hands. Therefore
it was requisite that S. Paul should by similitudes declare how it is Gods
holy spirit that puts us in possession of the Gospel, and of all the
benefits contained therein, and which holds us in them unto the end. Now we
know that bargaynes are confirmed by giving of an earnest penny, which men do
commonly call a Gods penny. For as much then as in buying either Lands, houses,
inheritaunces, or wares, although a man's bare word ought to suffyze, yet
notwithstanding me^ are so ill dispozed, that if they perceive any
disaduauntage to themselves in the matter, they will not be ashamed too eat
their word: therefore was this ceremony of giving an earnest penny, added: and
it is all one as if the payment were fully performed, so as the bargayne were
utterly past calling back again. S. Paul then means here, that Gods
spirit serves to warrant our salvation too the full. And too what end? For
your inheritance (says he) too the day of your redemption. It is true that
we be Gods heirs even in that we be his children. But we must note how it
is said in the eight too the Romans, Romans 8. c. 24.
that our salvation ^s shet up under hope. So then, we cannot see it, nor
enjoy it as now, according too the third of the Colossians, Coloss. 3. a. 2.
where it is said, that we be like dead men that are departed out of this
world, and that our life is hidden with God in Christ. Therefore although we be
Gods children, yet have we not the full inioyment of it as yet. And it is all
one with that which S. John says in his cannonicall Epistle. 1. John. 3. a. 2.
We ^nowe (says he:) whereby he shows that our faith is not doubtful: but
yet he adds that it is not yet seen, (or it does not yet appear,) but we
must wayt for the day wherein we shall be like unto God, and the^ we shall have
light to see the thing perfectly, which we do but believe as now. Again, we
have seen how S. Paul said in the second too the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 5. b. 6.
that as long as we be in this earthly pilgrimage, we be (after a sort)
absent from God. For why? we walk (says he) but in hope, and we see not the
thing as if it were present, but we see it by faith. John. 5. ^. 24.
Too be short, although we be passed from death too life (as is said in the
fifth of John:) yet do we fight against an infinite number of deaths, because
we be beseeged by them. And S. Paul does well match both toogither in this
text. For on the one side he says we be not yet come too our redemption and
heritage: and yet therwithal he shows, that we be nevertheless sure of it
for all that, and that nothing but our own unthankfulness lets us too
glory fu^ly in God, and too say with full mouth, that we doubt not of our
coming too the heavenly life, forasmuch as we have an earnest penny thereof by
the holy Ghost, and are so knyt too our Lord Jesus Christ, that all the goods
which he has, do belong unto us, and are made common to us by faith.
Therefore let us mark well what is contained in these words of S. Paul's. He
says that the holy ghost is our earnest penny. Seeing it is so: we must needs
be sure of our redemption, whereof we shall have the possession at the last day,
yea even to the full: and that does the thing of it self show sufficiently. For
we be but silly worms of the earth, we be compassed about with rottenness
and corruption, we be beset with so many miseries as is pity to see, the
world rayleth upon us, and mocketh us and our simplicity, we be feign too
endure hunger and thirst, it seems often times that God has forsaken us, and
after a sort cut us of, yea, and that he vou^safeth not too pity us, as the
most despyzed creatures of the world. Lo at what point we be too outward
appeerance. And therefore it stands us on hand too have a remedy, too
warrant our selves withal in the mids of so many perplexities and
hartgriefes. That is the cause why S. Paul says purposely, that the holy
Ghost is our earnest penny. Although then that the world have the bridle looce
to trample us under his feet, as they say: although our Lord keep us occupied
with many temptations: although he humble us in such wise, as it may seem that
we be as sheep appointed too the slaughter, so as death be continually
between our teeth: yet are we not unpurveyed of good remedy. For why? Seeing
that the holy Ghost reygneth in our hearts, we have whereof too boast even in
the mids of all our temptations, according as it is said in the viii. Romans 8.
c. 15.
too the Romans, that being once assured that God takes us for his children,
we may not only call upon him, but also although we be afflicted and
tormented, yet we cease not too be always fully and infallibly resolved
that he is our father, too lead us too the glory of heaven: for even that also
is (...) mean whereby our hope is tried.

Furthermore we be warned also too walk in patience, and that seeing God has
given us his holy spirit for an earnest pennye, we must not be so hasty and
impaciente as we have bin wont too be. For if God handle us roughly, by and
by we fall too grudging, and are very loath too suffer any thing: for we see
how tender and nyce we be of nature. But we must endure patiently, because
God will not have us too come too his kingdom at one leap, as they say, but
will have us too pass by this world through the midds of thorns and breers,
so as we shall have much a do to get through, and we shall be in great
distress. Seeing that he will have us led such a way, and yet notwitstanding
gives us so good a remedy as ought to suffyze us, which is that he
strengthens us in invincible constancy by his holy spirit: let us stand in
a readiness too fight till the time of victory be fully come. It is true that
our faith does even now already get the upper hand: but we receive not yet the
fruite^ of it, another do we fully enjoy it. Therefore we must determine with
our selves too sygh and groan continually, and yet therwithall too rejoice
also. For (why? too rejoice in our hearts, and also) too cry with S. Paul,
alas wretched wight that I am, who shall deliver me from this prison of my
body, are things that may match very well toogither. Therefore let every of us
moorne, yea and be grieved at the heart, for that we be still so much given
too our wicked lusts, and too the number of vices that are in us. And yet
notwithstanding let us cease also ^oo say that we thank God, and too be
contented with his giving of such portion unto us as ought too suffyze us, and
too tarry his leyzure till he accomplish and perform the thing that he has
begun, seeing we have his holy spirit so dwelling in us, with a promis that
we shall, never be destitute of him unto the end. Thus ye see how we be
here incoraged too take heart of grace, and too walk in such constancy, as all
the miseries of the world may not stop us of (...), till we be ^^me to our
races end. And that is the cause why S. Paul speaks purposely of redemption.
It is true that we be redeemed by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1. d. 30.
etc.
and he is given us for our redemption or ransom, as is said in another text:
yet notwithstanding we have not the effect and full fruition of it as yet. 1.
Tim. 2. b. 6.
Then is there a dubble redemption: one which was accomplished in the person of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and anoother which we wait for, and which shall be
showed upon us at his coming ageine. Romans 8. c. 23.
According wheruntoo S. Paul says in the viii. too the Romans, that although
we groan and be hild down in anguish, yet we must not be dismayed at it,
nor think it strange: because all creatures (says he) do bear us company,
yea and be as a woman that trauelleth of child. For we see that all the world
is subject too corruption through the sin of Adam. Seeing then it is so: let us
not quayle in our gronings, but let us so measure our affections as too hold us
contented in that we have our redemption purchaced in the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and thereuppon trust that he will accomplish the same thing in
us and in our persons, which he has brought us in his own. The thing
therefore that S. Paul meant too say, is that Gods spirit is our earnest penny
during the time that we wait too be taken out of this transitory life, and
too be set free from all miseries, specially from the bondage of sin, which
is the heauyest burden that can be. Until such time then as we be
delivered from all those things, we must rest upon this, that Gods spirit
dwells in us.

And as touching the redemption of purchase: it may well be taken for
purchaced redemption: for it is a very ryfe manner of speech: like as when it is
said, the spirit of promis, it is meant, the spirit that assures or warranteth
all the promises: The spirit of the fear of God, because it is he that makes
us obedient too his righteousness. So likewise when he speaks of the
Redemption of purchase, it may well be said that it is the redemption which
was purchaced for us, too show that if we feel the effect of it in our
selves, so as we be out of all doubt of the things that Jesus Christ has
done for us, we must not mistrust that he has suffered in vain. For surely
his suffering were too no purpose at all toward us, unless it came unto us,
so as it might redound too our profit, and we enjoy it. That therefore is the
thing that is purchaced in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ. And yet in the
mean season, as in respect of our selves he reyneth us short, ^oo the end we
should not through our own unthankfulness refuze the benefit that God
offers us, that is too wit, our rejoicing in our afflictions, because we
know that our salvation is sure, nor repyne against God and blaspheme him, but
walk on quietly till we be delivered from this prison wherein we be, and
till we be fully set free by being gathered together in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us feel them more and
more, yea even so far as too bring us too utter mislyking of the
wretchedness that is in our selves, so as we fynding that there is nothing in
us but a dungeon of all naughtiness, may learn too resort too his
righteousness, and to seek it at the well head, and too acknowledge that he
has showed himself a merciful father toward us, not doubting but that
thereby he meant too assure us also that he had adopted us before the beginning
of the world, too the intent we should continue in calling upon him with
true steadfastness and never give over. And so let us all say, Almighty God
heavenly father. etc.

The sixth Sermon upon the first Chapter.
15. For this cause I also having herd of the faith which ye have in Jesus
Christ, and of the love which you have toward all the Saints,

16. Cease not too give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers.

17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory should give you
the spirit of vvisdome and revelation, too have knowledge of him.

18. That is too wit (too have) the eyes of your mind inlyghtened, that you
might understand what the hope is which ye ought too have of his calling,
and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance among the Saints.


We have seen already how Saint Paul brought the Epesians not only to the
chief but also too the only cause of their salvation, and showed that they
must of necessity father all the whole upon God, without mingling of any
foolish presumption therwithall, as who should say that they themselves had
furthered Gods grace which they had received, either by their free will, or by
any good intent in them. Saint Paul therefore has showed in effect, that not
only the Ephesians too whom he spoke, but also they that had bin Gods Church
before, ought all without exception to confess, that all their welfare
proceeded of Gods only free goodness, not only because they were all
redeemed by mean of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also because he had called them
too the belief of the Gospel, according too his choozing of them before the
creating of the world.

And now he warranteth all the said doctrine by the record which it yields
unto God, in that it does even then magnify his goodness, when he is as it
were separated from man's eye, and from the sight of all witnesses. Trewly the
doctrine of the Gospel ought not too be the less esteemed when it is
preached and published in the open face of the whole woorld: but yet it
behooves him that speaks it too have it thoroughly printed in his heart, and to
say the same thing in himself before God and his Angels, which he speaks
before me^: for otherwise it were but a iangling, or rather an vnhalowing of
Gods word: if a man should step up intoo the pulpet too talk like an Angel,
and in the mean while have no such meaning in his heart, nor be persuaded of
the thing that he speaks. It were better that a man were drowned a hundred
times, than too bear abroad the most excellent record of salvation and of Gods
truth: and in the mean season not too be persuaded in himself of the thing
that he preaches, so as God and his Angels might know that he has the same
thing printed in his heart. Therefore it is not without cause, that after S.
Paul has preached Gods free goodness in choozing whom he lyked, and in
calling them too the knowledge of his Gospel when he had chozen them, and in
confirming them with his strong hand, and by giving the^ invincible constancy
and steadfastness when he had called them: now he adds that God knows his
witnessing thereof too be in good earnest and unfeignedly. For he protests
here concerning the prayers which he makes alone by himself, when no man
could know his thought nor what he says and utters with his mouth: that
even then he auoweth the same doctrine before God, inasmuch as he prays him
to voutsafe too accomplish the thing that he has begun. Here therefore we
have too mark first of all, that such as mind too have their labor
profitable too the edifying of the Church, and such as have any true zeal,
must not only give themselves too teaching, but also therwithall pray God too
work with them by his power and grace. For oftentimes ^t befalls, that we
do but beat the water, (yea though we have ^he tongues of Angels) because
we pray not God to further the doc^rine that we preach. For of our selves we
be but unprofitable instruments: and when he has given us utterance, he must
also make it effectual, 1. Cor. 3. b. 7.
according as it is said, that he which planteth is nothing, and he that
waters is nothing, but it is God that gives the increase. Seeing it is so:
Let such as have the charge of teaching Gods Church walk fearfully and
carefully, and not only indeuer to win men unto God, (...) also humbly
acknowledge that they can do nothing of themselves, and that they should but
cast forth a sound intoo the air, which would vanishe away out of hand, if
God wrought not with them by the secret power of his spirit. That therefore is
the thing that we have too remember upon the words that S. Paul speaks
here.

But every of us also ought too apply it generally too his own use. Therefore
when we come too be taught Gods word, or when any of us reads it alone by
himself: let us not imagine our wits too be subtle enough, and that we be
able enough too understand whatsoever the scripture tells us: but let us
acknoweledge our own beastliness, and pray God too make his doctrine too
prevail in such wise with us, as it may not slip from us. But this thing will
be perceived the better by the process that S. Paul holds on here, if we
wey well all the words that he uses. He says that he yields thanks unto
God without end or ceassing, for the faith which he heard to be in the Church
of Ephesus, And for their love toward the Saints: and yet notwithstanding he
continues his praying unto God, that he should inlighten them more and more,
and bring them too the perfection which all the faithful ought too labor too
attain unto, till God have taken them out of this world. Now, in that he
says that he cease not to give thanks unto God, we see by his example
wherabouts the faithful ought too spend their time. For in very deed the
chief sacrifyze that God requires and allows, is that we should honor
him for all his benefits, and yield him his deserved praise for the same. And
it is not too be thought that that can be done (as ye would say) by starts
or by patches: but like as God on his side ceasseth not too pour out his
benefits infinitely, so also behooves it every of us too enforce ourselves, too
bless and praise him without ceassing. For S. Paul speaks here unfeignedly:
and when he blessed God for the Ephesians, he meant as much for all other
Churches. What an unkindness then were it, if a man should not think at all
upon the benefits that he has received at Gods hand? We are all of us bound
too praise God for our neighbors. If we hear it reported that God has
prospered his Church, or showed mercy too his people a hundred leages of, and
too be short, if we hear of any thing that ought too make us glad: it
becomes our mouths too be open to praise God for it. Now if we be bound too
do this for the good turns that we see not, but which our neighbors feel,
though they be distant in far Countries from us: what is too be thought of us
when God fills our mouths (as it is said in the Psalm), Psalm. 145. ^. 16.
and yet in the mean while we have no mind at all too yield him thanks? And
we have too note further, that if we be bound too praise God for our meat
and drink, and for all the things that belong too this flightfull life: he
binds us to him much more without comparison, when he calls us too the
heavenly heritage, and when he blisseth and inritcheth us with spiritual gifts
of grace, which serve too lead us far further than this world. Seeing then
that God uses such bountifulness toward us: what excuse can we have, if we
follow not the example that is showed us here in S. Paul? which is, that all
our life long we must occupy our selves continually in praising the name of
God.

Now heerewithall he shows that faith and charity are the very gifts of
God, and come not of our selves, as men do always imagine through a diuelishe
pride. I told you before, that S. Paul played not the Hypocrite in giving thanks
too God for the faith and charity of the Ephesians. If every man could
believe, and had faith of his own inclination, or cold get it by some power of
his own: the praise thereof ought not too be given unto God: for it were but
a mockerye too acknowledge our selves beholden too him for that thing which we
have of others than of him. But here S. Paul blisseth Gods name for
inlightning the Ephesians with faith, and for framing their hearts unto
charity. Therefore it is too be concluded, that all the whole comes of God.
The heathen men bringing in their own freewill, th^^ght themselves beholden
too God for nothing, but for their good fortune, as they termed it: for they
surmyzed that they had all things by their own power and policy. The Papi^ts
also will well grant that Gods grace must be feign too help us in par^e: ^ub
yet (...) all that they will have man too be still exalted, and too attayn too
^^yth by his own motion. ^eere S Paul shetteeh out all these di^^lish
opinions, and shows (as we have seen heertofore) that whenever there is
any Church in the world, or any people too ^al upon (...), which are settled
and grounded upon the belief of the Go^pell: God deserves to have the whole
glory thereof. And why? For his hand must needs have wrought in that case,
because men woold never inclyne too any goodness, if they were not guyded and
gouer^ed to it, yea and even drawn too it perforce by the holy Ghost. For
there is so grea^e (...) usnesse in us, that we not only be weak and feeble,
as the papists imagine, but also utterly contrary too God, until such time as
he have clenzed us. And this is the thing which he means in saying by his
prophet Ezechiel, that the hearts which were stony before, shall be turned
intoo fleshly hearts, namely that he will sof^en them, and bow them to his
obeisance.

Furthermore under these two words of Faith and Love, S. Paul has
comprehended the whole perfection of Christians. For the mark whereat the first
table of the Law ameth, is that we should worship one only God, and hang
upon him for all things, acknowledging our selves too be so indetted unto
him, as we ought to flee to him alone for all refuge, and indeuer too spend
our whole life in his s^ruis. That is the sum of the first table of the Law.
The contents of the second are nothing else, but that we should live
toogither i^ equi^ie and vpryghtnesse, and deal in such wyze with our
neighbors, as we should streyue our selves too help all men without hurting
of any man. And we be sure that God has set forth so good and perfet a rule
of good (...) in his law, that nothing can be added unto it. Seeing it is so
not without cause does S. Paul in this place set down faith in Jesus Christ,
and charity (toward our ney^^or as the sum of whole christen comes (...),
showing whereunto we ought too frame our selves, and which is our rule. But
herewith all we have also to mark, that under this word Faith, he
comprehe^deth the whole seruis of God. For it is imposible that we should not
be wholly ravished in love to our heavenly father, being once acquainted with
his goodness, as he has showed it us in the person of his only son.
Behold, God draws us out of the dungeon of confuzion and death, and opens
us the gate of the heavenly kingdom, and tells us that he will take us for
his children. Now can we hear and believe this, but that we shall be wholly
given over unto him, forsaking the world, and hating the evil that is in our
selves, because it separateth us from him. Ye see then how the word faith
imports a full yielding over of our selves wholly unto God. Ageine, faith is
not an idle thing: it imports that we should resort unto God, and that
whenever we be steyned with any blot, we should pray him to redress it:
for there is not any necessity in the world, which is not as a dash with a
spur, which God gives us to make us comme unto him. Faith therefore imports
prayer and supplication. It imports moreover that it cannot be but we must
halow the name of God by resting our selves upon him, and by yielding him the
whole glory that belongs too him, when we know that he gives us all
things of his own free goodness, looking for nothing at our hands but only
the sacrifyze of thanksgiving. Thus ye see how faith imports all that is
contained in the first table of the Law. True it is that the part is put for
the whole: howbeit it is too be considered that the things which we have
spoken of, cannot be put asunder. Now then it stands us on hand too live
uprightly and indifferently with our neyghbors, as it is said in the sixtenth
Psalm, Psalm. 16. ^. ^. 3.
that we be beholden to God for all things, and that we cannot yield him any
recompense agein, and that when we have streyned our selves too the uttermost,
too bestow aught upon ^ym, all that we can do, is another here nor there too
him. What requires he then? That we should be given too doing of good to
his poor faithful ones, according as S. Paul also names the Saints
expressly in this Text. True it is that we ought too use charity toward all
men without exception: for we cannot be the children of God, who makes his
Sun to shine both upon good and bad, except we love our enemies, and streyne
our selves too succor and help them. That therefore is the mark that we must
ame at. Yet notwithstanding this hinders us not to love all Gods children
with a brotherly love, because they be knit unto us with a streyter bo^d. That
is the cause why it is said as well in my forealleged text of the sixtenth
Psalm, as in this present one of S. Paul, that we must have love toward
all the faithful. Yea and S. Paul's him self in an other place does well
discuss the doubt that may be cast in this behalf. For he wylleth us too
have charity too all men in general, Galat. 6. c. 10.
and chiefly too such as are of the household of faith. God then will have us
too becomme like him (...), and to follow his example in doing good too al men,
yea even too (...) as are not worthy of it, in so much that we should too
the vtter^ost of our power, procure the welfare of those which seek nothing
else but to pick out our eyes. Moreover, for as much as he has set his ^^arke
upon all the faithful, and commended them unto us, he will (...) us too
bear a certain special brotherly love toward them. For ^ods gifts are too
be esteemed wheresoever they be seen, Psalm. 1. a. ^.
accor^ing too the fifteenth Psalm, where it is said, that we must love such
as fear God, and abhor such as are wicked. Then if we see the tokens that
God has put intoo his faithful, whereby he comes near them: is it not
meet that we also on our side should be stirred up too love them? Too be
short, we see that S. Paul has comprised here the whole rule of good and
holy conversation: that is tooo wit, that first of all we must give over our
selves wholly to our God, to stick steadfastly unto him: And secondly live
euenly and uprightly with our neighbors, absteynyng from all evil doing, and
indeuoring too do good too all men, according too our power and ability. And
how may that come too pass? Even by knowing our heavenly father, and by
acknowledging the inf^nite good turns which he has done us, and whereof he
voutsafeth too make us partakers daily, so as all our whole life depend upon
him, and he only be the party at whose hand we look for everlasting
salvation, by calling upon him, and by yielding him thanks all our life long.
Let that serve for the first point.

Again, as touching the second, it is not possible for us too love our
^eighbors, but we must also live soberly without showing any evil ^^ample,
and look in such wize too our behavior, as no man may have cause too
complain of us. For what charity is there in a whore^onger that goes about to
dishonest another man's wife? or in a thief that seeks too steal another man's
goods? Ageyn, seeing that our life ought too be guided with all honesty: when
soever any man bruste^h out intoo drunkenness, blasphemy, or such other
things, it cannot be, but that in so doing there must be some trubbling of
poor folk^^, some robbing them of their goods, or some starting out intoo all
manner of extorsions and excesses. So then, if we have charity, and love
toward our neighbor, we shall live a sound and upright life with them, and
we shall rule it in such wize, that we shall not buzie o^r selves about
vain fancies, as the Papists do: for they take (...) pains in their
Ceremonies, and they call it Gods seruis too bab^^e much, and too gad here and
there on pilgrimage, and to do this (...) that: and in the mean while they
do but plonder away in their ow^e imaginations: and that is only for want of
knowing whereunto God calls them. Too the end therefore that we take not
labor (...) vain, let us mark what God allows, and let us hold us too
that. For we cannot miss, if we abide continually in the way, as he shows
it us by his word, specially since he shows us in so small room^, what is
requisite too the leading of such a life as becomes us. For were the volumes
long, and without end, we would excuze our selves that we were no great
Clerks, and that we could not bear away so many things. But now seeing that
our lord vttreth his whole demau^ds in two or three words? we must needs
grant, that if we bear not away so short and eazie a lesson, we be to^ pee^ish
and froward, and stop our ears (...) wilfully, least we might hear what he
says unto us.

Finally it is too be noted upon this word Faith, that S. Paul does not
without cause say, the faith in Jesus Christ: for that is the thing which we
must look at. The fathers of old time had always the image of God before
their eyes: for they might not make sacrifize but before his merciseate: they
might not hope that God herd them, Colos^. 1. ^. 15. etc.
or was merciful too them by any other mean. They then had the visible image
of the Arc of covenant: H^br. 1. a. 3.
but we have now Jesus Christ the image of God, which was invisible of
himself: for not without cause does S. Paul say, that God is incomprehensible
till he manifest himself in the person of his son. Therefore since we have
Jesus Christ who is the express image of God, it behooves us to look thither.
And here ye see also why it is said, that he is the express image of the
power of God his father. For although the persons be distinct: John. 5. d. 23.
yet does he represent unto us the things that are belonging and requisite
too ou^ salvation, so that in knowing the son, we know the father also, as
says S. John: and he that has not the son, renounceth the father, what
protestation soever he make of going too him. So then, whereas it is said here,
John. 14. a. 1.
that we must believe in Jesus Christ: let us bethink us of the warning which
he gives to his disciples. Believe ye in God (says he?) believe ye also in
me. There he shows that the ancient fathers which lived under the Law, had
but a dark teaching, until the time that he was manifested too the world. True
it is that they woorshippid the living God, yea and that they had none access
unto him but by means of the media^or. Howbeit, that was but under shadows
and figures, another had ^hey any such light as we have nowadayes under the
Gospel. And (...) that cause also told I you that he is called the image of
God, who is of his own nature invisible, so as we could not know him,
unless he ^^tered himself by such means. Too be short, let us mark that we
^oo nothing else but wander, till we have our faith settled in Jesus Christ.
And this will be the better perceived by the errors wherewith ^he world has bin
imbrewed unto this day. For the Papists will pro^est well enough that they
believe in God: as much do the Turks and the Jews also. True it is that the
Papists and Jews seem too come nearest the truth: for the Jews protest
that they worship the living God, even the same God that gave them his Law by
Moses. But what for that? In the mean while they reject Christ, who is the
end and substance of the Law. As for the Papists, although they ^^^fesse
Christianity, and auowe Jesus Christ to be their savior: yet is (...)
^pparant that they make war against him, for as much as they (...) set up
serving of God after their own lyking, so as there is nothing but disorder in
all their doings. As touching the Turks, they can well enough say, Almyghtie
God the maker of heaven and earth: but shall we think that God will renounce
himself, or vnsaye that which he has said, which is, that no man can come
unto him but by his well-beloved son, whom he has ordained too be the
mediator ^^tweene him and men? Ageyn we see how the papists will well y^^ugh
say, that they believe in God: but yet therwithall they will needs (...) patrons
and advocates too bring them too his presenc^. Agein, (...) not enough for them
that they be bought with the blud of ou^ (...) Jesus Christ: they must also
put too their own merits, and ^^^^some themselves by their own satisfactions:
and when we have offended God, we must have such means and such. Then if a
man list too examine the papists belief, surely he shall find that they
^eleeue their own dreams, and that all that ever they do, is (...) confuzed
maze. For with Jesus Christ they mingle whatsoever comes in their own head,
whereas we know that he ought to continue whole a^one by himse^fe. We see then
how S. Paul leads us to the true t^yal of our faith: which is by resting
upon Jesus Christ, so that we feel our selves utterly void of all goodness,
and that we m^^t draw from out of his fullness, too be filled with all good
things, or else ^o will be unto us. For if we had all the Angels in heaven on
our side (if it were possible:) yet is it certain that all should go too
w^ecke, if we have not the said head, as S. Paul says in the first and
second chapters of the Epistle too the Colossians. Coloss. ^. c. ^8. and. 2 b.
10.
And so ye see what we have too gather upon that sentence.

Now after S. Paul has said, that he thanketh God for the things that he saw
alredie in the Church of Ephesus: he adds that (...) pra^eth too him also.
This is too show us that when we see God bestow his excellent gifts upon
his children, we had need too beseech him still to cont^newe and go forewarde
with the same, and that for two causes. For he that stands, may happen to
fall, and again, God had need too increace his grace more and more. For even
they that are the perfectest shall have cause too be ashamed, if they look
well intoo their own wantes. Ye see then that the thing wheretoo S. Paul
brings us, is that when we praise God for the gifts which he has bestowed
upon his chozen children* we ought too match prayer also with our
thanksgiving. And why? For it is in hi^ only too bring too pass the thing
that he has begun: and it beh^ueth us too lay always this ground, Lord thou will not leave the work of thine own hands half undone. Psalm. 138. b. 8.
And the same thing which we ought too do for others, is also requisite for
our selves. Too be short, we be here warned too magnify God in such wise
for his goodness and gifts which we have felt already, as we must perceive
that there is still much default in us, and that it stands us on hand that he
should give us perseverance too the end: and moreover that he should correct
our vices, and augment his grace in us, till we be come too full perfection,
which thing will never be till we be rid of this mortal body. Yet
notwithstanding we see how Satan does now adays possess such as surmyze a
hellishe perfection, and make but the three first petitions too their father,
saying, that it is enough too pray God that his name be hallowed, that his
kingdom come, and that his will be done: and so they cut of all the rest of
the prayer which our Lord Jesus has left us. And for this matter I have the
signing of their own hands which their disciples know, whereby those devils
show that they must needs be utterly without wit, seeing they be carried away
so far, as too refuze too yield God this glory, that even now we be yet
still over laden with the burden of our infirmities, hild down with store of
corruptions, and hemmed in with abundance of vices, and that God must be feign
too clenze us of them more and more, yea even from day too day, until he have
brought us too the perfection wheruntoo he calls us. And it stands us so
much the more on hand too mark this doctrine well: because the Papists are
not so far ouershot in the errors of their supersti^ions and Idolatries, as
these varlets are, which do now adays sow abroad their poisons in their
privy meetings and lurking holes. But howsoever they fare, let us mark well
what is showed us here by the holy Ghost, when S. Paul says that he prays
God. And why? I have told you already, that the Ephesians had profited, and
that the gifts of God and of his holy spirit were augmented in them: He has
showed that. Now too knit up the matter, he says further, that he prays God
too give them that which they have not, and which they want as yet. Since it is
so: let us mark that the more we have profited, the more cause have we too
humble our selves, and with all myldnesse too beseech God too finishe the
thing that he has begun, (...) too increace his gifts in us, till we need
no more too go any f^rther, which shall be at the meeting, whereof we shall
speak more in the fourth Chapter.

But yet must we mark well the words that S. Paul uses. For he says, the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, or the glorious father,
(for the speech father of glory, is put in the Hebrew tongue, for glorious
father) give you the spiritual revelation too have knowledge of him. Now when
as S. Paul sends us here too Jesus Christ, saying, that the God whom he
calls upon, is the same which is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea and
his father too: it is too show the trust that he had too be heard, and that the
Ephe^^^ns should take heart too follow the same fashion and rule of praying, ^^d
that when they have any occasion to resort unto God, they should h^ld the same
way that he did, and keep by the streit line of coming (...) our Lord Jesus
Christ. But now if a man demand how God is above our Lord Jesus Christ: the
question is easy too be resolved, if we have an eye too the person of the
mediator, John. 10. ^. ^0.
which is abased in our stead and degree, too be the mean between God and
us. True it is that Jesus Christ is all one with his father, and when we
speak of the living God, it behooves us too acknowledge that the whole
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him. Therefore we must not separate our
Lord Jesus Christ, Coloss. ^. b. ^.
as though he were a new God, and some other than the same that was showed too
the fathers from the beginning (as some devils say now adays, which have
stirred up that stining villainy and abhommination:) but it is the selfsame
only one God which has showed himself too us in the person of the father, so
we seek him in Jesus Christ. For in Jesus Christ we have too consider the
office of the mediator, in that he so abased himfelse. Not that he forw^nt any
whit of his majesty, nor that he was any whit abridged or diminished of his
eternal glory, there was no such thing at all. But as in respect of us he was
abaced, yea and utterly emptyed. And we must not be ashamed too say, that
Jesus Christ was abaced, seeing it is said that he was emptyed: for that is the
very word that S. Paul uses too the Philippians. Phil. 2. a. 7.
Therefore when we speak of Jesus Christ as he is joined too us, too the end
too bring us too his father: so is he under God his father, namely in respect
that he has taken our nature upon him, and is become our fellow. And that
also is the cause why he said to his disciples (as S. John reports in his
twentieth chapter) Go ye too my brethren and tell them, John. 20. d. 17.
I go too my God and your God, too my father and your father. Lo how Jesus
Christ joins himself in such wise with his faithful ones, that he says he
will have one selfsame God with them. Yea verily but in what sort? For is he
not God himself? Yis: howbeeit forasmuch as he is clothed with our flesh, and
inasmuch as he voutsaued too be made flesh, too the end that we might be
members of his body: that is the cause why he has one God with us. And that
is the cause also why the Apostle applies this text of Esayes too his person:
Esai. 8. d. 18. etc.
Lo here am I with the servants which thou have given me: so as Jesus Christ
comes there as a captein that presents himself before his king and prince,
Heb. 2. d 13.
saying, Lo here I am with the company of children which thou have given me.
Howsoever the case stand, we see that Jesus Christ draws us too God his
father, too the end we should repair too him with full trust, and he receive
us. For otherwise who is he that durst be so bold as too hight himself that
his request should be heard? What grace could we obtain, John. 14. a. 6.
if the gate were not opened us by Jesus Christ, and that he performed not the
thing that he has spoken, namely that he is the way:

Howbeeit too the intent we might the better know what need we have too be
guyded by our Lord Jesus Christ: S. Paul sets here before us the infinite
glory of God. How dare we then be so bold as too offer our selves intoo Gods
sight, but for that we have an advocate which makes us a way in thither? For
if the sun do dazzle men's eyes, and the heat of it sindge us though we
be very far of from it: what will become of us when we will preace unto
God? For what else is the sun than a little power which he has breathed
intoo it? And must we not needs be as it were swallowed up, when we preace
to the incomprehensible majesty that is in God? Yet notwithstanding if we
have Jesus Christ, we have too understand that God is not only the father of
glory, but also the father of mercy, and that he looks with pity upon such
as are most miserable, and are had in reproach and disdeyne of the world. Lo
whereupon we ought too rest in praying unto God.

S. Paul prays God here expressly too give the Ephesians the spirit of
wisdom and revelation. It is certain that God had already reveled too them
the truth of his Gospel, as it is seen. And verily we could not have one
spark of faith, or of light, except God had wrought in us already, Math. 16. c.
17.
according as it is said to Peter in the sixteenth chapter of S. Matthew, Flesh
and blud has not opened these things unto thee, but my heavenly father which
is in heaven. And yet for all this, Peter shows afterward, that he knew not
any whit of Christ's spiritual kingdom. Then although he were but as a silly
nouice sat his A. B. C. yet is it witnessed of him, that the small taste of the
Gospel which he had, was a gift from heaven. Hereby we see how God must be
feign too increase his gifts more and more in us: and in that respect is our
life termed a way, because we must always go on forewardes, till our race be
ended. And who soever imagines any perfection in this world, is possessed of
Satan, and utterly renounceth God grace. Yet notwithstanding let us not surmize
that God changes his purpose, (for he is not variable) or suffers his grace
too be chopped out in gobbets and cantles, at men's pleasures: but he has
appointed this order, that we should grow from day too day, and yet
therwithal learn^ to acknowledge soberly our wantes, and too groan for them,
and to mislike of them, and to hold our selves always in awe. Ye^ see then
that these two things agree very well: namely that the Ephesians had already
received the spirit of Revelation, and yet that they needed to have it given
them of God. For although there be but one spirit, yet are the gifts diverse,
and they be distributed to every of us in measure, and as it pleases him to
give them. There is none but Jesus Christ which has received them fully. He
only is the fountain that can never be drayned dry, it is he upon whom Gods
spirit re^teth: to the end that we should al of us be made partakers of it.
And for our own parts let us acknowledge, that the wizest of us have need too
be always scol^ers, and too learn still even to our dying day. Howbeit, by
the way let us mark that this word Revelation condemns us of al blyndesse.
For we have our eyes open too discern between white and black: we see the
Sun and the Moon, we see these worldly things, and are able to judge of
them: we need no new Revelation for that geere, for we have it of nature.
True it is that our eyes are instruments of Gods power and goodness, whereby
he makes us to inioye the light: but that is a common thing. But here S.
Paul shows us, that we be blind, and that we conceive not any whyt of Gods
spiritual grace, except he open our eyes, and take away the kercheefe or veyle
that is before them, yea and give us a new sight, which we have not. For we
have our eyes worse tha^ stopped, until he inlighten them by his holy spirit.
Thus ye see what we have too bear in mind. And that is the thing which he
proceeds still withal. Namely (says he) too have the eyes of your
understanding enlightened. But a man might reply, If we have the spirit of
Revelation already, why have we need of it? Uerily as who should say, you saw
nothing at all. True it is that you see partly: but you have your eyes still
too much dymmed. And this may be said generally of al men, 1. Cor. 13. d. 12.
according as it is said, that in this world we see things but d^^ly, and
as it were through a glass, till we be able to behold God in his heavenly
glory, at which time we shall be fashioned like unto him. Agey^e, too the intent
that men should not allege (and say) M^st God then reuele things in such
wise unto us, as if we were in such taking that we could see nothing at all?
And shall a man be as a bru^e beast without discretion or judgment? To
answer heereunto, it is true that we have some wit, but yet are we blind
for all that, because we be corrupted by sin. God therefore must be feign too
give us new eyes, as I said before. And he adds the word wisdom, the better
too beat down the fond ouerweening that men conceive in themselves, when they
will needs fly without wings too come unto God. For there is not that man
which would not be wise. If we desired true wisdom by seeking it at Gods
hand: it were a good and well ruled desire. But there are two faults in us:
for we will needs be wyze after our own conceyt. Am I not wyze enough too
govern my self, will a fool say? And in the mean while we despyze Gods
word, and every of us will needs have the ^rydle laid looce in our neck, and
have leave given him too do what he thinks good. But that is too great an
ouerweening. The other vice is, that in reading the holy scripture, we still
imagine too come too the knowledge of the things that are contained there, by
our own discretion. But here both twain of them are excluded by S. Paul.
For when as he desires God too give his faithful ones the spirit of wisdom,
he shows that they have no discretion, no more than brute beasts, except it
be by the guyding of our Lord Jesus Christ, of purpose too come too the
kingdom of heaven. For even in civil matters and worldly affairs, God gives
it not too any, but too such as he thinks good. Now if he keep his special
goodness always too himself, too give discretion too whom he lists, too
guide himself withal in these bace things of the world: then does he make
the unbelievers too be well syghted: and therefore when the case concerns
the heavenly life, there is no preparation in us. And so S. Paul presuppozeth
the thing which I have said already, namely, that we must be taught at Gods
hand, too know him by the doctrine of truth through the record of the Gospel,
for without that, we should be like these fantastical fellows, which roue
under the pretense of having the revelation of Gods holy spirit: howbeeit, that
is not after the manner that S. Paul takes the word Revelation, when he
prays God too give it too his children. As for example, when Jesus Christ
speaks of his spirit, he does not separate it from the doctrine that he had
preached. When the spirit comes (says he) he shall tell you all truth.
John. 14. d. 26. and 15. d. 26.
And how is that? Had not the Apostles received it already? Yis: but he adds,
he shall show you the things that you hear now of my mouth. Too be short, it
is the peculiar office of the holy Ghost to teach us in such wise, as the word
which we hear, may therwithall have his course and place, and as we may profit
in the same.

And theruppon S. Paul shows also wherein lies all our light and knowledge:
namely in knowing God in the person of his only son. That (say ^is the thing
wherewith we must content our selves. For if we have ^i^klishe wits too be
inquisitiue of the things that pass our capacit^e: Let us consider a little
how weak and raw our understanding is. And if our wits be so gross and
heavy: how shall we do when we would s^ye above heaven and earth? Are we
able too comprehend all that in so small a room? Yet nevertheless we see how
men take unmeasurable leave to be inquisitiue of this and that, and to put
forth questions in way of pleading and disputing against God. For this cause
S. Paul shows us here, that if we mind too be wize, it behooves us too
be sober: that is too wit, we must understand what manner a thing God and our
Lord Jesus Christ is, as he himself will show anon after, that when we be
once come to that point, we have so much as ought well too suffize us, and if
we presume too go any further, it is but a wilful overthrowing of our selves.
S. Paul then will show that more at length hereafter: but it ought to suffize
us, that as well in this text, as in all the whole holy scripture, we ought too
learn which is the God whom we ought too serve, what is his will, how we may
have our trust in him, what entrance we may have to pray too him, and too fly
too him for succor at all times. That is the thing whereunto we must employ our
selves. But that cannot be done, unless all that ever we have need of, and is
auaylable to our welfare, be too be had in Jesus Christ, in whom God has
manifested himself. For in it self the majesty of God is too high a thing,
and we should be undone a hundred times before we could come nere him, if it
were not that he is come down unto us. But if we once have Jesus Christ*
there we have a lively image of him, wherein we may behold whatsoever is
requisite for our salvation. For there we understand that God is our father,
and that we be clenzed from all our sins too be transformed intoo the
glory of God. There we see how God accepts us for rightuous, and that we
be reconciled too God ageine. There we perceive how he has raunsomed us, and
that we shall never be left destitute of the grace of his holy spirit, till
he have brought us too the ioying of our inheritance. Thus do we know all
these things in our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 2. ^. 2.
And that is the cause also why S. Paul says in another place, that he
desired not too know any other thing than Jesus Christ, and that it is he
onley of whom he intended too boast. According whereuntoo we have seen
heretofore, how he forsook all things to abide under the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that although the same has too the worldward nothing but
shame and reproach: yet he protests that he had given over all that he had
esteemed before, and that he esteemed them but as hinderaunce and loss, yea and
as filth and dung, too the intent too cleave too our Lord Jesus Christ, and too
show that such as are possessed with the fond opinion of their own
deseruings, do separate themselves from our Lord Jesus Christ, and that if we
will be knit unto him, we must give over all that we imagine our selves too
have of our own, and offer our selves unto him ^oyde of all goodness, too be
filled at his hand: And here ye se^ also why S. Paul says, that he had lever
come too the haven of salvation poor and stark naked, then too live in the
mids of the Sea, and too be there swallowed up. For although he were taken for
an holy man, and as half an Angel: yet made he no reckening of all that, so
he might be partaker of the remission (of sins) that was given him in Jesus
Christ, and of the grace which he has communicated too all his members.
Therefore let us learn too magnify Gods grace in such wyze, as we may
utterly forget all the toys wherewith the devil de^^iueth the unbelievers, by
puffing them up with I wot not what manner of pride, and come utterly empty
too our Lord Jesus Christ ^oo beg his grace. For we cannot receive one drop of
it, but by confessing our selves too be utterly unworthy of it.

And now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknoweledgment of our faults, praying him too make us perc^yue them more and
more, and that the same may so humble us, as we may be stablished in his
grace, and labor too come nerer and nerer unto him, that being beaten down
in our selves, we may be rayzed up by him through his mere mercy, and
depending altogether upon him, resort unto him as too (...) father, and
continewe in so doing till he have taken us out of the prizon of sin, and
joined us perfectly too himself. That it may please him too grant this grace,
not only too us, but also too all people. etc.

The seventh Sermon upon the first Chapter.
17. I pray for you, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of
glory, give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation, too have the knoweledge
of him:

18 That is too wit, too have the eyes of your understanding enlightened, too
the end ye may know what the hope is which you ought too have of his calling,
and what the riches are of the glory of his heritage among the Saints.


ALl men have naturallye some understanding. Not that it shows itself as
soon as they be borne: but in process of time all have some discretion of
good and evil. And for that cause are they reasonable creatures. But the
understanding which we have of nature, is not enough too bring us too the
kingdom of heaven. For we stop far short when matte^s that concern the
heavenly life do come in question: We see that every man has wit in matters
and affairs of the world: and every man will look about him. Agein although
diverse could find in their hearts that their own consciences were dead: yet
notwithstanding God has so graued a kind of feeling in their hearts, as our
lives must needs be brydled, and even the wickeddest and woorst natured of us
all, shall of force have some remorse or hartbyting, and be constreyned
whether they will or no, too allow the good, and condemn the evil. True it is
that when they have committed any fault, they will labor too hyde it with
vain excuces. But if a man ask them whether murder, extortion, robbery,
whoredom, deceyt, and forswearing be vertewes or no: thy will say, they be
vices worthy too be condemned. Every man will talk so. For it is Gods will
that there should be such a knowledge printed in man's heart, too the end that
all should be condemned without excuce, and be enforced too be their own
judges. But (as I said before) this is not enough too lead us unto God, and
too open us the kingdom of heaven in such wise, as we may know how too be
saved, or how too call upon God. Then are we stark blind in that behalf:
for our insyght reaches not beyond the world. Therefore God must be feign too
work in us, and too give us new eyes too spy out the things that are
requisite too our salvation. And that is the cause why S. Paul prays unto
God here too give them inlyghtened eyes. Wherein he presuppozeth that men have
alredie some entrance, not too atteyne so high as is requisyte: but too have
some seed of Religion in them, and too perceive that there is a God:
Furthermore God must be feign too give a greater light, and such a one as we
be quyte void of, by reason of Adams sin: for we be plundged in such
darkness, that we go clean awk from the right way, till God have reached us
his hand. Ye see then that the thing which is contained here, is that God
has done more for us in giving us the eyes of understanding, than in making
us men, and putting us intoo the world? because that thereby he reformeth us,
and gives us a clear and sure insyght, as to those whom he has chozen. For
it is a privilege which is peculiar too his own children, and not common too
all men. And truly we see that when God utters his power, it is not known
but only too such as have inlyghtened eyes, according too this saying of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 2^. a. 4.
Thy God has not given thee a heart too understand, nor eyes too see, even
unto this day. We know that miracles were wrought in the sight of the
people: yet notwithstanding the passing of the red sea, the issuing of the
water out of the rock, the falling of the Manna down from heaven, the thick
cloud by day, and the fiery pillar by night, the abundaunt coming of the
flesh unto them, and the horrible punishments that God laid upon the
rebels, and upon such as had given full scope too their own lusts, all this
geere the people understood not. Moses telling them that they had need too
refer themselves too God, that they might be enlightened by his spirit,
says, I see that even unto this hour Gods gracious doings have bin buried
among you through your unthankfulness: (...)
but that is because men are blockish, and do never understand aught that
belongs too their welfare, till God have wrought in them. Therefore it
stands you on hand too rid your selves of all ouerweenyng, and too crave
understanding at Gods hand, acknowledging your selves too be unable too reach
so high as too judge ryghtly of Gods works, and too profit your selves by
them, until he have given you a heavenly sight in your minds. This is the
sum of the things that we have too mark in this streyne.

Now hereupon it is easy too gather, how the wretched world has bin beguyled
by the opinion of freewill, which has bin put into their heads. For the
Papists will well enough grant, that without Gods grace we cannot walk as we
ought to do: but yet they say therwithal, that we may well further Gods grace
by our own freewill: and so they make a medly of the^ together. When they mind
to defyne freewill, they say it is a mingled thing, so as we have reason and
wit too chooze the good, and too refuze the evil, and that therwithall we have
also power and ability, to perform and put in execution the thing that we
have purposed. But we see after what manner S. Paul speaks here of mamies
reason, which they term the Queen that ouerruleth and brydleth all our
thoughts and deeds. He shows that she is stark blind, until God have
renewed her, and not that he does but supply our wantes where any be, as
though there were some piece of power in us. Had it bin so, S. Paul would have
said, that God furthereth our light, or that he increases it, or that he
adds too it whatsoever it has need of. Howbeit he speaks not so: but he
says, God give you inlyghtened eyes: showing thereby that it is a free gift,
and not only that our Lord must be feign too bear with our infirmities, and
too put some further portion theruntooo: but also that we being blind can see
nothing at all, till he have opened our eyes, and that we be guyded and
governed by the said manifestation of his holy spirit, which we have touched
heertoofore. And now forasmuch as men run always flinging over the feeldes,
and buzie their heads about many unprofitable things: S. Paul shows us
whereto we ought too apply all wholly both our understanding and wit, namely
about the seeking how too know what the hope of our calling is. I have told
you already, that men are as ye would say, borne to curiosity, and that they
roue and raunge, and frame many wicked gazes (in their heads:) and that is the
cause why many men do martyr themselves out of measure, 2. Tim. 3. b. 7.
ever lerning, and never atteyning too the knowledge of the truth, as says S.
Paul. Therefore let us mark well, that all the true knowledge which we must
seek, is too atteyne to the hope wheruntoo God has called us. For the
scripture serves not too feed us with vain and superfluous things: but too
edify us too our welfare: that is too wit, to make us perceive Gods goodness,
that we might be joined unto him, and he be our true happiness. And
hereuppon we may gather also, that until such time as our Lord have
enlightened us by his holy Spirit, we can find another way nor path too come
near the heavenly life, no nor so much as guess what it means. Wherefore it
is for our behoof, that our Lord should put us in possession of our salvation,
by the power of his holy spirit. I told you heertoofore how that faith serves
too give us an entrance intoo the kingdom of heaven, and intoo the heritage
that is purchased for us by our Lord Jesus Christ, and that God must be feign
too give it us by his holy spirit. Then since it is so, let us mark that we
have need, not only too have ^he Gospel preached unto us, but also that God
bore our ears, so as we may hearken too the things that are contained in the
same, and he open our eyes too see the things that he shows us: and too be
short, that he may both begin all, and bring all too pass. Howbeit for as much
as men (as I said before) do by their fond imaginations take more upon them
than they ought too do, and on the other side despize Gods gifts: S. Paul
magnifyeth here the hope whereof he had made mention before, saying: What the
richesse of the glory of his heritage are among the Saints. No doubt but that
when there (...) any speaking of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, we will
say, ^^ey be high things: howbeit that is but too exempt our selves from ^^em,
if we could escape: so as we could be contented to know ^ightnought of
the things that concern our salvation. We be vn^aciable when any body feeds
us with vanities and leazings: but if God call us too his school, we shrink
back as much as we can ^ossibly, yea and we set this before us as a shield,
that we be rude, and that we have but a small and over gross understanding,
and that the secrets of Gods word are too deep and incomprehensible for us.
We have skyl enough too say so: and yet is al but hypocrisy and feynednesse.
And for proof thereof men will always judge after their own liking, so as if
any thing be propounded to them from out of Gods word: Is it so, say they? And
how is that possible? They reason, they scan of it. Behold, it is God that
speaks, and yet will not they without gainsaying, receive the things that
are showed them in the name of God. We see then that they do but lie, in
saying that they be dull and gross witted: for they think the clean
contrary. The starkest idiots (say I) and the veryest doltes of them al will
still be wizer than God. Ageine, on the other side, what causes the Gospel too
be despized, but that a number of per^ and fantastical fellows, think it too
be but a simple doctrine, and that it has not finenesse and suttletie enough
for them? So much the more need therefore have we too bethink us of the
thing that is showed us here by S. Paul: which is, that the glorious heritage
wheruntoo God has called us, is an infi^ite riches. For besides that we be
nothing else but mire and rottenness, s^^^ shetteth us out from all hope of
salvation. And so long as we be Gods enemies, what can we look for at his
hand but utter confuzion? Yet notwithstanding it pleases him too make us
fellows with the Angels of heaven, yea and more than that too: for we be made
members of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the end we should be parttakers of his
life and glory. How excellent riches are these? When we shall have employed
all our wits about them, ought we not too be tootoo much ashamed, seeing
that God has uttered so inestimable goodness toward us? So then, S. Paul
too waken up men's drowzinesse, and to rebuke and correct their
unthankfulness, for that they commend not the hundredth part of Gods grace, as
they ought too do: tells us that if we think better upon it, we shall
find that his speaking after that manner, is too stir us up too pray God too
inlyghten us, because that without him, we should not be able too come any
thing near faith, nor near any knowledge at all.

Thus we see now S. Paul's meaning, which he pursues and continues much
more in adding, what the excellency of his power is in us that have believed.
And ageyn, according too the effectual voorking of the strength of his power.
He gathers and heapeth up many words here toogither, which import all one
thing. Nevertheless it is as it were a correcting of man's leawdnesse, which
labor too deface Gods goodness as much as they can, insomuch that whereas they
be not able too deface it altogether, they diminish it in such wise as it
appears not, as if it had but a spark whereas it ought to have full light.
But by the way let us mark, that whereas S. Paul sets down here the Saints
and believers: he means the faithful whom God has already called too him.
And therein he shows that even when we have faith, all our holiness
proceeds of Gods mercy, and men bring nothing of their own growing. Truly
this title of Saints is very honorable: but yet it behooves us to go to the
welspring of holiness: for in our selves we have nothing but uncleanness. Gods
children must needs be holy: yet must they consider from whence they have it,
whether they have of their own purchase and polli^ie, or of Gods gift. S.
Paul shows here, that the praise thereof ought too be yielded simply unto
God. Leuit. 11. g. 44. and 19. a. 2. and. 1. et. 1. c. 15.
For it is not for naught that he says so often, I am holy. And agein, we know
that Jesus Christ was sanctified for us, too the inten^e that we might be
washed and scoured from all our vnclenenesse. Thus much concerning the first
point.

Afterward follows the cause of our faith: namely that men atteyne it not
otherwise, tha^ by the drawing of a secret motion, Math. 11. d. 29.
according as it is said, that we must learn of God, not only because his
word contains all wisdom, and God does thereby teach us faithfully the
things that are for our behoof: but also because our Lord expounds it
moreover, saying, he that hears it of my father. He himself spoke it, John.
6. e. 45.
which was the wisdom of God: and yet he shows that the things which ^e
uttered with his mouth, could not prevail, except God spoke with^^ a man by
his holy spirit. Now if Jesus Christ could not profot men by his teaching,
further forth than Gods spirit wrought within their hearts* what shall the
preaching do which we hear at the mouth of mortal men, who are nothing?
men then must plant and water, and God must give increace, 1. Cor. 3. b. 6.
as S. Paul says in the third Chapter of the first Epistle too the
Corinthians.

Furthermore, as I have told you, that we must draw all our holiness from
out of Jesus Christ, in whom we shall find all the fullness and plenty of it:
so also let us understand, that by that saying we be warned, that we be not
called too filthiness, too take leave too do evil: but too be as it were
sholed out too the service of God. Most men can well enough brag that they be
faithful, and that word runs roundly upon every man's tongue: but faith is a
preciouser thing than we think: for it (...) our hearts (as it is said in the
foftenth of the Acts) too the intent we should be as it were sholed out and
set a side, Act. 15. b. ^.
too give our selves wholly too Gods service. But her^by it is meant, that men
are as it were of a corrupt and infected lump, till God have drawn out the one
so^t from the other. Then differ we nothing at all from them that are as
deeply plundged as is possible, in all manner of evil and wickedness. We be
all alike (say I) as touching our nature. But they that believe in our Lord
Jesus Christ, must be as it were ^orted out from the rest of the world, as S.
Peter also says in his first Epi^^le. Agein, we have seen heretofore, that
we be clenzed by the b^ud of Jesus Christ, too the intent too be drawn out
of this world, John. 17. c. 15.
according also as he says in S. John, where he prays too his father, not
too take us out of this world, and out of this transitory life, but too keep
the naughtiness of the world from bearing rule in us, and too exempt us from
it. Ye see then that the thing which we have too bear in mind, is that
holiness is the true record of ou^ faith. And therefore whosoever is called a
Christian, ought too fee consecrated unto God, and not too intermeddle or
defyle himself with the vnclenenesse and f^^thinesse of the world. True it is
that our holiness shall never be perfect, so long as we be in this world:
for we do always draw the lines too us, and although sin over master us
not, yet does it dwell in us, and we keep continual battle against it, to
get the upper hand. But howsoever the world go, yet when God once has
sanctified us, we must apply our selves to his service, we must indeuer too
clenze our selves more and more from all vices, and we must give our selves
wholly unto him, so as we be no more as worldlings, which take leave too do
what they list. This in effect is the thing that S. Paul meant too say.

Moreover, no do^^^ but that in this place he makes comparison between such
as are drowned in all ignorance, or rather are so hardened, that they have no
mind at all too submit themselves too the obedience of the Gospel, but do
fight furiously against it: and the faithful which are as silly sheep,
herkening to the voice of the good shepherd. S. Paul then condemns here all
scoffers and scorners which despyze God, and are as Dogs or brute beasts,
without any feeling of religion. When we see these things, they are all of
them mirrours unto us, too make the hears stand up upon our heads, by
making us too know what we should be, if God pityed us not. And therefore when
we see folks scorn God so openly, and rush forth at randon into al
lewdness, let us acknowledge the infinite goodness of our God, in that he
has separated us from the company. Wherefore when we see one sort sotted in
their unbelief, and an other sort full of pride, bitterness, and
stubbornness against the Gospel: let us understand that we our selves should
be like them, but that God has reached forth his arm upon us.

But now let us mark well the words that S. Paul uses herein, saying, the
excellent greatness of his m^ghtinesse, according to the effectual vvoorking
of the power of his strength. It should seem that the holy Ghost meant too
thunder down upon this devilish opinion wherewith the world has at all times
bin besotted* that is too wit, of freewill. For the heathen men presumed so
far, as too say that God had in deed created them too be in the world, and
that it was in his power too give the^ good or bad fortune, as they termed it:
but that it was in every man's own power and freechoyce too follow vertew, and
too behave himself in such wise, as no fault might be found in him. Lo how
the heathen men parted the stake between God and themselves. The lesser
matter, which is the setting of us here beneath too crawle here like frogs,
they left unto God: but the greater matter, namely our atteyning unto heaven,
and the ruling of our selves in all vertew, that said they, was in man's own
abilltie, and belonged only too himself. The Jews and Papists have not bin
altoogither of this mind: for (as I have touched alredye) they confess that we
have need of Gods help: But yet for all that, they will have us too mingle
some piece of our own holiness with Gods grace, and too be able too work
jointly with it, as they say, insomuch that when it comes too the reckening,
the cheef part shall always be found in our selves.

But let us see how the holy Ghost speaks of it. Too what end uses he all
these term of highness, power, strengh, effectual vvorking, and myghtinesse?
wherefore heapeth he up all these toogither, but too show that men be mad when
they will take more upon them than becomes them? There is not that word
here, which serves not to abate our cackling, if we boast of never so little
a drop of goodness. For if men say, I have yet some good moving in me, I have
some piece of vertew: behold, S. Paul speaks of Highness: as if he meant to
show that all the goodness which we have, is above the world, and has not his
root nor spring in our selves, but comes from above, as S. James says.
Iam. 1. c. 17.
Agein, if men say, we have some power too withstand our own vices, and to
fight against temptations: S. Paul says here, that our strength, our power,
and our might comes of God, and that he must be feign to vestowe it upon
us, and we to receive it of him. If men say still, yet by streyning our selves
we may be able too do somewhat: S. Paul tells us, there is no effectual
working, there is no bringing of the thing to pass, unless God give it us,
according too his speaking of it in the second to the Philipians, where he
says, Phil. 2. b. 12. 13.
that it stands us on hand too walk in fear and wariness, because it is
God which gives both the will and the ability to perform the will, according
too his own good pleasure: that is too say, he begins the work, and
brings it too the end and knitting up. Too be short, let us mark, that
look how many words there are here, so many great thunderclappes and
lyghteninges are there too beat down and too sink all the pride of man, too
the intent that being confounded in our selves, we might give God the glory
which he deserves, and with all lowliness frankly and freely yield our selves
guilty, acknowledging that al goodness comes of him, and that we be beholden
to him only for it. Thus ye see how the effect of the matter which we have
too mark upon this streyne, is too imbace our selves in such wyze, as we
might have no desire too part halues with God, too say that he does but help
us, and that there is some portion of his grace and holy spirit in our own
freewill: but too yield him purely and simply the whole praise of our salvation.

Furthermore, let it also make us too despyze the world, that we may content
our selves with the hope of the everlasting life which is purchased for us by
our Lord Jesus Christ. For we know that although men be generally subject
too many afflictions, and that this life of ours be notwithout cause termed a
vale of wretchedness: yet god exercizeth his own children with greater
abundance of adversities, than he does the other sort: for they also have
need too be always put in mind to renounce the world. If we should live
here to much at our ^ase and pleasure, what woold become of us, seeing we
miss not too fall a sleep here, notwithstanding that God do prick us and
quicken us up so many ways, to pass hence in post without ^esting here
bylowe? ye see then in few words, how God will exercyze us many ways
after he has called us too the faith of the Gospel, for else we would be
weery of serving him, and it would seem too us that his love were but a very
slender thing, if we should not learn to give over all other things as little
or nothing worth, and too embrace Jesus Christ. Therefore let us learn that
S. Paul's intent here, is too draw us in such wise unto God, as nothing may
let us too walk in our calling: and that if we have not all things to our
lyking in this world, we may learn too esteem the inestimable benyfites of
our God better than we have done, that we may say with David (as he speaks
in his sixtenth Psalm) I have mine heritage, which suffizeth me: seeing that
God has given himself too me, I have so excellent a portion, Psalm. 16. ^. 5.
that I pass not for going through all the afflictions of the world, Poverty,
sickness, reproach, fear, and threatinings, all these things shall be sweet
too me, so I possess my God, and he make me to feel that he has chozen
me, and reserved me too himself, and is minded too have me partaker of all
his goods. Thus you see in effect, that by this text we may be hartened and
strengthened unto patience, too bear myldly all the afflictions and
adversities of the world, and not too be grieved or out of conceyt: and that
although God make us now and then too drink of a bitter cup, and give us cause
too sigh and lament, yet we must not fall too repyning and grudging, but
assure our selves that God has given us a good comfort, in that he has called
us too be parttakers of his kingdom, and so uttered his power already in us,
as we ought as it were too advance our selves above all earthly things, and
too look down at them as at our feet.

And for as much as we do not yet perceive such fullness of Gods grace, as
were to be wished, therefore S. Paul sends us to the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And surely if he had not added, that God has uttered his power in his
only son, after such manner as we have herd it: what a thing were it? For we
might allege in way of reply, howso? where are these riches of God? For we be
not only bereft of the goods of this world, but also we be as a dry and barrein
gro^ud in respect of the grace of Gods holy spirit. If there be any portion of
it in us, it is so small, as we ought too be ashamed of it: and yet for all
this, we be moreover plundged in our infirmities. If ye speak of Gods
power, it ought too get the upper hand of all sin in us. But we be so
weak, that we be as good as beaten down. Agein, it were meet that Gods
image should shine forth in us, and we bear such store of fylthinesse and
such blemishes about us as is pity too see. We should be wholly consecrated
too God, but the world holds us back, and we be as it were snarled in it.
Lo how the faithful might be abashed when any talk were ministered
concerning Gods grace, if they stayed there, and were not led forth too Jesus
Christ. Not without cause therefore does S. Paul add here, that God did then
utter the excellency of his power, when he rayzed our Lord Jesus Christ from
death. And he speaks purposely of his resurrection, because that in his death
we see nothing but astonishment. For there appeered nothing but weakness: but
by his vanquishing of death he showed himself too be the son of God, yea and
the Lord of glory and life, who ^ad all power in himself. And that also is the
cause why S. Paul says, that God did set him at his right hand. For it had
not bin enough for Jesus Christ to have bin rayzed agein, except he had a
continual and abiding dominion. True it is that even in his (only)
resurrection, we have a record that he is the son of God: but yet for all
that, we must pass one step further, namely that he had not a blast of power
and away, but that by his ryzing agein, he atteined such superiority, that all
the world is governed by him, and he is now set down at the right hand of God
his father, to maynteyne and preserve his servants that call upon him, and
put them selves intoo his keeping, and has sufficient power to overcome Satan
and all the world, and all our enemies. Now then we see S. Paul's meaning: that
forasmuch as we might be cast down, and our faith at least wise sore shaken,
if we should look no further than too our selves: therefore he sets Jesus
Christ before us, as the true pattern, wherein we may see the thing that as
yet is unseen in our selves: that is too wit, Gods inestimable power which
surmounteth the whole world. For first he is rayzed from death: and secondly he
is set at the right hand of his father. Now the speaking of Gods right hand is
a resemblance taken of men. It is certain that God has another right hand nor
left, for he is infinite, and fylleth both heaven and earth, and agein, he
has no body, but is a spiritual being. Therefore we must not imagine any
place certain, when Gods right hand is spoken of. And wehn as it is said,
that Jesus Christ sits there, it is too show that he fills all the world
with his power. True it is, that as in respect of his manhood, he is in heaven:
and it is one of the Articles of our faith, that he is ascended into heaven.
But yet notwithstanding, although he be absent from us in his body: and that
there is a great distaunce betwixt us: it is no let but that he fills all
things with his holy spirit, and dwells in us himself, and that we be
nourished by his own substance, John. 6. f. 55.
according to this saying, that his flesh is our meat, and his blud our
drink. Ye see then how that Gods right hand is not some certain place for
Christ to sit in, but the souereinty which he has obtained too govern the
whole world. And (as I said before) it is a similitude borrowed of men, as when a
prince makes his vicegerent, he sets him at his right side, as who should
say, Lo here the second person (of my Realm) whom I will have men too obey.
God then in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, Colo^^. 2. b. ^.
meant too show that he is our father. True it is that the whole fullness of
the Godhead is in Jesus Christ. Howbeit forasmuch as we be heavy and
sothfull, and unable too atteyne too the majesty of God, therefore it is
said, that Jesus Christ has obtained all souereintie, so as we be sure that
he has us in his protection, and that being under his hand, we be safe, and
all the devils of hell (do what they can) cannot prevail at al against us.
For who is it that has al power? It is eue^ our head. Although the^ that we
which are his members be weak: yet is there strength enough in the head, which
is the chief part of the body. And so ye see for what cause it is said, that
Jesus Christ is set at the right hand of God his father: namely too show us
that we need not too seek far for his help, seeing he governs all things
both above and beneath, and we ^ee committed too his charge here. He says
that God has uttered his high and infinite power in us. Howebeeit forasmuch as
that suffizeth not, by reason of the infirmities which we feel, and for that
there is so much amiss in us still, and we be not yet come too the full
measure, no nor too the hundredth part of it: therefore too the intent we may
be the better assured of all the things that we want, we must consider them
in Jesus Christ: Are we then subject yet still unto death? Behold Jesus
Christ is received up intoo everlasting life: for the very cause why he became
a mortal man as we be, was that the life which he has, might belong unto
us. Does sin dwell still in us? Behold, Jesus Christ has no spot nor blemish
in him. Are we weak? He is the power of God his father, and look whatsoever
he received in his manhod, which he took of us, was for our sakes and too our
behoof. Too be short, look whatsoever we want, and whatsoever may comfort
or quicken us, we shall find it in our Lord Jesus Christ, because we should
not be in care and perplexity, as though we were excluded from the benefits
that S. Paul has made mention of heretoofore. Finally we should never have
any settled trust, except we knew that the things which are wanting in our
selves, are in our head. For the measure of Gods gracious gifts is very
fimall, yea even in the perfectest folk, and in such as are forewardest* and
have profited most of all. Since it is so then, we should always hang in a
mamering and doubt. But when we know that all is accomplished in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that he is as it were the first fruits, and that we were
sanctified in him, and that in his person we have received the things
aforehand, which shall be (...) us in all plentifulnesse hereafter when he
has taken us out of this world: there verily lies our certeintie, wheruppon
we ought too rest, that we be not shaken down with any temptation. Too be
short, we be taught by this text, that although Gods grace be weak in us,
that is too say, although he have put but a small beginning of it in us, and
not so large an abundance as were requisite or too be wished for: yet
notwithstanding the same gives us a taste and sauer too trust in him. For
there cannot be so little grace of his holy spirit in us, but that (as says
S. Paul in the eight too the Romans) we know the same is as a gage or earnest
penny aforehand, of the life that he has promised. True it is that this lump
of sin dwells still in us: but it ought too content us that God voutsafeth
too bestow never so little of his holy spirit upon us.

Furthermore, for as much as we can not be sure of all these things,
consydering the slenderness that is in our selves, and the infirmities and
wantes which we have: therefore we must lift up our eyes to Jesus Christ. Yea,
what avails it us, that we may find all perfection in him? for we be
tootoo far of from him. We be far from him as in respect of distance of
places, and in that respect does S. Paul say, that we be absent from him,
because we walk but by faith, and not by open eye sight and beholding. But yet
for all that, we he members of his body. Then seeing it is so: like as a root
cannot be separated from the tree, but sends forth his sap intoo all the
boughs and branches of it: Even so let us understand, that the end whereunto
our Lord Jesus Christ has in such fullness received the spiritual gifts that
belong too the heavenly life, is too communicate them too us so far forth as
needs, even from degree too degree, according as w^ shall have profited in
the faith. And heerewithall let us continually bear in mind, that we must
stoop and humble our selves, and (be contented too) be still far of from
the perfection whereuntoo it becomes us too aspyre, and too be as hungry
folks, so as we feeling our own necessity and lack, must run too our God
too beg at his hand, knowing that he is able too increace it from day too day,
and that if it were not so, we should be undone out of hand, and al should
go too wrecke and vanishe away, but that he continues the thing that he has
begun. Ye see then how it stands us on hand too be joined too our Lord
Jesus Christ, and too know that there is an inseparable bond between him and
us. And inasmuch as he once became poor too make us rich, as it is said in
another place: that is the very mean whereby all the riches that are in him,
are at this day communicated unto us. Not that we have the full fruition of
them, as I said before: but because it is enough for us that we have some small
portion of them, too make us taste the love of God, and too know that he will
not fail us in any thing, but that since he has given us a warrant that he is
come near unto us, and dwells in us by his holy spirit, as we have seen
in the second too the Corinthians: he will also ^ll us even unto the end. His
using of the word Inriche, is too show that there shall always be want and
needinesse in us. Phil. 1. a. 6.
Nevertheless let us trust boldly to this promis, that he which has begun the
good work in us, will go through with the same, yea even unto the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And that is said too give us some refreshing when our life
is (too our seeming) ouerlong, and we would feign that the said perfection
were already showed openly in us, and that Jesus Christ were come agein. But
it is said that unto that day we must always be iourneying, and go on still
foreward further and further, and beseech God that he suffer us not too
quayle. Sure we be that we shall never fail too sustain want and
necessity: but yet will he succor us in such wise, as we shall perceive that
if he have once voutsafed too behold us with the eye of his mercy, it is too
accomplish the ^oorke of our salvation throughout, and (too do us too wit,)
that he has not knit us too our Lord Jesus Christ for naught, but that his so
dooyng has bin, too the end that every of us might even now, according too
the measure of his faith, possess the goods that are peculiar too him, till he
have filled us too the full: which shall be when he has knit us fully too him.

But now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sins, praying him too make us so too feel them, as it
may draw us from them, and cause us to direct our life obediently according
too his commandments, so as we may show by our deeds, that he has not
bought us so dearly in vain, but that we give over all our own fleshly
lusts, and yield our selves wholly too the service of him that has once
adopted us for his heritage. And therefore let us all say, Almyghtie God our
heavenly father. etc.

The eight Sermon upon the first Chapter.
19. And that you may know what the excellent greatness of his power is
toward us believers, according too the vvorking of the myghtinesse of his
strength,

20. Which he uttered in Jesus Christ when he raised him from the dead, and
made him too sit at his right hand in the heavenly places.

21. Above all principality, and myghtinesse, and power, and Lordship, and
above all names that are named, not only in this world, but also in that
which is too come.

22. And has put all things under the feet of him, and set him over all
things, too be the head of the Church,

23. Which is the body of him which fills all in all.


I Began too tell you this morning, how God has sufficiently declared unto
us, that if we have and possess his only son Jesus Christ, we have the full
perfection of all good things, so as if we cast our eye upon him, we may see
all that is too be wished. And therefore that although there be many things
blame worthy in us, yea and that we find nothing but frayltie in our selves:
yet we shall have a sure and substantial stud too lean unto, in that our
Lord Jesus Christ calls us too him, and tells us that the things which he
has received of God his father, are common too us, and that although we enjoy
them not as yet too the full, yet we cannot be disappoynted of them. Too be
short, I told you also that our Lord Jesus Christ is set at the right hand of
God his father, too the end that we might be sure that all things are under
his hand, and that he rules the whole world, and that all good things are of
him, and he is able too disappoynt all anoyances, insomuch that if we be under
his protection, we may defye the devil and all our enemies.

And now too the intent we should learn too content our selves the better with
Jesus Christ alone, and not wander here and there as we be wont too do: S.
Paul adds expressly, that he was set above all myghtinesse, souereintie,
principality, and power. No dout but that he means the Angels: howbeit he
has used this manner of speech, to hold us the better too our Lord Jesus
Christ, that no fancy might turn us from him: as if he should say, although
God have imparted some portion of his glory, dignity, and power among the
Angels: yet does it no whit diminish, that which he has given too Jesus
Christ: and therefore, we shall find in him all things that are needful, so
as we need not too gad here and there for them, another is it lawful too
join any companion with him, because all preeminence, and whatsoever else may
be thought or deuyzed too be most noble and excellent, is there, that is too
say, in our Lord Jesus Christ, and he (only) is too be sought unto, as Paul
himself says also in the first too the Colossians. For it is not now alate
that the world has sought occasion too turn away from our Lord Jesus Christ,
under color of seeking too the Angels of heaven. We see how Gods creatures
are always drawn too some superstition, and men make Idols of them, because
God executes his souereintie by the Angels, Psalm. 1^4. a. 4. etc.
and they be as it were his hands, his officers, and his instruments. That is
the cause why men think them selves too have done much in betaking themselves
too S. Michaell, Heb. 11. b. 7.
or too S. Gabriell, or too I wot not whom else. For (as I said) it is not a
vice newly deuyzed: the devil who is the father and author of lying, has
entangled men at all times with such fancies, yea and even the Christians have
followed the example of the heathen men's doings in that behalf. For the heathen
men have always surmized the Angels too be as half gods, and thought too
have them as their mediators, whereby too come unto God, because they were not
worthy of themselves. And even after the same manner, talk the Papists at
this day. Now, the selfsame abominations began too be builded upon the earth
even in S. Paul's time. And for that cause he shows that it is not lawful
too match any thing with Jesus Christ, but that although the Angels ^ee
magnifyed, and be called vertewes, powers, Lordshippes, and dominations, and
men give them what other tytles they li^t: yet must they stoop and be
inferior too the head, and the chief dignity must be reserved too Gods
son, Esai. 45. d. 23.
because that all knees must bow before him, Romans 14. b. 11.
not only of worldly creatures, but also of heavenly. We see then that the
cause of S. Phil. 2. b. 10.
Paul's packing toogither of so many words in this place too express the
Angels withal, is that we should the better be hilde too our Lord Jesus
Christ, and rest wholly upon him, without wandering one way or other, under
pretense that the Angels have excellent and noble gifts. And so we see and
may gather upon this streyne, that all the dotage of the popedomme in imagining
of Patrons, Advocates, and mediators unto God, sprang up every whit of it of
none other cause, than for want of knowing of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
things given unto him by God his father: For we have no mind too repoze our
selves upon him, except we know too what end he is come. But the Papists
have on the one side imagined themselves too be separated from our Lord Jesus
Christ, not knowing that he is become our brother, too the end we should
repair familiarly unto him: and on the other side they have robbed him of his
office which is allotted him in the holy scripture, and made but a dead thing
of it. So much the more therefore behooves it us too mark well these sayings,
that we be made al one, and gathered together into one body with the Angels of
heaven, and with the holy fathers that lived under the Law, and that we and
all the Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, must with one common accord glorify
our common head Jesus Christ, and resort unto him, and that he must be set up
on hye for every man too look at, and that we must not wilfully put
blyndfoldings before our eyes, but take away all impediment, that his glory be
not in any wise dimmed. The very mean then to overcome all lets that Satan
shall cast in our way too stop us from coming too Jesus Christ, is too
consider that there is no dignity or worthiness in the whole world, neither
above nor beneath, which is not made too stope, too the end we should all of
us be joined unto him, with one accord. Thus you see in effect what we have
too gather upon this text.

True it is that by those words, we be done too vndestrand also, that God
distributeth offices among his Angels as pleases him, so as one has a greater
charge than another. Yet notwithstanding it is not in our power too know how
the case stands with them. Let us be contented too know it according too
the measure of our faith, and only give ear too Gods word, and in all
soberness learn of him, without giving bridle too our own fond curiosity,
as a number do, whom we see disputing finely of the Angels, as though every
of them would be marshal of Gods house, too place every of the Angels
according too his degree. For there is not a more diuilish malapertnesse, than
too babble in that sort of Gods secrets, further than God has made us privy
too them by his word. Therefore let us hold our selves contented, that the
Angels (how noble so ever they be) are ordained too be the ministers of our
welfare, by means of Jesus Christ. And whenever we intend too have the
familiarity (or acquintance and help) of them: Let us not do as the Papists
do, which have their peculiar prayers too make unto them: but let us repair
too Jesus Christ: for by that means shall all things become common between
them and us. When having spoken of the Church, we say, I believe the
communion of Saints: it is certain that the Angels are comprehended therein,
seeing that God imployeth them too do us service. And why does he so? It is
not for that we be worthy of it: but because he has gathered us all
toogither under Jesus Christ. That therefore is the very bond of concord and
brotherhood between us and the Angels.

Now hereupon S. Paul adds, that Jesus Christ has obtained a name, (that is
too say, a majesty) which is above al names, as well in heaven as in earth.
Here S. Paul shows us briefly, that all our wisdom is to know the benefits
that are brought unto us by the son of God, and which we possess in him
alone, so our faith be settled wholly upon him, according as it is said in the
Acts of the Apostles, Act. 4. b. 12.
that there is none other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved.
For (as I told you this morning) inasmuch as God is incomprehensible, and
dwells in light which we cannot approach unto, 1. Tim. 6. c. 16.
(as S. Paul terms it:) Jesus Christ must as it were step in betwixt him
and us, too the end we may preace boldly unto him, and know that he is not
far distant, nor far separated from us, wherefore let us mark that whereas
here is mention made of Name: it is because God wilbee known in the person of
his only son. Deuteronomy. 4. f. 35. 39.
It is said herewithall, 1. Cor. 8. b. 4. 6.
that there are not many Godheads. As touching the essence or being, we have
but only one God: and yet in Jesus Christ we have the lively and express
image of the father, Coloss. 1. b. 15. etc.
so as there we find whatsoever is expedient and requisite for our salvation.
Ie^e. 9. g. 24.
It is said that we ought too glory in our knowing of the only one God: but
yet that is accomplished in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, because that
when men go about too seek God, they enter intoo a terrible maze, unless
Jesus Christ be their way and leader. Thus we see now whereat S. Paul amed.

And it is added also, that the same is not only for this world, but also for
the other: whereby is meant, that the knoweledge which we have of Jesus Christ,
will suffize us for the heavenly life. Now it should seem at the first blush,
that there is some contrariety beetweene this Text, and that which is said in
the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians. For there he
says, that at the latter day when the world shall be judged, our Lord Jesus
Christ shall yield up the kingdom too God his father, of whom he holds it:
and here he says, that Christ is stab^ished in all authority, yea even for
the world too come. But these two agree very well. For whereas he says, that
Jesus Christ has a name above al names, and that he is the image of God his
father: that is because of our rudeness and infirmity, according also as when
he is called Gods liuetenant, that is, because we could not be in rest, except
we knew that God has his hand stretched out too succor us at our need: and
we perceive that the better in Jesus Christ, inasmuch as he is come near
unto us, and is become our brother. God than does not so reign by the mean
of Jesus Christ, that he should give over his own office, and sit idle in
heaven himself: it were a leawd dotage too think so. And truly we see how
our Lord Jesus Christ speaks thereof in the fifteenth of S. John: my father
and I (says he) have always our hand at work. There he shows that the
ordeyning of him too be ruler of the world, was not too the end that the
father should in the mean while sit unoccupied in heaven: but it is said so
in respect of us, too the intent that we should not doubt but that God is
continually near at hand too us, when we seek him in faith. At the latter
day, and after the judgment, we shall have new eyes, as says S. John. And
for as much as we shall be like unto God, ^. John. 3. ^. 2.
and be transfigured intoo his glory, we shall see him as he is: which thing
we can not do now, because we have too dull wits. Wherefore it is enough for
us now, 1. Cor. 13. ^. 12.
that we behold him as in a glass, and darkely (as says S. Paul) and that
we know him in part. You see then, that the yielding up of the kingdom by
our Lord Jesus Christ unto God his father, is that we shall behold Gods
majesty and substance which is incomprehensible too us as now. For we shall
have our nature changed, and we shall be new fashioned in the heavenly glory,
and we shall be quite and clean rid of all the corruption wherewith we be
compassed about as now. And yet for all this, it is not meant that Jesus Christ
shall be abaced: for he shall be then much better in his perfection, according as
it is said in the third too the Colossians, that our life is hyd in God with
Jesus Christ, and that when Jesus Christ appears, the^ shall our life be
discovered likewise. Too be short, when we be come too the souerein bliss,
that is purchaced for us, then shall we have the thing that lies as yet but in
hope, and Jesus Christ shall gather al things too him self, so as we shall be
then partakers of his glory, every man according too his own degree and
measure. Thus ye see how these two Textes agree very well: namely (that God
has given Christ a name above all names, and also) that he shall yield up the
kingdom to God the Father. And why? for we shall then see his heavenly
majesty, which we be not able too conceive as now, because we be fleshly.
Also we shall perceive, that whereas Jesus Christ is appeared unto us a mortal
man, he has bin so glorified in his humane nature, that in very deed he is
God, of one self same substance with his father. This (say I) shall be fully
known then, whereas now we have but a little shadow of it. Furthermore, let us
learn, that when Jesus Christ was exalted by God his father, it was too the
end that his advancement should serve too our everlasting salvation. And
therefore in the.ix. of Esaias he is called the father of the world too come,
too the end we might know, not only that he is given unto us for this
transitory life, but also that the substance of the faith which is grounded in
him, is in heaven, and that there we shall feel the fruit of the thing that
is now hidden, and which we taste as yet but in part, and that we shall enter
intoo full possession of all the goods that are given too him already. Thus
ye see why S. Paul has purposely made express mention of the world too come.

He adds immediately, that God has put all things under his feet, and made
him head of the Church above all things. His speaking here of the subjection
of the whole world, is too show, that what soever thing we have need of, if
we can resort too our Lord Jesus Christ, he is able too succor us, for he
has wherewith too do it. Yea and we must mark well how it is said in the
eight Psalm, that God has care of all things, yea even unto the sheep, too
the birds of the air, and too the fishes of the sea. Too be short, al
creatures are put under his feet. And too what end? For the holy Ghost meant
too draw us thereby, as little babes, and to show that the spiritual benefits
(which we ought too have in greatest estimation) are communicated too us by
our Lord Jesus Christ. His saying then is, that we might not eat one byt of
bread, save in respect that we be members of Jesus Christ. For it is all one
as if he intended too train us up higher by an Apcie, in as much as all
things are given too our Lord Jesus Christ, with condition, that if we be
members of his body in deed, al things that he has, do belong unto us, and
that if we separate not our selves from him, he will hereafter make us
partakers of far higher and excellenter goods: that is too wit, that we
shall be named Gods children, and be taken so too be, and become the temples of
his holy Ghost. And what a thing is that? What a thing is it, that we may come
freely unto him, and call upon him boldly, as our father? What a thing is it
too be enriched ageine with the gifts that we were bereft of by the sin of
Adam? What a thing is it too be matched in fellowship with the Angels, in stead
of being under the tyranny of Satan, and under the thraldom of sin? How
can we have these so high and noble things, since we can not claim so much
as a morsel of bread as our own, without theft, saving in that we be members
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now then we see whereat S. Paul amed, in saying
that all things are made subject too our Lord Jesus Christ. So then let us
learn now too give God thanks in the name of his only son our lord Jesus
Christ, whom he has sent, not only too feed and nourishe our bodies, but
also too be food too our souls, that they may live everlastingly. And by
that mean let us learn too inure our selves, to acknowledge that our Lord
Jesus Christ has wherewith too succor al our necessities. Then if the devil
make so violent assault upon us, as we may be afraid of utter quayling: let us
understand that our lord Jesus Christ has an invincible fortress wherewith too
defend us against him, and armies wherewith too make us invincible in all
battles. Therefore when we be weak, let us resort too his strength: when we
want any grace, let us desire him too give us what he thinks necessary: when
our enemies play the mad beasts, and it seems that we should be quite and
clean swallowed up as it were in gulfes, let us beseech our lord Jesus Christ
too hold us under his protection, and too hold Satan as it were chayned with all
his vpholders, so as he suffer us not too be ouercomme of of them. Ye see then
how all things were made subject to our lord Jesus Christ, not for his own
use: (for what need had he of them?) but for our sakes, too the end he should
give us what soever he knows too be for our behoof, and that we also
should learn too seek all things at his hand, and that when he sees our
enemies have the advantage of us, he should repress them, as he well can.

Furthermore, whereas S. Paul says here, that he was ordained head in the
Church (or over the Church) in all things: it is a continuing in his matter,
too bring us wholly too Jesus Christ. As if he should say, It is true that Gods
gracious gifts are dealt abroad, yea and that the Angels and mortal men also
may be ministers of them unto us: but yet howsoever the case stand, we must
always resort too the welhead. The veins that are dispersed throughout the
whole body, may well give strength too every part, for they be as it were the
Cunditpypes of the blud: but yet howsoever the world go, the brain must
always be the welspring of life. It is well to be seen, that in a tree the sap
is spread throughout: and yet notwithstanding albeeit that the root ascend not
up too give nurrishment too every branch and leaf: all the nurrishment
comes of the root. And if any man woold say, that the whole tree is
maynteyned alive by any one brau^ch: the clean contrary is seen. It is true
that a great bough may well give nurrishment to the branches and twigges that
are about it: but is it meet that that should prejudice the root therefore?
(No surely:) no more than the members of a man's body ought too prejudice the
head* though every member do his dewty. Here S. Paul says that our Lord
Jesus Christ was given to the Church to be her head above all things, as if
he should say, it behooves us all too resort unto him. In this case there is
another S. Paul, nor S. Peter, nor the virgin Mary, nor S. Michaell that have
ought of their own. For they are all needy and hungery, saving so farforth as
Jesus Christ fills them: and therefore al of the^, as well che great as the
small, must be feign to draw out of his plenty. And that is the cause why that
in the selfsame text which I alleged out of the first to the Colossians,
Colos. 1. c. 19.
S. Paul says, it pleased God the father that all plenty or fullness should
dwell in him. For the title of Head is not alonely a style of fleeting honor:
but it serves too express the power of our Lord Jesus Christ so much the
better. Therefore like as a (natural) head not only has superiority and
preeminence above the whole body, but also yields nurrishment too the whole,
and keeps the man alive: even so is it between our Lord Jesus Christ and us,
in so much that all should go to wrecke, if we depended not upon him.
Although (say I) it seem that we have received right excellent gifts at Gods
hand already: yet notwithstanding all is but wind and smoke, unless we
hold out in the union of our Lord Jesus Christ. Herewithall it behooves us too
note also, that inasmuch as Christ is called a head, it is meet that all
others should obey him, and that we should yield unto his doctrine, that he
may rule all things as the head rules all the rest of a man's body. For the
feet go, and the hands stir, and too be short, there is no part which is
not willing and forewarde too do whatsoever the head shall appoint it. The
like must be done in the Church: Jesus Christ must rule, and all men must
quietly obey him. And so we have too mark in this text, first that our
salvation does so depend upon Jesus Christ, that there are another Angels nor
men, how holy soever they be, which have not need too receive at his hand,
the things that they want in themselves. And therefore when we stand in need
of any thing that is requisite, either for the present life, or for the
heavenly life, either for our bodies, or for our souls: there is no running
too S. Peter, nor too S. Paul, but we must go straight to our Lord Jesus
Christ. Mark that for one point.

Secondly also let us learn too suffer our selves too be ruled, and too be
hild in awe by the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thereby we may show our
selves too be true members of his body. And he cannot be our head, but he
must needs therwithall be our Shepherd too, and have all authority over us.
But like as I told you that the devil has labored too deface the glory of
Gods only son, under the pretense of Angels: so on the othersyde, he has
sent us an ydole intoo the world, too be a bar in our way, that Jesus Christ
might be as it were separated from us. For the Pope is not ashamed too spew
out this blasphemy, that the Chruch should be but a headless body, if he
himself reigned not over it, ne had the universal dominion of it, so as every
man looked at him, and his seat were above the whole world. And that is as
much as if he should say, that Jesus Christ has no more too do here, but
ought too hold him contented with heaven, and let his successor alone too rule
in his stead. But herein we see how he ^uershoots himself, to abolishe the
whole souereintie of the son of God. So much the more therefore does it stand
us on hand too bear well this Text in mind, wherein S. Paul says, that
Jesus Christ is appointed too be head of the Church above all things. It is
true that the Pope will affirm himself too be but as an vnderhead, and
therefore that Jesus Christ is not thrust out of his place. But let us look
back too that which I have touched already: which is, that Jesus Christ will
have no imaginatiue title, but will have his power reserved unto him, which
belongs unto him. For a head requires not only too be set highest: but
also too have all men too receive all things from him: and it behooves us all
too understand, and that he is the very root of our life, and the fountain
from whence it behooves us too draw, notwithstanding that he send forth his
spiritual benefits and goods among us, by such channels or ^undits, as he
thinks good. Thus ye see what we have yet further briefly too bear in mind.

This matter is laid forth more at large in the first Chapter too the
Colossians. For S. Paul shows there, that our Lord Jesus Christ, Coloss. 1.
b. 16. 17. 18.
was appointed too be the head even from the beginning of the world,
forsomuchas all things were created in him, and not alonly forsomuchas he is
our redeemer at this day. For put the case that Adam had not fallen intoo the
ruin wherintoo he has drawn us with him: yet had Gods son bin always
still as the first borne of al creatures. Not that he himself is a creature,
but because he is the foundation, according also as S. Paul adds the reason
thereof, which is, that in him the Angels were created, and in him they have
their being or abiding. Ye see then that the son of God should not have
ceased to have had all pre-eminence both above and beneath, though we had not
fallen with our father Adam intoo such confuzion as we be in. But now our Lord
Jesus Christ must be our head after another manner: that is too wit, too make
us at one agein with God his father, and too gather us toogither agein unto
him, from whom we were estraunged by sin, so as he was our deadly enemy,
til we were brought in favor agein by means of Jesus Christ, by forgiving us
our sins. And besides this, S. Paul declares in the same Text, that Jesus
Christ was ordained head of the Church, too the end that all fullness should
be in him. Thus we see how we ought too be knit with the Angels, with the
ancient fathers, and with the Prophets, with condition that our Lord Jesus
Christ must nevertheless not only continue the first and chief, but also
have all things referred unto him, and we communicate in such wise toogither,
that every of us keep his place, and be all members of one body, and that
there be no mo heads thereof but only one. For if we add any fellow to
Jesus Christ, it is a bereeuing him of the thing that God his father has given
too him alone. Let us be contented that he makes us partakers of all his
benefits, upon condition that we acknowledge all things too come from him,
and seek all things in him. For in the five and fortith Psalm it is well
showed, Psalm. 45. b. 8.
that we are al of us fellows with Jesus Christ, and that we receive some
portion of all the good things that were given unto him. But yet for all that,
it is not too be said that he is fellow and fellowelyke with us, and that he
cannot be discerned from his Apostles as the papists prate in their (peuish)
proverb, but it is too the end that we should know, that none of all the
good things which we can wish, are far from us, but that they be offered
us by him, and that he is so liberal, that he desires nothing else at our
hands, but that we should receive the things that are for our own welfare,
according as he himself says, Come unto me all ye that are a thirst,
(...). 55. 1.
come drink water, yea even without money or moneys worth, drink your fill
of water, wine, and milk. There our Lord shows how it is he that we must
resort unto, and that if we look upon him, his majesty is too high and too
far of from us. Jesus Christ therefore must be as our mean, and forasmuch
as he is come down too us: let us also repair unto him, John. 7. f. 38.
according as is said in the seventh of S. John, come unto me all ye that
are a thirst: John. 4. b. 14.
and whosoever drinks of the water that I will give him, he shall have his
belly so full, that fountains of water shall flow out of him. Condicionally
that men seek faithfully in Jesus Christ for the things they have need of, he
will give us not only so much as shall serve the turn of every one of us for
himself: but also so much as we shall be able too bestow upon our
neighbors too, and too succor their want.

Now for a conclusion S. Paul adds, that the Church is the body, and
accomplishment of him that accomplisheth (or performs) all things in all men.
In terming the Church the body of Jesus Christ, he shows the thing that I
have touched already: that is too wit, that we need not too make long
windlasses or hard iourneyes too get the things that we have need of. For
since we be united and joined too the son of God: what require we more? We
must needs grant this principle, that we have another life, nor gladness, nor
any good thing, but only in God alone. That being confessed, let us see by
what mean we may atteyne too him: and that is by the means of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And so ye see the cause why it is said here, that all fullness
dwells in him, and that it is his charge too unite us unto God, and too
draw us back from the scattering, wherein we be. Therefore we cannot swerve
aside one way nor other too convey any piece of that thing to S. Peter, or too
S. Powle, which is reserved too Jesus Christ alone, but that we must rob God
of his dew. True it is, that we will not be acknowen of it: but yet shall not
our Hypocrisy serve too acquit us before God. We may well pretend many
starting holes, but yet do we give sentence of condemnation upon our selves,
in confessing that we ought to seek all our welfare at Gods hand. Well then,
if we allege that we be not woorthye too preace intoo Gods presence: it is
true, and if we ask how we may be able too fly without wings: that is true
too. And if we say, then must we repair too S. Peter or too S. Paul, that
we speak of our own head. For God says the clean contrary. I send you
too mine only son (says he:) for in him shall you find all that you want:
and fear not that ye shall have any scarcity, if ye be once filled with
the grace that I have put in him, and which abides in him. And that is the
cause why the Prophet Esaias Esaias. 55. a. 1.
speaks purposely of Wine, Water, and Milk: as if he should say, we have
all fullness of life in Jesus Christ. As for those then which gad too S. Peter
and too S. Paul, and will needs have Patrons and Mediators: they not only
do wrong too Jesus Christ, in cantling out the thing by pieces and gobbets
which is given wholly unto him: but also rob God of his honor. For since it is
his will, that all fullness should dwell in Jesus Christ, according as I have
alleged before: it is certain that we go about to defye him openly, when we
abide not within the bounds which he has set us, in putting us in subjection
too that person which he has given unto us, too the end that he should give
us all that we have need of.

But yet the thing which he adds ought too be a greater and larger comfort to
us, when he says, that the Chruch is the accomplishment of him that
accomplisheth all. Now, by this word Accomplishment, he meeneth that our Lord
Jesus Christ, yea and also God his father account them selves as imperfect,
except we be joined unto him. And that (as I said) is a record of Gods
infinite goodness, whereat a man can never marvel enough. First and foremost,
God needs not too borrow at other men's hands: for he is perfect of himself:
another wanted he aught even before he made the world. And when he made it, did
he it for his own profit, or too his own advantage? No: it was alonely too
the intent that we should know his goodness, power, wisdom, and
ryghtuousnesse, and be witnesses of it. For he has set us here as on a
stage, too the end we should see his glory in all his creatures: and yet
notwithstanding he could very well forbear us. But put the case that God
should borrowe of others too perfect himself withal, and that he were like too
mortal men, of who^ none is able to forbear company: put the case that God
were such a one: What are we? What can he fare the better by being joined
unto us? It is all one as if the son were matched with a quamyre. For what
have we but infection and filthiness? what are we else than things so
corrupted by Adams sin, as it is horrible too think? How then can we bring any
such perfection unto God? Although there be nothing but frayltie in us:
although we be froward and leawd: although there be nothing in us but all
manner of filth: and too be short, although we be lothely in his sight: yet
notwithstanding it is his will to have us joined to him, yea even upon
condition that he should be perfected in us by his and our joining after that
sort toogither. As if a father should say, me thinks my house is empty, when
I see not my child in it. A husband man will say, me thinks I am but half an
man, when my wife is not with me.

After the same manner speaks God, that he thinks not himself full and
perfect, but by gathering of us too him, and by making us all one with
himself. He takes his whole pleasure in us, and will have his glory too shine
forth in us, so as his beams may sheade out on all sides. And although the
whole glory be in himself: Yet will he have it seen, how it is his will that
we should have our part and portion of it. Thus you see in effect what S.
Paul meant by calling the Church, the accomplishment of God and of Jesus
Christ. Now then, can we be excuzed before God, when we say that we cannot
come at him, seeing we be his body in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ? If
one of our feet being diseased, would run I wot not whither, and raunge up
and down, saying, I go too seek remedy so^^e where else: and for performance
thereof, would be cut of from the body: if (say I) that the members of a
body had any understanding and discretion, and could speak after that manner:
were it not a madness that the foot should say, he would be rent from the
body, too seek else where the thing that it wants? Even so when the
Papists and other Idolaters allege that they must be feign too serve their
turn by the Saynctes, and too have diverse mediators and means too bring them
too God: it is all one as if they should say, Jesus Christ is nobodie, another
have we any success or entrance unto him. Yea, are the membes separated
from the head? Of a truth, S. Paul has here accused and condemned all those
of unthankfulness and unkindness, which under color of unworthiness too
come unto God, do deuyze themselves new means, and separate themselves from
Jesus Christ, and diminish his power, and rend it in pieces. S. Paul
condemns them for that they cannot find in their hearts too accept the
benefyte and privilege that is offered them, in that our Lord Jesus Christ
has voutsafed too become all one with them, as with his own body. Now then
let us lerane too have such familiarity with our Lord Jesus Christ, as too
resort unto him at all times whenever we be warned of our defaults and
wantes.

Furthermore too the intent his majesty should not be defaced thereby: S.
Paul adds, that he ceasseth not too accomplish all things in all men. For
we see on the one side, that when men are once indewed with Gods gifts, they
fall too thrusting of themselves intoo his place, and would be esteemed in his
stead. After that manner do we deale^, and we bear our selves in hand that
the gifts which God has bestowed upon us freely, are as a pray or booty too
boast of, and too advance our selves more than is lawful. Agein, on the other
side, when we hear Jesus Christ spoken of, how he was abaced for our sakes,
how he went down intoo the dungeons of death, how he voutsafed to be subject
to all reproach: it seems too us that we may well despyze him. S. Paul
therefore too beat down all pride, and too show that Jesus Christ was not so
abaced, that his glory was diminished: says, that yet nevertheless he
does all in all things. Wherefore let us learn too receive the blissing,
grace, and benefits which are given us by our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therewithal let us acknowledge, not only that we be made of nothing, and that
our life is but a flyghtfull and vanishing shadow: but also that all the
virtue and excellency which we ween our selves too have, is but like a
green flower, which withers out of hand as soon as God breaths upon it.
And therefore let us not imagine our selves too be rich, whereas we be poor:
let us not vaunt our selves of our own free will: let us not presume upon our
own deserts, nor upon any other of the flimflammes which the devil has
deuyzed in popery: but let us draw, let us draw of the fountain that cannot
be drained dry, that we may find wherewith too staunche our thirst whenever
we be dry. Finally there are two means whereby God does all in all things. For
like as he himself created the world: so also must all things be guided and
governed by his hand. If it be demanded who causes the Sun too rise and
set every day, who guides the whole order of nature, who ordreth the days,
moonethes and years, and who makes the intercourse of day and night: It is
God, who does all in all things. As much is too be said of all other things
which we perceive in the universal government of the whole world. Therefore
we must not imagine that God was a Creator but for a minute of an hour: but
that he does also hold on in mainteyning the things that he created. Howbeeit
S. Paul speaks here of the spiritual goods which are, as ye would say, the
peculiar heritage of Gods children. God then does all things in us: Yea, but
not alonly by the common order of nature: but by inlightening us with the
belief of the Gospel, in that he halloweth us, and clenzeth us from the vices
and wicked lusts of our flesh, in that he draws us from the world, and to
be short, in that he pr^uideth us all things requisite too our welfare and
salvation. And so ye see how he does all in all things. As if S. Paul had
declared in one word, that the faithful are not any thing, ne can do any
thing, ne have any thing of themselves. Then speaks he not here, another of
the sun, nor of the moon, nor of the trees in the fields, nor of any other
fruit: another speaks he of beasts, no nor yet of men, as in respect that they
be the children of Adam: but of those whom God has begotten agein by his holy
spirit: so that whatsoever concerns salvation, or belongs too the heavenly
life, is not to be had but only at his hand which has all things in
himself, and does all in all things, as is said of him here. And therefore
let us learn too empty our selves, and too offer our selves in sacrifize too
God with true and right humility, too yield him his deserved praise, so as
none of us separate our selves from him through our own unkindness, but all
of us do him such honor, as too confess that we hold all of him, and that
we be joined too him by our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our everlasting God,
acknowledging that it is he from whom all good things come, and that it is he
also too whom all (...) ought too be yielded and rendered.

Now therefore let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our sins, praying him too make us perceive them
more and more, and that the same may cause us too have such a mislyking in our
selves, as we may earnestly and heartily seek too give over our selves wholly
too our Lord Jesus Christ. And that forasmuch as he has called us already too
him by his Gospel: we may so frame our selves thereafter, as too renounce all
superstitions, and too assure our selves that all that ever we can imagine too
bring us too the kingdom of heaven, are but deceytes of Satan, and that it is
enough for us too have Jesus Christ alone too make our recourse unto: that
like as it was the fathers will too advance him on high, too the intent that
all men should look at him: so also we may have our eyes fastened upon him,
and apply our whole minds in such wise thitherwarde, as we may have none
other way nor preparation than by him alone, nor swerve one way nor other: but
when we be once brought intoo the right way, hold on continually toward
our mark, till we be fully come thither. That it may please him too grant
this grace, not only to us, but also too all people. etc.

The nienth Sermon, which is the first upon the second Chapter.
1. Even then when you were dead through your offenses and sins.

2. VVherin ye walked for a time, according too the course of the world, after
the Prince of the power of the air, which is the spirit that works now in
the children of unbelief.

3. Among whom we also had al of us sometime our conversation, to wit, in
the lusts of our flesh, dooyng the will of the flesh, and of the thoughts,
and were by nature children of wrath, as others were.

4. But God who is rich in mercy, through his great love vvhervvith he loved
us,

5. Even when we were dead in sin, has quickened us toogither with
Christ, by whose grace you be saved.


We have seen already heretoofore, that too know Gods infinite goodness
thoroughly, we must always consider what we be our selves, and what our
state is till God have pitied us too succor our wretchedness. For until men
have so examined them selves, how wretched and miserable they be, surely they
will never yield God the hundredth part of the honor that he deserves.
Wherefore let us bear well this lesson in remembrance, that too yield God the
prayze which is due too him, every of us must consider wh^^ he were of him
self, if God had not reached out his hand unto him. And in good faith, what
is our nature in general? It is too think nothing but al manner of evil: and
that is the matter which S. Paul treats of as now.

In the first chapter the matter which he treated of continually, was that we
cannot sufficiently exalt our God, considering the mercy that he uses
toward us. And now too express the same yet the better, and to touch us the
more to the quick with it: he shows us as in a picture or in a glass, what
men are til God have prevented them with his grace, and called them back too
himself. Therefore he shows that we be plu^dged in so horrible a dungeon,
that the very thinking of it ought to abash us, and make the hears stand up
upon our heads: for it cannot be but that theruppon we must needs be moved
and inflamed too bliss Gods name, for that he has sought us so in in the
bottom of Hell, John. 5. ^. 24. 25
too draw us up too the kingdom of heaven. And our Lord Jesus Christ, too
show in what case he finds us, says that he is come to the end that the
dead should ryze at his voice. Ye see th^n that the office which the son of
God takes upon him, is too draw us from death too life, by the doctrine of
his Gospel. According whereunto he adds, that such as believe in him, are
passed from death wherein they were hild down, and are entered into the heavenly
life. Not that the faithful do enjoy it here already, but because they
possess it in such wise by hope, as they be thoroughly assured of it. Now
whereas our Lord Jesus Christ says, that his voice has power too rayze the
dead: he takes it by a similitude. For what life soever we su^myze o^r selves
too have: yet notwithstanding if we be separated from God, weel be in a
spiritual death, howsoever the unbelievers imagine themselves too be more than
alive in their own wisdom and virtue. And therein do they harden themselves
and make their brags of it too the uttermost. But let us see where the
welspring of life is. It is in God, and they be alienated from him. Also let
us see what is the true life of man. It is not that he should be s^ttle and
fine witted, and be able too compass his matters well in this world by his
own cunning and policy, or too purchase himself renoune, or too be witty
and well aduized too give counsel too all other men: it is not that he should
excel in all humane sciences and in all arts: another is it that he should be
esteemed and renouned as a man of noble courage, or as one that has the other
virtues that are commendable among men: but it is a higher thing that we must
begin at, namely to know that God is our father, that we be defended and
preserved by the light of his word, and enlightened by faith too know the way
of salvation, and too assure our selves that our whole welfare lies in him, so
as we seek it there with all lowelynesse: and also too know the mean whereby
too atteyne too it: that is too wit, by having our Lord Jesus Christ in whom
the whole fullness of grace is offered us.

Thus you see what the spiritual life of man is, and where it lies: that is
too wit, in the light of Gods word, and in the woorking of his holy spirit,
so as we be new fashyoned agein according too the image that was lost, and
utterly defaced in us by Adams sin. And is that too be found among worldly
men? Yea even among those that are most honored? No surely. Then is it not
without cause that our Lord Jesus uses this similitude, saying, that we be
raised from death by means of the Gospel. For flourish we never so much,
bear we never so fayer a gloss before men, and seem we too have never so
much wherefore too be had in estimation: yet are we but wretched carions,
there is nothing but rottenness and filthiness in us, God lotheth us, we be
damned and forlorn before him, the Angels abhor us, all creatures curse and
ban us, and all things ask vengeance upon us, because we defyle them. For
there is such corruption in man, that heaven and earth must be infected with
it, until God have changed them. Romans 8. b. 19.
The thing then which our Lord Jesus Christ's saying imports, is, that until
we be renewed by the Gospel through the faith that proceeds of it: we be
but as dead men, there is not one drop of life in us that deserves the name of
life. And too be short we be as good as buried in our graves, and must be
feign to go out of them agein, whereby we be done too understand, that we
be cut of from Gods kingdom, and consequently that there is nothing but filth
in us: and yet notwithstanding that God voutsafeth too be knit and united
unto such as put their trust in him and in his goodness. That (say I) is our
rising agein. Too be short, we must always consider, that man brings death
with him even with his birth: not only because he is mortal, but also because
he is separated from God. We be mortal wyghtes, and it were but in respect
that we must needs pass through this world, and depart thence whenever it
pleases God: but we be also dead before hand. And how is that? Because our
souls are altoogither sinful. Romans 8. a. 7.
There is another thought nor affection in us, which tends not too evil: all
is repugnant or rebellious against God, and against the rule of his
ryghtuousnesse. When we imagine either one thing or other, we can never deuyse
any thing in our minds, but sin and vnryghtuousnesse, according as it is said
in Genesis, that God knew that all that ever man had in his thought and
imagination, Genesis 6. (...).
was sin. Now since it is so, let us understand that although we had knowledge
of good and evil, Romans 8. b. 6.
and that we had far greater skill and discretion than we have: yet are we
so marred, that all our desires and lusts rebel against God, as it were too
make war against him. Seeing then that we be so corrupted in our souls, and
that there is another thought nor affection which is not utterly naught: let us
not think it strange, that God with his own mouth auoweth us too be dead,
notwithstanding that through our own fond ouerweening, we imagine that there
is some life in us. And that is the very thing which S. Paul treats of as
now, in saying that the Ephesians were parttakers of the above mentioned grace,
though they were dead through their own sins and iniquities. As if he
should say, Too the intent ye may the better esteem the value of Gods grace,
and what it brings with it: think not only upon your present state, but
consider that if God had left you such as you were of your selves, and had not
succored you at all, but had let you follow your own swindge: you had bin
undone. Consider what your nature is, for ye were dead, and there was no hope
that ever you should be quickened agein, because it is not in the power of
man's own free will, too give himself life agein when he is once dead. Know
ye therefore that God did draw you out of the dungeon of all destruction, yea
rather out of the bottom of hell, when he voutsafed too adopt you too be his
children, and too call you too the knowledge of his Gospel. We see that this
saying of Saint Paul's, is conformable too the doctrine and record of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

So then, let us always run back to the wells head, whenever we be
tempted too glory in our own vertewes, and imagine our selves too have I wot
not what too advance us withal: let us resort too our natural state, let us
consider that we had bin undone, and that we were undone yet still at this
day, if God of his infinite mercy had not drawn us out of the confuzion wherein
we were, and delivered us from it by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
it is purposely said in offenses and sins: too stop all men's mouths,
that no man might make profer too withdraw himself from the common array, nor
think that any thing is so grievous as the corruption of our nature, which
cannot be stayed but by death. It S. Paul had set down but one of the words,
either offenses or sins: by and by there woold have bin answearing and
replying. For some woold have thought themselves too have bin of the common
array. And other some would have said, Uery well, though there be some sin in
us, though there be some fault in us, it does not therefore follow, that we
be utterly condemned and cursed of God: for will he use such rigor and
extremity against us? But S. Paul has joined both the words toogither, too
show that there is nothing in our nature, but all wickedness and sin: and at a
word, that there is not one drop of life too be found in it. Therefore it is
al one, as though he meant too aggrauate or make the thing heinous, which men on
their part would make light. For if we have never so small a portion of virtue,
yea, or but a shadow of it: we will needs exalt it above all the mountains
of the world. But if there be any vices in us, though they be never so
gross and apparent, yet we make but very light faults of them. Therefore it
stood S. Paul on hand too beat down this fond presumptuousnesse of men, and
too show them that they be wholly saped in sin. For although he speak here
too the Ephesians, yet speaks he generally too all men. And in good sooth, he
expresses it yet better, in saying, that we vvalked according too the trade
of the world: for the evil lurketh unespied, till it bewray it self by his
fruits. And the cause why men cannot humble themselves before God as were
requisite, is that they flatter themselves till they be convicted, and be
compelled (...) stoop and too hold down their heads spyt of their teethe.
For we see what hypocrisy is in us, insomuch that we woold bear our selves
in hand that black were white, and never find our selves faulty, so long as
our misdeedes could not be laid open too our faces, nor any man stop our
mouths, by witnessing them too our heads. Too have many wicked thoughts, or
too be tempted too do this or that evil, we think it no sin at al. Too
be short, S. Paul has justly set down, that the Ephesians walked in their
sins: too the intent too show, that he speaks not of a thing which ought
too be unknown too them. For in beholding their own lives, and in beholding
what they had bin, and what trace they had followed: they should be driven too
confess that they were utterly forlorn and cursed before God. Therefore when
soever our hypocrisy hinders us from submitting our selves unto God, and
from beating of our selves down^ by acknowledging of our sins: let us learn
too look intoo our life. Truly, although we perceived a whole million of
faults which we have committed: yet is it nothing in comparison of that
which God knows. Yet notwithstanding too waken us the better, that we may
not be deceived by our own self soothing, as we have bin wont too be: let
us always judge of the root by the fruits of it. Seeing then that we be
gilty of offending God so many ways, let us conclude thereupon, that there is
nothing but frowardness in our nature. And too show the better that he
speaks not here of any one sort of men, but of al mankind: S. Paul adds,
that it was according too the trade of the world. The word that he uses
here, betokens the course of time. As if he should say, Even as we see the
Sun does daily rise and go down, and as we see Winter and Summer follow
one another: so is it an ordinary custom, yea and even the nature of man too
be utterly froward, spytefull, and rebellious against God, and there is
nothing in him but all manner of leawdnesse and corruption. It is not for men
too say, ^ush, evil custom has gotten the upper hand: and agein, this
serves for some men, but all do not so: there are some nations more sinful
than othersome, and there are some me^ more stubborn and malicious than
others, but yet there will always some vertew be found in some other men.
Nay, says S. Paul: for it is the common course of the world. As if he
should say, it is so natural (too all men,) as there is no disputing whether
one man be bad, and another good. (...)
For like as fish is made too suck up water: so ar^ we suckled, or rather made
stark drunken withal manner of iniquities and sins. We be so filled and
stuffed with them, that we burst agein. Thus ye see how S. Paul meant here,
not too rebuke some one sort of men, but too show all men without exception
what their state is, till God have redressed it. Therefore let us open our
eyes, and look intoo the thing that S. Paul says, and we shall perceive
that all our worthiness and nobleness is decyphred unto us here, here are
our arms blazed: that is too wit, that we be but dead men, till God quicken
us by his mere grace. Agein, too the end we should know that this death
proceeds not from elsewhere than of our own sins: it is said, that we be
all corrupted, that there is nothing in us but faults, sins, and offenses,
and that all our whole life bears record thereof, so as the fruit shows
what the root is. And on the other side, that our starting aside is not for
once and no more, but that we tend wholly thither, that is too say, too evil:
we be inclyned thereuntoo, nay rather we be carried headlong thereuntoo, yea
and we be driven with such a rage, that we never cease stryuing against
God, till he have brought us in subjection too him by his holy spirit.

And S. Paul thinks it not enough to say so: but adds things which ought
to make us too tremble yet more, saying, that it is according to the prince of
the air, according as he has all power in the world, according too the
spirit that rules all the unbelievers. His talking after that manner, is too
show, that till God have quickened us by means of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
until he have gathered us unto him: the devil has dominion over us. See I
pray you what the dignity of men is, until Jesus Christ have raunsomed them.
They dye not once and away, (but everlastingly:) and he must be feign by his
Gospel to make them parttakers of the saluatinn which he has purchased for
them. Then until God have wrought in us by his grace, whose are we? The
devils: he is our prince. Too be short, he has all authority over us, and
rules us with such tyranny, as there is nothing but haling of us too him by
force. But S. Paul uses this word Spirit purposely, to show that the devil
rules all our thoughts, all our affections, and all our desires, that he
possesses us, and that we be all wholly his bondslaues. At a word, we
cannot stir one finger, we cannot once move, we cannot think one thought,
but the devil is at our elbowe, and haleth us in such wise, as we utterly
become deadly enemies too God. When we hear these things, it is no time for
us too fall a sleep and too flatter our selves, nor too be so lusty and
presumptuous, as too go too law still with God, as though there were some
goodness in us, and that he were bound to acknowledge our virtues. Must not
men needs be too far out of their wits, when they continue still in their
hypocrisy, and will needs stand too their tackeling against God, and win him
by their replying, after that the holy Ghost has thundered so dreadful and
horrible a sentence upon our heads? Then if a man be considered in himself
and in his own nature, what shall he be able too say? Behold, a creature
cursed of God, and worthy too be cast out of the common account of all other
creatures, yea even of woormes, flies, lyce, and vermin. For there is more
valor in any vermin in the world, than there is in man. For man is a creature
wherein Gods image is defaced, and the good that he had put in it, corrupted:
there is nothing in it but sin, insomuch that we be the devils limbs, and
he not only rules us, but also possesses us and is our prince. Be we once
thoroughly persuaded of this in our hearts, shall we not on the one side have
cause too run quaking too our Lord Jesus Christ, and too hold us shrouded
under the shadow of his wings? And on the other side, must it not needs be
a beastly blockishnesse, if we be so thanklesse as not too magnify Gods
goodness, in that he has drawn us out of such a dungeon unto himself, too
make us fellows and brethren not only of the Angels of heaven, but also of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of glory, thereby too put away all
reproach, and in stead of being hateful too all creatures, too make us bear
his mark, and too be honored, and too be embraced of the Angels, as their
brethren, and too be auowed of our Lord Jesus Christ as members of his body?
So then, now we see S. Paul's meaning.

And further, too the intent that all replying should cease: he shows what
the power of the devil is. For he could have said in one word, ye have lived
after the manner of the world, that is too say, diuelishly, ^for so does the
thing that he speaks import: but in sted of naming the devil in one word,
he says first, according too the prince that has his power in the air, and
the spirit that vvoorketh even now in the rebellious children. In saying, the
prince that has his power in the air, he disappoynteth us of all starting
holes. For it is not for n^ught, that the devil is named the prince of the
world: and yet it is not for that he reygneth over the son, the moon, the
stars, the skies, and the earth: but for that he holds us captive in his
bonds: because we be not worthy too be governed by God. For had Adam
continued in the soundness wherein God created him: God woold have hild us as
his children. But after the fall of our first father, God left us, and Satan
took us in possession. True it is that Satan cannot do any thing at all
without Gods leave: for whereas he is named the prince of the woorld, it is not
meant that he fyghteth in such wise against God, as it cannot be known who is
the stronger: that were a cursed blasphemy, and like these heretics, which
seeing such phrases in the scripture, have imagined that the devil does now
and then resist God, and that he has such force and power, that God is feign
sometimes too give him place. But such words are stark madness.
Nevertheless this souereintie of Satan is Gods just vengeance, according as it
is said, that he delivers us intoo the hands of our enemies, when we cannot
abide that he should reign over us. And so is that thing fulfilled and
verefyed in us all. Forasmuch as God has printed his mark in us, we ought too
be governed by his spirit: but our father would needs exalt himself, he
would needs set up his bristles against God, and he was not contented with his
own state and bounds. Forasmuch therefore as he rebelled in that wise, and
could not find in his heart too abide the souerein dominion of God: he was given
up too the devil, and made subject too him: and forasmuch as he could not
abide that God should reign over him, he was feign too have another master,
and that subjection must reach unto all men in general. So then let us mark
that the souerenitie and tyranny of the devil, is a just vengeance of God
upon men for their sin. Let that serve for one point. And therefore let us
not imagine that the devil has the reins of the bridle laid looce in his
neck, or that he has liberty too do what he list, though God withstand
him: but that we be left up and given over unto him. And too the intent we
may yet better know this subjection, S. Paul says that he is in the air,
as he will speak more at large ageyn in the end of the Epistle. He could have
said simply, according too the prince that has great power, according as our
Lord Jesus says, Luke 3. d. 27.
that he is the strong man which possesses the world in peace. Ye see then
that the devil is called a prince, because he has such power as we be not
able too withstand.

And besides that: S. Paul gives him his place in the air. Not that the
devils are inclozed in a place certain, for we our selves see that they enter
intoo men's bodies, yea and into the bodies of Swyne, after as our Lord gives
them leave and power. Luke. 8. d. 33.
But he speaks purposely of the air, too make us understand that they be
above our heads. If we have an enemy, we will see if we can overthrow him.
But if he have his foot upon our throat already, if he tread upon our
bellyes, if he be already gotten upon us: what remedy is there then? None at
all on our part. That is the cause why S. Paul speaks here expressly of the
air: as if he should say, that men may well brag and lift up their nebbes,
and be brazenfaste in auauncing themselves: but yet is the devil above them
with all that he can make. Too be short, he shows that we be utterly given
up too that cursed bondage. And to make the matter the playner, he adds,
according too the spirit. For what is the cause that we perceive not the state
which he speaks of, but because we be fleshely* If there reigned a tyran
over us that would lay a subsidy upon us too day, and a tax to morrow, and
sack men's houses: and the next day cut this man's and that man's throat, and
ravish men's wives, and commit other enormities and outrages: we would well
enough perceive it. And why? Because we be quick of feeling in the things
that touch our flesh, and so earthly, as we cannot perceive any thing,
except it concern this present life. That is the cause why we perceive not
our own miseries: for they be invisible. We think not that the devil is
such a Tyran, nor so horrible as he is: because we see him not. But S. Paul
tells us, that we must look higher then this world, and that we must have
other eyes than those that beehold visible things: and that it stands us on
hand too look upon the devil, though he be ghostly: and that although he
have another arms too strike us with, nor legs too go with, nor any such
other things: yet he fails not too be the woorst tyran that can be deuized
in the whole woorld. And why so? For he enters unseen. If there were a man
that could enter into other men's heads and hearts, yea and intoo their thoughts
and affections, without sword or staff, without venim or poison, without
threatening, or any thing else: or if he had an hundredth deaths in his hand,
and could make them enter without feeling how: I pray you were not such an
enemy much more too be feared, than such as come furnished with great force,
and make a great noize? Yis surely. Now S. Paul tells us, that the devil is
such a one: for he is a spirit, says he. So then, let us not to be so
fleshely as we have bin wont too be, another let us judge according too our
own rude and fond fancye, when the said spiritual enemy is spoken of: But
let us assure our selves, that he is able too do us much more mischief
without al comparison, then if we could see how he came toward us, and how he
entered intoo us. So then forasmuch as he is a spirit, let us be so much the
more afraid of him. And too the intent the faithful should be the better
dispozed too come too this foresaid point, that is too say, too know their
own confuzion, till God have provided for it: S. Paul adds yet one
confirmation more of his saying. For as soon as we have received the faith,
and be enlightened by Gods holy spirit: if we have any desire too do well,
we shall by and by indeuer too serve our God. And it will seem that that were
enough. But if a faithful man look intoo himself, he shall find enough to
mislike and too sighe and groone for: according as I have told you before,
that even S. Paul confesses himself too have bin unhappy, Romans 7. c. 24.
and cries out, who shall set me free from this prison of death? The
faithful then shall always find enough in themselves wherefore too morn
before God. Yet notwithstanding forasmuch as God has put some goodness, some
well meaning, and some good intent intoo us: the same does half cover the
leawdnesse of our nature, so as we know not a long time after that it were
requisite, how wretched our state is, so long as we think but upon our
selves, I say, upon our selves, such as we be after that God has partly
reformed us by his holy spirit. That is the cause why S. Paul sends us too
behold what the unbelievers are. If we look upon the world, we shall see
some given too covetousness, and some too pilling and poulling, and not only
the little thieves that are whipped and hanged: even such as are robbers, I
say, not in woods and forests, but in houses, in markets, and in places of
Justice. We shall see that there is another faith nor loyalty among most men,
but that all men are given too pilling and pouling, without any respect of
equity or uprightness. We shall see some rushe out intoo whoredom and
dishonestie, some intoo drunkenness, and some intoo other leawdnesse and looce
behavior. We shall see men rap out oaths, periuries, and other cursed things.

Agein, we shall see secret conueyances, impoysonings, spytings, malicings,
treasons, and wicked practizes. Too be short, we shall see some so devilish,
that they fling them selves headlong altoogither, as though they meant too make
war wilfully against God. These are things that may astonish us: And although
we be dull, yet ought we too have some remors, when we see things so far
out of order in the world. Nevertheless S. Paul says that if we consider
what is done, and how all things are turned topsiteruie, and what liberty
the world takes too withstand God: it behooves us too apply the same too our
selves, and too conclude thus: the same should betyde me, yea and even as much
as I see in them that are most wretched. For when we look upon the diseases
that are abroad, how some are eaten with cankers and other filthy diseases,
and othersome have as terrible sicknesses as can be: we must pry upon them and
say, as ill, yea and worse to, should light upon me, if God pitied me not. For
all of us do carye the seed of them about us: and that not only in our
bodies, (but also in our souls) for there may be some diversity of
co^plexions, so as some shall be stronger and lus^yer than other some: but the
soul of man is utterly corrupted and marred. So then the sins that reign in
us, are all of them warnings to make us cast down our eyes, and too be ashamed
before God and his Angels, yea and too make us hate and utterly abhor our
selves. Thus ye see why S. Paul has added here, that the devil woorketh now
still. He uses the word Now: as if he should say, my friends, if in looking
upon your present state, you find any thing well, and that the same keeps
you from humbling of your selves thoroughly, and from feeling how miserable ye
should have bin, if God had not showed pity and mercy toward you: see what
is done about you, see how the vnbeleueres behave themselves, and you shall
find them to be as wyld beasts, and enemies of their own salvation: you shall
find them stark mad against God, and against all right. Too be short, ye shall
see so great enormities, as shall abash men, and make them too say, Alas, is it
possible that it should be thus? And so ye see what ye be. Say not: fie on
thee naughtipacke. Ye may well find fault with such a one, but ye must
therwithal add by and by for a sauce to season it, how great has Gods mercy
bin toward me? Then let us never condemn the sin that we see euerywhere in
other men, without considering therwithal, that if God had not brydled us, we
had fallen as deeply as we see others too have fallen: and therefore let it
stir us up immediately too pray God that he lead us not into temptation,
Math. 6. b. 13.
and let us acknowledge Gods infinite goodness, in that it pleases him too
reyne us in such wise, that we fall not intoo the horrible falls which we
see about us. For when we look upon the wickeddest in the world, yea and even
upon such as we be driven too abhor as monsters: we must (as I said before)
conclude thus with our selves: Alas, as much should befall us, if God remedied
it not.

And so ye see how we ought to put that lesson in ure. And S. Paul speaks
expressly of the rebellious children, too show that there wilbee no obedience
in us, except God put it intoo us, and reform us, and both change the
naughtiness whereuntoo we were given before, and continue and increace the
goodness that he has begun: for else Sa^an has so taken possession of us,
as he must needs draw us like brute beasts. True it is that S. Paul adds
anon after, that this served not only for the heathen, (howbeit that Gods grace
was most apparent in them:) but that even the excellentest men were
comprehended therein, and (which more is) that the Jews, (who thought
themselves too have a singular privilege of exemption from the common
cursednesse of men,) were also forlorn and damned, till they were redeemed by
our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherein we see yet better the thing that we touched not
long since: that is too wit, that here is no mention made of any one sort of
men alone, but that the holy Ghost thu^dereth upon al men, to the end that al
of us should be beaten down from the least to the the most. But this cannot be
discoursed as now. Therefore we must for conclusion take that which S. Paul
treats: which is that God has quickened us. Whereby he does us too wit, that
we bring not life with us from our mothers womb, but that by reason of sin we
be in death, when we come intoo this world, which is worse than if we were
not at all: yea and that there is no geynsaying too it, because we shall not
find any thing in our selves but corruption and wickedness, and because that
the more a man stirs it, the more it stinketh, and we shall be the more
loath too see the great and deep dungeon of all iniquity which is in us.
Therefore it stands us on hand too be quickened, and too have life given us,
not of nature, bu^ of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, because we be
renewed by him: yea and too know that God has taken us out of a wretched and
cursed state, and theruppon too forget all vayn glory. And Let us not think
that ever we shall yield unto God the praise that he deserves, till we
abhor all our own wretchedness, and be come too the point (to know) that
the devil reigns over us, till God pluck us out of his paws, and set us
free from his cursed tyranny. For is there any thing more irksome than too say,
that we be subject to the devil, and that he reygneth, not only over our
bodies, as sum worldly tyran might do, but also over our souls, and over
all our thoughts? For he is a spirit, and there is not that thing in us which
is not corrupted by him, and filled with his poison. Since we know this: let us
consider also that God having found us in that plyght, has notwithstanding not
disdeined us, (...) let^ed for all that too succor us, according also as S.
Paul uses the some reason, (...)
when he says, that we were Gods deadly enemies, at such time as Jesus
Christ redeemed us. And so let us conclude, that God respects nothing but our
miseries, when he calls us too him. He looks not whether we seek him or
no, for how were that possible? we draw clean arsward. He looks not
whether we be able too do him any seruis or no: for we be rank rebels
against him. He looks not whether there be any good towardness in us: for all
our thoughts and lusts are deadly enemies fyghting against his
ryghtuousnesse. Whereat looks he then? What moves him too succor us? Even
the infinite number of miseries that he fyndeth in us, and the horrible
confuzion wherein we be: those are the things which inclyne God too show us
mercy. So then, let all mouths be stopped, and let us not presume too bring
any thing in this behalf, as th^ugh we had bound God unto us, or that he
found aught in us wherefore he should show us favor: for he must take all
things of his own, and do all of his own infinite goodness, because he
sees us miserable, damned, and utterly forlorn, and let that stir us up too
do good, and too provide remedy, not only for our diseases, but also for our
death. For if we were but corrupted with sin and vice: the malady were
already incurable. But besides that, there is a death, yea and a spiritual
death, which cannot be recovered by all the means and remedies of the world:
God must be feign too put too his hand, yea and that so myghtily, as it may
be known that he ^aueth us by miracle.

And now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God,
with acknowledgment of our sins, praying him to make us so too feel them, as
we may forsake them, and be rid of them daily more and more, and that in the
mean season he of his goodness will bear with us, and not e^amine us over
streytly, but by little and little aba^e and correct the naughtiness that
reigns too much in us, and not suffer us too be s^aues unto Satan, but set
us free by our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom we hold all our spiritual
freedom. And so let us all say, Almyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The tenth Sermon, which is the second upon the second Chapter.
3. We also vvalked with the disobedient, dooyng the pleasures of the flesh
and of the thoughts, and were by nature the children of wrath as others are.

4. But God who is rich in mercy, through his great love vvherby he loved us,

5. Even at the time when we were dead by sin, quickened us toogither
with Christ, by whose grace you be saved,

6. And rayzed us with him, and made us sit with him in heavenly places in
Jesus Christ.


I Began this morning too show you how S. Paul meant too stretch out Gods
goodness unto all men, too the intent that none should have cause too boast
of himself, as though he had any worthiness alone by himself. And truly if
ever there were any nation in the world advanced above others, Exodus 6. a. 6.
it was the Jews: forsomuchas God had accepted them for his own household,
Exodus 19. a. 5.
and called them a holy lineage and his own inheritance. In that respect
therefore the Jews seemed well worthy too have pre-eminence above others. 1.
Pet. ^. b. 9.
Howbeit too the end that none should darken the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he says, that ever they also were the children of wrath, so as it
stood the^ on hand ^o lie drawn out of the dungeon of confuzion, whereof I
spoke this morning. Too be short, S. Paul shows here, that even those whom
men woold deem too be the excellentest, can bring nothing whereof too brag, or
too purchase themselves estimation before God, but are all received too grace
too be made heirs of the heavenly life, by means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now here might a question be demanded, why S. Paul sets the heathen men
on even ground with the Jews, seeing that God had set such odds betwixt them.
For it might seem that all the promises were disanulled: and that were a
doing of wrong unto God, rather than unto men. If we grant (as of
necessity and reason we needs must) that Gods choozing of Abraham's offspring,
was not in vain, and that his telling of them, that he accepted them too be
of his household and Church, was not too deceive them: they must needs be
nearer and more familiar unto God, and they must needs have some mark whereby
too be gathered unto him. It seems then that S. Paul should not have
abaced the Jews after that sort. But in another place he shows, that all
this geere agrees full well, if we consider the Jews (on the one side) in the
state of (Gods) chozen and peculiar people: and (on the other side) what they
be (of themselves) and what they have deserved before God. For in the Epistle
too the Romans, Romans ^. a. ^.
after that S. Paul has given sentence upon the whole world, showing that
there is not any one which is not damned and forlorn: he moves this question:
Seeing then that God gathered Abraham's lineage, and dedicated it wholly too
himself, what shall become of them? Shall there be no holiness in them? For
it seeemeth else that God had but dalyed, and that his saying in the holy
scriptures, that he had not dealt so with any other nation, was nothing worth.
But S. Paul says, De^t. 4. ^^4.
that of a truth men ought too commend the grace that God voutsafed too show
forth upon his people: and so consequently that they are too be preferred
before all the whole world, so far forth as they be indewed with the
benefytes which they had by Gods promises. Hewbeit he adds forthwith, that
in as much as they be descended of Adams race, and are sinners, as well as all
other men, and there is nothing in our whole nature, but corruption and
frowardness: all men must be feign too stoop, and all of us must needs
acknowledge, that one of us cannot be sholed out from another, according as we
have seen hee^toofore in the second chapter too the Galathians, (...)
where S. Paul told S. Peter thus: Yea, we be Jews by nature, and it
seems that we ought too go alone by our selves, seeing that God is our King,
and has sanctified us, and voutsafeth too dwell among us. Well then, it seems
at the first blush, that we should shake of the Gentyles, as unclean persons,
and such as have none acquaintance with God. But let us come too account
(says he) a^^ there is none of us all but he is indaungered unto God, and
must needs perceive himself too be a wretched sinner. Since it is so, God
must be the judge of all men, and we must needs sink before his majesty,
till we be reconcyled unto him by our Lord Jesus Christ. Too be short, S.
Paul's meaning in this text, is not too deface Gods grace, but too show that
the Jews had not any other mean in themselves whereby too obtain the
salvation and heritage of heaven, than only by being members of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that they must always be feign too take themselves first for
cursed and damned. For the worthiness which they have is but as a wyndfall,
and they be borne in sin, and subject too cursednesse, no less than all
other men, and Gods accepting and choozing of them too himself, was a special
and (as they say) a supernatural gift. Ye see then that by nature the Jews
are forlorn as well as the rest of the whole world, and yet nevertheless that
God has also received them too mercy.

By the way we must mark, that under the word Nature, Saint Paul shows,
not only that we be sinners by custom, so as every of us thrusts his
fellow out of the way, and we be too much inclyned too follow the evil,
rather than the good: but also that there is a further matter in it, which is,
that every of us brings sin with him even from his birth. Too eat and too
drink are things that accompany us: but yet is sin more rooted in us, than
all the things that belong too this life. Truly the heathen men will think it
strange, that the young babes which are not able too discern between good
and evil, nor have any discrecion or will, should already be sinners and
damned before God, according too S. Paul's saying, who calls them the
children of wrath: but yet must we needs yield our selves too condemnation
whether we will or no. As soon as babes be able too make any sign, it is
certain that they will show enough and too much, that they be froward and
naughty, and that there is a secret poison lurking in them* And that although
they cast it not out at the first, yet they be as a brood of serpents. Since
it is so, let us understand that Saint Paul does not without cause call us
the children of wrath, as well as the Jews, not excepting the very infantes
out of the number, whom men term innocents, and take them so to be: For we
must not regard our own opinion, nor the things that we see before our eyes,
but we must give glory unto God, who is the competeent judge thereof,
although we find it incomprehensible. How soever the world go, we must
always come back too that which is said in the one and fiftith Psalm, Psalm.
51. b. 7.
namely that we not only offend God daily in diverse manners: but also are
loathsome too him beforehand, yea even before we have either done or thought
any thing, because we were begotten in sin and cursednesse. And by that word
Children of wrath, S. Paul means that we be the heirs of death, and that
God must needs be our enemy, yea even as soon as we be conceived. Yet is
not God cruel, another hates he the things that are of his own making. That
is true, if we had such pureness in us as was in our forefather Adam,
according too this saying, that all things which God made were good, God then
should hate his own workmanship in us. But we must conclude, that since he
hates us, and is as it were armed to take vengeance on us all, we have well
deserved it. And that although sin cannot be poynted out with the ^inger, as
ye would say: yet does God know it well enough, and we must hold our mouths
shet at it. That is in effect the thing that we have too gather upon this
Text, in applying it too S. Paul's meaning. For if the Jews, which seemed too
have or ought too have some peculiar prerogative, are nevertheless included
under the general state of men: what can we allege which are borne Gentyles,
if we will presume too bring any bravery before God? So then we have well
wherewith to be confounded dubble, seeing that they, in comparison of whom we
be nothing, have notwithstanding no entrance intoo the kingdom of God, but
by his only free mercy, an^ by being reconcyled by mean of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

But there is yet one question or doubt more. For how should the Jews be Gods
enemies, seeing he had auowed himself alredye to be their father? Some man will
say, that the seeing of the things that were figured, and the truth and
substance of them remained as yet too be accomplished. But we have too mark
yet further, that although God had adopted the Jews in Abraham: yet they were
received in Jesus Christ, and that that grace was grounded upon him, according
too this saying, In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blissed. Genesis
22. ^. ^8.
And we have seen in the Epistle too the Galathians, that the said seed must
be referred too our Lord Jesus Christ: for without him there is no unity,
(...)
but utter s^attering asunder. Since it is so, it is not too be marueiled, that
the receiving of the Jews into the Church, as well as the receiving of the
Gentyles, is fathered here by Saint Paul upon the only free bestowed
goodness of God.

Howbeeit, there is yet a second point, which is not too be forgotten: which
is, that although the Jews had obtained such grace, yet they abode in suspens
till the coming of the Redeemer. And for that cause we shall see in another
place, that those which were near, and those that were far of, were
reconcyled by him. For we know that there is no atonement too be made with
God, without sheading of blud. Now the Sacrifizes of the Law could not put
away sin, Leuit. 17. c. 11. and. Heb. 11. f. 22.
nor pacifye Gods wrath and cursing. When men offered the blud of an Ox, or of
a Calfe, or of a Lamb, it was not too make atonement with God, there was no
such power in the brute beasts: for the thing that is corruptible, atteyneth
not too the soul. Therefore it is too be concluded, that the Jews were Gods
children by hope, and yet that they were utterly separated from him, till the
atonement was made in the person of the Redeemer. And by that means did God
show himself favorable toward them, as he did toward the rest of the world.
And for that cause also does S. Paul add, that God being rich in mercy,
has quickened them, as he did the Gentyls, even according too his great love
vvhervvith he loved them.

The cheef point (as I told you this morning) that S. Paul handles, is, that
we should learn too be ashamed, yea and too loathe our own wretchedness, by
resorting too our original, and by considering in what plyght God finds us,
and out of what a dungeon we pass, when God reaches us his hand. And the
second is, that we should magnify his goodness so much the more, because it
is an incredible thing, that he should voutsafe too cause the doctrine of life
too come down too the bottom of hell too quicken us: for we were sunk down
thither. Thefore we must mark well these words, where it is said, that God
being rich in mercy, quickened us when we were dead, according too the great
love which he bears us. True it is, that this title might always agree unto
God, because he another abateth nor increases: and so shall God be evermore
rich in goodness. But we must therwithall mark the circumstance of the place,
and the matter that S. Paul treats of here: which is, that God has uttered
the inestimable treasures of his mercy upon us according too the greatness of
our miseries. And For that cause also he adds, the great love wherewith he
loved us. For needs must there have bin such a goodness in God, as is able to
ravish us, seeing it surmounteth all our capacity, and that we be not able
too taste the hundredth part of it, though we give our selves never so much
unto it. And why? For when S. Paul says that God loved us, he speaks
expressly of himself, and of such like, which had bin chozen from among that
people, when as the greater part of them was cut of. For although the Jews
were the first borne, and had pre-eminence above us, as by right of
inheritance, and that we be but as silly things borne out of season, 1. Cor.
15. a. 8.
as S. Paul speaks of himself: yet notwithstanding we see that they be now
banished from Gods kingdom, and are become as a president that ought too make
the hear stand up upon our heads, when we behold the wrath and vengeance of
God that is uttered upon them. Therefore whereas S. Paul and some small number
mo were chozen from among the Jews: it was through Gods love which had the
greater appearance toward them. Likewise now adays, if the Gospel were
preached purely through the whole world, and faith given indifferently too all
men, so as there were none but he should be touched immediately with the holy
Ghost, and all of us were alyke: it woold seem to be as the course of nature.
And like as meat and drink are common to all men, so it woold seem that we
had this of our own natural motion, and that it were not a special grace of
God. But when we see so many Countries hungerstarued, so as there rayneth not
one drop of good doctrine upon them, but rather the wretched people are fed
with Lies and trumperies of Satan: and that on the other side God inlyghteneth
us here, and waters us with his word: whereof comes that, but of the
great love whereof S. Paul speaks here? Agein, many men have their ears
beaten with the Gospel, and yet it is apparent too men's eyes, that they
become hard hearted by it, and wax worse and worse. For it is certain that a
man shall not see so horrible monsters in the papacy, as where the Gospel is
preached and professed, for they will say they be reformed, and yet they seem
too be devils incarnate: and we need not too go far to see such syghtes.
So then, let us mark here, that we must not surmyze that any of us has
aught wherewith too please God, more than his fellows, nor presume too make any
account of our selves: but that we must always repair too the fountain that
cannot be drayned dry, and not go too the pits that are full of holes and can
hold no water, or rather which have nothing but s^id and filth in them, (for
all the gloriousness and bravery of men is no better) but draw of the said
love of our God, and confess that God must not be persuaded or moved by other
folks, but only that it pleased him too love us freely, by receiving us unto
him, and by inlyghtening us with his holy spirit in the faith of the Gospel.
And so ye see what Saint Paul meant too note here.

Now on the other side, to the end that men (who are always subtle witted, in
seeking some shifts and starting holes or other: should not excuze themselves
by being under the Tyranny of the devil, nor allege that the same ought not
too be laid too their charge: Saint Paul shows that the said bondage
ceasseth not too be wilful. I showed you this morning, that notwithstanding
all our free choyze, and notwithstanding our reason and will, yet we be as it
were fettered too Satan's service, so as we can do nothing but all
naughtiness, another should we be any better by nature, than the arrantest
thieves in the world, if God had not pitied us, accordingly as Saint Paul
sets forth al other men unto us as a looking glass, yea and even such as
despyze God and all order, and are driven by Satan intoo all outrage: saying,
that we should be like them, if God had not bin merciful too us. But now
there are many which grudge against God, and which go too law with him,
saying: If free will be so defaced, what shall become of us? If men were able
too give themselves unto goodness, and yet notwithstanding made none account
of it, but gave themselves too evil: surely it were good right and reason,
that they should be hild for guilty. But if they cannot but do evil: why
should God condemn them? At leastwise they ought too be borne withal, seeing
it is apparent that they be hild under Satan's dominion, even from their
mothers womb. Lo what many men allege, in hope to wash their hands. Yea,
and they be not contented too justify themselves by vain shifts, but they
do also rail against God, as though he were the cause of their damnation. But
S. Paul to prevent such s^aunders, says, that they which are under the
bondage of Satan and of sin, cease not for all that too be condemned by good
right. For they be not constreyned theruntoo by force: they be subject in
deed, but that is with their own good will. And that is the cause why he
says, that even such as are brought back agein to our Lord Jesus Christ,
have walked in the lusts of the flesh: that is too say, that before God had
changed them, and brought them too his obedience by his holy spirit, they
walked in their own wicked lusts. True it is that men will grant their nature
too be sinful, but yet they say, it suffizeth that the will be otherwise.
All men will grant that it is the will which puts the difference between
vice and virtue: But when the philosophers spoke after that fashion, they were
of opinion that we have a francke and free will. And that is the thing that
deceived them, because they knew not that we were marred by the fall of Adam,
and yet notwith^^anding cease not to be justly accursed, for so much as our
offending of God is with our own good will. And therefore also he adds agein,
doing the desires of our flesh, and of our thoughts. As if he should say,
that they which are possessed of Satan, and hild under the s^au^rie of sin,
cannot allege any compulsion. For why? it is their o^ne will that dryueth them
thereuntoo. Thus ye see in effect, how S. Paul meant too stop the mouths of
all misspeakers, too the intent, that men should not pick any quarrels too
God, by pretending that they ought not too be shent for their naughtiness,
seeing they be subject too it by nature. But let us mark heerewithall how S.
Paul has matched thoughts with the flesh, too the end we might know that
sin reaches throughout us, and that we have no piece of us clean and pure,
wherintoo infection is not spread. For the Papists will well enough confess
that we be corrupted in Adam: but they say, that we do in deed tend
always unto evil, when we be tempted unto it, and yet nevertheless, that
if we harken unto reason, and bridle our lusts by ruling them well, then we
shall see plainly that we be not altoogither unable too do good. And so the
opinion of the Papists is, that man's free will is not of such force as it was
at the beginning, but that it is wounded, yea and sore maimed, howbeeit, that
it has yet still some life, that is to say, some vertuousnesse, as they
imagine. But we have seen this morning, that the determinate sentence of the
holy Ghost is more general: that is too wit, that we be not only sick, but
also dead, till we be rayzed agein by Jesus Christ. Now S. Paul confirms
the same thing, saying, that our wicked lusts, and the affect o^s that are
termed the sensual appetytes, wherein we resemble the brute beasts, are not
the only things that harrie us here and there: but that we must take the
matter more strictly. What are all our thoughts, all our determinations, and
all that ever is deemed too be best in man? They be (says S. Paul) stark
wickedness. For if God should let us go after our own thoughts: it is
certain, that there is not a more horrible confuzion, than that would be. So
then, we see that men are not humbled here by halues, too confess only
their frailty, and that they have partly need too be succored and helped at
God^ hand: but we see they be utterly damned before him, sit^ their thoughts
are here called wicked and froward, and that they have nothing in them which
provoke not Gods vengeance against them. So then, let us on the one side
yield our selves guilty, assuring our selves that we were justly bereft of
all Gods graces in the person of Adam: And agein, on the other side let us not
take the same for an excuse, in hope too escape by such shifte, as who should
say, we were not the bo^dslaues of sin, nor we our selves any whit too blame
for it, because we be hild down in Satan's snares and nets even from our
birth. But it behooves us to consider always, that every of us shall find the
welspring of his disease in his own conscience. Men may hold plea as much as
they list: but if they enter intoo themselves, and ask their own consciences,
ye shall see them condemned and confounded without any nay. When a man has
babled what he can, so as he thinks he has won the gole, by saying that he
has no free will of his own, nor ability too resist God: there needs no
more but this one word: what think thou too be the thing that provoke
thee too evil? Ho, it is the devil. Thou say well. But yet mark a little
whether that does so fully excuze thee, as that thou perceyuest not right
well, that thou wart stirred up and driven too it by thine own selfmouing:
know thou not that the welspring and root of the mischief is in thy self?
When thou art so rebellious against God, that thy thoughts are full of untruth
and unbelief, and that so much the more because thy lusts are out of square,
and imbattelled against God and his righteousness, even too make war with
him: when thou see all this, must thou yet hold plea further with him? So
then, let us not seek any starting holes, seeing we carry a sufficient judge
with us, even within us, namely seeing that every of our own consciences
rebukes us. That is the thing that S. Paul amed at in this streyne. And
thereby we also are war^ed, not too presume aught at all on our selves, but
too bridle all our senses and imaginations, and all the understanding and
reason which we ween our selves too have. For until we have so renounced
our selves, it is certain that we shall never be meet too apply our selves
too the serving of God.

And S. Paul says expressly, that those whom God has quickened, are by that
means made fellows with our Lord Jesus Christ: for it is even he in whom they
have their life. True it is that we^ ought too seek it in Gods being: howbeeit
forasmuch as that is too high for us, so as we cannot come at it, no nor any
thing nere it: therefore our Lord Jesus is called the way. John. 14. ^. 6.
And he offers himself, and tary^th not till we seek him as though he weere
far from us, but reaches out his arms too allure us too him, insomuch that
in his Gospel he says, if any man be a^hirst, let him come unto me and
drink. And this is fulfilled in his person, Iere. 7. ^. 37.
as has bin said erewhiles. So then let this speech be marked, where S.
Paul says, that those which were dead before, were quickened agein by Jesus
Christ. And here we see yet better the thing that I touched shortly this
morning: which is, that S. Paul speaks not of a visible death, whereof men
may judge by outward sight: but of the corruption that is in our souls: for he
fyndeth fault with us all. How then may we atteyne too the heavenly life. How
shall we be rayzed and quickened agein to possess the heri^age that is
promised us? We see on the contrary part, how we be subject too as many
miseries as can be. This therefore must needs be meant of the newness of life
which he speaks of in other places. Now it is certain that this life is not
yet perfeet in us: there is but a little entrance of it, which serves too
lead us further, and too bring us too the end, (which shall be) when we be
come too the full glory that he speaks of here. And we see also how S.
Paul setting himself forth for an example, alleges that he had given over
all things for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, yea and even the fond opinion
which he had of his own ryghtuousnesse: insomuch that although men esteemed
him as a little Angel, yet notwithstanding he knew that it behooved him too
be saved by Gods free grace in Jesus Christ. And in sted of all his honor and
riches: he had suffered so many reproaches, so many tortures, so many beatings,
and so many imprisonings, that a man would have said, Phil. 3. ^. 12.
he had bin lyfted up above the world: and yet notwithstanding he adds, not
that I am yet come too my mark, but I streyne my self foreward, and forget the
time that is past. For if I stay upon the things I have done already, saying, I
have overcome so many incounters, I have dealt thus valeantly, I have not
ceased too preach the Gospel every where, I have wrought in such wise, that
the fruit of my doctrine is come to the whole world, I have passed the sea, I
have bin among barbarus nations, where God and his Gospel were never erst heard
of, I have had a number of lets, and have overcome them all, I have incountered
with thus many enemies, and have got the upper hand of them all: If S. Paul
say, I had had all these considerations with him, he had become cold: for it is
an easy matter with us too shrink away when we once think with our selves,
(...), I have done enough for my part, now let others march on in their array.
And so every of us woold take his leave, when he had some thing or other, I ^ot
not what. But S. Paul says, that he forgets the time past, too the intent too
cut of occasion of slothfullnesse, which might come in his head, and says,
that he streyneth him self foreward, and holds his arms open too atteyne
unto it. And how long time did S. Paul streyne himself foreward? Even too the
end. Then let us mark well, that our glory shall never be perfect, that is
too say, we shall never thoroughly enjoy the glory that we wayt for, until
the end. And therefore it behooves us always too take warning of our own
wretchedness, too moorne for it before God, and too confess that we be
beholden too his only goodness for all things. Now then, howsoever we fare,
we see that we be reformed unto newness of life by Gods spirit: and that
although we dwell among unbelievers, and be subject too many miseries, yea
and have sin dwelling in us: yet there is none of us but he feels that the
handsells which God has given us of his holy spirit, are not vain nor
unprofitable. If any man allege, that before such time as Jesus Christ woork
in us, we have alredye some life, as is seen: answer was made shortly this
morning: that forasmuch as all that ever men have by nature, is not able too
bring them unto God, but makes them too rest upon this world: none of it
ought too be made account of, when the heavenly life comes in question. Then
let men calp their hands at us on all syds: yet are we but dead men, when God
lays the bridle looce in our necks, and suffers us too walk after our own
fancy and lyking. Man may well have some reason: but what can it do so long
as it is in the own nature? It will fight against God, and against all truth.
Yet notwithstanding, man, say they, has a will: howbeeit, that the same will
be wicked. True it is (as I have said alredye) that it has no strength in
it. Yet notwithstanding forasmuch as man is wicked and froward, and has the
cursed root of rebellion in himself, so as he cannot but do evil, he
offends God willingly. And seeing it is so, let us boldly conclude, that we
be in death, till we be made partners of the life of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Esaias. 6^. a. 1. and Luke 4. c. 18.
and that he deal unto every of us the spirit which he has received, in such
measure as he lists: according as it is said that Gods spirit rested upon
him, and was given unto him in all plenty, and that as now he must deal it
too every one of his faithful ones. Therefore according as our Lord Jesus
Christ makes us too taste of his holy spirit, and according as he
strengthens thereby: so are we quickened in him and with him.

Now heeruppon he adds, that he has made us too sit in the heavenly places
with our Lord Jesus Christ. This serves too magnifye the grace that we have
hithertoo spoken of, yet so much the more. If he had said in one word, that
we were q^ickened: it had bin enough, and it ought well too have inflamed our
hearts to sing Gods praises, and too occupye our selves therein, and too apply
al our indeuers theruntoo. But here is a greater vehemency, because of our
coldness and laziness. For S. Paul has showed on the one side, that we
were dead and hild in bondag under the tyranny of Satan. Alas, these are
terrible things. And now he sets down on the other side, that God has not
only loved us, but also glorified us in himself, and that we be lifted up
from the bottom of hell, aloft unto the kingdom of heaven, where he has
lodged us, and given us seats among his Angels. Seeing then that we hear
this, needs must we be to much doted, and our wits too much brutish, if we
make not in good earnest too glorifye the inestimable goodness of our God, and
too conclude, that we be so beholden and bound unto him, that although we
should do nothing else all our life long, but preach the grace that we have
felt by experience at his hand, yet it were nothing at all. And so ye see why
S. Paul has purposely set down, that we be lifted up too heaven wi^h Jesus
Christ. And heeruppon we have a very profitable exhortation too gather, which
is, that although we be here in the mire, and do but craule like poor
frogs: yet ought we to bear this state patiently, for so much as on the other
side God has lyfted us up so high, even us that were nothing, yea and cursed
creatures too. And therefore whenever we be feign too suffer hunger and
thirst in this world, or be mocked by unbelievers, or put to the abiding of
many outrages, let us resort too that which is said here: namely, that yet
neuer^helesse we be set already in heaven with Jesus Christ, howbeeit not in
such wise, that it is apparent unto our eyes. For in this behalf we must
give place too hope, and unto that which is said in another text, (...)
namely that our life is hid, and that we must hold our selves quiet, till it
appear at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus then you see in effect,
how it beehoueth us too understand the things that are spoken here of the
diverse state of Gods children, after they be called too the faith of the
Gospel. But by the way, we must not imagine an earthly paradyse in this world,
where we shall have another trubble nor greef: we must make our reckening, that
we shall never live here at our ^ase, but we must make room for faith, as I
said before. And besides this, whereas the holy Ghost avouches by the mouth of
S. Paul, that we shall be lifted up on high: i^ stands us on hand too cast
down our heads, and too suffer our selves too be oppressed by our enemies,
and too be ouermaystered by them with all pride: we (I say) must suffer these
things, and yet in the mean while be fully persuaded, and thoroughly resolved
of this doctrine, that we for all that shall not fail too inherit the kingdom
of heaven, for it is impossible that the head should be separated from the
m^mbers, and our Lord Jesus Christ is not gone thither for his own sake alone.
We must always repair too that principle. Our confessing that Jesus Christ
is rizen from the dead, and gone up intoo heaven, is not alonly too glorifye
him in his own person. True it is, that first of all it must come to pass,
^hil. 1. b. 10.
that all knees must bow before him, and that all creatures both in heaven and
earth, yea and even in hell, must do him homage. But yet notwithstanding, the
union whereof we have treated heertoofore, is fulfilled in this, that Jesus
Christ having gathered us intoo his body, has begun that thing in himself,
which he intends too perform in us, namely when convenient time comes. So
then, Jesus Christ is gone up intoo heaven, too open us the gate in these
days, which was shet against us by Adams sin: and that is the very manner of
our sitting with him alredye. And therwithall S. Paul shows in one word,
what he intended. In deed this saying shall be declared more at lenth in his
dew place, where S. Paul himself will treat of it more at large in the next
Sermon. Yet notwithstanding we may see whereat he amed, too the end we may
have a sure and right mark too shoot at: which is, that we be saved by
grace, and that noman is able too claim any thing of his own. Nevertheless
it is not enough for us too have confessed in one word, that our salvation
comes of Gods free favor, and too have felt it also within our selves: but
we must also therwithall be taken in love with the infinite greatness of the
same grace, by considering what we be, how all evil comes of our selves,
and that there is no saying nay, because our faults do too much conuic^ us,
in so much that if God should execute a hundred times more rigor against us
than he does, we could not contend with him, nor dispute with him, but that
we should always have this record of our own consciences, that we be
justly worthy of death, and that the same is dew unto us by our desert. Then
seeing it is so, let us hold fast this doctrine, for we shall have profited
greatly for our whole life, if we once know, that there is not only some one
naughty touch, but an infinite number of evils in us. Therefore let us learn
too mislyke of our selves, and too hate and abhor our selves, and afterward
when we be come too the grace that is showed us in our Lord Jesus Christ, let
us understand, that without that, the devil should needs have full and whole
possession of us, and reign over us, as he had done before. Also let us beware
that we profit our selves by such grace, so as it may serve too put away all
our cursednesse. And then let us assure our selves, that not only all our
miseries shall turn too our benefyte by our Lord Jesus Christ, but also that
he will give us such strength, as we may well glory in our state: and
although we be driven too fight against many temptations, and that we be
frail on our own behalf: yet nevertheless we shall overcome them in such
wise, as we shall have cause too yield God thanks by our Lord Jesus Christ,
insomuch as being joined unto him, we cannot fail too come too the full
perfection of all good things.

Now let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknoweledgement of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as
it make us not only too confess three or four of them, but also too go up
even too our birth, and too acknowledge that ^here is nothing but sin in us,
and that there is no way for us too be reconciled to our God, but by the
blood, death, and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore as often as we
feel any hartbytings too ^urne us aside from the grace of God, too cite us too
his judgment s^ate, let us have none other refuge, than too the sacrifize
whereby our Lord Jesus Christ has made atonement between God and us. And
w^ensoeuer we be weak, let us desire him too remedy it by his holy spirit,
which is the means that he has ordained too make us par^^kers of all his
gracious gifts by: and let us so continue in the same, as we may be an
example unto others, and labor too draw them (...) us too the fay^h and
unity of the doctrine, and by our life and good conversation show that we
have not gone too school in vain, in so good a school as the school of the
Son of God. That it may please him too grant this grace, not only too us,
but also too all people. etc.

The eleventh Sermon, which is the third upon the second Chapter.
8. Surely you be saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves:
it is the gift of God:

9. Not by works, least any man might boast.

10. For we be his vvoorkmanship, created in Jesus Christ, too good works
which God has prepared for us too walk in.


SSaint Paul has showed heeretoofore, that our salvation is the true looking
glass, wherein too behold the infinite glory of God: for it is his will, too
be known by his goodness above all things. And for that cause also has he
showed, that God choze us before the making of the world, howbeeit not in
respect of any thing that could be found in us: but too content his own only
mercy. Here therefore he concludes that matter, and shows what he meant when
he told us, that our adoption hangs and proceeds of Gods chozing of us in
his own everlasting purpose, that is too wit, too the intent we should be as
it were clean defaced, and confess that whatsoever we be, and whatsoever
goodness we have, we hold it all wholly of God and of his only free
goodness. That is the cause why he says, that we be saved by grace, not of
our selves, but by Gods gift, and not by works. It had bin enough ^^o have
excluded all the goodness and virtue that man could imagine. But for as much as
it is hard to beat down the pride whereto we be too much given: S. Paul
reherceth this matter agein, too the end it might be the better understood,
and confirmed more at large. And therwithall we have too mark, how he matcheth
faith against it, as well too show the mean whereby too come too salvation, as
also too (...) (...) more therefore does it stand us on hand, too mark well the
thing that is said in this streyne, which is, that we be saved by grace, and
that we do nothing at all too it, but that God gives us all that ever
belongs too our salvation. And why? Because we can do nothing at all: we
have another good works nor deser^es too allege for our selves.

Furthermore, this speech is well worth the weying, when he says, least any
man might boast. For theruppon we have too gather, that it is not enough for
us too father some part of our salvation upon God: but that we must come to
that point, and yield so far, as not too make any countenance too it at all,
but abide too have all our own glory so abaced, as only God may have all
pre-eminence, as we have seen in other textes, and specially in the place of
Jeremy, where it was alleged, ^ere. 9. g. 24.
that God is not glorified as he ought too be, another is it possible for us to
glory in him, till all that ever we think our selves too have of our own,
be cast down and done away. For another the virtue, nor the wisdom, nor the
ability, nor the ryghtuousnesse of man mu^t be put forth, if we intend
that God should keep still that which is his own, and which he reserueth too
himself. Now therefore we see that all the partnershippes which the world woold
make with God, are but fond dotages, yea and illusions of Satan, who laboreth
too make us believe that we are able too do somewhat of our selves, too the
intent too pluck us thereby quyte and clean from ou^ God. For so long as a man
imagines himself to have any one drop of goodness of his own: he will never
give over himself unto God, but be puffed up with vain presumption, and rest
upon himself. Satan therefore has won much at our hands, when he has once
persuaded us, that we be able too do any thing of our selves, or that we
can make any means to atteyne too salvation: for his drift is, too make us
leave seeking of the things in God, which God offers us. And by that means
we abide empty still, according too the virgin Mary's song, Luke. ^. g. 53.
where it is said, that such as are so filled with ouerweening, shall abide
still hungry, and God will laugh their vain presumption too scorn. Then can
we not be fed with Gods grace, except we long for it, and feel our own
lack, according too this saying of the Psalm, P^al. 81. b. 10.
Open thy mouth, and I will fill it. So then, let us mark well, that men shall
then be dispozed to receive at Gods hand all that is requisite for their
salvation, when they reserve nothing too themselves, but acknowledge that all
self boasting must be put away. And (as I said before) by that means the
partnershippes which the world pretends too make with God, do fall too the
ground. For the Papists are driven too confess, that without Gods help they
can do nothing, and that they be too weak too withstand Satan, if they be
not strengthened by the holy Ghost. They can find in their hearts too grant,
that they cannot deserve aught at all, except God supply their wantes, and also
that they have need of the forgiveness of their sins. But yet for all that,
they cannot abide too give over their freewill, but imagine verily that they can
partly further themselves. Theruppon they are always buylding of some desert,
and although (they grant that) Gods grace prevent them at the first, yet they
always mingle therewith some indeuer and good will of their own, and when they
flee unto God for release of their sins, they bring him their own
satisfactions for the same. And so ye see, that the Papists will not in any
wise freely and wholly yield and give over unto God the praise of their
salvation, but keep back some part of it, commonly the one half or more, too
themselves. But S. Paul passes further here, and shows that we do
wrongfully always defraud and bereue God of his glory, till we have forgotten
all the false opinions wherewith the world deceyueth it self. Therefore the
only way for us too glorifye God, is too acknowledge that we be nothing of
our selves. And so, humility or lowelynesse is not a feyning or false
pretense, as many suppoze, which think themselves too have contented God by
saying in one word, that they be wretched sinners, and as weak as is
possible: but we must be fully resolved, that all that ever men imagine in
their own brains concerning deserts, freewill, preparation, help, or
satisfaction, is every whit but leazing and trumperie of Satan. When we once
know this, then will we submit our selves as we ought to do, and then shall
God keep his estate, as he deserves, and we also shall yield him such honor
as is dew to him. But this cannot be done (as I said) unless all that ever men
conceive and imagine concerning good works, wherewith too deserve well at Gods
hand, be utterly razed out.

Moreover let us mark therwithall, that if we will be partakers of the
salvation that God offers us, we must bring nothing with us but only faith.
For (as is said in another place) faith takes no help of good woorks. Although
it have record of the Law, Romans 4. a. 4. 5.
yet does it not bring aught unto God, whereby too bynd him (...) us, but
rather witnesses that we be utterly emptyed, and that we have none other
hope than only in his free goodness. But like as a man that is pinched with
great distress, so as he can scarsly stir a finger, and has nothing but his
tongue too cry out, alas that some body would help me, and pity me: eue^ so
must faith ryd away all the over weenyng which we have in our selves, that we
may receive what soever God offers us, so as all the praise thereof be
reserved unto him. That therefore is the thing that we have too bear away.

And heerby we be warned, not too be unthankful when God calls and
al^ureth us so gently: but too run unto him as poor hungry souls, and to
have an earnest mind too be succored at his hand, because it pleases him. For
what is the cause that our Lord Jesus Christ profits not a great number, but
for that they have deaf ears when God incorageth them too come too him? And
verily some of them are so beastlyke, that they pass not for the heavenly
life, so they have here whereof too feed and too drink like Swyne, or
wherewith too wallowe in their own delyghts and pleasures: as for the
spiritual goods (which we ought too labor for) they be nothing with them.
Ye see the^ that the one sort shet God out of the doors, because they be
dulled with the allurements of Satan, and drunken, or rather utterly bewitched
with the delyghts of this world, either in pomp and honor, or in riches, or
else in whoredom and other loocenesse. And the other sort think they have
wherewith too make God beholden too them, as we see many hipocryts do, which
cannot give over the vain self-trust wherewith they be swollen like Toads.
Wherefore too be short, let us mark well this word faith, that the pleasures
and ease of this world hold us not back from lifting up our hearts unto God.
And that is the very way too fasten our anchor in heaven. For we can never have
the said substancialnesse of faith, which S. Paul speaks of, except we pass
swiftly through the world, and know that our heritage and resting place is
elsewhere than here: and moreover shake off all vain imaginations that may
come in our heads: for they serve but too turn us away from Jesus Christ, so
as we may not come at him, nor he have any entrance at al unto us. That is
the thing which we have too gather upon that text.

Now for further confirmation, S. Paul adds hereuppon, that we be Gods
workmanship. He means not this of Gods creating of us, and of his setting of
us in this world: but his meaning is, that men, as they be borne in Adam, are
vnme^e for the heavenly life, and that if they think too get any thing by
that, they deceive th^mselues too much, because they be but as dead creatures,
and as caryo^s wherein is nothing but rotten ^ilthynesse. For proof hereof we
need too seek no further matter than this present Text, where he says, that
we be created in Jesus Christ. Here therefore S. Paul makes a comparison of
the dubble birth that is in all the faithful. For we have all of us one
general creation, whereby we live in this world: and God creates us new
agein, when he voutsafeth too give us newenesse of life by his Gospel, I mean
when he printeth it in our hearts and mynds by his own secret working: for the
word alone were not enough too do it. So then, as in respect of our first
creation, there is no difference between the Jews, the Turks, the Heathen men,
and us. We are al of us taken out of one Lump, we are all the children of
Adam, yea we are all heirs of Gods wrath, and cursed by nature, as we have
seen already heretoofore. Then if men examine them selves, and search what
they be by their first birth: they shall find how there is nothing in us but
sin and wickedness, and that the wisdom which we ween our selves too
have, is but beastlynesse: and that the light which we think we have too
discern between good and bad, is but stubbernesse and stark spytefulnesse
against God: and so ye see we be corrupted in all parts of our soul.

Now then what can we do too find favor at Gods hand, and too make him
beholden unto us? for if we can do nothing but evil, it is but a kindling of
his wrath more and more against us. We be worthy of endless death already
before we come out of our mothers womb: in so much that although we perceive
not the sin that is in a young babe: yet has he the seed of it within him,
and God auoweth that all of us deserve too be drowned in the bottom of hell:
Then if the little babe be so rightfully condemned before hand, even ere he
have seen the light of the world: what is too be said of us when we be come
forth, and do show that we be naughty (in deed) and that our nature is
altoogither sinful: And when we be come to age, what can we do (as I said
before) to fall to composition with God, so as we might help foreward his grace,
and that our so doing might be a means too further our salvation? Lo what
S. Paul means by this Text, where he says, that we be Gods woorkmanship.
As if he should say, poor creature, thou think too play the d^utie
fellow in this behalf, by putting thy self foreward too allege some
deserving, and that thou art able too begin and too approach unto God, so as
he on his side must be feign too be beholden unto thee: When begannest thou
that? If thou say, thou begannest it before thou wart borne: thou deseruest
that men should spit in thy face. If thou say, it was afterward, between the
age of seven years, and the age of twenty or thirty years, at what time
thou wart inlyghtened with the Gospel: thou art on the contrary part
sufficiently disproued, that thou could not have one drop of willingness
too do good, but that all thy thoughts and desires were utterly rebellious
against God, and as men of war fyghting against his righteousness. Therefore
thou have done nothing else but fight against God, ever since thou wart borne.
Agein, if thou take it too be from the time that thou wart a little babe,
unable too discern between white and black: yet wart thou of the cursed race
of Adam. And so turn thee on which side thou will: and reason must needs
drive thee too perceive, that thou wart unable too do any thing too Godward,
and consequently that all that ever he has wrought for thy welfare, ought too
be fathered upon him alone, without chalenging any drop thereof too thy self.

Thus we see now why Saint Paul does in this text call us the work or
woorkmanship of God, according also as it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 79. ^.
13.
that they which were the household folk of his Church, were also his flock.
For there the Prophet sholeth out the children of Israel, whom God had
gathered toogither of his own mere goodness, too set them aside from other
heathen nations. For it is certain, that God found none other cause too keep
that lineage too himself, or too prefer them before others, save only that he
of his own mere mercy had them theruntoo. As much is to be said of us at this
day. And that which he adds, namely that we were created in Jesus Christ,
ought too touch us yet the more too the quick. For there he shows that the
creating of us in Adam, is but a bringing of us too destruction: and therefore
that it stands us in hand too be fashyoned and cre^ted new agein, namely
even in Jesus Christ, who is the second Adam, as he him self terms him in the
first too the Romans, and in the fif^eenth of the f^rst too the Corinthians.
Ye see then that this word create, is enough too stop the mouths, and too
put away the cackeling of such as brag of the having of any worthiness. For
when they say so, it is a presupposing that they were the makers of themselves.
He that chalendgeth too himself any fredome of will, and takes upon him too
have any mean or ability to do good (of himself:) it is certain, that his
meaning is, too step intoo Gods place, and too show himself too be a Creator.
But there is noman which abhors not such blasphemy. The blyndest betles and
maddest bedlems in the world, account the word Creation, as a holy and
sacred thing, and will say, that God is the very Creator or maker of all
things, and thou Hipocrite confessest the same with thy mouth, and yet thou
do but lie, forasmuch as thou think that thou have some freewil too
further thy self too welfare and salvation. And so thou denyest the first
article of our faith: for thou make God but half a creator, So then they will
well enough confess with their mouth, that God is the Creator, yea and as
far as the life of this world comes too, they will say, they hold it of him.
But now is there a much excellenter life, namely which we hope for, and which
we possess alredye by faith, howbeit that we enjoy it not alredye now
presently. And how much more precious and worthy is that life wherein we
shallbee parttakers of Gods glory, than this wayfaring which we make in this
world, that is but a shadow that vanishes away out of hand? Now if ye ask
the Papists of whom they have the (heavenly) life, we have it partly of Gods
grace (say they) and partly of our own feeewill. Forasmuch then as they father
some piece thereof upon themselves, and think too part stakes after that
fashyon with God: we must conclude that they be their own creators. But
heeruppon they will reply, and protest that they never meant any such thing, and
that they had lever dye, than too utter any such blasphemy. Yea, but in the
mean while, which is the thing of greater value? too create a man's self too
be a mortal man in this world, or too purchase everlasting life? S. Paul
tells us, that if we can do any thing by our own freewill and power, God
is not fully our creator. But he says, we be his woorkmanship and of his
making, yea even in respect of the heavenly life: it behooves us too bear that
always in mind: for S. Paul speaks not of this transitory life, but of the
inheriting of the kingdom of heaven. We see then that the Papists defye God
in their pride, like villainous blasphemers as they be. And therefore for our
part, if we mind too be parttakers of the grace which is purchaced for us by
our Lord Jesus Christ, we must be rid clean of all selfweening, and
acknowledge that our beginning too do well, springs of Gods voutsafing too
call us too him, and of his preventing of us through his own free goodness.
Too be short, S. Paul's meaning is, that all they which think themselves too
have deserved aught at Gods hand, do bear themselves on hand, that they be
men of great ability, whereas in deed they be already dead, and are nothing
at al. What can a dead man do? And surely we be dead (as I have declared
heretofore) till God ^uicken us agein by the means of faith, and by the
woorking of his holy spirit. Now if we be dead, what good can we do, or
whereuntoo can we dispoze cur selves? Agein, we be nothing at all: for the
word Create, imports that all that ^uer is in us, is of Gods putting intoo
us. Like as when it is said that he created the world of nothing, it is as
much too say, as that where as there was not any thing at all before, he gave
being too that which was not. Even so as in respect of the spiritual life,
that we be cre^ted, is as much too say, as that we were nothing at all
before. Now, if we be nothing, shall we be able too bynd God too give us
this or that? Are they not things utterly against nature? Then let us mark
well, that too know how we be saved by mere grace, and that we have all
things of Gods gift, and of his free goodness, we must be feign too come
too this point, namely that God gave us our being, according as it is avouched
by the example of Abraham in the fourth too the Romans. Romans 4. a. 1.
For in Abraham's body we see what is in our souls. When Jesus Christ was
promised too Abraham in his son Isaac, Genesis (...). c. 19.
ye know he was a man altoogither drooping and barrein: and his wife also was
far stricken in age. And therefore that either he on his side should beget, or
his wife on her side bread a child, are things impossible. But he believed God,
which calls forth the things that are not, Romans 4. c. 17.
and gives them being. Seeing then that Abraham was as a withered block, and
had no s^rength nor lustiness in him, and yet notwithstanding receives the
promis that was made unto him: therein it behooves us too behold that we
cannot be parttakers of Gods grace, except we acknowledge our own
inability, and be first of all v^terly abaced in our selves, that our Lord
may begin our life, and continue the same, till he have brought it too full
perfection.

Furthermore let us mark well, that his saying in Jesus Christ, is too send
us back too the corruption which we have by inheri^^unce in Adam. For we can
never find in our hearts too yield our selves giltye, till we feel it
proceed in our selves. And moreo^er it serves too show, that this benefyte is
not common indifferently to all men, but only to those whom God has chozen,
accordingly as we have seen alredie, that we were chozen before the making of
the world. Now then this extends not generally too all Adams offspring, but
only too so many as are renewed in Jesus Christ. And therefore it is all one as
if S. Paul should show, that we had need of a remedy, for so much as we
be alredye forlorn and damned, at such time as God by the means of Jesus
Christ plucketh us out of the dungeon wherein we were. And this serves too
confirm yet better the thing that we have seen heertoofore, which is, that
we can not be faithful, except God make us new agein, so as we hold of him
all things that belong to the heavenly life, and all the spiritual goods which
we have. Now seeing we be created in Jesus Christ, it is all one as if it
were said, that all the ryghtuousnesse, all the wisdom, all the virtue, and all the goodness that is in us, we draw it from out of that fountain, and that
God scatters them not abroad at adventure, but has put the fullness of all
things belonging too our salvation, into Jesus Christ, in so much that when we
be once made members of his body, John. 1. b. 16. and Colos. 1. c. 19. and.
2. b. 9.
we be also made parttakers of all his benefyts, and that without him, we
be cut of from all parts of our salvation, as though we were rotten and
stinking wretched carkesses, and that there were nothing in us but filth, as I
have declared before. Thus ye see what we have too mark further, when S.
Paul says, that we be not only Gods woorkmanship, but also created in
Jesus Christ.

Now he adds, too good works which he has prepared for us to walk in.
His setting down of good works in this place, is to show, what a folly, or
rather what a madness and frentiknesse it is in men, too bear themselves in
hand that they can bring good works on their behalf, as who should say, they
had the^ in their sleeves, or as if they were of their own growing. For needs
must God have prepared them (says he) and that we should have them at his
hand. And it is all one as if he should say, go too, show here your prowess
and vertewes: enter a little into account with God: seeing your pride will not
be daunted, but ye have all ways some bristles set up still, bring forth
all that ye think may make for ye. Well, say you, and we will bring our good
works, as the Papists are wont to do: who allege in this wise: what? how
now? shall we not be saved by our own merits, and by our good works? And
whence draw ye them, says S. Paul? Have ye coined them in your own shop?
or have ye some gardin of your own planting, whence too gather them? or spring
they, I wot not how, of your own travel and policy, so as you may further
your selves by them? No, but contrarywyse, know ye that God has prepared
them. And is it meet that you should fall too replying against him, when he
has pityed you, and showed himself bountiful toward you? Is it meet that
ye should presume too step forth too pay him, as though ye had wherewith of
your own? When a man has bin well kept and tended, and his host has lent him
money at his need, and he has received it at his hand (too pay him withal:)
shall he afterward boast, that he has paid his host? There is an host, that
not only is contented too do his charity upon a man, but also after he has
found him both at bed and at board, will say too him, Hold here wherewith too
pay: too the intent it may not seem too you, that my charitable dealing has
bin too make an vnderlyng of you, I will receive payment for it at your hand,
yea, ^ut yet the same shall come out of mine own purse. Now, shall he too
whom such franknesse has bin used, go and say, he has well paid his host?
Yea, and with what money? Even with the same money that was put intoo his hand.
So stands the case with those that put forth their good works, too say,
that God has not saved them freely, but that they them selves were a help too
it. Yea, but where come they by those good works? That was the thing that S.
Paul amed at, when he said that God prepared the good works. True it is that
God prepares men's conuersations by the Law, wherein he gives us a certain
rule how too walk according too his will: and it is all one as if he prepared
the way for us too go in as we ought too do. But that would nothing boot us,
except we received the good works themselves at Gods hand. When God
commands us any thing, we may well have our ears beaten with the sound of
it, but it will never enter intoo our hearts, for we be full of pride and
naughtiness, and too be short, it is impossible for us too obey God, till he
have softened our hearts, and utterly changed them.

And that is the thing which is declared too us by the Prophets, and in all the
holy scripture. God therefore must be feign too make another preparation: that
is too wit, when he has taught us, and told us what is good, and what he
lykeeh of, afterward he must reform us, and so guide and govern us by his
holy spirit, as there may be one accord between our life and his law. Then
until such time as God prepare good woorks after that fashion, that is too
say, till he give us them by shewng us his will, and also make us to do them by
his power: we must needs be utterly unprofitable Now since it is so, let us
learn too humble our selves before God, both for that is past, and also for
that that is too come. For that which is past, let us acknowledge that God has
plucked us out of the gulf of hell, and that whereas we were by nature damned,
he has voutsafed too have us too be his children, and therefore let us not be
so ouerweening, as too think that we have this or that, but let him be
gloryfied as he deserves, and let us assure our selves that he has pulled us
back from death, to the intent, that the beginning, welspring, root, and
only cause of our salvation, should proceed of his only free bestowed
goodness. Thus ye see in effect, that it is a point of true humility, to give
all the glory of our salvation unto God. And for that which is too come, it
behooves too know that we could not stir one of our little fingers too do
any good, except we were governed by God, and received the good works them
selves at the hand of him, and of his holy spirit. So then, as often as we feel
our own weakness, let us flee too him for refuge: and when we have done
any good, let it not puff us up with any pride, but let us always think our
selves so much the more straytely bound unto God, yea even by dubble. He that
is yet very weak, must confess him self exceedingly bound unto Gods mercy,
for bearing with him: but he that goes before others, and is as a mirror of
all holiness, must confess himself much more bound unto him. For why? He
has nothing of his own, he holds all things of God, and of his only free
goodness. Wherefore let us all our life long walk in such sort, as we may
still from year too year, from mooneth to mooneth, from day to day, from
hour to hour, and from minute too minute, continually acknowledge our selves
bound unto God for the goodness which he has given us of his own mere mercy,
and let us think our selves beholden too him for all things.

And let us mark by the way for a conclusion, that S. Paul's intent here, is
not to decypher all the causes of our salvation one by one, but too abate men's
lustiness, that they might not make any bragges, or any countenance (...) God
is in their debt. Therefore it is enough for S. Paul to have stopped all men's
mouths in such wyze, as they may not take upon them too have aught of their
own. For contrariwize whenever God gives us good works, although they be
the fruits of his mere goodness: yet can they not purchase us any thing at
his hand: for we must always ground and settle our selves upon the
forgiveness of our sins. There lies all our righteousness.

Too be short, there are two things requisite in yielding God the praise that
is dew for our salvation: first that we acknowledge our selves too have all
things of him: and secondly that we acknowledge that all the good works, and
all the good will which he has given us already, serve not too purchase us
favor at his hand, nor for us too trust upon: but (too show us) that he had
need too uphold us, and too burye and forget all our sins, and that by that
means we be justified before him, because he acquitteth us, notwithstanding
that we deserve too be condemned a hundred times. So then, too be shor^, when
it is told us, that there is another freewill, nor any thing else in man: it is
too the end we should learn too give all glory unto God, and not have any
cause too vaunt our selves any more. And that afterward upon the knowing
thereof, we should understand that we should be in continual trubble and
perplexity, were it not that we be sure that we shall always obtain grace
and mercy, by coming too God with tears and lamenting. And how so? Because he
voutsafeth too acquit us, and although he could thunder down upon (...), and
drown us: yet he buryeth our sins by means of ^ur Lord Jesus Christ, and
receives us always too mercy.

Thus then ye see how men ought in all points, and in all caces too be
confounded in themselves, and too be ashamed of their own leawdnesse, that
they may glorify God: and therwithall ackowledge that they should always be
in doubt and anguish, but that God does evermore pity them, and the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the sacrifize whereby we be reconcyled too
him. That therefore is the true way too uphold and auow God too be the Savior
of the world: and that also is the way for us to father all things upon the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as he deserves: namely by rayzing and putting
quyte away all the glorying which we pretend to have in our selves, and
theruppon too confess, not only that all the goodness which is in us, is of
Gods putting intoo us, but also that he must be feign too bear with our
infirmities, because we cease not too provoke his wrath, till he make that
satisfaction auaylable, which was made by the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

But now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sins, praying him to make us too feel them more and
more, till we be so pulled down, as there may be no more show of sin in
us: and that in the mean while, we may nevertheless seek the aid and help
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And that forasmuch as he has partly inlyghtened us
already by his holy spirit, it may please him too increace his grace in us more
and more, till he have communicated it wholly unto us: and in the mean time so
uphold us and govern us by his holy spirit, as our whole indeuer may be
nothing else but too frame our life after his holy law: and he not pass upon
the great number of our sins which we commit, never ceassing too stray away
too our own undoing, but hold us back by his secret power, until he take us
away out of this world, and join us with our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
fountain of all perfection, that we also may be perfect in him. And so let
us say, Almyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The twelfth Sermon, which is the fourth upon the second Chapter.
11. Wherefore remember that you which were sometime Gentiles in the flesh,
being called uncircumcision, in respect of that which is called circumcision,
made by hand in the flesh:

12. Were at that time without Christ, strangers too the common weal of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants that conteyne the promise, without
hope, and without God in the world.

13. But now in Jesus Christ, you that were erevvhyle far of, are made
near by the blud of Christ.


ALthough the things that are preached unto us generally concerning Gods grace,
ought too mo^e us too magnify his name, and to acknowledge the benefyts that
we have received of him: yet notwithstanding if a thing be done privately
unto us, then ought we to be touched yet the more therewith. The same order
keeps S. Paul here. For we have seen this morning, how he made clean
riddance of all that is in man, that there might be but only one ground woork
of salvation, that is too wit, the mere goodness of God. Now he applies the
same particularly too the Ephesians, willing them too bethink themselves of
their plyght wherein God found them: as if after his speaking of all mankind, he
should send every one of us too his own experience. And in very deed, that
which is spoken here too the Ephesians, concerns us also, like as if a man
having told us of the forlornnesse wherintoo we be tumbled by Adams fall,
should say: Consider also what you were, and after what sort you lived in all
beastliness, before such time as God called you too the knowledge of himself.
The thing then which we have too mark, is, that S. Paul having showed how
that all me^ from the greatest too the least, ought too confess that they have
their salvation through Gods only goodness, adds another particular
declaration, wherein he shows the thing that every one of the faithful ought
too know in himself. True it is that the thing which he has said for that
time, would not agree in all points too our days: but yet shall S. Paul's
answer always have his course, and serve too good purpose. For although we
have bin baptized from our infancy, yet come we of such as erst were cut of
from Gods Church. For the Jews were sholed out from all other nations of the
world, as a people whom God had ordained too himself, we were then all
Heathen, (I mean as in respect of our forefathers,) before the Gospel was
preached too the world. But now agein we see what confuzion is come upon us,
through the unthankfulness of such as were called too the truth of the
Gospel, and how we have strayed away after such a sort, that we have bin as
good as cut of from Gods Church agein. For the baptim that we received in our
chyldhod, stood us in none other sted, but too make us dubble guilty before
God For they that were plundged in the superstitions of popery, and in all the
Idolatries that are committed there, had as good as renounced their baptim, and
were become renegats: and we can not excuze our selves too have bin forsworn
unto God, seeing we were start away from his obeysaunce. Therefore it is not
for us too make any boasting, or too seek any excuce too cover our
wretchedness withal: but rather too confess freely that we were as deadly
enemies too God, and worthy too have bin utterly given over of him, because
he had reached us his hand too bring us back agein too the way of salvation.
So then, first we take this text as it lies, to apply it to the Ephesians,
and afterward look too take profit of it our selves. Now then let us see the
contents and substance of these words, Bethink your selves, and remember how
ye were sometime Gentyles.

First he puts a difference between the Jews, and those whom God had
suffered too walk on still in their own darkness. For it was a special
privilege that God gave unto Abraham's offspring, when he adopted them, too say
too them, you shall be my people whom I like of, as though ye were of mine own
household. Those then which came not of Abraham's line, were as good as banished
from Gods kingdom and Church. And he adds, in the flesh. Not as he speaks
in diverse other places, where he uses that word in reproach: but too show
that God had showed by a visible fashion, how wretched their state was, and
that they needed not any great deepenesse of wit too perceive it. For
circumcizion (says he) served as it were too rid men of their uncleanness.
And furthermore that Sacrament was ordained of God, too show that all the
seed of man is cursed, and that we cannot be ryghtly made holy and pure, but
by the cutting of, and putting away of the things that we have by nature. Too
be short, like as now adays we be taught by Baptime too renounce
whatsoever we have by birth: so also was circumcizion a token to show how all
men were filthy and loathsome, till they had forsaken their own kind. Now then,
S. Paul's meaning is, that the said visible sign, showed well too all the
heathen, that they were (as ye would say) unworthy too preace unto God, and
that he voutsafed not to receive them into the company of the faithful. For
the Jews had not invented circumcizion of their own brain: but (as I have
said before) God had sholed them out from the rest of the world, and all was by
reason of the privilege of his own mere grace and goodness.

Theruppon S. Paul adds further, that they were at that time without
Christ. And this serves too show yet better, that men are horrible scattered,
and can do nothing but run astraye, till God have knit them toogither in the
body of his son, and adopted them too be his children. For we know that
Jesus Christ is the light of the world, and that all ryghtuousnesse dwells
in him, and that he is our redemption and life. So long then as we have none
acquayntance with him, we must needs be as poor blind men in the dark, we
must needs be as good as dead, we must needs be naked of all holiness,
ryghtuousenesse, power, and all goodness. And forasmuch as our freedom
depends upon him: we must needs be hild under the tyranny of the devil
and of sin, till he have raunsomed us from them. For this cause therefore does
S. Paul send us here under the person of the Ephesians, too Jesus Christ, too
the end, that they which are not parttakers of Gods son, should know that it
were better for them too be drowned a hundred times, than too continue always
in that state. And why? For since we can have another life nor soul health nor
ryghtuousenesse, nor ought else that is allowable, but in Jesus Christ: it is
all one as if he said, that we have nothing but utter naughtiness and
destruction in our selves.

He adds thereunto, the common weal of Israel: showing thereby that all the
promises which were made too the Jews, were grounded upon Jesus Christ. And
therefore they that belong not too his body, are forthwith depryued of all
Gods promises, and cannot conceive any hope of life, but only by imagination,
wherein they beguile themselves. And verily he adds, the instruments (or
couenantes and conueyaunces) of the promises: as if he should say, that God had
not called the Jews as it were in hudder mudther, but had passed a solemn
conueyance or evidence, which served too leave all the world in condemnation.
Therefore forasmuch as God had advanced Abraham's lineage, it must needs be
that the rest of the world was so much the more confounded, like as if some
Princes or some Cities should make a league, all others that are not
comprehended in it, are as good as deprived of the benefit that is contained
in it. And when God declared that he took the Jews too be his flock, and
that he would be their father and savior: he declared also that no part
thereof could come to the Gentiles, whom he had after a sort forsaken, and to
whom he had not voutsafed too show the like mercy. Finally he says, that they
had bin without God, which is the full measure of all mischief. For what shall
become of man, when his God has so shaken him of, as there is no access for
him, nor no coming too him agein? And that not only he is forsaken of his
God, but also cannot but plundge himself deeper and deeper intoo the bottom of
hell, and make war against God, as though he were at defia^ce with him,
because he is stubburne and rebellious against all goodness? Thus ye see,
that the thing which S. Paul sets forth here, too the intent that the
Ephesians should profit themselves, by the things that he had said this morning
concerning the only cause of our salvation: is that there is none other thing
for us too trust unto, but only Gods mere grace.

But now let us come too o^r selves. I have already declared briefly, that our
fathers were in the same state that S. Paul sets down here. And therefore
we have no cause too brag of, as often as we think of what root and original
we spring. For if the very Jews be at this day a record of Gods wrath and
horrible vengeance, which he lays upon them for their unbelief: is there
not much more cause for too cast down their eyes, which are but as things
borne out of time? For the Jews are of the holy root that God had chozen, and
we be but graffed intoo it in their stead. If God has not spared the
natural branches, Romans 11. b. 16. and. 17. c. 21.
what will he do too us that have bin brought in as it were against nature?
Lo how S. Paul exhorts us too lowelinesse, too the end we should learn to
submit our selves always too Gods mere goodness, and frankly and freely
confess that our welfare consists therein. Also I told you secondly, not
only that our fathers were strangers to the hope of salvation, because they
were not adopted as well as the Jews: but also that the horrible scattering
which came upon the whole world, and which reigns in it still at this day,
ought too beat down al pride and presumption, that Gods grace may shine the
brighter upon us. Now then (as I said) although we be baptized, and have the
badge of Gods goodness and free adoption: yet, notwithstanding we have bin
wretched idolaters, and were gone away from our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
things that we had in greatest estimation, turned too our greater damnation,
in stead of being for our welfare. Therefore we have good cause here too
bethink our selves.

Furthermore for as much as we be short witted in magnifying Gods grace, let
us wey well this word which S. Paul uses here to bring us to remembrance of
the things which we might forget. For when we be indewed with Gods grace,
and it has pleased him too give us some good desire too walk in his fear, and
he has wrought so in us by his holy spirit, as men may perceive that there is
some goodness in us: it may make us too forget by and by what we were before,
by means whereof Gods grace is as good as buried. Too the intent therefore that
our present plyght hinder not our continual praising of God, and our esteeming
of his goodness and grace as it deserves: let no length of time darken the
benefits that we have received of God, but let us as it were enter intoo
examination of them every day. And although God have changed our state at this
day, so as we be no more the men that we were before: yet notwithstanding let
us bear in mind, that before God had pity upon us, we were as seely sheep
that went astray, and as beasts that are utterly lost, and that without the
same small beginning, we had bin damned ten hundred thousand times erst, had
not God prevented us, and given us remedy for the cursed state wherein we
were. Ye see then, that the thing which we have to consider upon the said
speech, whereby S. Paul puts the Ephesians in mind, what they were before,
is, that although God had put away the thing that should have made them
ashamed, and marked them before hand with his holy spirit, so as they were
become as precious perles: yet notwithstanding he will have them too bethink
themselves, (like as in very deed it is, the fruits of repentance which the
scripture sets down,) that when God has reached us his hand, and brought
us home agein from our straying, we cease not too beethink us of our (former)
sins, even in such wyze as we may be sorye, abashed, and ashamed of them.

Whereas he says, that the Gentyles have good cause too hold down their
heads, because they were sometime without assurance of Gods goodness and
love: thereby we be put in mind, that we receive a singular benefyte at Gods
hand, when we have the use of his Sacraments, which are as warran^es, that he
takes and auoweth us too be of his household and Church. True it is, that if
we abuse them, we shall pay deerly for it: but yet whatsoever come of it,
when the Sacraments are put too the end wheruntoo they were ordained, it is
certain, that they be as it were inestimable treasures, as I said before. For
although we have Gods promis that he takes us for his children, even from our
coming out of our mothers womb: yet is there nothing but uncleanness in our
flesh. Now then, have we baptim? There it is showed us that God washes and
clenzeth us from all our uncleanness, that he pulls us out of the confuzion
wherein we were with our father Adam: and that he will have us clothed with
Jesus Christ, too be parttakers of all his goods, as though they were our own.

We see then what baptim imports, and consequently how much we ought too
esteem this grace of Gods coming unto us in such wise, and of his showing of
himself too be our father after so homely manner. As much is too be said of
the supper. For there it is showed us visibly, that Jesus Christ is the true
food of our s^ules, that like as our bodies are sustained and nurrished with
the bread and wine, so we have our spiritual life of the very substance of
Gods son. Seeing then that our Lord Jesus does as it were from hand too hand
show us, that he gives us his body and blud too be our spiritual meat and
drink: is it not a thing much more worth than all things that are too be found
in this world? And herin we see how malicious and froward most men are: for
as touching the Lords Supper, many come to it, which rush thither like
wretched beasts, not knowing why it was ordained. Some agein make but a custom
and ordinary use of it: and although they have bin taught to what purpose it
avails us: yet they do but wring their mouth at it, and all is one to the^,
when it is once past with the^. And othersome defyle it even wilfully. And as
touching baptim, we se how the world goes with it. For whereas we ought to
think daily, and not only once aday, but every hour of the day, both upon
Babtim, and also upon the Lords supper, to confirm our selves the better in
Gods grace: so little does any man set his mind that way, that if baptim be
minnistred in the Church, men make none account of it. Scarsly can one be
found among a hundred, that can fitly tell and utter what that sign of our
adoption betokens. And yet ye see what disdeyne is matched with that
ignorance. Must not God after his long suffering of us, and his pacient waiting
for us, be revenged of such dishonor, when his grace is so lightly esteeemed
among us? So much the more therefore does it stand us in hand, too mark well
what S. Paul tells us here, when he says, that the Gentyles being
depryued of the Sacraments which God gives too his children for a warrant of
his goodness and love, are in miserable taking, too the end we may learn too
make much of the privilege which he has given us, not too boast folishly of
it, as hipocrytes do, who abuse Gods name continewally: but too make us too
fare the better by a thing of so great price and value, and too make us know
that we be no whit better than they which are as poor hungrestarued souls,
against whom God shetteth the gate still, and too whom he voutsafeth not tooo
impart those pledges of his, wherein he shows and witnesses that he will be
our father. Ye see the Turks have circumcision as well as the Jews, and yet
is it nothing worth, because there is no more any promis of God going with it:
and yet notwithstanding we come of Adams race as well as they. Wherefore have
we Baptim, but because God intended too show himself the more pitiful
toward us, and too utter the riches of his goodness? Agein, the Papists
will needs be called Christians, and have Baptim as well as we. And yet in
the mean while they be bereft of the holy Supper, yea and they have the
abominable Mass, wherein they renounce the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And what cause is there why we should be so preferred before
them, saving that God would have us too be as myrrours of his infinite mercy?
So much the more therefore behooves it us too walk in awe and warenesse, and
too set store by the things which God shows us too be of such worthiness
and excellency, that we may fare the better by them. Wherefore mark it for a
special point, when S. Paul speaks here of Circumcision and
uncircumcision. 1. Cor. ^. d. 19. and Gala. 5. ^. ^. and 6. d. 15.
For although he say in other places, that Circumcision is nothing, (howbeeit
that was but because it was abolished, and the use thereof ceased, as of all
other figures of the Law:) yet notwithstanding, at such time as God ordained
it, and so long as the Jews used it holily, it was a sure warrant to them of
Gods adoption, as if he had clenzed them from all the filthiness that is in
Adams race, and appropryed them unto himself.

After he has said so, he adds, that they were without Christ, and
without promises. Here he shows that the Sacraments take and borrowe their
force of Gods word. For if there were no more but the bare signs, it were no
matter of great importance. If Circumcizion had bin given too the Jews without
any doctrine or instruction: too what purpose had it served? Surely they had
bin never the better for it. But when as God says, I am the God which
sanctifyeth you, you shall be my children, I will receive you, and therewith all
take you for mine heritage: and on the other side also I give my self too you,
and wilbee your life: forasmuch as Circumcizion had such promises, it was as an
inestimable treasure too the Jews, because the foundation (that is to wit, our
Lord Jesus Christ) was laid sure, whereon the promises were settled, and as ye
would say, confirmed. That then is the cause why S. Paul joins here the
common weal of Israel, and the instruments of Gods promises, and our Lord
Jesus Christ al toogither. Howbeeit in speaking of the common weal of Israel,
he shows, that God had chozen one certain lineage which he would have too be
holy: and so was it too be concluded, that all the rest were unholy. In
speaking of the instruments of the promises, he shows (as I have touched
alredie) that we must not look upon Circumcision in it self, but we must
direct it too the right end of it. It becomes us too know wherefore God
would have it used among the Jews: for otherwise it is but an Apes toy, as the
number of fond devotions which the Gentyles had, whereby they hoped too have
had holiness: but all of it was but abuse and trumperie, because they had no
promis of God. Likewise they say now adays in the papacy, that they have many
Sacraments, and therewithal as many murlimewes and gewgawes as can be: but
all that God disalloweth, is but pelting trash. And why? for there is no word
that sanctifyeth them. So then let us mark well, that too profit our selves by
the Sacraments, we must always be taught them by Gods doctrine. And thereby
we may judge, that many are cut of from the Church of God, who
notwithstanding are now adays thought to be highest in it. For in the mean
while where is the instruction, which they should have too be partakers of the
benefytes that God offers them? They will allege their Baptim, and they will
say, they receive the Lords Supper. If a man ask them too what end: they
understand nothing at all, and that is as an utter abolishing of the power of
the Sacraments. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand too come
back too this point, namely too learn of the Gospel, too what end Baptim was
ordained, what fruit it yields us, and which is the right and lawful use of
it: and also too consider whertoo the holy Supper avails us. For if we have
not Gods word: our Lord himself tells us, that the Sacraments which we
recey^e, are as it were imbaced, and there is nothing but falsehod in them. And
like as if a man should set a (Princes) seal to a letter that had nothing
therein, or which had but imaginations and dreams contryued in it, it were an
offense worthy of death: so also for so much as the Sacraments are as Seals
too warrant Gods promyses unto us, and too make them of authority among us:
if we separate them from his word, it is certain, that we be falsifyers
before God and his Angels. That therefore is one thing more which we have too
mark upon this streyne.

And we must mark also, that Jesus Christ is set down with the common weal
of Israel, and with the Sacraments and promises, too show that it is he on
whom all of us depend. For it is certain that God never comes at men without
the mediator. For since he hates unrighteousness, and all men are cursed in
Adam: it was requisite that our Lord Jesus Christ should step in, that we
might have some entrance and access unto God. 2. Cor. 1. d. 20.
And that is the cause why S. Paul says also, that he is the yea and the
Amen of all Gods promises. For there shall never be any certeintie of Gods
promises without Jesus Christ. Exodus 24. b. 8.
And for the same cause also all things were dedicated in the Law with blud,
yea and even the book of the Law it self. When the covenant was red openly,
Hebr. 9. ^. 20.
and published solemly too the people, the book was besprinckled with the blud
of the sacrifize, too show that all the doctrine contained in the Law, and
all the promyses whereby God adopteth those too be his children, whom he has
admitted intoo his Church, must be confirmed by the blud of our Lord Jesus
Christ. So then, will we have the promyses too be sure and infallible? Will
we be assured of them, that we may freely call upon God, and fight against
all temptations? We must resort always too Jesus Christ. It is much when God
tells us with his own holy mouth, that he will reserve us for his own: but
yet must we needs tremble continually at his majesty, till we have cast our
eye upon our Lord Jesus Christ, and know that God lyketh well of us for his
sake, so as our sins be buried, and shall never come too account. Thus ye
see how the promises, the Sacraments, and all that ever we have, must be
ratifyed by Jesus Christ. Too be short, (if I may make an humane comparison,
and speak gr^ssely) he is the true sauce too make all things sauerie that
belong too our salvation. For without him, we should continue evermore as men
in a swound, and (as I have said alredye) we could conceive no hope at all,
nor have our minds so settled, as we might resort unto God for refuge. Not
without cause therefore d^oth Saint Paul say, that such as have no
Circumcision, nor other Sacraments whereby too be consecrated unto God, nor
any pr^myses of salvation, are without Christ.

And now he adds a thing which may seem hard and strange at the first
sight, when he says, that the Ephesians were without God. For it is certain
that although they were wretched Idolaters, yet they had a certain opinion
that the world was not made of it self: for we k^^we that all men have
continually hild so^e seed of Religi^n, and even they which ouersho^e them
selves so far, as too wype out all knowledge of God, are first most ugly
monsters, and secondly although they strive too thrust all knowledge of God
under foot, yet must they needs have harthitings, that sting them in spyte of
their teeth, and they be driven too feel that they cannot escape the hand of
God. Howsoever the case stand, we be na^u^ally inclyned too know that there
is a God. And the heathen men have always had their devotions and divine
services (as ^hey termed them) to show that they worshipped some Godhead. How
then does S. Paul say here, that they were without God? We have to note, that
it is not enough for men to confess that there is some certain Godhead, and
to indeuer to discharge themselves of their duty by serving of a God: but
they must also have a certain settled belief, that they wander not too and
fro after the manner that is spoken of in the first Chapter too the Romans,
Ro^. 1. c. 21.
where it is said, that such as deuyze strange shapes of God, do vanish away
in their own foolish imaginations. Now it is certain, that all such as are
not taught by Gods word, by the law, by the Prophets, and by the Gospel, are
out of the right way, and after a sort, at their wits end, so as they be
tossed too and fro like wavering reeds that yield too every wynd, and theruppon
make sundry shapes of God. For every man builds and forgeth crooked
conceytes in his own brain, and we know that man's wit is as a shop of
Idolatry and s^perstition, in so much that if a man believe his own conceyt,
it is certain, that he shall forsake God, and forge some Idol in his own
brain. Lo^ what we be. And it may right well be said, that we be without God,
when we wander away after that fashion in our own imaginations, and in our
false opinions. And that is the cause why S. Paul says, that such as have
had a mind too worship some unknown Gods, have woorshipped nothing but Idols
and fantastical imaginations, and that God belongs not at all unto them, and
so consequently, that they were utterly forsaken of him, like as they were
become renegates, and had renounced him before. So Much the more then behooves
it us too travel and take pain too know which is the God whom we ought too
worship. I have told you already, that it is not enough for a man too allege
that he has a good intent, and that he meant too worship God: that will go for
no payment: for God lyketh not of the liberty that men take too make
themselves believe this or that. Since it is so, we must present our selves
before God with all warenesse, that be may show us the way too come unto him.
For else we shall but go astray, and he that runs swiftest, shall be furthest
of from him, yea and in the end break his neck. Lo in what case we be till
God have reached us his hand, and set us in the right way, that we may not be
as poor wandering beasts all the time of our life.

Agein, for as much as he has given us a record of his majesty in the holy
scripture: it becomes us too hold our selves short thereunto, and not too
covet too know any thing which is not showed us there. What must then be our
lodestarre too know God by? Too suffer our selves too be taught by his word,
and too be so discret, as to receive whatsoever is contained there, without
geynsaying, and not too presume to add any thing at all thertoo. And we ought
so much the more to have that care, 1. John. 2. d. 22. 23.
since we know how S. John auoweth, that he which has not the son, has not
the father. Then like as I have told you, that because God reueleth himself in
this word, it behooves us too seek him there: so also forasmuch as our Lord
Jesus Christ is his lively image, let us not enter intoo over high
speculations, to know what God is: but let us repair too Jesus Christ,
acknowledging that it is his office too bring us too God his father, and that
it is he by whom we must be guyded, and so shall we be sure that we shall
not be without God in this world. Now if they that take so much pain, and
trott up and down too serve God, be condenmed here too be without God,
because they have not hild the true rule, but have bin beguyled in their
superstitions: what shall become of the dogs and swyne that have no awe at
all of God, specially since they bereue themselves of all knowledge, and
degenerate intoo beasts, after they have had some understanding of the truth,
by having their ears beaten with the holy Scripture: Of which sort we see a
great number now adays, who too take the advantage of the time, and too make
good cheer at their pleasure, could find in their hearts too quench, or too
darken the light that God had caused too shine upon them, yea even too the
utter defying of Gods maie^tie, as though there were no more instruction at
all. We see how this cursed ^eede is dispersed abroad at this day through all
the whole world. But (as I said before) if the poor ignorant sort, which never
had any certain way, but have bin as blind wretches wandering here and there
too seek God, and yet he has not s^ewed himself unto them, have none excuce
at all, but are condemned at Gods hand, because they had not a true root: what
shall beco^e of the unhappy wretches that despyze God in that wise, and (...)
against him, saying, we know no more what the true doctrine and Religion
mean. So much the more then ought we too humble our selves, and too know
that since God has reveled himself unto us, now that he is joined too us with
an insepa^able bond, and has showed himself a father too us, and has
voutsafed too make us members of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and made
us one with him, with condition that whatsoever he has, belongs now unto us:
we ought too learn too magnify that grace, and too acknowledge what we have
bin, and what we should be still, if God had not showed himself merciful
toward us.

Heruppon a man might demand what S. Paul meant by the word World: for it
should seem that out of the world they were not without God. Howbeeit, that
was too aggrauate the matter so much the more, by saying that the Ephesians had
inioyed the light of the Sun, all the Elements had served them, and they had
received so many commodities of Gods gift in all his creatures, and yet had
not known him. For what else is the world but an open stage whereon God will
have his majesty seen? Let us lift up our eyes: do not the Sun, the Moon,
and the Stars, lead us too him that gave them the vertewes which we
perceive in them? For behold, the son is far of from us, and yet he gives
us light. Agein, he causes the earth too bring forth fruits, also we see the
dubble course that he keeps: and although he wander now on the one side, and
now on the other, yet notwithstanding he keeps his compass continually, and
never fogetteth how far he ought to go on the one side or on the other, as
huge a mass as he is. If a Ball or a Boule were too be hild up, it woold
need some help: but behold, the Sun has nothing to hold it up, but the
secret power of God: and yet notwithstanding he is so huge and infinite a
mass, as exceeds all the whole earth. Mount he up, or go he low, turn he,
or return he, on the one side or on the other: yet keeps he his course still
every day through the whole world, and every year also on the contrary part,
and yet for all this he misseth not in any of all those things. Too be short,
when we behold the skies, we ought too be ravished with desire to go unto
God. Agein, when we behold the things that are nearer us, namely the variety
of the good things that God bestows upon us: (we have cause too do the
like.) Finally without going any further, let us but enter intoo our selves. If
a man look but upon one of his fyngers, what workmanship and what goodness
of God is there? We then are in the world where God utters such abundance
of miracles, whereby it is his meaning, too be known and worshipped: and yet
notwithstanding we play the beasts, and go on like blockeheades without any
understanding, not knowing the God that made us and fashyoned us, even him that
utters and shows himself in all his creatures both above and beneath. Is
not this enough then too bereeue them of all excu^e, which play the beasts in
their ignorance, living here but only too devour Gods benefytes, and in the
mean while repair not too him, too do him honor, or to offer him their
service? Then is it not without cause, that Saint Paul addeeth yet further
this saying, that such as were so destitute of the knowledge of the Gospel,
were without God in the world.

Now thereuppon on the other side, he sets down the grace of God, which
they had received, too the end, they should know that it was not of their
own purchase, nor obtained by their own policy and ability, but that they
ought too consider well how greatly they be bound unto God, for rayzing them
up too heaven from the deep dungeons of hell. If God had but lent us his hand
to lift us up when we were fallen but too the ground, and so let us alone in
our own state, we should be beholden to him for it. For when we be fallen,
and some body helps too lift us up agein, we will cun him thank, and so
ought we too do. Behold now, God has not only lift us up from the ground, but
also drawn us out of the gulf of hell. And his so doing, is not too make us
crepe here beneath upon the earth, or to make us too inioye the benefits that
he offers us here presently: but too advance us too the kingdom of heaven,
as we have seen heretofore, how we be put in possession of it already by
faith, and are set in the person of Jesus Christ in the glory that he has
purchaced for us, for he is entered into it in our behalf. The seeing it is so,
have we not cause too magnify Gods grace so much the more? So have ye Saint
Paul's meaning, in that he says, that now by Jesus Christ you be come nere
unto God, even you (says he) which were far of before. Therefore at a
word (forasmuch as the whole, cannot be laid forth at this time) let us
understand, that whereas men seem to have some worthiness in themselves, they
cannot but stray away to their own destruction, so long as they be separated
from God, because that by nature they ^ee strangers unto bim, yea and quite
cut of from him. Moreover let every of us know for his own part, how we had
forgotten God, and were quite turned away from him, till he called us agein
unto him. When we know this, let us learn too magnify his grace for
voutsafing too reconcyle us too himself, and too put away all the enmity that
was betwixt him and us, and too make us his children of his deadly enemies,
assuring our selves, that all this is done by means of our Lord Jesus Christ,
too the intent we should out of that fountain draw all that belongs too
our salvation. And furthermore let us consider also, what furtherance we have
by the helps that God has given us too come too Jesus Christ by, and too
confirm us in him, too the end we may have a resolute and sure doctrine. As
for example, when the Gospel is daily preached unto us, Jesus Christ is
offered there unto us, and he on his side calls us unto him. Too he short,
he has his arm^s stretched out to i^brac^ us. Let us understand that: and
afterward let us add the Sacraments theruntoo, and seeing that Jesus Christ
has not only commanded the open preaching of the Goswell, (...) he shows
himself too be our Shepherd, and that he will have us too be his flock, but
also confirms the same by Bapti^^, and by his last Supper: let us take good
heed that we make not those signs vnauaylable through our own malice and
unthankfulness: but let us (rather) consider to what end God has ordained
them, and let us so use them, as we may grow more and more in faith, and be
thereby in^^amed with such zeal, as we may indeuer too give our selves wholly
unto God, since it has pleazed him also too give himself unto us.

And now let us f^l down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him, not only too make every of us too
know the vices wherewith we be atteynted, but also those which he has
voutsafed too cle^ze us of, and specially that we may come too our original,
and consider that even from our moothers wombes we bring nothing but (...),
and that we cease not too increace the (...) and more, that when we know
it, we may bliss his holy name for the knowledge which he has given us, and
be so prou^ked too repair unto him, as we may hold the right way, without
swaruing from our Lord Jesus Christ, because that without him we must needs
be ^ani^ted the kingdom of (...), and shut qu^te and clean out of it. So
then, let us hold that way, and call upon this good God of ours in^e^^antly,
that he voutsafe to make us feel by experience, that his calling of us unto
him, is not in vain: that we fynding such fruit of our prayers, may be so
much the more incoraged too flee too him for our ref^ge, and also to give him
thanks for all the benefyts which we receive at his hand. That it may please
him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people. etc.

The.xiii. Sermon, which is the fifth upon the second Chapter.
13 Now in Jesus Christ, you that erst were far of, are mad^ near by the
blood of Christ.

14 For he is our peace, which has of both ^vvayne made one, and broken
down the wall that was betwixt them,

15 That is too wit, the emnitie, through his flesh, aboolishing the law of
the comm^undements which were in ordinances: too the end he might set them
both in himself, to make one new man of them.


We have see^e heeretoofore how we be all enemies of God by nature, because
we be gone away from all rightuou^^^^sse, through the sin of Adam, so as
there is nothing in us but leawdenesse and rebelliousnesse. And although men
soothe and flatter themselves, it is certain, that they cannot bring any thing
before God, which shall not provoke his (...) God then must needs disclayme us
for his (...) we must be feign too be guyded by our Lord Jesus Christ: for
we cannot come unto God but by that mean. (...) had some familiarity with
God, because he had adopted them: in respect whereof it is said, that Abraham's
offspring was holy: not that they had more worthiness than the rest of the
world: but because of Gods goodness who had voutsafed too chooze them. And
therefore before such time as our Lord Jesus Christ came intoo the world, the
one were in comparison nearer, and the other were further of from God. Not that
the Jews were better worth than the Gentyles, as I said before: but because it
had pleased God too accounte the^ as of his own house. Ye see then that they
were nygh, because it was said unto them, that God ^ate among them, and that
they were a priestly kingdom, whereof they had also as it were a visible sign
by the records that were given them, as by the Sanctuary and by all the
appurtenances thereunto belonging. Now S. Paul framing here his matter too the
Gentyles, says, that they have changed their state, because that whereas they
were far of from God, they were made near him by the cross of Jesus Christ:
And that serves too the magnifying of Gods grace the more. For as I have
declared heertoofore, if we consider not in what plyght God fyndes us before
he reach us his hand too draw us too him: we shall never know how much we
be beholden and bound unto him, nor how great his mercy is toward us. But
when it is showed us, that even from our birth we be cursed, and the devil
holds us under his tyranny, and we be in thraldom unto sin, and God is as
it were armed against us, too be our judge with all extremity: when this
geere is set before our eyes, and it is added further, that God has drawn us
out of the dungeon of hell, too advance us to the kingdom of heaven, assuring
us that we have our inheritance there, which cannot fail us, and also it is
showed us, that we have the certeintie of all these things in Jesus Christ:
then must we needs be ravished too woonderment, considering that Gods
goodness surmo^^teth all our understanding. This is the thing that S. Paul
goes forward withal here ane^. And this matter is well worthy too be often
remembered: another is it too be feared, that it is but needless talk too put
us in mind too yield God his dew honor, and too have a steadfast setlednesse,
so as we may call upon him freely, being thoroughly persuaded and resolved,
that he will always be a father too us, and accept us as his children, namely
if we be members of his only son, as knitte unto him by belief of the
Gospel. Ye see then that the thing which we have too mark in the first
place, is, that by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, because he has
reconcyled us too God his father by his death, we be now come near too the
kingdom of heaven, from whence we were far of, yea and without hope too
have any access or entrance thither. And although S. Paul have spoken but
too one nation: yet is his matter general. And so the holy Ghost exhorts
us at this day by the same doctrine, too consider our own misery, that we
may be abashed in our selves, and receive the inestimable benefyte that is
offered us by the Gospel in the person of Christ.

Hereuppon he adds, that he is our peace, making both one, yea even those
that were far of, as well as them that were near. Like as in the
forerehearced sentence S. Paul meant too humble the Gentiles, and showed how
much they were indetted unto God: so here he adds a warning for the Jews,
to pull down their pride, that they might not think themselves too be better
than other men, because God had chozen them. For acording as men are always
given to auaunce themselus beyond measure, that people abused Gods grace, and
bare themselves in hand that the lineage of Abraham was as a lineage of Angels.
Too be short, when it was told them, that the Church should be united
together both of Jews and Gentyles without exception: they thought that God
did them great wrong and injury. In so much that it was oftentimes told them,
that Gods choozing of them, was another for their virtue, nor for their
nobility, nor for any thing else that he found in their persons: but because
he had loved their fathers without any desert of theirs. Often times therefore
were they warned by Moses and the Prophets, too challenge nothing at al too
them selves, but too go too Gods free goodness, too spy out them selves
there, too the end they might confess, that if they had any prerogative above
others, that was not of themselves, nor for their own sakes, but because it was
Gods good pleasure too keep them to himself for his own heritage. And yet for
all that, S. Paul shows here, that the Jews renounce their own salvation,
if they match not with the Gentiles in true brotherhood. For why: Although the
Jews were near God alredye, and had witness that he hild them for his
children: yet notwithstanding, the matter hung in suspense til the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Then behooved it them too be knit to God by the
mediator, or else they should have had no peace in their consciences. For when
men examine themselves, they must needs conclude by and by that God is justly
their enemy. And for proof thereof, what have we in our thoughts, in our
lusts, in our souls, and in our bodies, but utter corruption? Therefore it
ought to make us to quake as often as we think what we be. But the Jews had
the Ceremonies and shadows of the Law, which were assurances of Gods grace
unto them. Yea, but if they had stayed there, what a thing had that bin? For
the blud of brute beasts could not scour away their spots, nor set them in
Gods favor. Therefore it stood them on hand too resort too Jesus Christ. And
that is the cause why S. Paul shows, that the Jews ought not too too be so
puffed up with pride, as too shet the heathen out of the doors, as though they
were not worthy too be of Gods Church. For Jesus Christ is the mediator as
well of the one as of the other, unto God his father. In so much, that without
him, all of us are shet out from the hope of salvation. No man then ought too
despyze his neighbor in this case, nor too look over the shoulder at him, as
the proverb says. But we ought too embrace one another in ^rew unity of
faith and love, knowing that euerychone of us from the greatest too the least,
should ryghtfully be cut of from Gods Church, but that he of his own mere
goodness gathers us too him. After the same manner does S. James exhort the
great men of this world too glory in their smalnesse, James ^. b. 8. ^
because God has taken away the blyndfolding that let them too know their
own wretchedness. For we know that men do wilfully abuse their greatness,
and believe them selves too be marvelous wyghtes, till they come too know
God. Therefore the great men of this world have their eyes blyndfolded, and
that deceyueth them, and makes them too take leave too do what they list.
Now Saint James says, that they have cause too glory of their smalnesse, for
that our Lord discovers them too be creatures out of all hope, as of
themselves, and yet nevertheless takes them intoo his favor of his own
mercy. And let the little ones (says he) rejoice in their nobility, because
God has exalted them: in so much that whereas they were but as wretched
woormes, and had nothing but reproach in them, God has taken them up, and made
them new creatures. Ye see then that the means too unite us as we ought too
be, is, that every of us in his degree acknowledge himself too be in a
wretched and miserable plyght: an^ that when he has yielded all too Gods mere
mercy, he acknowledge that the same is spread over all at this day, and that it
is not for us too stint or too bridle him, but in as much as he has chozen us,
it is our dew^ie too receive those intoo our fellowship, whom he has set in
the same array and company with us. That (say I) is the thing that Saint Paul
amed at, in saying that our Lord Jesus Christ is the peace of all men, yea even
as well of them that were mere before, as of them that were yet far of. But
yet (as I told ye before) he had an eye too the foolish ouerweening of the
Jews, which would have driven away the G^ntyles from the kingdom of God. And
he tells us, that if we mind too have Jesus Christ too be our mediator, too
give us entrance too God his father, and too guide us thither, and that all
this should be grounded upon Gods mere mercy: let us not be so folish as too
claim aught too our selves, as who should say, we were better than other men,
or ought too be preferred before them: but let every of us acknowledge that
all of us had need of Gods infinite mercy, Romans 2. ^6 b. 9. and Gala. 3. d.
22.
because all of us were shet up under sin, as S. Paul says in another
place.

Now must we apply this well too our own behoof. For some think that men are
advanced the rather, because some of them have bin of an honest and unblameable
conversation to the worldward: some borne of honorable houses, and othersome
indewed with ex^^llent vertewes, or with some skill and cunning. Too be short,
every man sercheth and seeks as much as is possible, too allege some thing
why God has accepted him rather than his neighbors. But let us learn, that
although we were near God in outward appeerance, yet notwithstanding, the
only way too be in his favor, and too be able too call vppn him, and too
hope that he will hold us in his fatherly love even too the end, is, that Jesus
Christ be our head. And how may that be? Luke. 19. b. 10. 12.
It is certain that he is come to save that which was lost. And agein, (as it
is said in another place) it is a sure and infallible saying, M^^k. 9. b. 13.
that our Lord Jesus Christ came too call agein too salvation, the sinners that
were in damnation. Luke. 5. f. ^2.
Since it is so, let us learn too humble our selves with all modesty, and not
only too shrink in our horns, 1. T^^. 1. c. 15.
but also too be utterly abaced and brought under foot, that God may be
glorified as he is worthy, and that one of us perke not above another, but
make all one body, for that is the condition wher^ppon we be called.

Furthermore, the title that S. Paul gives unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
namely that he is our peace, ought too be well considered: for without that
we should always be as a straught, or as blocks, for they that have any
feeling of their sins, cannot be in rest without feeling of sore ^orinentes,
but are so out of quiet, as it were better for them too be sunken under the
earth, than to see themselves so cyted before Gods judgment seat every minute
of an hour, and too be distressed in such sort. Then if we have not Jesus
Christ for our peace, surely the ^^kening up of our consciences must needs
daunt us, and hold us as it were upon the Rack, by making us too ^eele that
God settes himself against us as an enemy, or else it m^st needs utterly
(...), us, and make us brute beasts, so as we shall not only fal^ (...) but
also be so bewitched by the devil, as we shall feel no more gre^f nor
remorse for them. And so this lesson, where it is said, that Jesus Christ is
our peace, cannot be (...). For first it warns us to be touched to the
quick with out (...), so (...) sorry for them, considering that Gods (...)
accordingly as he calls none unto him, but such as are (...) ^ tired. Agein,
when we once know that: we may ouerleape all distrust and doubting, because
that whereas we have provoked Gods wrath: i^ is appeased ageyn by our Lord Jesus
Christ: whereas we have (...) with God, and kept continual war ag^^yn^^ him:
Jesus Christ (...) made agreement betwixt us: and where as God (...) us for our
sins, and for our naughty and froward nature: Jesus Christ puts all that
away, too the end that God may take us, not only as his creatures fashyoned
after his own image, but also as his dear children, whom he has adopted too
be heirs of his kingdom. And so ye see what we have too gather upon that
(...).

And were this point thoroughly (...) world should not flote so continually,
nor (...) so as it does. (...) most men now adays are carried est one and est
another, and do nothing else but wander. The Papists on the one side have
their pride too keep them from contining ryghtfoorth unto God: they will
(...) have their freewill, and their (...) what the grace of Jesus Christ (...)
themselves from it as much as they ran: And God in the mean season pays then
as they be worthy. For as for the^ that are so fore possessed with that
devilish selfmeening, that they can dispose their life in such wise, as too be
able and came unto God, and too deserve somewhat at his hand, and again, have
their (...) with him, when they have done (...): when they have such things too
themselves, all slippeth away like wynd, and they (...) unto the other
extremity, saying show shall we be (...) if we have not (...) And so are
they (...) whereof Jesus Christ is all the while unregarded: they make them
bywayes, and go not too Jesus Christ who is the true way. For as much then as
they leave the right way which cannot mislea^e them: they must ne^des wander
now (...) one side, and now on the other, and after long tyring of themselves,
break both their arms and legs, and in the end find that the further they
proceed, the further they go back from God. So much the more therefore does it
stand us on hand too wey these words of S. Paul, where we be warranted
that we shall be received lovingly at the hand of our God, if we have Jesus
Christ for our peace, and rest wholly theruppon. And for the same cause (...)
join thertoo the (...) of the text, by me alredie alleged, namely, Math. 11.
^. 29.
you shall find rest too your fowls. Whereby our Lord Jesus Christ does us
too understand, that all such as separate themselves from him, and are not
contented too have hi^ for their mediator, shall ever be^ ^nquie^, and although
they assure themse^^es, and bear themselves in hand with this and that, yet
nevertheless they are afterward afraid, and find no resting place too stay
their foot on, another have they any safe harborough wherein too eschew the
storm. Therefore it stands us upon too go too our Lord Jesus Christ, and too
he thoroughly resolved that he is our peace, if we intend too call upon God
freely and without any doubting. Finally all men (...) exception must come
thither, as well they that are near God, as those that are far of. If there
be any that think there is any valor or worthiness in themselves, surely
they will never repair too our Lord Jesus Christ, till they have laid that
imagination under, foot. Agein on the other ^yde, though we be a thousand
times past hope in outward apperance, yet let us assure our selves, that our
Lord Jesus Christ is of sufficient abil^tie too wype away the rememberance of
all our iniquities, so as God shall receive us into his favor* accordingly as
S. Paul having said, that Jesus Christ came too save wretched sinners, 1. Tim.
1. a. 15.
adds, that he himself is an example thereof: in so much that ^e which had bin
a persecuter of the Church, an enemy of the (...), yea and a sheader of
giltlesse blud, was nevertheless received, not only intoo the common array, but
for an Apostle, too bear abroad and too publishe through the whole world, the
message of salvation, from the which he had erst bin out of. Seeing then that
God has uttered forth the treasures of his goodness upon him: we may well
assure our selves that if we trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, and seek too be
at one with God his father, by ^ea^es of his death and passion (...) we were
in teh bottom of hell, yet should we be or aswen from thence, and Jesus
Christ would show in deed (...) that that ^y^le was not (...) him by
imagination. And so ye see what we has too gather more upon chose words of
S. Paul.

Now he ^^^eth, that Jesus Christ has broken down the wall that was
betvveene them. And he uses that (...), too declare that the Ceremonies and
figures are abolished, so as there is now ^o let but that we may be knit
together in concord and brotherly love. And anon after he compares the
Ceremonies of the ^a^e too (...) emnitie. For like as we now (...) days have
Baptim, which separateth us from the heathen: so when God choze the Jews, he
gave them Circumcision. Now then, when we be one (...) baptized, we bear the
mark whereby God will have us known too be of his Church, and of the flock
of his son Jesus Christ. The like be(...) and use had Circumcision in the
time of the lame. The Sacrifizes witnessed (...) them, that God forgave them
their sins. Forasmuch (...) us (...) privilege was not given too any (...)
to Abraham's lineage (...) says, it was as a wall (...) (...); like as if some
ground were paled about too keep sheep in, or as if some stable were made to
keep cattle in. Even so was it then. For God (as is showed in the song of
Noyses) had stretched out his lines too hold the lineage of Abraham separated
from the rest of the world. There ^^en was Gods pathe, and the Ceremonies were
as walls or pa(...)s too hold in that people under the keeping and the
protection of God. And what were the ^e(...)^yles? They went on at adventure,
yea and even in destruction, according as it is said, that God had not
voutsafed them the fa(...) too manifest his righteousness unto them. And S.
Paul also shows (...) pre(...)y, that God had suffered them too walk on in
the (...) and that they had bin as wretched beasts in taht behalf. Now we
(...) S. Paul's mea^ing when he speaks of the Ceremonies, how they were as a
wa(...) too deuyde the Jews from the Gentiles. But now are they all broken
down, because that Jesus Christ (...) is the truth and very substance of
them, is come too put away all those shadows. For the giving of the
ceremonial la(...) was not to the (...) (...) the people shouuld (...)
themselves wholly about that, and put their (...) in it, as hypocrites do,
which pervert Gods meaning, that ^oo the intent they should ^pply the absence
of (...) (...) Jesus Christ, as S. Paul speaks of them in the second too the
Colossians. The Jews had not yet the pledge that is given us in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore it was needful that they should be vphild in good
hope, till he were showed to the world. Wherefore not without cause were all
those things cast down by his coming: for he is now unto us as the day son
of righteousness. And therefore it is no reason that we should ^ee led any
more as it were by dark shadows. For by that means the emnitie is done
away, because that at this day we be joined too that lineage which God had
dedicated too himself, and there is no more diversity at all. Forasmuch then
as we be made the children of Abraham by faith, there is but one spiritual
ki^red among us.

But let us mark that Baptim, and the Lords Supper (which are the Sacraments
that Christ has ordained) are not a division like too the figures of the law.
For although we be separated from the vnbelee^^^s, and from such as never
came yet within in Gods Church: yet is there not any one certain nation of the
world, which (...) accepts peculiarly by it self, but he will have his grace
spread (...) over all. There is not then any such distin^^ion as there was
before, that it can be said, we come of the lineage of Abraham, we be they
whom God voutsafed too adopt. None can say so: for there is now another Jew nor
Gentill any more, as it is said in many places of the scirpture. Therefore
whosoever calls upon Gods name purely, of what nation so ever he be, the
same is well lyked and accepted of him, as says S. Peter in the sixtenth of
the Acts, and also in his first Epistle. And Baptim and the Lords Supper serve
now a days too unite the whole world. For let the barbarousest sort that can
be, come, and God will receive them: Baptim shall be ministered unto them,
because it belongs to all such as are kni^ together intoo the body of the
only son of God.

Now herewithall let us look too apply this Text too our ^dif^cation. And
first of all let us understand, that the abolishing of the Ceremonies, namely
as touching the using of them, was the very key to open us the kingdom of
heaven. For the accomplishment of them was fully showed in our Lord Jesus
Christ, so as it is known better than ever it was, that they were no trifles
nor unprofitable (...): but yet for all that, it is not for us to use them,
seeing we have the full perfection of them all in Jesus Christ. And by that
means we see how God has powered out his goodness upon those whom he had
shaken of before. That is the means whereby we belong too him at this day. In
that respect is the Gospel published indifferently too all the world, so as
our foref^thers, which were heathen men, were received intoo the Church, and
we be succeeded in their rooms. For although it be seen that the world
has bin utterly forlorn, and that there has bin an horrible desolation in
it: Yet has God made the thing effectual which is spoken in his Law, Exodus
2^. b. 6.
namely that he contineweth his mercy too a thousand generations. Thus ye see
what we have too remember in the first place.

Secondly although baptim serve not peculiarly for any one people, City or
Country: yet are we as ye would say, marked out by God, when he gives us
the use of his Sacraments, to assure us of his adoption, and too nurrish the
hope that he has given us by his Gospel. It is true that they which shrink
away from our Lord Jesus Christ, do after a sort make their baptim vain: but
that shall cost them right dear, because the pledge and earnestpenny which God
gi^eth us, too show that we be joined too our Lord Jesus Christ, and are
clothed with him (as it is said in the xii. Chapter of the first too the
Corinthians) is too precious a thing (too be so misused.) And therefore all
they that inhonour themselves with the name of the Church, and yet
notwithstanding are disordered and dissolute persons, shall one day feel what
a trayter ^^^nesse it is too have so unhallowed their baptim, which God had
ordained for their salvation. But let us on our side ^ake heed, that we walk
as folks sholed out from the filth of the world: (...)
for (as says S. Peter) the very cause why our Lord Jesus Christ has
gathered us unto him, is, that we should glorifye him for delivering of us
out of the darkness of this world and of the devil, intoo his own light. And
we have seen heertoofore in the Epistle too the Galathians, how Jesus Christ
will have his death serve, too draw us from all the uncleanness and
filthiness of the world. Likewise in the first too the Thessalonians S. 1 Thessalonians. ^. b. 7.
Paul says, that we be not called too uncleanness, but that we ought too
be pure, and too dedicate our selves too our God in pureness, so as we may
show in deed, that we intend too honor him with all that ever he has
given us. The thing then which we have to gather upon those words of S.
Paul, is, that we must not run astray like wyld and mad beasts, nor yet
kick against him, but quietly bear the yoke of our God, and approach unto him
with true obedience, and moreover (...) our own wandering lusts, too the end
we may walk like holy people, like people that are dedicated too God, and
finally as his heritage. Thus ye see how this text is too be prac^^sed of us
at this day.

Now he adds purposely, that Jesus Christ has done it in the flesh, meaning
in our nature, too the end that we might be sure that in his person we be
a^owed too be Gods children. For like as in Adam we be all lost: so by our
Lord Jesus Christ the second Adam, we be restored too the hope of salvation.
And in deed after the selfsame manner does the Apostle show us, that we may
boldly trust that God will always be o^r father for his fake. Hebr. 2. d. 16.
For he has not taken on him the nature of the Angels (says he) but the
seed of Abraham. And although Matthew in the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, beging
at the person of Abraham, as at the welspring and root: yet does S. Luke lead
us further, and tells us, that Jesus Christ appeared not alonly for the
Jews. Truly S. Matthew does it upon very good reason, namely too show that
Jesus Christ came specially too perform the promises that had bin made of old
time. But S. Luke shows the same thing that S. Paul declares here: namely
that when we have gone up as far as to ^ur first father Adam, we shall
find, that our Lord Jesus Christ was yet still before him. True it is, that he
was conceived by the secret and wonderful power of the holy Ghost, in the
womb of his mother: but yet for all that, he ceased not too be the true
lineage of Abraham, and of David, and also of Adam, and there is no doubt but
that we be joined too God by (...) mean, seeing he is our true brother, and
we need not to seek far, because we be bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh, as we shall see hereafter in the fifth Chapter. Thus ye see in
effect what S. Paul meant by adding this saying, that the fulfilling or
performing of all these things was done in the flesh of Jesus Christ. For if
we should consider nothing else in Jesus Christ, but his heauen^ly glory and
divine majesty, what would come of it? We would be abashed, and we might
say, he were too far of for us too come unto him. But now seeing he has of
the same flesh that we have, (...)
and is become very man, like unto us in all things, saving only sin, so as he
vndert^^ke our passions or sufferings, (...).
and our wants and wretche^nesse, (...) have pity of us, as the Apostle says:
we may assure our selves, th^^ when we offer our selves unto God, we
shall be joined unto him in the person of his only son. For like as he is
very God, so on the other side he is a kin too us, because he came down
hither, and refuzed not too be in this state of bondage, too the intent that
we might be glorified by his means for like as he not only abaced him self
(...) also emptyed himself utterly: so will he also lift us up intoo his
heavenly glory. And for that cause also is he called our brother: This only
one saying ought too break off all distrust, when we be in dout and
perplexity whether God will accept us or no. For seeing we have this record,
that Jesus Christ is our brother: what would we have more? So then we may well
conceive out of what filth and defylements, yea and out of what a gulf God has
drawn us, seeing he has assured us of his fatherly love, wheruppon our
salvation is grounded, yea and that in the person of Jesus Christ. For we see
how the wretched papists wot not too which Saint too vow themselves: yea and
too bar themselves of all excuce, so as there may need none other process
too conde^mne them: they make a common proves of it. For even in that one
saying that they wot not too which Saint too bow themselves, they show
themselves too be faythlesse and destitute of all aduyce and stay of
themselves, and too be as stray beasts. For they have such a multitude of
their Saints, that they have made whole warreines of them. It is true, that
all of them have the Uirgin Mary for their advocate: they catch hold of Saint
Michaell, or of Saint Peter, for their patron, or of some other Saint, after
as their superstitious mind leads them here and there. Howbeeit, all that
they do is with unquietness of mind, and they shall never find rest, because
they have no word of God too stay upon. And when they find themselves
hampered in any perplexity, they be like wretched forlorn caytifes, that are
utterly at their wits end, because they see well enough that they find no
ease at all, when they have ^ossed and turmoyled never so much. But now, seeing
that we be sure of the hope which we ought too have, because (...) Lord
Jesus Christ is our year, and is (...) us, too unite us too God his father:
let us under stand that the same is an inestimable benefyte, for the which we
ought not too be afraid too suffer ten hundred thousand deaths, if need
were. And S. Paul says consequently, that the Law consisted in ordinances
and Decrees, too show that God abolished not the law of good and holy
conversation, when he minded too call the Gentyles ^oo salvation: but that he
(...): away only the ceremonies that served peculiarly for the present time,
and were not given but only too the lineage of Abraham. Ye see then what was
abolished. And therefore let us leave the figures of the Law, as Circumcizion,
Sacrifizing, feastfull days, as they were kept then, the difference of meats,
Lyghtes, Perfumes, and all that is set down in writing by Moses: for all
those things must be vanished away at the coming of Christ: and yet for all
that, let us hold still the Law that God has given us, which is inviolable:
that is too wit, let us woorship him purely, let us call upon him, let us put
our trust in him, let us do him homage for all the benefits that he has
bestowed upon us, and let us hallowe his name. Agein, let us aduyze our selves
too walk in pureness of life, and with such conscience toward our
neighbors, as we may do no man wrong or harm: and finally let us withdraw
our selves from all the defilements of the world. Here ye see that the Law
which God has given us too rule our life by, must continue still: for that is
not abolished, but only that which consisted in traditions, and in the figures
that served but for the time, and were too have an end by Jesus Christ. Now
seeing it behooves us too give over the shadows that were used, and had their
full scope in the time of Moses and the Prophets: it is much more reason that
the Christian Church should not now adays be burdened with men's inventions.
According whereunto S. Paul ^elleth us, that we must content our selves with
Gods Law, which serves too show us how we may be unblameable, that is too
wit, by walking in ryghtuousenesse, Justice, faythfulnesse, and mercy, and
specially by calling upon God purely, and after a spiritual manner. Mark
that for one point.

Agein, he says that the shadows of the Law should in these days, not only
be superfluous, but also as a curtain to keep us still in darkness, and too
let us from seeing our Lord Jesus Christ, as we ought too do, in the mirror
of his Gospel. Therefore let us conclude, that the ryghtuousenesse which God
requires at our hands, is another manner of one, than that which the papists
have imagined: for all the things which they term Gods service, are but
stark gewgawes. Yea and wheretoo serve they all, but only too deface the
peculiar operation of our Lord Jesus Christ? For the poor ignorant souls are
hilde fast too them, and stand poring altoogither upon them. When I speak of
ignorant souls, I mean the ablest sort of them, even thos^ that think
themselves too ^ee of greatest capacity: for they are all entangled like
wre^chd beasts. And therefore let us learn too hold us too the singleness
of the Gospel, and too look upon our Lord Jesus Christ there, like as he
also (...) familiarly unto us, too the intent we might be advanced by him,
and boldly call God our father, and flee too him for refuge, not doubting but
that he will be near us, whenever we call upon him in truth.

Now let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgement of our faults, praying him that his making of us too feel them
more and more, may cause us too forsake them by true repentance, and too walk
continually aright, and too give our selves too holy conversation. And that
forasmuch as we be so weak, that there will always ^ee many vices in us:
it may please him too hold us up till he have taken us out of he world, and
thoroughly fashioned us like too his own image, according too the ground work
which he has begun in us. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father.
etc.

The.xiiii. Sermon, which is the sixth upon the second Chapter.
16 Jesus Christ has reconcyled us both in one body, too the end, too knit
both the one and the other unto God by his cross, killing the enmity thereby.

17 And being come, be preached peace too you that were far of, and too them
that were nere hand.

18 For by him both twain of us have access too the father in one spirit.

19 Therefore ye be no more strangers and forreyners, but fellow citizens
with the Saints, and household folk of God.


We have seen this morning, how S. Paul has told unto such as were erst
without hope of salvation, that they were so much the more bound unto God for
his calling of them too be of the number of his children, seeing it was not a
common and ordinary thing, nor a thing that was looked for. On the other side
he did also beat down all pride, too the intent that the Jews might not
think in themselves, that the privilege of adoption was of their own
purchacing, nor vaunt themselves though God had preferred them before all the
rest of the world. And now going foreward still with the same matter, he
says, that we were reconcyled, as well the one side as the other, by the
death of Jesus Christ, and that in so dooyng he has knit us toogither intoo
one body, putting all enmity too death by his cross. This serves too
express better the thing that we have seen already. He had said that we
must come unto God by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ: for without him we
be all a far of, as well Jews as Gentyles, because we be all sinners, and
God in an enemy too us, till his wrath be appeazed toward us. Now S. Paul
shows, that that is done by his bearing of our sins upon his cross. For
it is by his obedience, that all our iniquities are put away, and it is by his
sacrifyzce, that our sins are washed away.

To be short, were it not for the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
we should stand bound still in the hand writing that is spoken of in the
second too the Colossians. Coloss. 2. ^. 14.
For if we should come too reckening, who durst open his mouth too excuze
himself before God, or ( look too) escape the damnation that all of us have
deserved? For if we should go about too allege but one point, there would be
a thousand too stop our mouths, so as we should be driven too stand still
all confounded, till we came too the remedy, that is too wit, that Jesus
Christ has by his death made so full satisfaction for all our dettes, that we
be quitted and released. That then is the thing which S. Paul handles as
now, too the end we might know what manner of access it is that he speaks
of. For, too preace intoo Gods presence, in case as we be of our selves, were
too great a boldness. But when it is told us, that God will not lay our sins
and misdeeds to our charge, because Jesus Christ has put them all away by his
death: then is it no rashness at all for us too go unto God with our heads
bolt vpryght, but we have a good foundation, and a boldness that God lyketh
well of. Therefore as often as we have occasion too pray, or too fight against
any temptations, let us learn too know that we have need too be incoraged
too patience, and too be asserteyned of the everlasting life, and too repair
all wholly for refuge too the death and passion of the son of God, knowing
that until such time as we be dipped in his blud, and washed by the woorking
of his holy spirit, we shall evermore be lothely, and God will justly shake
us of, and be always a judge too us in sted of being our father. And it is
not enough too know that Jesus Christ has made amends for us, yea and that
all things requysyte too our salvation, were fully accomplished and performed
by his death and passion: but we must also therwithall receive the benefyte
thereof in such manner as it is ministered unto us. For what shall it avail the
Jews, Turks, and other like, that Gods son undertook the condemnation that
belonged too us? They shall rather be hild dubble guilty, because that by their
unthankfulness they bereeue themselves of the benefyte whereof they might have
bin parttakers, if they had received the promises of the Gospel by faith. But
the Jews on the one side blaspheme our Lord Jesus Christ, the Turks on the
other side laughe him too scorn, and count him but as a night ghost. And the
Papists labor with tooth and nail to deface his power, and too rob him of the
greatest part of his graces. These therefore shall find that the death which
the son God has suffered, serves too increace their cursednesse, and too
kindle Gods wrath so much the more against them. Yea and even they also which
never heard of the Gospel, are utterly excluded from this treasure.

And for that cause S. Paul adds, that Jesus Christ has preached peace to
them that were near, and too them that were far of. Whereby he shows,
that when the Gospel is preached, we be daily put in possession of the
salvation which was purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ, at ^eastwyse if
we lay hold on him by true faith that has taken lively root in our hearts,
too bring forth good fruit. Therefore there are two things required. The one
is, that we know how that the matter and substance of our salvation is in
Jesus Christ: and the other is, that the same be declared too us by the
Gospel. And too the intent we may be the surer of this doctrine: S. Paul
says, not that Christ has sent his Apostles, or set up a great sort of (...)
too bring us such message: but that Christ himself is come too bring tidings
of peace too all men. Now it is certain that our Lord Jesus Christ has not
executed the office of preaching since his Re^urrection, saving only among his
Disciples, that they might be furnished aforehand too preach every where the
doctrine that was committed unto them. But S. Paul says, that he preached
too such as had erst bin far of from God. He did not this in his own person.
Then is it certain that S. Paul speaks of that preaching of the Gospel,
which was done by the Ministers that were appointed by God, and by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

And yet notwithstanding he says, that it was Christ himself that preached,
namely too the end we should yield the greater reverence too the Gospel, and
hold it as the truth authorized by God, and every of us submit himself too it
without any geynsaying or replying. For if we have any doubt of it, let us not
think that Jesus Christ shall boot us any thing at all. Therefore we must
assure our selves of it, yea and (as we have seen in the first Chapter) Gods
promises must be sealed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, who for the same
cause is called the earnestpennye of the life that we hope for, and the very
sign, manuell, or seal that God printeth in us, too the end, that our faith
should be in full certeintie. We see then whereat S. Paul amed in this text,
in saying that Jesus Christ being rayzed from the dead, and having performed
the charge that was enjoined him by God his father, was our Redeemer, and also
the bringer of the same me^sage unto us, not for once and away, but by
continual preaching of it, insomuch that he will have his mouth still open
even too the end, too witness unto us, that in him we shall assuredly find
all that we can wish too bring us too the heavenly life. Now then must we not
be very blocks, if we be not touched too the quick, at the hearing of these
words? It is true that the son of God fleeteth not from place too place, nor
is conversant here beneath among us in visible fashion, another were that
requisite. But yet for all that, the doctrine which we preach in his name,
ought too have like anthoritie, as if he spoke to us himself mouth to mouth.
And for the same cause also does he say, (...). d. 40.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that receives you, receives me:
Luke. 10. c. 16.
and likewise, he that rejects you, rejects me. And agein, John. 13. c. ^0.
by this means is God my father honored, even by your beeleeuing of the
Gospel. And contrariwise he has great wrong and reproach done unto him, when
the things are douted of that are so well certifyed there. The Pope and all the
rabble of his Clergy allege this for the mayntenance of their tyranny. But
our Lord Jesus Christ's meaning was, too warrant us the message that concerns
the forgiveness of our sins, wherewith our ears are beaten continually. For
we shall always hang in a mamering and doubt, if we be not thoroughly
persuaded and resolved, that all things contained in the Gospel, are hild of
Jesus Christ, who is the infallible truth it self. For if we have an eye too
men, we shall be ever wavering and doubtful. And for proof thereof, what
can they bring us of their own growing, but utter vanity and leazing? So
then, although our Lord Jesus Christ abide still in his heavenly glory, and we
be absent from him in body, yea and that it be a strange thing to us, too
say, that he dwells in us, Math. 18. d. 20.
and that wheresoever two or three be gathered toogither in his name, he is
in the mids of them: yet notwithstanding we must be fully assured of this
point, that when the pure doctrine of the Gospel is preached, it is all one as
if he himself spoke unto us, and were familiarly conversant here among us.
Then too be short, our faith must ame at him, as at the very mark or butte of
it, and we must rest upon him. And seeing that God his father has sent him
too be a faithful witness, look whatsoever is ^old us truly in his name,
we must receive it without any geynsaying.

Furthermore, as we have here wherewith too strengthen us in true constancy
of faith, and too arm us against all the assaults and alarumes that Satan can
give us: so it is a great shame for us when we be deaf at the hearing of the
Gospel, or let it alone as a thing hanging in the air, taking it too be but
as a fable or a thing of no value. And yet for all that, most men now adays
do either despyze the Gospel, or else are so besotted, that they discant of
it, as of a tryfle, or else make but a mock of it. Some having heard Sermons,
or having bin taught at some Lecture, or by some other means, will perchance
say, it is possible that this may be true: and as for me, I will not say nay
to it: but forasmuch as I am no clerk nor divine, it is al one too me, I will
let it alone still in his ordinary course. Some other will say, Tush, I will
hold me too the faith of my forefathers: For it is too dangerous a matter to
change. Some agein say thus: How so? It is a new doctrine, that we never
heard of before. And othersome being not contented with such scornfulnesse,
add outrageous cruelty, and fight openly against it, in so much that they
could find in their hearts too pluck God out of his seat, wheruppon they fall
to sheading of innocent blud, indeuoring to the uttermost of their power, too
wype away the remembrance of the Gospel. But in the mean while, let us
understand, that whenever the message of our salvation is set forth unto
us, if we despyze it, we shall be guilty not only rejecting a benefit that
was brought us by a mortal creature, but also of shetting the gate against
Gods son, when he came too seek us to our salvation. And therefore too
quicken up our slothfulness, and too correct the cursed stubbornness that
might hinder our full and obedient yielding too the Gospel: let us mark that
the preaching thereof is not a thing done by haphazard, another do men come of
their own selves, as says S. Paul also too the Romans: Romans 10. c. 15.
but Gad himself visits us, and comes unto us, and our Lord Jesus Christ
performs still the dewtie of a shepeherd, and calls us too him with his
own voice, because he sees us too be as sheep that go astraye. And although
we be peaked aside here and there: yet his mind is too gather us together
agein to be of his flock. Were this well printed in our hearts, surely we
should be better disposed, not only to receive the doctrine of the Gospel
with all humility, but also too be inflamed with such a zeal and
earnestness, that the whole world should be nothing in comparison with us. Too
be short, Gods word would be as sweet as honnie to us, and more precious
than all goold and silver, considering that the son of God being in the glory
of God his father, does nevertheless make us to hear his voice, and that not
as one that speaks a far of, or with a sound that vanishes away in the
air, or in such wise as we have no certain record of the things that he
speaks: but as one that comes and preaches too us himself. For look what
is done by his authority, and according to the commission that he gave and
committed too his Apostles: it becomes us too receive it for his sake, as I
have declared before.

Moreover S. Paul's intent here, is to provoke us too receive the Gospel with
all obedience, not only for the worthiness of the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ: but also for the things that are contained in the Gospel it self: for
it is the message of peace, says he. Let us consider what it is to have war
with him that made us and fashioned us. If we have an enemy in this world,
although he be but a frail man, and have no very great credit: Yet will we
be afraid least he shonld practice some policy or spite against us, or
revenge himself by force. Too be short, we would ever be unquiet, so long as
we had any enemies in this world. Must we not then needs be tootoo brutish,
seeing we fall a sleep when God shows himself too be against us, and that
he is armed too take vengeance upon us? If we considered well what it is too
have war with God, (as in deed our sins cease not to provoke him to
displeasure) we should find on the contrary part, what a benefit it is too
have peace and atonement with him. Now seeing that this is brought us by the
Gospel, whereby we enter possession of the atonement that was made by Jesus
Christ, when he offered himself in sacrifize by his death: it is a thing that
ought too inflame us in such wise, as too make us embrace the Gospel with
earnest zeal, and too give over our whole mind thereuntoo. So then
considering the coldenesse and laziness that is in us, let us so much the more
think upon this saying, and apply the same too our use, namely, first too
know that the son of God refuzeth not too teach us, and too be o^r
scholemaster, so we be contented too be his scholars: and secondly that we
shall have a doctrine which is more too be desired, than all the pleasures,
honor, and goods of the world: that is too wit, that we be at peace with
God, and that being sure of his favor toward us, we may have recourse and
access unto him, and be received as his children at his hand. Well ought we
too note that: for S. Paul meant too show which is the true peace, because
many men think themselves well at ease, which notwithstanding have no peace
with God. For some are puffed up with devilish self weening, as the Monks and
Friars in the popedom, who persuade themselves that they have deserved so well
at Gods hand, as there can no fault be found in them. They then which ground
themselves after that manner upon their own virtues and good deeds, think
that God is bound unto them, and they may well be luld asleep, because Satan
besotteth them with the foolish self trust which they have conceived: and that
is because they ame not at God, but have forged an Idol in their own head.
And in good faith, what are the things that they would content God withal, but
gewgawes and baggagely trifles, as if they would still babes with them? The
Papists must take a sprinkling of holy water, they must all too be cross
themselves, they must fast this wake, and that wake, they must gad on
pilgrimage, they must forbear eating of flesh upon such a day, they must
babble thus many Paternusters, they must set up a candle to such a saint, they
must here thus many masses, they must say thus many meaculpaze. Too be short,
when a man has raked them all on a heap, it is certain that they be but the
scrapings and offals of all filthiness. And yet to their seeming, God is well
paid with them, as who should say, he were an Idol, or a little babe, as I said
before. We see then that none of all those hipocrits that are so puffed up with
presumption, can have any peace with God. But forasmuch as they fetch such
windlasses and look not at God, but askewe, and though they make countenance
of approaching unto God, yet their offering themselves unto him is it not with
si^glenesse and substanciall soundenesse of heart: they do but beguile them
selves with their fond flatterings. Also there are a sort of these scoffers,
which do but nod their heads when men speak too them of their salvation,
saying, it is enough, if we may give but one good sigh, but let us not cease
in the mean while too make frolic chere, for what a thing were it too pass
all the time of our life in such dumpishnesse? That would do us no good, and
therefore let us play the good fellows. Hereupon they fall to unthriftiness,
some after one fashion, and some after another. They have a thousand ways too
destruction, and all confederate themselves against God as much as is possible.
Therefore for because there have always bin so many, yea and to many, that
bring their own consciences a fleepe: S. Paul in this place (like as also in
the ^^ft too the Romans Romans 5. (...)
) sets down the tr^w peace: which is, that when we come unto God, and
must present our selves before his Majesty, we be sure that he will pity
us, and not lay our sins to our chage, but receive us as his own children.
Then if we intend to enoye this spiritual peace, which passes all the goods
of the world: let us ^earne too have war with our selves. And how is that? It
is, first too know that we be damned and forlorn, and that there is no hope
of remedy for us, whereby too get out of the pit of destruction agein, except
we be recovered by means of our Lord Jesus Christ. When we be so bereft of
all untoward selftrust in our own deserts, and know that we be empty and
stark naked: let us repair as poor beggars unto God: that is the thing that
is requisite for the atteynment of true peace. And by the way also let us not
think too gain any thing by being blockishe* so we should fall^ sleep in
this world: bnt let us understand, that forasmuch as we have no certain time
(appointed us,) it is our duetye to summon our selves evening and morning
before God, and too examine our sins thoroughly, and too be both sorry and
ashamed of them. When we have once learned too make war thus against our
own vices, and too plye it thoroughly without Hypocrisy and counterfetting:
then are we in the high way too the peace which our Lord Jesus Christ does
publish and preach unto us every day by the Gospel. And that is the very
cause why S. Paul says expressly, that by him we have entrance in unto the
father. As if he should say, that no unbelievers, no heathenish worldlinges, no
mockers of God, no dullardes which think not of their everlasting salvation,
can by any means taste of what value the peace is, which we obtain by the
Gospel, or (conceive) how precious and amyable it is. And why? For they put
too many scarfes before their faces, too keep them from being abashed at Gods
Justice, and from being stricken with terror of their sins. Too be short,
they make themselves wilfully drunken, that they might have a senseless
conscience, and they bere^ue themselves of all understanding, as though they
were brute beasts. But when we consider that all our welfare consists in
being able too have all our recourse unto God, and that our coming too him is
certain also, yea and that the way is open for us too go thither familiarly:
surely then will we forget all other things, and long too be made parttakers
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and too be united intoo his body, too the end that
God may receive us, and we call upon him with full trust in our necessity,
and settle our selves upon the love that he bears us, not doubting but that
whatsoever is offered us in the Gospel, is all one as if God uttered his heart
among us.

Now S. Paul having spoken of the preaching of the Gospel, adds purposely,
In one Spirit. He had said before, that we be all knit toogither in the flesh
of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely* for that he took our nature upon him, and by
that means abolished and took away the cursednesse that was in Adam.
Nevertheless, the doing thereof in the person of the son of God were not
enough, if the Gospel were not as a mean to him. Now therefore for a third
point, S. Paul adds, that we must communicate all of one spirit. For
although the Gospel be preached, yet are there many stubborn persons, and
others so be^narled in this world, that they think no more of the heavenly
life, than dogs and Swyne do. Othersome agein are so saped in their
hypocrisy, that although God do call us all and allure us sweetly too him in
the person of his son, the number of them that come unto God is very small.
For this cause S. Paul says, that we must have Gods spirit. For it is
certain, that by nature we be variable, and not only every one of us will
needs have his opinion by himself, but also we change every minute of an
hour, by means whereof, we be so far of from being all of one accord,
that none of us abides settled in his opinion, from morning to night, except he
be governed of God. It stands us then on hand, when we hear the Gospel
preached, too have Gods spirit to guide and govern us, so as we may
thoroughly embrace our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him have access too the
father. Now therefore we must bear in mind, first that when our Lord Jesus
Christ exhorts us by his ministers (according also as S. Paul says in the
second too the Corinthians:) we ought too be well dispozed too come unto him,
2. Cor. 3. ^. 4.
yea and to run unto him, even with enforcing our selves above all power of
man. For (when we have done what we can) yet shall we have none access
unto him, but all our indeuer shall rather be a retyring back, than a going
foreward, unless his spirit guide us. So much the more then does it stand us
on hand too pray God too touch us with his holy spirit, and to cause him to
make us way unto him, as is said in the eight to the Romans, Romans 8. c. 15.
and as we have seen also likewise too the Galathians. For there S. Paul
puts a difference betwixt Gods children, Gala. 4. ^. 6.
and the Reprobats. We (says he) have the spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba father. We should not know him of our selnes (says he) because
there is nothing in us but infirmity: and it were too great a rashness in us,
too call God our father. But when God has once sealed the truth of his Gospel
in us by his holy spirit, and inlyghtened us inwardly, so as we know it is he
that speaks: and thertoo has assured us of his goodness and mercy: then
may we freely and with open mouth cry out, that he is our father. And so ye
see in effect what we have too bear in mind, too the intent that none of us
trust too his own brain, when the Gospel is preached unto him, but that in
cosideration of the rudeness and weakness that is in us, we suffer our
selves too be governed by Gods spirit, which is the chief kye whereby the gate
of paradise is opened unto us. And for that cause also is it said, that we
must be besprinckled with the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...)
as S. Peter terms it in his first Epistle. For the same cause also the
Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 9. d. 14.
that Jesus Christ was offered up in spirit: meaning that his sacrifyze whereby
he purchaced us ryghtuousnes, should still be as a vain thing to us, if the
holy Ghost wrought not in it by his power. And S. Paul going forward with the
matter that has bin declared hertofore, adds also, that as well they that
were far of, as they that were near hand, had heard the said message, and
that the same is set before us also at this day, to the end we might be
confirmed in it more and more. And (as I have said already) by those that were
near, he means the Jews who had had some familiarity with God
theretoofore, because he had acquaynted himself with them, by giving them his
Law, telling them that he received their lineage too be the protector thereof.
Howbeeit, that was not too knit them thoroughly unto him, till he had pardoned
their sins, which was done by the means of Jesus Christ. For the Law could
yield them nothing but terror and anguish of mind, and curse them throughout,
and sink them down too the bottom of hell, as S. Paul says in the third too
the Romans, Romans 3. 2. Cor. 3. b. 7.
and specially in the third Chapter of the second Epistle too the Corinthians.
Therefore it was requisite that the Gospel should be added thereuntoo. Now it
is certain that David and the other holy Prophets, and likewise all the kings
and the faithful that lived under the old Testament, had not the Gospel so
manifestly as we have: but yet in very substance God declared unto the^, that
he of his own free goodness received them too mercy, for the redeemers sake
in whom they trusted. If the Law be separated from the Gospel, it not only
profits them not at all which rest upon it: but also serves too beat them
down, and too thunder upon them, and too show them how dreadful Gods
majesty is. It is in the Gospel then that we have peace: and therefore it
stood the Jews in hand too be made partakers of that doctrine. And as for us
that come of the Gentyles, we ought (as I said this morning) too acknowledge
so much the better, the dubble recognisance wherein we stand bound unto God,
for that he has voutsafed too make us fellows (with his peculiar people,) us
(I say) that were as things borne out of time, and too put us in the company
of those whom he had chozen and adopted before, in such wise as the records of
the Prophets are now fulfilled, wherein it is said, Esaias. 24. c. 15.
ye Gentyles and Nations, glorifye ye God with his own people: whereby the
holy Ghost foreshewed that there should be such a melody, that all men should
sing Gods praises, even as well the Gentyles as the Jews, when they were once
knit toogither, and gathered from out of the scattering wherein all of us are,
as is said alredie, and as we have seen before.

We see then whereat S. Paul amed, in saying that the Gospel was preached too
all men, as well them that were far of, as them that were near. Romans 10. ^.
15.
And that is it which he treats of in the tenth too the Romans. For there he
shows that we should ever be scanning, and never resolved of our faith, if
we knew not that the preaching of the Gospel proceeded of Gods authority, and
of his unchangeable ordinance. It is not for men (says he) too put forth
them^elues, except God send them. And God has begun too teach the world at
all times heretofore, Romans 1. c. 20.
though not by preaching or writing, yet by the only sight of the world it
self. No marvel therefore (says he) though God have voutsafed at this time
too extend his grace too all Nations, by making them too know that he would
be their father. Now then, like as on the one side, it stood the Jews on
hand too know how great need they had too be reconcyled too God by Jesus
Christ, and not too be deceived by trusting too their birthryght, or too their
Circumcision, or too any of all these shadows of the Law, but that it behooved
them too flee too the only means that I have treated of, namely, that God
received them too mercy, for the eternal sacrifyzes sake which Jesus Christ
offered: so let us on our side learn too magnify Gods goodness, seeing he
has voutsafed too cast us too be of his household and Church, notwithstanding
that we were cut of and banished from it before. And therefore let us look
too our selves, that we let not this benefit vanish away, ne be depryued of
it through our own unthankfulness. For what excuce will there be for us, if
when God calls us too heaven in the person of his only son, so as Jesus
Christ tells us, that it is he himself which comes too seek us, as often as
it is told us, that God will be merciful to us for his sake: we run not
apace unto him, both hot in zeal, and earnest in carfulness, too show how
we know that all our welfare, joy, happiness, and glory, consist in being
joined too our God? which cannot be but through his free goodness. Agein,
when we refuze too receive this peace, let us be afraid that Jesus Christ
will change his voice: for it is certain that the Gospel does always
behyght dan^nation too such as frame not themselves too Gods will. And it is
not for naught that the scripture speaks of binding, as well as of loozing^
for our Lord Jesus Christ meant too show us, Math. 16. c. 19.
that it is the very nature and dewtie of the Gospel, too pluck us out of the
bondage and prison wherein we be hild, until he has set us free: and so is
it his own office also, John. 8. c. 36.
as he himself says in the eight of S. John, where he declares the same
thing, howbeeit, he adds, that there are bonds also prepared for those that
take him not for their redeemer, ne suffer themselves too be set free by him.
And that is it which he means in S. John, John. 20. e. 23.
when he says, whose sins soever ye release, they be released unto them,
and whose soever ye withhold, they be withhild. Then does he show, that when
we preach the Gospel, we must first of all declare the message of
Reconciliation, which thing is spoken of in the first too the Corinthians, in
the place by me before alleged. Thus ye see that the thing which we have
too do continually, is too show that God has bin so kind unto us, as too
be at one with us in the person of his son, yea and too receive us too be
himself, that we might washed and scoured from all our filthiness, and be
accepted for ryghtuous before him. Math. ^. c. 16.
Lo how wretched souls are unbound, lo how poor captives are let out of
prison, Lo how they that erst were plundged in darkness of death, are brought
out ageyn too the light of life. But on the other side, we have also
commission too withhold sins, by threatening the despyzers of Gods word
with Gods horrible wrath, (and by telling them) that when they have shaken
their ears, and think themselves too be escaped, the doctrine that they have
heard, must be as ropes and fetters too bynd them withal. According wheruntoo
S. 2. ^or. 10. b. 6.
Paul says expressly in another place, that we have vengeance ready for all
such as ^et themselves against our doctrine. Yea though they be the highest in
the world, yet if they set up their bristles against God, and de^pyze him, they
shall not escape the damnation that is threatened them, at leastwyse when the
faithful have once performed their obedience. And in deed when an enemy
summoneth a people, there is trembling for fear, least they shall find no
mercy, if reasonable conditions should be refuzed: and what then shall be done,
when God comes, not only too will us too yield our selves unto him, but
also too offer himself too us, and will have us too possess him and all his
goods in the person of Jesus Christ? What shall become of us, if we refuze
such grace, when he uses such kyndnesse toward us? Must not horrible
damnation light upon so villainous pride and scornfulnesse, when men voutsafe
not too receive him, even him which not only procures their salvation, but
also created them, and by whom they be mainteyned? Then let us learn too
mark well this doctrine wherein peace is spoken of, too the end we provoke
not God any more, ne turn our bread intoo bane, and our meat intoo mortal
poison: but that we may be quickened truly by the grace which God offers
us daily.

And for that cause Saint Paul concludes, that they which are so touched with
Gods spirit, to obey the Gospel simply and substancially, are no more
strangers, but rather fellovvcit^zens with the Sayncts, and Gods household
folk. And this tends still too the end that I have noted before: that is too
wit, that Gods name should be glorified as it deserves, and that we should
not step lightly too him as we be wont too do. For we think too discharge
our selves with one word, by saying that Jesus Christ is our redeemer. But let
us always call to remembrance what we have bin, and in what taking we were,
til Jesus Christ drew us out of the dungeons of death. For the word
strangers, imports that which we have seen heertoofore: namely that before
the Gospel was preached, the Gentyles were without hope of salvation, cut of
from Gods favor, without promises, without God in the world: insomuch that
although they lived here, although they were fed and sustained by the good
things that God gave them, although they inioyed the light of the sun: yet
nevertheless they were without God. And at the same point are all unbelievers.
So then, S. Paul's rehercing what our redemption was when Jesus Christ came too
find us, and reached us his hand to guide us too God his father, is too the end
that we should learn to^ yield him the whole praise of our salvation.
Heeruppon he says, that we be citizens of heaven, companions with the
Angels of Paradise, and fellows with the holy kings and Prophets. When there
is any talk of the Prophets and Apostles, or of any of the Saynctes and
Martyrs, we have them in admiration, and good reason we should so: but in the
mean while we regard not wherefore the holy Ghost sets them before us. The
Papists make Idolles of them, and (too their seeming) they have honored S.
Paul and S. Peter well, when they have decked them with Gods feathers. But
contrarywyse it is said h^ere, that when God sets forth the grace that he
gave unto them, it is too the end that we should bethink us of the
benefit that he bestows upon us, in that he mustereth us in their band.
According whereunto the Apostle in the Hebr. 12. a. 1.
.xii. to the Hebrews, says, that they might to be unto us as a great and
thick cloud of witnesses, that we might follow their example the more
cherefully, and walk on in the way that they show us. Agein, when God has
made us too perceive the inestimable good which he does us, in matching us with
the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the faithful, let us go yet further,
(and consider) that he has made us fellowcitizens with the Angels of heaven.
A man would take great labor for a citizenship, Freedenizonship, or Burgesship
of this world, and yet notwithstanding they be but incoms of this life: And
what is this life of ours? A flyghtfull shadow which fleeteth away out of hand.
Behold, God calls us, not only to soiorne in his Church as strangers, but
also too assure us that he admits and accepts us for his children, so as
we may with true trust, and as it were with one mouth boldly call upon him as
our father, and keep one tune and melody with all the Saints. That therefore
is the thing which we have to remember upon this streyne: which order the
Apostle uses also in the end of the Epistle too the Hebrews, Hebr. 12. c. 18.
saying, that we be no more under the law, which could do nothing but fray us,
because there was nothing too be heard there, but thunderings, and
lyghteninges, which were terrible signs of Gods anger. But we (says he) are
come too mount Syon, where we hear the sweet voice of God our father, who
matcheth us with his holy spirits, with his Angels, and with the souls of
his faithful ones, so as we be now of their crew, and may speak unto God
as it were all with one mouth, because we have one common head. This is in
effect, the thing that we must bear in mind. And although we enjoy it not as
yet: yet notwithstanding we be sure, that by the means of faith we may
walk through this present life as strangers too the world, and that God will
not fail too auow us for his children and heirs: and that although we be
yet wrapped here in many vices and imperfections, yet notwithstanding, all the
Saints of Paradyse do acknowledge us for their brethren, and embrace us for
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

Now let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us so to feel them, as we
may mislike them more and more, and on the other side set our whole mind too
the considering of the infinite grace which he extends toowards us, in
calling us unto him, too the intent we may not be so spiteful, nor yet so
witless and blind, as not to hearken when he speaks, but rather that we may
obediently through faith yield unto the doctrine which he sets forth
unto us, wherein lies all our welfare and salvation: and that the same may
pluck us back from all the leaud lusts of the world, and from all the froward
affections that thrust us aside, and turn us away from him, so as we may grow
more and more in his fear and love, too be fashioned like his image, until we
be come too his heavenly glory, wheruntoo he calls us. That it may please
him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people. etc.

The.xv. Sermon, which is the seventh upon the second Chapter.
19 Then are you no more strangers and forreyners, but fellow citizens with
the Saints, and the household folk of God*

20 Builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets whereof Jesus
Christ himself is the head corner stone.

21 In whom the whole building being knit toogither, grows intoo a holy
Temple too the Lord:

22 In whom you also are builded together, for a dwelling place of God, in
spirit.


We have seen here already, how the holy Ghost by the mouth of S. Paul,
sets us out a looking glass wherein too behold the infinite goodness of our
God, in pulling us back from the d^^^eons of death, to make us his children
and heirs of the heavenly life. For this cause it is say^* that when we be
received into the Church, it is all one as if we were made Citizens, not of
some earthly City, but even of heaven, too be companions (...) all the (...)
and faithful servant of God, yea and with all the Angels of Paradise. And
because the Church is called not only Gods City, but also his house:
therefore Paul adds, that we be his household folk, thereby too inhaunce the
grace and favor that God has uttered toward us. For, (...) gathered intoo
Gods house, and too have him near unto us, and too have familiar acc^sse
continually unto him, is much more for us than if we were but generally of
some City of his. We see then, that because men do never sufficiently
esteem the spiritual good that we receive by our Lord Jesus Christ: S. Paul
meant to show here, how it is good reason that we should make more account of
the adoption whereby God has so gathered us toogither by means of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that we may now be familiarly conversant with him by hope: than
by all the whole world.

And he adds another similitude, which is, that we be builded to be the
temple of God. Sometimes the holy Scripture says, that every faithful man is
the Temple of God, because he dwells in us by his holy spirit. But when it is
spoken universally of the whole Church, then are we as lively stones, and the
building is so bound and clozed toogither, that every of us serves too the
perfectting thereof. Then is not the one contrary too the other. For every
faithful body alone is the Temple of God, because he ought too be given too
all holiness, by the woorking of the holy Ghost, and (as I said before) God
abides in us. Howbeeit for as much as we ought not too be separated asunder,
but rather to be knit toogither in unity by the bond of faith* it agrees
very well also, that we should be named stones, and that like as a building is
made of many stones, whereof there is none but it serves too some purpose: so
we should suffer our selves too be joined too our Lord Jesus Christ by belief
of the Gospel, that God may dwell in us, and be there purely woorshipped, and
we be fully assured, that whenever we call upon him, we shall always
find him at hand too hear us, and that when we be gathered toogither in his
name, we shall evermore have him among us. That is the thing which S. Paul
treats of here, when he says, that they which had bin heathen men, and cut
of from all hope of salvation, were builded up by the Gospel to be made a
Temple for God.

Now we see better than before, how God will take us for his household: that is
too wit, if we be taught purely by the doctrine of the Gospel, that God
auoweth us for his Temples, that he is contented too be worshipped of us, and
that he takes our seruis in good worth. Therefore until such time as we have
the doctrine of the Gospel too give us entrance too that excellent benefyte
which is utterly inestimable, we cannot be called another Citizens of heaven,
nor children of God, nor belongers too his household. And it is added, as well
too make us percey^e what reverence the Gospel deserves, as also too show us
that we need not to make far iourneis too seek it. For God offers us the
prerogative of entering into his house, the door is set open for us, at least
wise if we receive the promises that he makes. We need not too go about
heaven nor earth: God tells us and assures us, that he has adopted us,
too the intent we should lean all wholly unto him. And so ye see how we may
be familiar with him, and he be joined unto us.

But therwithall he shows also where we should seek for his word. For
faythlesse men are so spytefull, that they seek all manner of krinks too shift
themselves from God. And surely we see, that many make as though they were
willing too serve God, so it might be apparent too them, that it is he which
speaks: but therwithall they doubt whether the Law came of him or no, and
whether the Gospel be his truth or no. Lo how men would shake of Gods yoke
too the uttermost of their power, by their shrinking aside, and by their
starting holes and shifting. They make protestation with full mouth, that their
intent is too humble themselves under him: and yet they know not, another can
they discern which is his word. And why is that? Even because of their malice
and unthankfulness. S. Paul therefore too bar all such tryfling excuces,
tells us that inasmuch as God has spoken by Moses and his Prophets, and
finally by his Apostles, we ought too assure our selves, that all that ever is
couteyued in the Law, and in the Gospel, is the truth it self, and that we
ought not be afraid too be be guyled or deceived. We shall hear many
Replies, for every man imagines whatsoever comes in his fancy. But God
authorized his word sufficiently, when he published his Law. Agein, he gave
sufficient authority too his Prophets: and finally his Gospel was ratified and
sealed with miracles ynow. Therefore it is not for us too say, we know not
whether it be Gods word or no: For it is in our mouth, it is near at hand to
us, insomuch that God has voutsafed to feed us like littel babes with it, by
sending us mortal men to speak it too us face to face. So then let us learn
first of all, not to sor^ in the air, when the receiving of Gods word comes
in question. Let us be contented that he has given us sufficient record of
his will by his Prophets and Apostles (and so shall we yield him obedience)
though it has pleased him too use such instruments of his holy spirit: for
our faith cannot be without humility, and God takes a trial thereof, in
making mortal men too be the means whereby he communicates himself unto
us. Take it therefore for a principale, that it must not grieve us though God
appear not in visible shape, or though he send us not his Angels from heaven.
For it ought too suffyze us, that we know that the Prophets and Apostles are
sufficient witnesses, chozen and ordained too bring us the message of
salvation. And by the way Saint Paul shows, that there is very good
agreement between the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel. In deed we have
seen heretofore, that the use of the ceremonies is at an end: but yet for all
that, the substance of them continues still. And when God caused the Gospel
too be preached openly too the woorld, it was not for that he was unconstant,
nor for that he intended too teach men after a new and strange fashion,
wherewith the Law was nothing acquaynted: for the Law and the Prophets bare
witness continually too our Lord Jesus Christ. And thereby also are we put in
mind, too further our selves by all the things that are contained in Moses and
in the rest of the Prophets. For now adays there are some fantastical folk,
which think that for all doctrine, we ought too have no more but the new
Testament, and that all the rest is superfluous. It is true indeed, Coloss. 2.
a. 3.
that al perfection of wisdom is thoroughly contained in the Gospel: but yet
does it not therefore follow, that we ought not too be edifyed by the Law
and the Prophets: for we see that the Apostles themselves confirmed their
doctrine by their testimonies. And here when S. Paul says, that we must
be builded upon their foundation, he shows sufficiently, that whatsoever
things our Lord betook unto them in old time, is profitable for us at this
day, and we must practice it, and put it in ure. Likewise S. 1. Pet. 1. b. 12.
Peter says, that they served not only for their own time, but also for
ours. True it is, that they gave some taste of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
good things that are imparted to us by his means: but yet it is we that are
come too the fullness of the time* as says S. Gala. 4. a. 4.
Paul in another place. And the same is also a verifying of S. Peter's saying,
that is too wit, that the doctrine of the Prophets poynteth at us, and we
have more full fruition and greater fruit of it, than they that heard it
spoken. For we have so great a light in Jesus Christ, that the things which
were then dark, are now manifestly open and known unto us. So then, let us
study the Law and the Prophets, knowing well that they lead us to our Lord
Jesus Christ. For he is the mark that is set before us, and whereat we level
at this day, Romans 10. a. 4.
accordingly as it is said, that Jesus Christ is the end of the Law, and also
the pattern that Moses saw on the mountain. It is said, that the Law and
the Prophets bear witness of him, John. 5. g. 45.
and even our Lord Jesus Christ himself vpbraydeth the Jews, (telling them)
that forasmuch as they boasted of the Law, they were so much the more blame
worthy and less too be excuzed before God, and their offense was so much the
more heinous and unreasonable, because they rejected him, to whom the Law
sends us, and too whom the Law would hold us back.

So then, hereuppon we have too gather, that too profit well in the holy
scripture, we must always resort to our Lord Jesus Christ, and cast our eyes
upon him, without turning away thence at any time. Ye shall see a number of
folk that Martyr themselves exceedingly in reading the holy scriptures, they
do nothing else but turn over the leaves of it: and yet at the end of half a
score years, they are as well seen in it, as if they had never read line of
it. And why? Because they do but roue up and down, and a^e not at any certain
end, yea and even in worldly learning, ye shall see a great sort that take
pain enough, and yet all is to no purpose, because they keep another order nor
measure, nor do aught else then make a raking toogither on all sides. By
means whereof they be ever new too seek, and can never bring any thing too
perfection, and although they have gathered together a number of sentences of
al sorts, yet is there no hold at all in the^. Even so is it with them that
labor in reading the holy scripture, and know not which is the point that they
ought to rest upon: Coloss. 2. a. 3.
namely how it is our Lord Jesus Christ. For like as it is said that all our
perfection is in the Gospel: so on the other side it is said, that our Lord
Jesus Christ is given us too be the wisdom of God his father, ^. Cor. 1. ^.
24.
as says S. Paul in the first too the Corinthians. And like as it is said of
the Law, John. 14. (...).
This is the way, walk ye therein: so also it is said of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that he is the true way. Agein, as it is said, (...)
Lord, thy word is a Lantern too guide my steps by: so our Lord Jesus Christ
says, John. 8. b. 12.
I am the light of the world, he that walks in me, cannot go amiss. We see
then that all that ever is treated of in the holy scripture, is now verified of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to show us how that he is the only thing that we have
too take hold of. 2. Cor. 4. a. 4.
And in very deed, it is not for naught that he is called the lively image of
God his father. Coloss. ^. b. 15.
For although there be nothing but light in God: yet shall we never be able
too come too that light, till our Lord Jesus Christ come down too lift us up
thither, 1. Tim. 6. d. 16.
and give us enteraunce intoo the place that was shet fast against us before.
Ye see then that the thing which we have too gather upon those words of S.
Paul, is, that the Prophets and Apostles were chozen and ordained to bring us
to God, by means of our Lord Jesus Christ: who is his very image, and
therefore that the only thing whereon we must settle all our senses and minds,
is too be edified in the holy scripture.

And on the contrary part alos, let us conclude, that all such as give
themselves too vain curiosities, and will needs be wyser than God gyues them
leave too be, must abide still in confuzion, and in steed of going foreward,
go more and more backward, whereof we see many examples, as I said ^fore, and
it stands us in hand too profit our selves by them. For what is the cause of
all the corruptions in the world? what is the cause of the great number of
errors, of the great abundance of ungodliness, and of the great store of
superstitions which raygne every where, but for that men are ticklish in their
own foolish lu^tes and fleshly lykinges, and can never be contented with the
simpleness of Jesus Christ, as it is set down in the Gospel? So much the
more therefore ought we too bear well in mind the thing that is told us
here: which is, that we must always set our Lord Jesus Christ before our
eyes, and in our sight, if we purpose too have an infallible resting stock in
the holy scripture, and too further our selves in it. And heerewithall we see
also, that we need not too seek here and there for Gods word: for we be
sent too the Prophets and the Apostles, as if it were told us, that they be
our (...) within the which we must keep us, and that our faith has no leave
too start out on the one side or on the other, but must be hilde brydled under
the obedience of Gods word, as it is contained in the holy scripture.

Now had this text bin well understood, surely the wretched world should not
be in such disorder, as we see it is. For what is the cause th^^ men have
deuized so many ways of salvation, but for that they have not known the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is showed us here? And in good sooth let
a man look upon all the inventions of the Papists, and he shall find that
there is no end of their superstitiousnesse: and yet in the mean while they
have as good as forgotten Jesus Christ, or rather buried him in such sort, as
they have had no regard of him. And was it not a corrupting and falsifying of
Gods truth, when men knew not whertoo it tended, nor too what end it was
given, namely how it was given too keep us wholly too our Lord Jesus Christ,
Math. 11. d. 29.
that we might cleave to him, and find rest too our souls, as he himself
says? Agein, on the other side, whereupon do the Papists ground themselves
at this day? Even upon their Councels, upon their decrees, upon the things
that men have invented of their own brain: and yet they would needs bear us
on hand, that all perfection is too be had there. For as for the things that
Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught, they be but enterances, say they:
yea and they be not ashamed too say, that those things are but as an Ap^ie,
and that Jesus Christ forbear too speak of the things that were more high and
excellent, so as the holy scripture is but as a Catechism for little children,
and that too atteyne too the age of perfection, we must have holy Councels,
wherein God reueleth the mystiries that were unknown before. Now seeing that the
devil has so utterly bewitched and blinded them, that they have labored too
thrust Gods word under foot, too the end we should stray and wander here
and there without any good direction: we have so much the more cause too bear
in mind the thing that S. Paul tells us here, which is, that we must
mislyke whatsoever is added too the holy scripture, assuring our selves that
God has given such charge too his Prophets and Apostles, as he forgot not any
thing that was profitable or expedient for our salvation: and that if we
desire too profit in his school, we must not puttoo any morsels or coluppes of
our own, nor fall too borrowing of things here and there, that are contrary
too that pure doctrine, but must utterly mislyke all such dealing, yea and
abhor all manner of patching, as leven that sowreth, and marreth the whole
batch of dowe, because God condemns whatsoever men take upon them too add
unto the Law and the Gospel, from the which we must not in any wise turn
away: for it is not without cause said: John. 14. a. 5. and. 8. c. 12.
This is the way, walk in it. And whereas Jesus Christ says, he is the way,
and the light of the world: it is too the end that we should abide in him,
without swaruing aside in any wise, either too the right hand or too the left.
Another thing which we have further too consider upon this text, where Gods
doctrine is spoken of, and the Prophets and Apostles are named the Messengers
of it, is this: that we knowing what their office is, should not consent too
be taught by such as God never made privy of his will, and whom he
disauoweth, when they go about too add any one ^illable too the things which
he will have too be noted and hild without geynsaying. True it is, that the
Church cannot endure without the daily preaching of the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles in it: 1. Cor. 3. b. 10.
and that all they which are ordained too teach, are called Masons, Carpenters
(and builders) of Gods house. Therefore in that they be buylders of the
Church, they be all one with the Prophets and Apostles. Yet notwithstanding,
it follows not therefore that they may take what they list of the Law, or
take liberty too preach their own inventions: but they must draw (their
matter) out of the pure fountain that is offered us in the holy Scripture,
that we may be hilde continually too the simplicity of the Law and the
Gospel, and not be atteynted with any wandering opinions in sted of the
obedience of faith, which contenteth it self with the mean that God has set.
Agein, whereas S. 1. Pet. ^. a. 6.
Paul says, that Jesus Christ is the foundation and the head corner stone:
it is not meant, that it is lawful too mingle any thing with Jesus Christ, as
though he should but make some one piece of the buylding, and the rest be
supplied by others: but it serves too show that we must be builded upon
him, according as Saint Paul exhorts us in the third Chapter of the first
Epistle too the Corinthians, where he says, that no man can lay any other
foundation, than that which is laid already, that is too wit, than Jesus
Christ. Hereby S. Paul does us too understand, that men cannot set forth
any thing whereon too ground and settle their salvation: there is (says he)
none other foundation but Jesus Christ. Agein, we know his dominion extends
every where: and therefore all of us from the most too the least must yield
unto him, and not forsake the great number of benefytes which he offers us,
and which we possess by his means.

But yet shall we never understand how Jesus Christ is our only foundation, 1.
Cor. ^. c. 24.
except we know too what end he was sent, according too the forealleged text,
where S. Paul says, that he was given us too be our wisdom. And not only
that, but also he adds further, that he was given us too be our
rightuousenesse, redemption, and holiness. As if he should say, that Jesus
Christ is our wisdom, wheruntoo we mu^t wholly hold our selves, because we
may there see, that he is the welspring of all welfare, and has in him
whatsoever is requisite to our salvation. Then if we once know to what end
Jesus Christ was given, and the infinite benefits whereof he will make us
partakers: we will forsake all other food: that is to say, all that ever man
sets before us, shall be too us but as vanity, yea and even as dung and
filth, because we shall be fully satisfied with our Lord Jesus Christ. Now
then, that we may conceive how he is the foundation of the Church, and that
we ought too be settled upon him: let us mark that it is because God has
reveled himself fully unto us by his only son, and put all things intoo his
hand which are requisite too our salvation, or worthy to be desired, to the
end that we might draw of his fullness, as is said of him in the first
Chapter of S. John. And this in effect is the manner how we ought too put this
text in ure, where it is said, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in such wise the
cheef stone, that he bears up all the whole (building) in the corner: and we
know that the greatest weight of a building lies upon the corner.

But by the way, let us mark also, that S. Paul meant not too set Christ alone
in a row by himself, and to couch other stones with him, that should have
maystership and authority as well as he: but simply too show, that there is no
more diversity between the Law and the Gospel, as touching the substance of
them, but that our Lord Jesus Christ is the end of all, and that we be so
joined and knit together by his means, that all of us are made the Temple of
God, and belong by unity of faith too the spiritual building, wherein God
intends too dwell. Yet notwithstanding, if our faith rest not wholly upon our
Lord Jesus Christ, it is certain, that we cannot be builded upon this
foundation. For whereas the Papists invent Patrones and Advocates too get them
favor at Gods hand, and heap up a number of means too merit withal: it is
all one as if they made themselves strangers too Jesus Christ. Now whosoever
turns away from him, and it be but a finger breadth, must needs fall intoo
destruction. for* it is the property of a foundation too bear up the whole
building. Now if the buildig be too wide, and ouerhang it, it must needs fall
down. Even so goes it with us. If we be not builded upon Jesus Christ, so
as our faith be lined and leueled unto him, and we stick too him without
adding of one thing or other: he must needs disauow us for any of his, and
cast us quyte away. And in good faith, the Papists and their like do well be
wray their great unthankfulness, by their wandering here and there, and by their
adding of new means at their own pleasure. This wrong and outrage which they
do too our Lord Jesus Christ, deserve well that we should tumble them down and
cut them quite off from Gods Church. Therefore if we mind too enjoy the
benefit that S. Paul sets forth to us here, let us beware that our faith
be so framed too the Law and the Gospel, as too reject whatsoever things
man shall have invented, assuring our selves that it is the next way too draw
us too destruction, and that we cannot be grounded upon Jesus Christ too
stand fast upon him for ever, unless we addmit all the things that are
spoken and witnessed of him in the Law and the Gospel, without making of it
Lawful for men too add any thing at all too it. Ye see then in effect, that
the thing which we be warned of in these words of S. Paul, is, that we
belong not too our Lord Jesus Christ, ne can be of Gods Church, except it be
by following the pure doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and by forsaking
(as ye would say) all the filth and abomination that men have deuyzed by
their own dreams and dotages, how fair color of wisdom soever they bear.
For they will find store enough of fine pedlery, too make folk believe that
their adding of so many gewgawes, is not without cause. But howsoever they
fare, if we covet too be joined and united too Jesus Christ, we must so abide
in him, as too make none account of any other thing.

And therwithall we see also, that too be taken for Gods children, we must
give our wynds too true concord. For S. Paul sets down both twain of
them here: and in very deed, they be things inseparable, that Christians
being taught Gods word purely, should with one heart and one mind receive the
things that are so set forth unto them, and have brotherly concord among them,
too speak as it were with one mouth, and too make one pure and simple
confession. Then like as hithertoo we have seen that we must be builded upon
Gods pure word alone: so it is showed us here, that we must not every of us
be bent too his own opinion, but frame our selves too the unity of faith,
accordingly as S. Paul speaks thereof in the third too the Philippians,
saying* if ye intend too be perfect, ame ye all at one mark, and be ye knit
truly toogither in one. For we know how ambition tickleth us continually, and
every man would feign have somewhat by himself, too set out his own estimation
withal. For the very cause whereof came all the heresies that ever were, is this
pride so depely rooted in men's hearts, that whereas all of us ought too be
lerners, every of us will needs be teachers. And in very deed he that is to
teach other folks, must not set forth any thing of his own, but purely impart
unto them the things that he has learned of our Lord Jesus Christ. And so
because men are so froward, that they covet always too know more than is
lawful for them: therefore they misbehaue them selves, and every man would
keep a school, too make a show of him self. But it is said (here) that in
stead of this dealyng, we must be knyt toogither, that we may speak all as
it were with one mouth, and confess that we have but one God, and one Father,
by showing our selves too have no mo masters, but only Jesus Christ.
Nevertheless, it is true that such a concord would not be enough: but I have
told you already, at what end we must begin: that is too wit, at the pure
instruction which we receive of the Prophets and Apostles. The Papists brag
too too much of their agreement: and so may they do full well, for the devil
possesses the^ in such wise, that they be wholly sotted in it. In deed there
is ianglyng and iarryng enough among the^, and they snatch one at another like
Curdogs, when they be in their own Synagogues: but yet they stick toogither
like Burres, in the mayntenance of all ungodliness. We see their devilish
madness and wilful stubbornnes when they reason for the mayntenance of their
own lies against gods truth. But S. Paul shows us after what manner we ought
to agree* namely not in dreams and dotages, nor in the things that men have
put forth of their own store: but in the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles. Now seeing that the Papists have banished the holy scripture, and
although they make countenance to receive it, do nevertheless deface it, yea
and utterly falsify and corrupt it by their own inue^tions: thereby we see they
be far of from their reckening, in that they vant the^ selves with open mouth
to be Gods Church: for seeing they have not the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, they have no mark (...) the church at al. Although men were ready to
receive al things that are in the holy scripture, eue^ without geinsaying: yet
if they fall to mingling of their own fancies therwithall: Christianity is
thereby already corrupted and co^fo^^ded. Now, they not only entangle Gods truth
with their own inventions: but also utterly overthrow al: in so much that Gods
service is utterly corrupted by the^, poor souls are harried to and fro, and
our Lord Jesus Christ is robbed, so as they make but a fantastical conceit of
him, and attribute his offices to this man and that man, as it were the dealing
of some pray or booty. Forasmuch the^ as we see the papists so malapertly and
madly turn Gods word vpsyde down after that fashion: we may well conclude,
that although they boast themselves never so much to be the Church, yet God
disauoweth them, yea and utterly abhors them: and that if a man get him not
out of that den of thieves, it is impossible for him to be joined to our Lord
Jesus Christ. Thus ye see that the thing which we have to bear in mind, is,
that to be joined to God by means of his only son, and to be companions with
the Angels of heaven, and brethren of the Patriarks, holy kings, and Prophets,
we must be banished out of the Hellish Sinagogs that are in the popedom,
where it is apparent that Antichrist reigns, and that Jesus Christ is utterly
dispossessed of his right and souereintie. And verily we see their cursed
presumption, in that they have bin so bold as too say that the Sea of Rome is
the foundation of the Church. For they abuse these words of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the sixteenth Chapter of S. Matthew: Thou art Peter, and upon this
Stone will I buyld my Church. Math. 16. c. 18.
Now seeing that Jesus Christ says, that Peter shall be builded upon
himself (that is too say, upon Jesus Christ:) he means not too resign his
office either too him or too any other body: but thereby it appears, that
among the Papists there has not bin any reverence of the holy scripture, nor
any desire too be taught, but that all was one too them, so they might set up
a tyranny too oppress the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and too make
clean riddance of it, if it were possible, and that they have made no
conscience of manifest blasphemy, insomuch that even little children ought too
have spit in their faces, considering the gross beastliness that is, and has
bin among them. And herein also it is too be seen, how the devil has
reigned in full darkness, that Gods word was buried, yea and utterly
defaced, and the wretched world quite and clean be^eft of it for a time,
notwithstanding that it was their ordinary food. So then, let us abhor all
those blasphemies, assuring our selves that we cannot be grounded in but our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that when we be once faithfully instructed in him, we
need not too borrow elsewhere, because he has brought us whatso^uer is
requisite for our salvation. And it is not meet that we should do him so
great dishonor, as too seek any supply one where or other: but that we
should hold our selves all wholly unto him. That therefore is the meaning of
the things that S. Paul speaks here.

Theruppon he adds, that it behooves us all too be builded, and too grow
intoo a spiritual building, even too God, and in the spirit. First, whereas he
says, that we must be builded: it is to stir us up so much the better to
grow daily more and more in faith. He uses also the word Grow: and he
means in effect two things. The one is, that we must not think our selves
too be so perfect as need were that we should be, as some fantastical
heads d^o, whom ye shall see so puffed up with ouerweening, that they imagine
themselves too be wize enough, and disdeyne too look upon Gods word, or too
give ear unto it to be taught by it. But woe worth such pride: for we cannot
be disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, but by knowing that it behooves us too
be grounded in him, and too profit in him all the time of our life. (...)
For Gods word is of such height, breadth, and length, that if a man should
forbear eating, drinking, and sleeping, and buzie himself all wholly about
that: yet should he never know all. So then we ought too travel in it al our
life long, knowing that God intends as now but only to set us in the way,
and that we must go foreward by little and little, and be hi^d continually in
humbleness and modesty.

Agein, S. Paul shows us, that too be se^tled in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
too be furthered in all the good things that are given us by him: we must
have his word, that we may be builded vpp^^ it, and grow upon it more and
more: and that too bring the same too pass, we must be teachable: and from
day ^oo day labor too seek new help there too strenghthen our faith withal,
which shall never be perfect in this world, as we find sufficiently by
experience. Thus ye see what S. Paul meant by that* which he says here,
concerning our growing and going forward in the said building, howbeit unto
the Lord, says he: showing thereby that too have a goodly show, is not all
(that is re^uired at our hands) but that the chief point is, that God like
well of us, and that we be wholly given unto him, so as he have place and
room in us, and dwell in us as in his Temple. For the Papists will make a far
greater show then we on the (...) side: they have great multitudes, wherewith
they be p^ffed up (...) the uttermost. And theruppon they despyze us, because
we be but a handful of men (in comparison of them.) What, (say they) does
not Christendom extend through all Europe, Greece, and Affricke? And yet see
how these rascals that have another authority nor credit, nor any thing else in
them, will needs be counted the Chruch. Ye see then that the Papists shake us
of with devilish pride and malapertnesse, because they have on their side great
pomp, and all manner of riches, insomuch that if a man go intoo their temples,
he is ravished at them, as if he were in an earthly paradise. But al is not
gold that glistereth. And although their pomp be able too bleare the eyes of
poor ignorant souls, whom we see too be carried away in deed with such
things: Yet are they all no better but abomination before God. And so S. Paul
shows us that we must not spite the Papists, though they be very many in
number, and greatly multiplied: for they be but a head without a body, or
rather but a bumbasted and counterfeit body. Too be short, that which the
Papists term their Church, is a very monster. For it has no head, because
Jesus Christ has not pre-eminence over it, no nor any part or portion in it.
Too the end therefore that we might know how we should grow: it is said
unto us, that we must grow unto the Lord, and in Spirit, says S. Paul.
Here he draws us back from all worldly superstitions, dooyng us too
understand, that they be but pelting trashe, yea and very dung before God, who
abhors them.

Therefore we must grow in spirit. And verily we see that the shadows of the
Law ^^^assed immediately as soon as we had the accomplishment and substance
of the body, that is too wit, our Lord Jesus Christ. And now that he is come,
we must not gaze any longer upon those figures. Since it is so, we ought much
rather too give over the things that men bring in. How high and excellent so
ever they be, let us cast them from us, as filthiness, and hold our selves
content with this, that our Lord Jesus Christ will have us to build in him after
a spiritual manner. And so ye see how his doctrine ought too be sweet and
amiable too us, yea and too ravish us all wholly in love with it, so as we may
give up the world with a free heart, and give our selves too our Lord Jesus
Christ. But on the other side also let us beware, that the judgment which he
threatens unto such as cast aside this stone, light not upon our heads,
according too this saying, Behold, 1. Pet. ^. a. 6.
I lay a precious stone in Sion. Seeing then that Jesus Christ is given us too
be our foundation, we have there a precious stone, whervppon if we be
builded, we may be sure of our salvation. And we need not be afraid that
he is not strong enough too uphold us, so as he will never fail us. But if we
fall to iustling against that stone, it is cer^ein that we shall not be able
too stand against it, but we shall sink down underneath it, and in the end it
shall brooze us, and beat us all too pieces. Therefore let us take heed that
our Lord Jesus Christ turn not intoo a stone too stumple at, after the manner
of the world which now adays maliceth him, insomuch that every man settes up
his bristles proudly and rebelliously, too come russhing against him: but let
us bethink our selves well, and be meekely dispozed too yield our service too
him, that he may maynteyne us unto the end.

And although we see Jesus Christ too be rejected of the world, and it may
seem strange unto us that men should fight so against him, and that he
should be as a white to shoot at: yet let us not cease too take him still
for a precious stone, as Saint Peter counsels us in the second Chapter of
his first Epistle. Luke. 2. ^. 34.
Ye see then that when we hear these promises which Saint Paul tells us
of, we ought on the one side too be drawn too our Lord Jesus Christ, too
give our selves wholly unto him, and too forge^ all the things that seem most
excellent in the world: and on the other side too beware that our
unthankfulness be not punished for disdeyning too receive him as a precious
stone, since that God tells us that all our welfare lies in this, that is too
wit, that we be his Temple, and that he be called upon at our hands.
Therefore let us profit our selves by so great and inestimable a benefit, and
let us still grow and increase therein more and more, until we come too the
heavenly heritage, where we shall have full frui^ion of all the good things
which he makes us ^oo feel as yet but by faith.

And now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgement of our sins, praying him too voutsafe too wy^e out the
rememberance of them, so as they may not come too account before him: and that
therwithall he so correct us, as we may cleave fully unto him, and he so
bear with our infirmities, as we may not cease too resort unto him freely
at al times, though we be not worthy of it. And so let us all say, Almighty
God heavenly fafather* etc.

The.xvi. Sermon, which is the first upon the third Chapter.
1. For this cause, I Paul being the prisoner of Jesus Christ, am an
Ambassador for you Genty^es.

2. Surely you have heard the dealing forth of Gods grace, which was committed
too me on your behalf.

3. How that by Revelation he has given me knowledge of the mystery, (as I
have written unto you briefly heretofore.

4. By the reading whereof you may understand the knowledge which I have in
the mystery of Christ,)

5. Which was not known too the children of men in times past, as it is
now discovered too his holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit.

6. That is too wit, That the Gentyles are fellovvheires, and of one selfsame
body, and parttakers toogither of his promise in Jesus Christ by the Gospel.


ALthough every of us confess that the doctrine of the Gospel brings always
trubble and persecution, because the world hates it, and yet for all that,
that we ought not too be dismayed nor shrink away: yet notwithstanding it is
so hard too put the thing in ure which we confess, that there is almost none
of us all which is not vexed, and in manner shaken down, when Gods enemies
offer any unquietness, or when we see the silly faithful sor^ cruelly used
at their hands. Nevertheless it ought too serve for a strengthening of our
faith, when we see men which are frail of their own nature, not afraid too
hazard their lives in bearing record of Gods truth. Seeing then that the power
of Gods spirit appears most manifestly, if we were not to (...) blinded with
unthankfulness, it ought too assure us so much the more. But forasmuch as we
advantage our selves very evil by it: we have need too be incoraged, as S.
Paul also does in this text. When we see the devil stir up his
underlings too execute all tyranny against Gods children: let it not shake our
faith. And specially if the faithful endure patiently all that can be, for the
maynteynance of Gods truth which they know, and that they do also hold out
too the end. Without swaruing: that (as I said) ought not too be lost. And for
the same cause does S. Paul in other places say, Colos. 1. d. 24.
he suffers for the welfare of the Church. Not that he could purchase them
forgiveness of sins, or any grace by his death: Romans 1. b. 16.
but because the Gospel is Gods mighty power too the welfare of all that
believe, and the further that we go forward in it, the nearer it makes us too
come unto God, and unto everlasting life. S. Paul then suffered for the
example of those who^ he had taught before with his own mouth. For (thereby)
they knew that his speaking too them had bin in good earnest, seeing he spared
not his own blud and his life, too seal and confirm the doctrine that he had
brought them. As much is done in this text.

For he says, he was an Ambassador for the Gentyles, yea even though he were
the prisoner of Jesus Christ. Surely these two things seem too be as
contrary as fire and water. For could not Jesus Christ honor them better whom
he sends in his name, and which represent him, than too put them too all the
shame and reproach of the world? ^. Cor. 11. c. 23.
But S. Paul as well here as in other places, has not sticked too glory in
his imprisonment and bands. In deed he was kept in ward as an evil dooer: b^t
in the mean while he had record both before God and also before man, that he
suffered wrongfully, for executing his office, and finally for serving God
faithfully. Therefore let us not think it strange, that on the one side he
calls himself prisoner, and on the othersyde the Ambassador or messenger of
the Living God, even as representing his person and dignity. And it is not for
naught that he adds the name of Jesus Christ. For imprizonment generally
might have bred some evil opinion of him, because evil dooers are punished
with it by order of Justice. But the case puts a difference betewne evil
dooers, and the witnesses of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ. That is the
rause why S. Paul calls not himself a prisoner simply and without exception,
but also shows the cause why: saying, that Jesus Christ auoweth him, as
th^ugh he were an hostage (or pledge) for him. So then, by this saying we be
warned too re^eyue S. Paul's doctrine with the greater authority, seeing he
has rati^^ed it so well. If he had but only executed his (...) ^n in
preaching, we ought too have made acount of the obedience that he yielded
unto God. But he also wrought miracles, he in^ured a number of trubbles and
incomberances, and finally he suffered imprisonment and death. Now when we see
that for all this he ceased not too go through steadfastly, and too overcome
all the assaults that Satan and the wicked world were able too stir up against
him: surely we have the greater confirmation of the doctrine, which serves at
this day too our use.

And therefore when we be told of Saint Paul, and of the great number of
incounters that he endured: let us not think it is more than needs. For it is
always a more certain ratifying of the doctrine, too the end we might
understand how it is not of the doctrine of any mortal wight, but the doctrine
of the living God, who also strengthened him with invincible constancy by his
holy spirit. Now as this is well spoken of the persons of Saint Paul: so must
it also be extended further. For God wissed and ordained, that the rest of the
Apostles should suffer as well as he. And it is said of Saint Peter, ^ohn. 1^.
c. 18.
that when he was grown old, he should be girded after another fashion than
he had bin wont too be, so as he should be tied in streyt bonds, and be led
whither he would not, at leastwyse as in respect of fleshly infirmity, though
he had a spiritual disposition of mind to obey God. We see then in effect, how
Gods servants suffered, not a two or three of them, but so as there might be
as it were a great and thick cloud of them, as the Apostle says in the
twelfth too the Hebrews. Since it is so: let us make our hand of such helps.
For it is certain, that God meant too sustain our feebleness, by adding such
helps too his word (which ought too be of sufficient authority of it self,)
too the intent it should no more be doubted of, nor called in question. Thus
ye see how the thing that we have too bear in mind, is that the blud of the
Apostles and Martyrs that has bin shed too confirm the doctrine of the
Gospel, is as good as a hundred seals, yea as a whole milion of seals, too
warrant us all the things fully, which are contained in the Gospel. True it
is, that our faith ought too be grounded upon the authority of the holy
Ghost: and that although God had never a Martyr, too show that the truth of
the Gospel is firm and certain: yet it ought too suffyze us, that it is he
which speaks it. Agein, we have seen heeretoofore, that the truth shall
ever be doubted of, ^ill the holy Ghost have sealed it in our hearts. And for
that cause is he called our earnestpennye, 2. Cor. 1* d. 22.
because he insureth us of the heritage which we hope for, according too the
promise which has bin purchaced so dearly for us with the blud of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now for the last step, we must come too the experience that we have in these
days. For the blud of Martirs is shed still at this day, and God could well
let that the wicked should not run so upon the bridle against the faithful:
he could well change all their mischeeuousnesse and rebellion: and whereas they
be ravening wolves, he could make them as sheep and Lambs: surely he could
do so. But on the one side he ordeyneth Satan too drive them and stir them
up too such rage, and agein he gives them license and leave too trubble the
faithful. And why? Too the end that we should know what the power of his
holy spirit is, when it pleases him too guide and govern us. For (as I have
declared already) the weakness of men is such, that there needs but the
falling of a leaf from a tree too make them quake, and again we know that
death is horrible of it self. Therefore we must conclude, that God utters a
wonderful grace, when he strengthens his servants in such wise, as they be
not dismayed with any threateninges, nor at the sight of fire, when the enemies
and tirantes are not contented with single death, but add thertoo the most
tyrannical torments that can be deuyzed. Now then when the Martyrs persevere
in such constancy, therein men perceive that God has put to his hand. Wherefore
when we hear that they be handled so cruelly for Gods word, and that some,
if they escape, are notwithstanding redye too dye, and othersome knowing their
death shall be precious in the eyes of the Lord, offer them selves in
sacrifize with a cheerful courage: let us not suffer their blud too fall too the
ground. (I say,) when we hear of all these things, let us beware we suffer
not that thing too perish, which God has ordained for our edifying, and for
the better confirming of us in our faith. For although we ought too be
(sufficiently) instructed by the preaching (alone) yet must it needs be a
great strengthening too us, when Gods word is not only preached, but also
sealed after that fashion. Then is it not too be called in question, or too be
disputed of, as an uncertain matter: but they to whom God has granted the
grace, and are led so far by his holy spirit, as too suffer for his truth:
are faithful witnesses that their blud serves too give a full sealing up too
his word, too the intent that we should be the better resolved of it. Thus
ye see what we have to gather upon this streyne. And although the enemies of
the Gospel make a triumphing, and spit fire, and keep a great coil too
deface all that belongs too God: yet let not us cease too gloryfie God
always, seeing that all the battles which are prepared by Satan's policy
against the faithful, are turned of God into Crowns and Garlands, and he
makes them to overcome all things that seem to make to their undoing and
destruction. The thing then which we have yet further too mark, is this in
effect, that we must not be thrust out of the way when we see the wicked
sort, and the despyzers of God, and al worldlynges scorn our simplicity, at
such time as our brethren suffer persecution: but must consider that the
pryzons where they be kept, and the reprochefull fires are of much more
worthiness and excellency, than all the seats where those Judges sit, that
are as Satan's underlings or vpholders, and as rank murderers: yea and more
excellent than al seats of Kings and Princes, though they make never so much
adoo of their greatness.

Now hereuppon S. Paul adds, you also have heard the dealing forth of Gods
grace which was committed too me, as I have written briefly unto you,
according as he declared the mystery thereof unto me* and you may better
understand the knowledge which I have of the mystery of Jesus Christ. Here S.
Paul intends too prove, that he was ordained an Apostle, not as one that had
thrust in himself through rashenesse or folly, nor as one that had bin
advanced by favor of men, nor as one that had light intoo it by haphazard*
but as put in by Gods free goodness. And it is not here only that he stryueth
for the maintenance of his calling, that is too wit, to show that he was an
Apostle sent and allowed of God: but he stands upon that point in many other
places. Gala 1. a. 1. and. Titus. 1. a. 3.
It is true, that he passed not for his own person: but the certeynty of the
faithful depended thereupon. When we come too hear the Gospel, if we be
not thoroughly persuaded that he is sent of God: surely we may well conceive
some wandering opinion, but we shall never be sure, nor have any rest. This
then must go first: Namely, that such as teach us be allowed, and that we
know them too be employed of God to our salvation, and that they be
instruments of his holy Ghost. For otherwise a man may say, what is he? for
there is nothing in us by nature, but vanity and leazing. And on the other
side, were a man never so well learned and sound, so as there were nothing in
him but substantia^nesse and soundness, yet should he not be able too assure
us of the forgiveness of our sins: it is too great and high a thing too
warrant us atonement with God, and that he takes us intoo his favor, whereas
there had bin nothing but deadly emnitie before. If the Angels of heaven should
say it with one mouth, they could not warrant it us, except they were
authorized of God.

So then let us mark well, that S. Paul's laboring so much too show that he
thrust not in him self too be an Apostle, but that he was sent of God, and
had that office at Gods hand, and that in all his dooyngs he attempted not any
thing upon presumption, or through rashness, but according too our Lord
Jesus Christ's choozyng of him, because it was his will too be served of him
after that manner: is not causeless. That therefore is the ground that he
goes upon in this Text.

Now he says also, that the Ephesians ought too have known well the mystery
or secret that had bin reveled unto him, namely too the end they might have
bin sure that he was ordained and appointed too deal forth Gods grace, and
too preach everlasting salvation of their souls, too such as had erst bin cut
of and banished out of the kingdom of heaven. And here we have too mark
first of all, that too hear and too understand the things that are preached
too us concerning the Gospel, is not all that we have to do: but that we
must mount up yet a little higher: that is too wit, that God would have us too
be certifyed of his good will by the record of men. For were it a thing
deuyzed here beneath, it were too weak stuff. And therefore let us mark,
that the preaching of the Gospel and our common meeting toogither too be
taught, is not a policy or order of man's deuyzing, nor a fancy, or invention
of man, but an ordinance of God, and an abiding Law, where against it is not
lawful for us too atte^p^ any thing at all. Since i^ is so, we ought too come
so much the more soberly and aduyzedly thither as too Gods school, and (...)
as too a man's school, too hear the preaching. True it is, that we ^ught too
examine the doctrine, and that we must not receive all things indifferently
that are preached, nor at least wise be as bruce ^eastes in that behalf, after
the manner of the Papists, who term it simplicit^e, to be without, any
understanding at all: but yet must we bear such honor too Gods name, that
when the doctrine of the holy Scripture is set forth unto us* we (...) our
selue and from the world, and forsake our own reason, too submit our selves
with true obedience and (...), too the things which we know too have
proceeded of God. When we come thither with such mind so prepared, surely God
will never suffer us too be received, but he will so guide us by his holy
Ghost, as we shall be certifyed that our faith con^neth of him, and is grounded
upon his power, and tha^ it comes not of men. Let that serve for one point.

Agein, whereas Saint Pau^e says, that the calling of the Gentyles too the
knowledge of the Gospel, that they might be joined to them that were near
alredye, was a mystery or secret: we have too note, that God purpozed to
humble the world, and too hold it (as ye would say) brydled, too the end that
we should learn too honor his providence, notwithstanding that the reasons
thereof be unknown too us, and the means thereof hid from us. God could have
published the Gospel immediately upon the creating of the world, or straight
after Adams fall: but he did put it off by the space almost of two thousand
years: and afterward agein after the flud, although the world were renewed
agein, yet drove he it of agein. So then there passed a sixteen hundred years
or theraboutes before Abraham was called. And when God choze him and all his
lineage, it was not yet the Gospel. Nevertheless God took one man in his old
age, that was alredie passing and halfdead, yea and even as good as buried, and
in the mean while lets the whole world go too destruction. Now after that
four hundred years more were spent, the Law was published, howbeit, that was
but too Abraham's lineage only. The Gentyles being the far greater number, were
nevertheless excluded. This matter seems strange at the first sight, and
they that would hold God brydled to their lust, will find matter enough here to
iangle at, and so do they in deed. For they would needs have God bound to
call all the world alyke without exception. But that will he not do. Ag^in, is
the Law given? Then passes there a long time before Jesus Christ come intoo
the world. Too be short, for the space of almost four thousand years, there
passed an infinite number of people, wandering here and there like blind
wretches, and walking in the shadow of death, and God did let them still
alone, as it is said i^ the seventeenth of the Acts. Acts. 17. g. 30.
Sodeinly the Trumpet (...) and the wall was broken down^, and God gathered
toogither (...) e^st strayed from him, and had despyzed his name. He recey^^^
them too favor by means of our Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2. b. ^.
in whose person the souerein dominion of God is extended over all the world.
These then are things that could not enter into our conceyt, as I said before.
Therefore it is not without cause that S. Paul names that order of dealing, a
mystery that had bin unknown to al ages, and was reveled in his time.

But first and formest we must resolve a question that might be put here,
because the Patriarchs were not utterly ignorant what should insew, and the
prophets bare record of it. For when there is any speaking, that the Gentyles
should be matched with the people whom God had chozen and adopted before: it
is said, that Moses foretold and uttered, Romans 10. c. 19. 20.
and that all the Prophets said, that the strangers should come too woorship
God, and too honor his majesty. Then was it not a thing utterly unknown at
that time, as Saint Paul speaks of it: but yet let us mark that all those
prophesies ceased not too be dark, because the means were hidden. It is
true that the hope of the faithful was, that God would one day gather
toogither the world that was scattered after so horrible manner as we have
seen: but as touching the knowledge of the time, that Circumcision, and the
figures of the Law should be abolished, that God should be served after
another better known fashyon, that Jesus Christ should be as the daysimne of
ryghtuousenesse, that men should content themselves with him, that there should
be no mo visible signs but Baptim and the Lords Supper, too confirm us
withal in all the ghostly gifts which we obtain at this day: Acts. 11. a. ^.
all this (say I) was unknown. Yea and even the very Apostles themselves
continued still in that gross ignorance, notwithstanding that our Lord Jesus
Christ warned the^ of the things that were at hand. Math. 10. a. 5.
In deed when he sent them abroad into the Country of Iewrye, he said unto
them, Speak not yet too the Gentiles. But that was because the convenient time
was not yet come.

When he drew toward his death, John. 10. c. 16.
I have other sheep (said he) that are not of this fold, which must be
gathered toogither. Ther^ he shows that many were chozen of God his father,
who nevertheless were not compryzed in the nation of the Jews. And when he
was rizen agein from the dead, Mark. 16. c. 15.
he said, Go preach the Gospel too all creatu^es. Here then is commandment
first given them too preach the hope of salvation too such as were utter
strangers too it before. Now when S. Peter was aduertized that God would send
him too a heathen man, Acts. 10
he was so amazed at it, that the hears stood up upon his head. And how is
that possible? God was feign t^o send him a vision from heaven, too make him go
too a man whom he took too be unclean.

So then it is not without cause, that S. Paul speaking here of so high and
great a secret, says, it was unknown too the Patriarchs and Prophets. They
had in deed some incklyng of it: howebeit, that was but according too their
measure, and under shadows and figures. There was not then any certain
knowledge, till God had uttered the thing in effect, which he had kept in his
own determination. And soothly S. Paul thought it good too repeat the word
Mystery, or Secret, too the intent that one of us should not provoke another
too be wylful in opinion, as we be wont too be. For if a thing be hard,
one will say, this passes mine understanding, and another makes none account at
all of it. And by that means men turn away from obeying God, and cast as it
were a stumbling block in folks ways, so as their way and passage is stopped
up, and none comes near Gods truth, which would be evident enough, so men
would give ear unto it. But we be forepossessed with this opinion, that it
is too high and profound a matter, and theruppon it seems too us that God
speaks it not for us. And that is a cause which makes us too hold scorn of
his word, and to let it alone as a thing that belongs not at all unto us: yea
and the boldness and lewdness of men is such, that they condemn all things
that mislike them. Here S. Paul too amend that fault, says, that the thing
which is unknown to us, is nevertheless full of Majesty before God. For
shall we take upon us to measure Gods secrets by our imagination? What a
presumptuousnesse were that? Psalm. 3^. b. 6.
It is said, that his judgments and doings are so deep a gulf, as is able
too swallowe us up a hundred thousand times. Therefore let us learn so to
magnify Gods wisdom, as though his meaning be darksome unto us, yi^ we may
not therefore shake it of, but honor it with all humility. Trewly even the
things tha^ seem most common, ought too be ^eceyued in such wise of us, as
too understand that God gives us but a taste of them, and that we have not
the perfect knowledge of them: I mean the whole doc^rine of the Gospel. There
is not any point there which seems to be of so small importance, which
passes not all our understanding. And there are some other matters, wherein
God reserueth the reason to himself, meaning thereby too hold us short, too make
us confess that all his doings are rightful, although we cannot agree too
it of our own natural wit, nor conceive in our mind the reason why it should
be so. Now if ever this doctrine were too be put in ure, it has need too
be put in ure now a days. For we see how the wretched unbelievers do
generally shet them selves out of doors from coming unto God. What is the
cause that the wretched scules in the popedom do welter in their own
ignorance, and for any thing that is told them, do show still that they be as
it were bewitched by Satan? They say, that Gods word is too high a thing. Yea,
but does it follow therefore that we have just cause too reject it? We
should rather consider how it is said, Psalm. 18. b. 8. and. 1^9. 30.
that Gods wisdom is comprehended alonly by humility. And seeing that God
voutsafeth too teach the lowely and little ones, all pride ought too be
beaten down in us, and then should we find that our Lord gave not his word
in vain. Now then, seeing that in these days we see a number that find no
taste in the Gospel, because it is as a strange language unto them: Let S.
Paul's saying and declaration move us too receive modestly whatsoever God
^^lleth us, yea though the same be too high for us: and let us pray him who
has all light in him, too give us thereof as he knows too be for our
behoof. For like as God speaks too us, and makes his doctrine too ring in
our ears: so also does he work inwardly in our hearts by his holy Ghost.
Wherefore let us submit our selves too him, and be ready too receive whatsoever
is taught us truly in his name. Thus ye see what we have too remember under
the word Mystery, or secret.

Now therefore when we find any thing in the Gospel that shall seem hard and
uneasy too brucke, let us not do as a number of madfolks do, which reject
whatsoever is not too their own lyking: but (as I said) let us reverence the
thing that is hid from us as yet, waiting till God further us, and come
familiarly too us, and increa^e the measure of our faith. And so ye se how that
in reading of the holy scripture, we must have the modesty too hold our
selves in awe, (and too say thus:) I understand not such a text: but yet is it
not for me too give it over so, as though it were too no purpose: and therefore
I will pray God too bear with mine ignorance, and too open me the gate when
he sees ^it time, and that he which has the kye of all knowledge and
understanding, will show me so much as he thinks meet, and as may be for my
benefit. Agein, likewise when we come too a Sermon, if we vnderst^nde not
all th^^ is spoken too us, let us stay our selves, and in the mean while
honor our God, and reverence him in the things that are too high for our wit
too reach unto. And herein we see, that such as would stop the mouths of
all Gods true servants, that they should not speak of the things that seem
too high for them, are very devils incarnate. For what a madness is it, that
because we understand not why God has chozen some, and forsaken othersome,
how God governs the world, that the devil himself cannot do any thing
without leave, that the wicked are the instruments of Gods Justice: we
woormes of the earth, and stinking caryons should take such authority upon
us, as too say, that the thing ought too be rased out of the holy Scripture,
which not only was revealed too us by the holy Ghost, but also sealed with the
blud of Gods son? Must it not needs be that they are wholly possessed of
the devil, when they presume so far? Therefore let us abhor such monsters,
and pray God too lay his hand upon them, and too show that they be no better
than lyce, fleas, punices, and other the most vile and despyzed things of the
world, when they fall too iustling so against God, even with tyrannical and
passing barbarous fury. But as for our part, let us understand that the honor
which we owe too our God, is this: that whenever we hear any of the
secrets of Gods word, which cannot be known or understood of man, except
it be by the revelation of Gods spirit: we must wayt patiently till God
increace the knowledge that he has given us. Agein, when one man has a
greater measure of faith, and more understanding than other men, let him frame
himself too the lesser sort, and bear with them, and labor too further them
more and more: and let the lesser sort on their side have the modesty too hold
themselves within their compass, and not pass their bounds, Phil. 3. ^. 15.
but put in ure this saying of S. Paul in another place: If ye think
otherwise, tarry till God show it you, and in the mean while live in concord,
and let there be no trubble among ye. And so ye see what we have too gather
upon that streyne.

Herewithall let us mark, that God by that means intended too set the greater
glory upon his mercy: for when in the end he publyshed the doctrine of his
Gospel, then did he utter the infinite riches of his goodness toward us.
And although we know not all the reasons that God had in his mind, when he
deferred and put off the publishing of his Gospel so long time: yet
notwithsta^^ing it is very eazie for us too judge, that he intended too open
our eyes, and too waken us, and too quicken up all our wits, too the end that
every of us should apply himself the better, too know how much we be
beholden and bound unto him. For are we better than our fathers? Or when the
Gospel was published through the world, were the Gentyles more teachable than
before? No: but it seemed that wickedness was then come too his full measure,
so as there was nothing but contempt of God. Now when the world was so devilish
throughout, then came Jesus Christ, then was the message of salvation brought
too all men. Yea and when S. Paul (speaking to the Corinthians) had told them
that Murderers, 1. Cor. 6. b. 9. 10.
whormoongers, drunkardes, Thieves, forswearers, and such like folk, yea which
had committed yet more heinous crimes, should not inherit the kingdom of
heaven: he says unto them, you also have bin like them: too show that the
Gospel was not preached at Corinth, for any virtues that were there, nor for
that the inhabiters had bin more given unto God, or deserved aught at all: but
all proceeded of Gods only free goodness. Thus ye see that the secret which
S. Paul speaks of, is too be applied after this manner: namely that it was
Gods will that there should be sin in all men without exception, the remedy
whereof he has sent by his grace. Likewise also we in our time cannot say,
that we be better then our forefathers, as I told you before. For if ye
have an eye too the common state, there was more faythfulnesse among men a
fifty years ago, than is now: there was more modest conversation: there was
less excess and superfluity of pomp: and too be short, men were not like
Dogs and Cattes, as they be now adays. It is true, that they had always a
smatch of their own nature, which is nothing worth: but yet Satan seemed too
be then cheyned up. But within these thirty years, things have gone from
wooorse too worse, and so far out of square, as is horrible too see. And
theruppon, behold, Gods grace is preached, forguienesse of sins is uttered,
God calls those that were a hundred thousand times forlorn. Now what can be
said too it, but that Gods will was too give the greater beauty too his grace
and mercy by such an after deele? Wherefore let us consider, that the way too
advantage our selves by Gods wonderful secrets, is too reverence the thing
that we know not, and too receive the things that God vou^safeth too show us,
and too admit the things without geynsaying, which we know too come of him:
and specially too have regard that our faith be edifyed, and too consider
whether we ought not too be the more inflamed with the love of God, for that
he has voutsafed too send the Gospel abroad now adays as it were out of a
deep dungeon: and for that after we had strayed here and there like wretched
wandering beasts, and had bin plunged in superstition and idolatry, so as we
scarce had any more understanding of religion: he has appeered unto us agein,
not in person, but by his doctrine which is preached too us at this day, which
had bin utterly buried.

Let us then have regard of that: And although the world perceive not at the
first dashe why God woorketh after so strange a fashion: let not us cease
therefore too profit our selves by it, another let us pass for our own state
too be assured of the will of our God: but let us resort too the head, that is
to wit, to our Lord Jesus Christ, and understand, that since we be knit unto
him agein by the Gospel, God does always auow us for his children: and
although we have bin the wretcheddest in the world, and be yet still at this
day worthy too be banished from his house, and cut of from his Church, yet
notwithstanding let us not cease to hope still that he will call us too the
heritage which he has promised us from time to time. Therefore it ought too
suffyze us, that God will gather us intoo his body, yet notwithstanding that
we have bin scattered heertoofore, and that he will perform his purpose
toward us, if we suffer our selves too be governed by our Lord Jesus
Christ. And forasmuch as he is ordained too be our King: let us do him homage
willingly, submitting our selves to him with true obedience of faith, not
doubting but that he will reveal unto us the things that were hid before, so
as we may perceive how it is not causeless that Saint Paul says in the
second too the Corinthians, that although God have his secret purpose,
wheruntoo we cannot atteyne: yet notwithstanding he declares such things in
his Gospel, as are incomprehensible too all men, uttering there his heart
unto us, and reueling his will fully unto us, till we may come too the full
inioying of the things which we do now hope for.

And now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sins, praying him too make us profit more and more in
his holy word, and that the same may serve, not too puff us up with
presumption and ouerweenig, but to draw us still more and more to him in true
humility, that we forsaking all that is of our own brain, and which we be
able too bringfoorth of our own deuyzing, may desire nothing but too learn the
things that are showed us by his word, and to^ admit the same without
geynsaying, and too stoop and s^bmit our selves obediently and simply too the
Gospel, that Jesus Christ may be honored, and so thoroughly heard among us, as
we may never start from him: and that we may be so beaten down in our
selves, as we may never seek too be exalted but by his hand. That it may
please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too al people. etc.

The.xvii. Sermon, which is the second upon the third Chapter.
7. I am made a minister of the Gospel, according to Gods grace, which is
given me through the woorking of his power.

8. This grace is given too me, which am the least of all the Saints, too
preach among the Gentyles the incomprehensible riches of Christ.

9. Too open unto all men what the communicating of the mystery is, which
was hid from the beginning of all times in God, who created all things by
Jesus Christ.


I Have told you heeretoofore how S. Paul had an eye too two things, showing
that he was certainly appointed too publishe the Gospel through the whole
world, and specially among the Gentyles. For no man ought too go about too
vsurp any office in the Church, but God ought too have that authority: and
according to the everlasting order which he has set down, let us look too
follow the same, so as they that go about too advance themselves, Hebr. 5. ^.
4.
may be put down, and no man take any degree upon him, but he that is
called. Therefore mark it for a special point, that S. Paul meant too excuze
himself of rashness, by showing that he did not thrust himself in too be an
Apostle, but had good and sure warrant that God had appointed him thertoo. And
therewithal also he meant too assure the Gentyles, too the intent they should
receive the message of their salvation, as proceeding of God, and not of man.
For we must always be at this point, that the forgiveness of sins is too
precious a thing for us too be assured of by the authority of man. Then must
we be fully resolved, that it is God which speaks, Math. 18. c. 18.
too the end we may conclude, that whatsoever is unbound on earth, 1. Cor. 15.
b. 9.
is unbound also in heaven. And forasmuch as S. Paul had erst bin an enemy
too the Gospel, and had persecuted the Christians, 1. Tim. 1. b. 13.
and blasphemed God: it seemed that that should have impeached the receiving of
him for an Apostle, and the yielding of such reputation too him as was
requisite that he should have. Therefore he preuenteth the things that might
be alleged too bereeue him of all reverence, and says, that they must not
have an eye too his own person, nor too his deserving, but too Gods aduauncing
of him by his grace, and by a power that is not ordinarye among men. It is true
that S. Paul does always humble himself as much as may be, that men may
the better know Gods free be^towed goodness. And that also is the rule that
we must hold, because God will have all mouths st^pped, and none of us all
too have aught whereof too boast. For it is certain, that we shall evermore
but rob God of his honor, if we confess not that we be beholden too him
for all things, and that we have not any thing at all of our own. But (as I
have touched already) he meant here too put away all lettes, too the end that
no man might upbraid him, that he was unworthy of so excellent and great
dignity, as too be of the number of the Apostles. His intent then was, to
show that Gods grace surmounted all the impediments that could be in him
before. First he sets down Gods grace. It had bin enough for him too have
granted God so great prerogative, as too hold all things of him: but he
sets down two words m^, too exclude all that might be demanded of him.
How now? (might some man have said:) such condition, and such ought too be in
an Apostle: have thou such vertew? And so ye see why he was not contented too
set down simply the gift, but also would needs add, free bestowed. And
afterward he magnifyeth the same gift yet more, saying, that God wrought
therein according too the woorking of his power. Too be short, he gives men
too understand, that they ought to espy a singular and wonderful goodness
of God in him, and therwithall a power not ordinary among men. Those are the
two points which we have too mark. ^. Tim. 1. ^. 12.
Now forasmuch as in the first too Timothy he says also, that he himself
both is, and ought too scrue us all for a looking glass, let us learn too
apply the same unto us.

And first of al, whatsoever we ask of God, let us understand that the same
must issew unto us from the welspring of his only mercy and free bounty, too
the end we should forget all selfdeseruing. For it is the next way too shet us
out of the door, when we come unto God, if we imagine too bring aught of our
selves. Mark that for one point. And secondly to amend all distrust, let us
hope that God will do more than all our wits can conceive. For it is not in us
too measure his infinite power: and therefore whatsoever he has given us
already, let us think ^ur selves beholden too his goodness for it, let us do
him homage for it, and let us yield him the praise of it, as meet is we
should. And so ye see, that the thing which we have too gather upon Saint
Paul's example, is, that we must with all humility beseech God too work so in
us by his own mere grace, as his name may be glorified thereby, because there
is no deserving to be found in us. Also let us be out of dout, that his power
passes all our capacity, so as we may every way give him place and
entrance, and not shet him out from us through our unbelief. ^nowe we once
that? Has God showed us his mercy and power, and made us too feel them by
experience? Let us put them in ure to the uttermost of our power, and let us
not seek to deface his glory, under color that he has made us more
excellent than others, as though we had deserved aught of our selves, but let
us yield him his dew, and that which ought too be his peculiar own.

And herewithall, too continue his matter, he adds, that this grace was given
too him, (even) too him the least of all the Saints. This serves too expound
that which he had said concerning the gift of grace. Now heruppon we have too
mark, that if we intend too yield God that which we owe him, we must be
utterly abaced in our selves. For so long as men fall too parting of staks with
God, and will needs be somewhat of themselves: it is all one as if they would
set themselves against God, and be their own keruers. Too be short, God
never has his full right, except we be rid quyte and clean of all. Thefore a
man cannot discern how Saint Paul hild al things of Gods mere grace and free
gift, but by considering his (former) slenderness, that is too say, by
considering what manner a one he had bin, and what his estate had bin before.
And this is a point of great importance: for we see how men covet always too
reserve somewhat too themselves. And although they grant, that God deserves
too be exalted without end: yet can they not find in their hearts too forgo the
the whole praise of the things that he has given them, but would^ feign be
esteemed and had in some reputation for them. Seeing that we be so much given
to vaynglorie, and that there is not a harder thing for us too do, than too
humble our selves with such lowelinesse as God requires: it stands us on
hand too mark this doctrine so much the more, wherein we see, that God shall
never be honored as he deserves, till we be thrust down under his feet,
and have not any thing wherefore to be esteemed, but be become like wrethed
creatures that have nothing in us but misery, whereby God may have occasion too
show forth his mercy upon us. Lo how Saint Paul^ yielded the praise of all
things unto Gods freegift without hypocrisy, by acknowledging himself too be
the least of all others.

And let us mark also, that S. Paul's so doing, was not a feyned modesty,
after the manner of most men, which will commonly say, and make as it were a
proverb of it, O sir, I am the meanest and least able of all men: and yet in
so saying with their mouth, they cease not too have their hearts puffed up
with pride. In so much that in very deed, if a man should answer them, I
believe it well: they would be as hot as a toste, and had leeuer too be found
liars, than too give over their selfeweenyng, wherewith they be so full
fraughted. S. Paul used no such Ceremony full of untruth, but protested truly
the thing as he thought it, accordingly as in another place to the Corinthians,
1. Cor. 1^. b. ^.
he says, he is not worthy too be named an Apostle, because he had
persecuted Gods Church, and withstood his truth. And agein, when he sets
forth himself for an example in the first too Timothy, 1. Tim. 1. b. 13.
too the end we should not doubt but that God shows himself merciful
toward us: he says, Acts. ^. ^. 1.
he had blasphemed the Gospel, and bin full of cruelty, seeking to shed
innocent blud. There then S. Paul shows well enough, that there was no
counterfetnesse in his confession, and that his lowelinesse proceeded from his
heart. For he would have chozen too have bin out of estimation too the
worldward, and too have received all manner of reproach too himself, yea and
too have bin taken for a cursed caytife: than to have disgraced Gods goodness.
And like as his doctrine was too endure for ever: so meant he too have his wants
known in all ages and all times unto the worlds end, referring al things to
this poi^t, namely, that men might know how God had set him as it were upon a
scaffold, to warrant us that he will show himself as free hearted toward us
also at this day: and that on the other side we should not be ashamed too be
acknowne of our own wretchedness, too the intent that Gods grace may have the
greater gloss in us. Wherefore let us remember upon this Text, that we do
then offer God such sacrifize of praise, P^^l. 13. b. 6.
as he deserves, when we protest truly and unfeignedly, that all the good which
is in us, comes of his grace, who has bestowed it upon us, and that we
cannot chalendge any thing at all too our selves: but that when we have
examined all that is our own, we shall find none other things at all, than
such as may cause us too cast down our eyes, and make us ashamed. After this
manner (say I) must we follow the thing that S. Paul shows us here. Yea
and let another spyte nor vayneglory, hinder us too humble our selves among our
neighbors. For here S. Paul has not only showed that he was indetted to God
for all things, and that he was bound to him for all the good things that he had,
because they ^ame of his only mere goodness and free gift: but also
therwithall abaceth himself, in comparison of the rest of the Apostles. Now
then, let us rid away this cursed affection which is over deeply rooted in our
nature, namely, of desiring to perk up in such wyze, as men should look at us
above other men, and commend us more than others. For we see how S. Paul, who
was so excellent, did notwithstanding stoop^ too that lowness: wherefore let us
indeuer too fashion our selves like too him. And let us think well upon this
saying of our Lord Ies^^ Christ, ^uke ^8. c. 14.
that he which will be exalted of God, must be brought low in himself. So
then, let us be little ones of our own accord, and then it is certain that
God will reach us his hand. And although he send us another stateliness nor
dignity: yet will he give us so much thereof as shall be needful, at least
wise if we have the true meekness of seeking nothing else but too be
governed by his hand.

But here it might be demanded, how Saint Paul acknowledges himself a
little one, seeing he has done more than all the rest, as he himself says in
the forealledged place of the first too the Corinthians. ^. Cor. 1^. (...).
Saint Paul was not ignorant of the gracious gifts that he had received at
Gods hand, another meant he too imbace them in his mouth as Hipocrytes do, which
say, I am n^thing at all: for he wist well that God had indewed him with great
(...), and it is not a point of humility too say, I have another skill nor wit,
nor any thing worthy of praise: for if we speaks (...), we be unthankful
too God, as they that burye his benefits wherein his glory ought ^oo shine
forth. Saint Paul then meant not here too show, that he was a man without
knowledge, and without the gifts of the holy Ghost, or that he had received
less portion of them than other men had: but his calling of himself the least,
was in respect of that which he had bin before he was a member of the Church.
Math. 1^. a. 1. and Mark. 16. c. 15.
For our Lord Jesus Christ had in his life time chozen and sholed out the
twelve, too whom he gave Commission too publish the Gospel through the whole
woorld. And now in the mean while what was Saint Paul? He was not only a
pri^ate person, but also banished, and cut of as a rotten member ^r^m the
company of the faithful. And besides that, Satan drove him foreward too all
cruelty, so long as Gods spirrite was not in him. He had in deed a kind of
zeal, but that was stark madness, for he ceased not for all that too fight
against God in his own misbeel^efe: he did it ignorantly, but yet could not
that excuze him. So then we see that his terming of himself the least, was not
without cause, according wheruntoo he says in another place, 1. Cor. 15. b. 8.
that he was as an untimely birth, and that it i^ was not too be thought that
ever he should have come too the spiritual life, whereof he was a minister. For
he was as a rootten carkesse, and there was no lykelyh^^ that ever he should
have come too the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, seeing he was run so far
(...), and had bin as a tempest in thundering upon the Church, and as a
^allening Woolfe, that ^ought nothing else but too (...) his pray. And so we
see how his confessing of himself to be the least of the Saints, was
unfeigned, namely as in respect of his former state. But God, who not only
exalts the thing that is small and low, but also makes what he lists of
nothing, vou^asafed too change him after that fashyon, too the end that that
miracle sho^^d amaze us as often as we think upon it, and we not only learn too
magnifye Gods goodness in that deed, but also apply the same too our own
use: and therwithall every of us bethink himself aduyzedlye, and return too
our former state, (I mean not too be such as we^ were in old time,) but
consider welll of it, (...) too examine our selves thoroughly, that Gods infinite
grace and goodness may app^^^^ the more in us. That then is in (...) ^^ing
that we hau^ too remember concerning Saint Paul. And therefore as often and
when^ieuer the great treasures of Gods mercy which are imparted too us in our
Lord Jesus Christ, are preached unto us: let us be s^^e that every whit
thereof was warranted too us in Saint Paul's person, and that he spoke not as of
things unknown, but that he had sure experience of them, and that in his
person we may see still with our eyes, the thing that he uttered with his mouth.

Now let us come too the gracious gift that he speaks of, which is the
publishing of the incomprehensible riches of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the
Gospel. It was a great matter that Saint Paul had bin received too be a
sheep: Acts. 13. ^. 2.
but God thinking not that too be enough, did put him in office of a Shepherd.
The thing then which he means here, is, that whereas he had bin a Woolf full
of cruelty, he was not only changed too become a Lamb, too obey the voice of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and too be quiet in his flock: but also exalted of God
too a much greater and higher diginitie, insomuch as he was ordained a
Messenger of man's salvation, and a dealer forth of all the riches of our Lord
Jesus Christ, (...)
which nevertheless are incomprehensible: not that we ought not too seek
them, but because the measure of them does utterly exceed our capacity. Now
then we see the effect of that which Saint Paul teaches here: going
foreward still with the thing that he began with heeretoofore, namely that we
must understand that he thrust not himself forth through folish overboldness,
G^l a. 1. ^. 1.
too take upon him the office of an Apostle, but that he was called too it
from on hye, and set in that degree by God. And further let us assure our
selves, that this doctrine was not put forth intoo the air at all adventure,
but leueled at us by Gods holy Ghost, and by his wonderful forepurpose, as
we shall see anon after. Therefore let us not think that Saint Paul has
spoken only for those whom he presently taught, and that in the the mean
season the same doctrine belongs not too us: but let us rather understand how
it was Gods will, that Saint Paul's labor should be too our behoof at this
day, and that we should receive profit by it. That is it which we have too
remember concerning the process of the text.

And therefore let us understand, that whenever the Gospel is preached unto
us, we have there inestimable riches, insomuch that when we have thoroughly
set al our wits too the boulting out of the knowledge of the things that are
offered us (...), we may well have (...) taste thereof, but we shall never
p^rceyue (...) how free (...) God is toward us, howbeit it i^ enough for us
that w^e can after some sort perceive his goodness, and be a^^ured (...). It
is true that we ought too be ravished in love with it: but yet ^^wsoeuer we
fare, we shall never get past half our way, in so much that even he that has
as good as quyte given over the world, and forgotten all the intycementes and
pleasures here beneath, and is (as ye would say) led by an Angelical mind
too aspyre too the kingdom of heaven, shall notwithstanding have comprehended
but a small portion of the riches of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ. This is a thing
which ought to^ make us esteem the Gospel otherwise than we have done.
(...) on the other side, it will be a horrible condemnation too our
^nthankfulnesse, if we think the things that are set forth in the Gospel,
to^ be but odinarie matters, seey^^g that our Lord Jesus Christ utters there
the infinite treasures of his goodness. And moreover also we must
understand, that when we once have our Lord Jesus C^ri^t, we may w^ll give
over all other things as needelesse and supe^fluous.

For if we be a^ the point that the Papists are, who can well y^ough say,
Jesus Christ our Redeemer, and therwithall thrust him intoo the throng of their
He saynctes and She saynctes, so as Christ is as it were but a little fellow
shuffled in among the rest: I say, if we be at that point: surely we
renounce Jesus Christ, in disguizing him so through our leawdnesse. So much the
more then does it stand us on hand too wey well this text, where it is said,
that his riches are incomprehensible, that we may set our whole minds
theruppon, and enforce our selves even beyond our power, too know the good
things tha^ are communicated too us by Jesus Christ: for it is cer^eyne, that
the measure of our faith shall never atteyne too the uttermost. Since i^ is so,
let us assure our selves (as I said before) that our Lord (...) Christ ought too
suffyze us thoroughly once for all: for we^ shall (...) in him whatsoever we can
wish. And as soon as we swar^e from him* we may well surmyze we have won I
wot n^re what, b^t it shall be but wynd, which shall ^ill us too no purpose. So
then, let (...) Lord Jesus be known as he is, that is too wit, with the whole
(...) of his benefytes. For it is certain* that by him we obtain (...) that
ever we can ask at Gods (...) where else, John. 14. ^. 6.
it is a straying out of the way: for it is said, that he is the way, and that
by him we have access unto God his father. In (...) that it is his office too
guide us too God his father, thereby he shows us that we shall be satisfied of
all that ever we need, and that we^ shall (...) too our s^luation, so we
r^st wholly upon him. And on the contrary part, that when we wander out on the
one side or on the other, it is a plain renouncing of all the benefytes that
are offered us in his person: and therefore we be well w^rthie too starve when
w^e (...) needs add any thing at all too our Lord Jesus Christ, seeing that
God has showed himself so bountiful in him, that he has not forgot^^n any of
all the things that belong too the fullness of our felicity, joy, and glory.
Also we be warned by S. Paul's example, that the more that any of us is
exalted at Gods hand, the more he should humble himself, acknowledging how much
he is bound unto him. Tre^ it is, that even they which are furthest of all
behynd, have ca^se enough too magnify Gods goodness, for his calling of them
into his Church. For what a thing is it for us too be reckened as Gods
children, Luke. 24. ^. 26.
as heirs of his kingdom, and as members of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
partakers of the glory wherinto he is entered? Now the Christian that is (as
ye would say) an underling too all others, an (...) in a little nooke, a
raseall and an idiot which has nothing but scorning in this world: is
nevertheless adopted of God intoo the number of his children, too be of the
body of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, even the least have enough wherefore too
glorify Gods grace: but they th^^ are advanced too any degree of honor, have
so much the (...), if they h^nour not God for the thing which it has pleased
him (...) bestow upon them above other men. As for example, if a (...)
knowledge and grace too serve the Church withal, it is cert^in, th^^ he is
dubbl^ guilty, if he acknowledge not himself so much the more (...) unto God
for it. Also they that by their strength or (...) are able too do more than
other poor men, that have no more than wherewith too govern themselves, ought
also of dewtie too (...) ^hemselues before God, and too stoop in such wise as
there may (...) no presumptuousnesse nor ouerweening in them, too puff them up
withal. To be short, look as every man has received grace thought Gods
goodness, so ought his mark always too be that God (...) honored, and too
confess that we be the more beholden and (...) unto him, for that he has
(...) so liberally with us. That is (...) thing more which we have too gather
upon the example of Saint Paul.

But forasmuch as he had spoken of the riches of Jesus Christ, he tells us,
that those riches were then uttered, when Gods mysteries were published to such
as had bin blind wretches before. And I have alredye expounded unto you this
word Mystery, Secret, or pri^^tie, according too Saint Paul's applying of it
in this text. I said in effect, that all Gods woorks* being well considered,
have wherewith to draw us too wonderment. And why? Because they proceed of his
ryghtuousenesse, Justice, goodness, and wisdom, which are all of them things
infinite. When we speak of Gods wisdom, power, or Justice, they be not
things that we can defyne* as though we had full knowledge of them, (...) as
we can do of the things that we see heerebeneath. Ye see then how that all
Gods works, when we come too the considering of them from whence they
proceed, are wonderful too us. Well then. And are not all the things that we
see in the order of nature, Gods woorks too? Yis: but we partly see what they
be, and partly our wits come sh^rt of them. As for example, if it be
demanded by wha^ m^an^s the earth brings forth fruits, we know it does so,
because it is common among us* But if the cause thereof be demanded, surely
there all our wits vanish away. For is the earth able of her self too yield
forth corn? Is it able to make the things too live agein, which were as good
as dead? Whence come the leaves and blossoms of trees* and all such like
things, after that Winter has put all out of fashion? Agein, how can fruits,
Corn, and wine nurrish men, seeing they have no life of themselves? Then if we
fall too seeking out the ground of Gods woorks, it is (as I said) a bottomless
pit, and we (...) feign too confess, that God has in himself an infinite
wisdom, wheruntoo we cannot atteyne. Howbeeit Gods (...) now and then (...)
more wonderful unto us, when we find the cause of them (...) to our natural
wit and understanding. As for example, whereas it is said, that it was Gods will
that the Gospel should be preached upon the soodein through the whole world:
it was (too see too) a very mad kind of dealing, if we judge of it after our
own imagination. For some man will demand why God bethought him (...) to the
hope of salvation, since he had shet them out from (...) Behold, the world which
had continewed so long time before* was renewes agein at the flud. And we see
how God suffers the heathen folk too walk in destruction. When all manner of
wickedness was come to his full height, and ouerflowed the world as a horrible
flud, then suddeinly God showed him self. And is not that a secret too astonish
men withal? Now like as the wicked, and al such as despyze God, and al
worldlings are dazeled at these things, and so far out of conceyt with the
strangeness of them, that they could find in their hearts too go too Law with
God: so the faithful are taught too kno^, that Gods wisdom is
incomprehensible.

Agein, S. Paul speaking hereof in the fourth Chapter of the second too the
Corinthians, sends us back too the Creation of the world, saying, that if
we think it strange that God should inlighten blind wretches, and that such
as were but wandering beasts before, should be brought intoo the way of
salvation by the doctrine of the Gospel: We should consider how the light was
created at the beginning. What was there in the confuzed lump, whereof it is
said, that God created the Heaven and the earth? There was another beauty, nor
order, Gene. 1. ^. ^.
nor aught else* darkness covered all, as it is said in Moses. But God
commanded that light should be made, and so he drew light out of darkness.
Therefore (says S. Paul) although the world was in i^ksome darkness, and
that the Gentiles had their eyes as good as stopped up, so as there was not any
knowledge of salvation at all: Yet God at the coming of his only son,
showed how his promising by his Prophets that he would gather the world too
him, (...). 37. ^. 22.
was not for naught. And so ye see, how he brings light out of darkness
new agein. Howsoever the case stand, we must always come back too this
point, that the drawing of the Gentiles too the hope of salvation by the
doctrine of the Gospel, was a secret of God. And he speaks of the
communicating thereof unto them, because God had kept it secret too himself,
and therefore he adds, that it had bin unknown in all times and all ages. And
how so? For God kept it secret too himself.

We be warned new agein in this Text, too reverence Gods incomprehensible
ordinance, when we hear speaking of our salvation, and too consider that it
is a work which passes all our capacity, and that if we mind too have such
knowledge of it, as is good and prof^table too glorify God withal: We must
be as it were at our (...) end, too say, it is a thing that I cannot understand
aright. True it is, that we ought too set our whole study theruppon: and it
behooves us too exercise our selves in it all the time of our life, as we see
in the other Text. But howsoever we deal, yet must the final knitting up of
it always be, that God has not compassed the work of our salvation,
according to our slender capacity and weakness, but meant too humble us, too
the end we should be abashed in our selves. And when we have reverenced his
everlasting ordinance, which is hid from us, let us imploye all the power and
ability which we have, too the praising of his holy name. This is the thing
that we have to bear in mind: and look what is spoken too all men generally,
that must every of us apply^ particularly too himself. For S. Paul treats
here of the coming of the Gospel, unto us which come of the race of the
Gentiles, and says, that the same is a secret of God. Now if every of us
look intoo himself, and demand this question of himself, how comes it too
pass, that I am made partaker of the Gospel? how have I bin brought intoo the
Church? I say, it we consider well these things, we shall all of us from the
greatest to the least confess, that our Lord has wrought after an
unaccustomed fashion. For it is not of the order of nature, that God has so
reformed us and created us the second time, too the end we should be his
children, and bear his image: but it is a very Miracle which ought too rauishe
us and amaze us, as I have said already. Let that serve for one point.

And besides that, forasmuch as I must be feign too reserve that which
follows, till another time: let us note for a conclusion, that when there is
any speaking of Gods secrets, it is good reason that we should be sober, and
suffer our selves too be ignorant in the things that God has not reveled
unto us. Romans 1^* a. 3.
That is the thing which we have too consider upon the word Communicate, For
even very experience shows, what the end of them is, which give head too
their own curiosity, and will needs know all things, and search out all Gods
secrets by percell meal. They that mount up intoo such ouerweening, shall in
the end be confounded. And the higher that they clymb, the more horrible shall
their fall be, and God must needs cast them down utterly. Therefore let us
learn too know no more than God disclozeth unto us: for it is meet for him
for too show us so much of his power and purpose, as he thinks good. When it
pleases him too open unto us the things that were strange before, then let us
learn them of him, and not say, this is too dark: but let us pray him too
give us such understanding by his holy Ghost, as we may perceive whatsoever he
shows us by his word. Ye see then how we ought to be diligent and
heedfull in receiving the things that God has voutsafed too teach us in his
holy Scripture, and the things that are preached too us in his name. But
therwithall let us also tarry till he impart unto us what he thinks good, and
let us not thrust in our selves at al adventure too know more than is lawful
for us, but let us be contented with that which God shows us, assuring our
selves that it is not for any envy that he suffers us to know no more, but
for that he has regard what is expedient and behoofull for us, and therefore
gives us such light as he thinks meet, in measure and proportion. Thus ye
see in effect, how S. Paul meant that the Gospel was communicated unto him:
and also that the Gentyles received their part of it by his means, insomuch
that all men knew the things that were as good as buried from them before, till
God brought them forth to light. Likewise let us at this day understand, that
whenever it pleases God to rayze up men of skill which have the gift too
teach us, it is a sure token that he has pitied us aforehand, and is minded
too call us too the inheritance of salvation. And therefore let us be
teachable, let us suffer our selves to be taught by the word that is preached
too us, and let us coue^ no further, but let us rest upon that which God
shewethshe us. For the only means too satisfye us, is too be cotnented with
the free goodness which he has uttered toward us, which (as I said before)
is infinite, because the treasures of his mercy which he has powered out upon
us, do pass all man's capacity, insomuch that our unthankfulness shall be
tootoo vnexecuzable, if our own desires and lykynges lead us too know more
than is reveled unto us.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faules, praying him too forgive them, and too blot out the rememberance
of them, and to give us the grace too frame our lives too his holy will and
commandments, so as we may show by our deeds, that forasmuch as he has
adopted us too be his children, we also do honor him as our father. And
therefore let v^ all say, Almyghtie God heavenly father. and.c.

The.xviii. Sermon, which is the third upon the third Chapter.
9. The grace was given too me, too manifest too all men what the
communicating of the mystery is, which was hid from the beginning of all
times in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ.

10. Too the end that Gods vvisdome which is diverse in all sorts, might be
manifested too principalities and powers in heavenly places by the Church,

11. According to the determination of all times, which he made in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

12. By whom we have assurance and access in trust, through the faith which
we have in him.


LIke as I said this morning, that all Gods works in general, deserve well
too be reverenced at our hands, because God has printed in them some marks
of his infinite goodness, Justice, power, and wisdom. So also there are some
works more wonderful than the rest, and worthy too be advanced above
the common rate, for so much as God oftentimes woorketh after such a sort, that
men (even whether they will or no) are enforced to be abashed and astonished at
them. Of this sort is the doctrine (of the Bible.) For all that ever is
contained in the Law and the Gospel, is a wisdom which it behooves us too
worship, because that without that, we should never understand any thing,
insomuch that it is said, that God will be the teacher of the little and
humble ones. Psalm. 1^. b. 8.
Yet notwithstanding some part of the things that are showed us in the
scripture, may well be understood even of the rudest and ignorantest sort.
Agein, there are there higher or deeper matters. And those are they which S.
Paul means now, by calling the preaching of the Gospel a Mystery or
secret, in comparison of all the rest. For albeit that God had evermore
determined in himself too call the whole world too salvation: yet he kept the
execution of his purpose secret too himself, till the coming of ou^ Lord
Jesus Christ: and when it was doo^e, the newness of i^ seemed strange. That
therefore is the thing that we have too consider, when S. Paul says, that he
was appointed an Apostle, too communicate the secret that had bin hyd^^n before
in God. And by those words he does us too understand, that although too
man's sight the publishing of the Gospel was a new and unwonted thing: yet God
did nothing upon the suddein nor in have, but only showed then by effect, the
thing that he had a^re^dy determined and purpozed upon before, even from the
c^eation of the world.

Wherefore when we look upon Gods works, let us learn not too think he did
the things at abrayd (as men say) which were erst ^id from us: but let us
reserve his secret purpose too himself, and when we see the things come too
pass, let us understand, that it must needs have bin so, because God had
purpozed upon it. And this serves too humble us by all means: First too make
us know the smalnesse of our capacity, that we may reverence the things which
pass the reach of ou^ wit. And secondly, we have also wherewith too hold us in
suspense as concerning the execution of Gods ordinance: for we cannot gi^e
sentence of things too come, without fond rashness, and God will laugh us too
scorn, according as we see how all such as take upon them too prophecy (at
lestwyse of their own head, and without Gods calling of them to that office)
bewray their own shamelessenesse, and are worthy too be mocked of little
children. Ye see then that it becomes us too restreyne our judgments, in
the things which our Lord has not disclozed by effect, and that when we see
the things come too pass, we must understand, that therein he does not any
thing at adventure, but had ordained it so before. And after the same manner
must we judge of the change that was seen at the time that our Lord Jesus
was sent intoo the world. If it be demanded why God delayed it so long time:
men advance themselves too much in such curiosity. If it be demanded why
the heathen were then matched with the Jews, and set in equal degree with
them, seeing that God had cut them of from his Church before: we must also honor
this secret ordinance, whereof Saint Paul speaks here. And therwithall let
us understand that God had so determined it before. Could we have that
sobriety with us, we should learn too profit our selves much better by Gods
works, than do these hea^henish folk, which bark at them, though they
cannot byte them. And now adays we see that many are stirred up with devilish
rage, to murmur against all Gods doings, because they conceive not the reason
of his purpose, insomuch that thervppon they spew out their horrible
blasphemies, as who should say, it were not free for God too reserve any thing
too himself, but must call men too counsel, and make himself their underling.
Seeing then that a number do so far ouershoot the^ selves through that
villainous pride, to thrust God as it were under their feet: it stands us the
more on hand too put this doctrine in ure, that we may reverence Gods secret
ordinance, and therwithall receive the things that are uttered unto us, without
geynsaying, as good and ryghtfull, and done with such wisdom, as is not too
be found fault with.

And now Saint Paul thinks it not enough to say, that God had his secret
purpose hidden in himself: but also says, that his will was, that this
vvisdome which is diverse in many sorts, should be known. This title
deserves too be well marked, where he says, that Gods wisdom is (as ye
would say) of diverse sorts. Not that God is variable and chaungeable in
himself, nor that there is any snarling or intangling in his deuyces: there is
no such thing at all in God, another can there be: but Saint Paul's speaking
after that manner, is in respect of our vndersauding. Therefore if we would
comprehend Gods wisdom, we should be confounded and dazeled at it, because
it is infinite: and besides that, it has things in it which are able too amaze
all our senses, yea and too swallowe them quyte up, so as we should never
discern any thing certeynly, too say, Lo, this is it. But this had need too
be laid out more at length, that we may understand it, and fare the better by
it. Now and then we see some looking glasses, wherein we think we behold a
hundred, yea or rather an infinite number of images before us: and when we see
them, we be at our wits end. After the same manner has Saint Paul spoken
here of Gods wisdom, namely, as giving us warning of the weakness and
rudensse that is in our understanding, too the intent we should not be too
inquisitiue in serching the things that pass our capacity, and the matters
that God has purposed in himself. Then if we will needs so stye up higher
than is lawful for us, and thrust our selves foreward with foolish
presumption, too be privy of Gods counsel, and too inquyre particularly what
he has determined: our wits must needs fail us ere we come half way
there, and we shall find so many things there, that we must of necessity
quayle of our selves, and (be driven too) confess that it is not for us too
reach the bottom of so great and deep a gulf.

Therefore if a man demand here, how then can we confess God too be
ryghtuous, wise, and almyghtie, since we be so daunted at his woorks? for it
is said, that it is the wisdom of men too search out Gods woorks, and too set
their mynds wholly upon them: Psalm. 119. a. 2.
and he has also ordained the world too be as a stage, whereon too behold his
goodness, ryghtuousnesse, power and wisdom: and therefore there seems too
be some contrariety (between these two,) that we should be diligent and
heedfull in considering Gods woorks, and yet notwithstanding that our wits are
dazeled at the thinking upon them: the answer thertoo is very easy: which
is, that if we desire soberly, too know but the things which God voutsafeth
too reuele unto us, (...)
and which are for our profit: we shall have understanding enough, and we
shall well perceive that he enuyeth not the teaching of us by his woorks, that
we might come unto him, and put our whole trust in him, too know how too
call upon him, to discern between good and bad, and too walk according too
his will. Then if we give not head to our foolish and inordinate lusts, but
harken like good scollers to the things which our master voutsafeth too
declare unto us: we shall in Gods woorks understand all things that are for
the furtherance of our welfare. And that is the cause why it is said in the
book of Job, Job. ^6.
that we shall have done very much, if we can espy but the utmost borders of
Gods woorks. Then may we taste of Gods wisdom, ryghtuousenesse, power, and
goodness, by considering allonly the ^^sts or uttermost bounds of Gods works.
But if we will needs fall too gaging of them too the bottom, there we shall
find the foresaid gulf which is able too swallow up all our understanding. Too
be short, first it is too be understood here, that as well Gods word, as
his woorks, are unto us wonderful secrets, and such as pass all our wit and
capacity. Insomuch that if we have an eye to his works, there are yet further
miracles in them too daunt us withal, than the things that we see every day,
and which are in common use among us. Likewise in the holy scripture, there are
somewhat secreter points, and which are not very easy to be understood. Konwe
we that once we have first of all to humble our selves, and to pray God to
inlyghten us by his holy spirit, that we may profit our selves by all his
woorks and words. And moreover let us learn the things that he shows us, and
be contented with the measure that he appoynteth us, without coveting too
know any more than that which we may learn in his school. Thus ye see what
we have to bear in mind.

Furthermore when we once have such meeldnesse, surely our Lord will give us a
sure resting point: and although his priuities be incomprehensible, and the
doctrine of the Law and the Gospel be secrets above the the reach of the
world: yet shall we be taught by them too our welfare and salvation. And so
there is no mingling, no confuzednesse, no intangling for us, because God will
guide us by his holy Ghost, and give us wisdom and discretion too know
whatsoever he sees too be for our behoof. Mark that for one point. But if we
be unteachable or unruly, and will needs play the looce colts too search
further than we have leave: surely Gods wisdom will be always variable unto
us: that is to say, there will be such diversity of things, and so many
stoppes in it, as will make us at our wits end, and we shall abide as utterly
confounded. Yea and even the faithful shall well perceive the thing that Saint
Paul says here, that they may ever be put in mind too walk in awe and
fear, and not give themselves the bridle too much, nor take too much leave to
know more than our Lord will have them too know. Now then, the dout which
might have bin cast, namely how God will have us too be abashed at his works,
is removed. And yet will he not have us too be abashed at them, so we suffer
our selves too be taught by him.

Theruppon we may gather also, that it is a devilish stateliness when these
Ruffians take so highly upon them, Not^.
as too reject whatsoever they cannot conceive the reason of. If a man tell
them that God dispozeth al things by his secret ordinance, and that the things
which we term fortune, chance, ^azard, casualtie, hap, adventure, and such
like, are al determined before the making of the world, insomuch that even the
hears of our heads are numbered, Math. 10. c. 30.
and one little bird shall not light upon the ground, Luke. 12. a. 7.
without Gods providence: they step forth and object, how can that be? And
whereas God tells us in his Law, that he will have this and that done, shall
we say, that he has mo wills than one? Then should he be unconstant, and that
were too make God chaungeable, and so should he seem subject too all manner of
lightness like a mortal creature. But (as I said before) such men do ill know
their own ability. For they imagine that if God bynd not himself in all
points too the things which he has reveled to us by his word, he is contrary
too himself, and has a dubble will, and that moves them too gabble after that
fashion. But too be short, Gods will is always one, and single, and agreeable
in it self: howbeit that to our seeming it be diverse, and have many kinds of
it, as if we saw a hundred sundry shapes which dazeled our eye sight or
utterly dimmed it. Whereas S. Paul says, that Gods wisdom is diverse in many
sorts: it is as if a picture had a thousand colors in it, so as a man could
not distinctly discern one from another. Nevertheless, S. Paul in saying so,
meant not that Gods wisdom is so wrythed in it self, that there is any
contrariety or strife there. No: but he shows, that although God have
always one even meaning, and keep on still in one trace and in one rate,
James. 1. c. 17.
although there be no change nor variableness in him, and although there be
but one light wherein there is no dimnesse at all: yet notwithstanding when men
will needs preace unto him, their wits are always as it were astray and
dazeled, and if they go foreward, and step forth still with too great
boldness, they must needs be confounded in the end, and God must utterly
ouerwhelme (...). After that manner therefore must we take the things that are
spoken in the holy scripture concerning Gods providence.

True it is, that we have our lesson, where God tells us, that he will not
have any man too trouble his neighbor, nor too ^ommit robbery, extortion,
couetuousnesse, deceyt, or any manner of naughtiness: he tells us those
things, and therewithal commands us too live chastely, and too absteyne from
all violence. Now when wars are moved in the world, when blud is shed, when
infinite ra^^shments and robberies are committed; shall we say, that such
things are don, without Gods forcasting in his mind what was good? Think we
that he suffers fortune too rule the roste here beneath, as though he himself
were asleep in heaven, or repozed himself there in his pleasures? What a
blasphemy were that? We would make God as an Idol. Agein, what would become
of us, if it were so? (...)
for Satan is as a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us as his pray, and we
should be continually as it were in his paws and between his teeth. Then if
God ordered not all things in this world, nehild Satan and all the wicked
brydled: surely we should be a hundred (...) forlorn, and perish every
minute of an hour. Agein, if we knew not that wars, and such other like
things are Gods judgments, whereby he chastizeth our sins: it is certain,
that we would never be drawn to repentance. Now then, let us learn the
thing that is told us here, I mean according too our small ability: that is
to wit, that God has but one will, and that the same is certain and thoroughly
agreeing with it self, and has no lightness nor inconstancy in it: and yet
nevertheless, that we must therwithall reverence his secret determinations,
which are as now so high and profound, as we cannot reach unto them. And if
we cannot resolve our selves of all the doubts which the devil will cast in
our ways (making us too think) How is it possible that God should be clear
from sin, and not be the author of evil, 1. Kings. 2^. d. 22.
seeing he serves his turn both by Satan and by all the wicked, and imployeth
them too advance them selves one against another? how is it possible that he
should be blameless? When any of these fancies come in our heads, or if any
of those dogs which belke out their blasphemies in that wise against God,
assault us: let us be armed with soberness, knowing how it is said here, that
Gods wisdom is diverse in many sorts, and that although his will also be diverse
in many respects, yet notwithstanding it is always one still. That is in
effect, the thing that we have too bear in mind upon this streyne.

Now thereupon S. Paul applies the ground which he handles, unto the matter
which he has spoken here in general: that is too wit, that God created all
things by our Lord Jesus Christ, too the end, that this wisdom should be
known to the powers and principalities in the heavenly places, by the Church.
In sayng that God created all things by Jesus Christ, he brings us back
agein to the beginning of the world, where he speaks of the renewment that
was made, when God repaired the things that were decayed and scattered by Adams
sin, according as we have seen heretofore, how it was Christ's office to
gather toogither all things that were scattered before. For Adam had perverted
and marred all order by his fall, so as there was nothing but confuzion both in
heaven and earth, Romans ^. d. 21.
till al was mended agein by Jesus Christ. Now then, the restitution that was
made by our Lord Jesus Christ, may well be referred too this second creation,
as though that at his coming God had set the world in his former state agein,
which had bin as it were crazed before. Howsoever the case stand, both ^wayne of
them were done by Jesus Christ, that is too wit, as well the first creation as
the second. And the conueyance is not amiss, in that S. Paul leads us from
the one too the other, by the similitude which he sets down here. Let us
mark well therefore that all things were created in Jesus Christ, when he was
ordained too be head of Angels and men: Heb. 1. a. 2.
yea and that although we had had no need of a redeemer, yet had our Lord
Jesus Christ nevertheless bin stablished for our head. Colos. 2. b. 10.
There remained no more too do, but too clothe himself with our nature, and
too offer himself in sacrifyce for the redemption of sinners: but yet for all
that, he failed not too bear the office already of reconcyling men unto God,
and of joining them with the Angels of heaven. After that manner then were all
things created in our Lord Jesus Christ. But here S. Paul meant purposely too
lead us too the restorement, which was made at such time as Jesus Christ was
given us too be our redeemer. For although the world ceased not too have some
shape still, so as the sun and Moon shone bright, and the earth brought
forth her fruits: yet notwithstanding, we know, that (as S. Paul says in
the eight too the Romans) all creatures groan, and are as a woman traueyling
of child, because they see themselves subject to corruption through Adams
offense, Gene. 3. ^* 17.
for the which he was accursed.

Too be short, whereas God had showed himself our enemy, he be^ame our father:
and whereas the things that were created too our use, had vin turned away by
Adams sin: all was restored agein at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So
then, by that means he gathered all things toogither agein, ^sai. 65. c. 17.
and 2. Pet. 3. c. 13. and Apo. 21. a. 1.
that had bin scattered asunder before, and then was the world after a sort
changed, as the Prophets had spoken of it before. For although they meant not
too incloze the said renewment within any certain time: yet notwithstanding
when they preached of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the grace
that should be given to the Church at that time, they used such speech as
this: Behold, I make the heavens new, and the earth new. After that manner does
God speak by the Prophet Esaias: and it is not only once, but it is, as ye
would say, a common speech among all the prophets. Now then, Saint Paul
following the common phraze of the Scripture, says, that all things were
created new agein in Jesus Christ: howbeeit that is in respect of the Church.
The world it self was not renewed: but as in respect of us, we be parttakers
alredye of the re^^^rement that is promised us. For by our Lord Jesus Christ
we enjoy Gods creatures whereof we were depryued before. Whereas the sun and
moon shine upon us, and we be nurrished by the sustenance of the earth: we
know that those things belong unto us, because we be Gods children. And how
is that? Even because he has adopted us in Jesus Christ. For the matter which
we have sung in the Psalm concerning man, Psalm. 8. a. 5.
must be applied to the person of Gods son, as says Saint Paul himself,
who is a faithful expounder. Not that he restreyneth it too him alone: 1. Cor.
1^* d. 27.
but forasmuch as the things which he speaks concerning the vncorruptnesse of
mankind, is not too be found in it now, but all is marred and corrupted:
therefore we must be feign too repair too our head, by whom we be set in
good plyght agein. So then, we could not be blissed of God, another in our
mea^e nor in our drink, nor in the inioying of any of all his creatures, were
it not for the restorement that is made by our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he
has caused the world too be given us hensforth in heritage, too the end we
might with a good and clear consclence, enjoy all the gifts which he has
bestowed upon us. And so ye see, that the creating of al things in Jesus
Christ, is Gods reforming of his Church, and our parttaking of the purchaced
heritage, for his sake and by his means.

Now having said, that we be so created agein in the person of Gods son,
and that he is our head, inasmuch as we be knit unto him by faith: he
adds, that it is a vvisdome which the very Angels have not known, insomuch
that they fare the better by our salvation, and have cause too honor God for
preferring them so too the thing that was after a sort buried from them before.
Some thinking this too be strange stuff, have bin of opinion, that S. Paul
spoke of the devils. But he speaks expressly of the heavenly places, and
means too put a difference betwixt the chozen Angels, and the castawayes. And
ageyn, too what purpose were it for the devils, too know Gods wisdom i^ our
salvation? It were too no purpose at all. There are others, which being not
able too rid themselves of this text of Saint Paul's: have thought that the
Angels are here among us, too be as scholars, and to hear the preaching of
Gods word. But that is too fond and chyldish an imagination: for we know,
that as well the doctrine, as the use of the Sacraments, are allotted
peculiarly unto us of God, because of our rawnesse. The Angels of heaven have
nothing too do, another with Baptim nor with the Lords Supper. And why? For
the Angels be altoogither spiritual. But forasmuch as we creep here
beneath, therefore we have need of such means as are convenient for our
infirmity, too make us come by little and little unto God. Therefore the
doctrine that is preached among us, serves not for the instruction of the
Angels. How then should it be understood, that the Angels were taught by the
things which they see presently in the Church? Let us mark first of all, that
although the Angels behold the face of God: Math. 18. ^. 10.
yet is it not meant that they be come too the perfection which is promised us:
for that is reserved too the latter day, when all things shall be fulfilled.

The Angels then know not things yet but in part. True it is that they must
not be mustered in our state and taking: for like as they be nearer God than
we, so be they taught more familiarly. But howsoever they fa^^, yet must they
be feign too hyde their eyes, as is showed us in the sixth Chapter of Esaias, in
the vision that is given him there. Albeit then that the Angels be heavenly
spirits, and be familiarly conversant with God, as household servants of his
kingdom: yet have they their eyes covered, too show that they understand not
all things as yet, and that their knowing is but in part. For God must show
them that they be but creatures, that they might thereby be hild in continual
awe, too humble themselves before him, and to keep themselves in their degree.
According heeruntoo, it is said, that the Angels of heaven know not when the
last day shall be: Math. 24. ^. 36.
that is hid from them. And why? Too the intent that men should humble
themselves the more, and not be ashamed to be ignorant of the things which God
has not reveled unto us. Too the end therefore that it may not grieve us that
God concealeth many things from us: the very Angels are set before us, as not
knowing all things as yet. Then is it not without cause said, that they knew
not what should befall and come too pass at the coming of the son of God,
that is too wit, that all people without exception should be called too the
truth of the Gospel, and be all adopted of God, (...). 3. ^. 7.
too be made the spiritual children of Abraham. True it is, that the Angels
knew well that Jesus Christ was the head of all mankind: but how that should
be done, or at what time, or by what mean, that was hidden from them. That
is the manner wherein S. Paul says, that they profited, namely by beholding our
Lord Jesus Christ too shed forth his grace in that wise. For it was not enough
too say, that men should wonder at such a miracle as that God should take
those intoo his house, that were strayed away before, and alye himself with
those that were erst his mortal enemies, and allure them to him, whom he
before abhorred. If it had bin said, that men ought too be astonished at it:
that had not bin enough. But when as S. Paul says, that even the Angels
find it strange, and are feign too marvel at it, seeing how God utters so
great treasures: it serves well too show us, that whenever there is any
speech of our calling, that is too say, of the mercy that God has showed us
in forgetting what we were, and in fashioning us anew after his own image,
insomuch, that whereas we were lost, and forlorn, yea and utterly drowned in
the bottom of hell by Adam, he has set us up ageyn, and taken us up too the
kingdom of heaven, and is not contented too show us his bounteousenesse in
this world only, but also intends too make us partakers of his endless
glory, and too give us the crown of life in his kingdom: it is a thing for us
too learn too wonder at, too the end we may receive so great, so high, so
excellent, and so worthy benefits, with such reverence as they deserve.

And Saint Paul not only here, Colo^^. ^* b. 16.
but also in other places calls the Angels, Principalities, too show us,
that we cannot deuyze any thing so high and noble, which is not inferior too
Jesus Christ, as is declared more fully in the first too the Colossians. For in
as much as many men did even at that time magnifye the Angels, too deface the
majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ: S. Paul shows, that although the Angels
be as it were Gods powers or vertewes, Psalm. 10^. d. 21.
and his arms wherewith he executes his works: and although they be
dominions and powers: yet notwithstanding Jesus Christ ceasseth not too have
all pre-eminence and authority over them: but like as the sun darkeneth the
light of the Stars, so must all the dignity of the Angels be laid down,
that it hinder not Jesus Christ too be looked at of all men, and to be the
only Loadestar, and too be known that it is only he in whom lies the
fullness of all good things: and so is he in deed, as is said in the same
text. And it is a point well worthy too be marked still. For we see how it
is enough now adays among the Papists, too allege the vertewes of the
Apostles, or of the Uirgin Marie, or of the Saints, too make ydols of them.
And it seems too them on the contrary part also, that if men do not
woorship them, and pray unto them, and yield them the seruis which belongs
alonly unto God: they be utterly undone. For thus do they allege: How now?
Why should not the Uirg^^ Marie be our advocate, seeing she lived so holy a
life, that she was as a mirror of all perfection, and so hyghly in Gods
favor? Ue^ily as who should say, that the excellency which God has put intoo
his creatures, should serve too bereeue Jesus Christ in such wise, that he
should be put back therefore. So then let us understand, that whatsoever can
be said or preached of the vertewes and worthiness of the Uirgin Marie, of
the Apostles, and of all oath men, yea and of the Angels of heaven, serves
not too diminish the majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor too turn us away
from him, nor too cause his offices too be dealt away too this man and too that
man. Wheretoo then? Too do us too wit, that vertewes are so distributed to al
Gods children, John. 7. f. 37.
as there is none other fountain of all goodness, but Jesus Christ, who is
the (only) party too whom we must resort, and that the creatures are never the
more impaired, though Jesus Christ ouerpeere them as their head. That then is
in effect the thing which we have too mark upon Saint Paul's words, where
he taunteeh such as would needs exalt the Angels without end or ceassing. For
he says: very well, I grant they be powers, virtues, and principalities: but
yet is our Lord Jesus Christ still their head, and they be so grounded upon
him, that they fare the better by our salvation. Now then, what an
ungraciousness were it, if we should leave Jesus Christ, and go seek too the
Angels, seeing that even they do wonder at the riches which God has uttered
in knitting us intoo the body of his son, and consequently in calling us too
him too be his own children by that means? Thus ye see how the woondering
of the Angels at our salvation, ought too frame us the better too our Lord
Jesus Christ, and make us to stick fast unto him, without swar^ing from him
any manner of way. And for that cause is it added in the end, that by him we
have boldness and enteraunce in hope, through the belief which is in him.

Here S. Paul meant shortly to blame the unthankfulness of such as are not
contented with the having of Jesus Christ, but think that he should have some
helps added too him. Therefore he says, what desire we more than too be
knit unto God? Is not our full happiness there? (...)
Now it is so, that by beeleeuing in Jesus Christ, we hau^ confidence that we
may ^reace unto God: the access is given (...) And whereas trust or
confidence is not enough, we have also bol^^nesse too come unto him with our
heads upright, not as pre^uming any whit of our selves, nor yet too come
thither rechlesly, but we must always practice this saying of the Psalm,
Psalm. ^. b. 8.
that although we rest upon Gods goodness, yet must we evermore worship him
with fear. Notwithstanding, we may always come boldly unto Gods throne,
assuring our selves that his Majesty shall no more be terrible to us, seeing
he shows himself a father toowards us in the person of his only son. We
see then how S. Paul's meaning is, too hold us fast too Jesus Christ. And
therein we see also what our frowardnes is. For it is certain, that the care
and zeal which S. Paul had too make us cleave fast too the son of God, came
of the wisdom of the holy Ghost, who knew our frailty and unsteadfastness.
Had we (as ye would say) but one drop of settled wit, it were enough too do
us too understand, that by the Gospel we may possess Gods son, who gives
himself unto us, and that having him, we have all that ever we can wish. Romans
^. f. 32.
It were enough too have spoken this in one word, as S. Paul has showed
already: but we see how he dubbleth and confirms his saying, as though it
were a hard thing too be believed. And of a truth, it is very hard, because
we be too much given too distrust and unbelief. Agein, too believe for one
day, is not all that we have too do: it is required that we should hold on
still, which is a very rare thing too be found in this world, because we be
always ^isking. By means whereof, men do as it were wylfully bereue
themselves of the thing that was given them. Furthe^more, forasmuch as all the
world is at the point, and we cannot be won or persuaded but with great
pain, too come too our Lord Jesus Christ, and too rest upon him, let us use
the remedy that Saint Paul sets us down here.

And first of all we must mark well, John. 10. b. 9. and Math. 27. f. 51.
that Jesus Christ is the door too open heaven unto us: for we know that at
his death the v^yle of the Temple was rent asunder, and that in such wise, that
we may now enter familiarly intoo the Sanctuary of God, not of such a
material Temple, as was then: but (even of heaven,) so as we may preace intoo
the presence of our God, and resort unto him for refuge, as if a child should
cast himself into the lap of his father or mother: for it is certain, that God
surmounteth all the fathers and mothers of the world, in all kyndnesse and
favor. Seeing then that we know that: what count we more? Would we have
some better or excellenter thing than God? Then must we go seek it in the
bottom of hell. For when we have made our vagaries as much as we list, we
shall always find, that there is nothing in any of all the creatures either
above or beneath, (...). 44. ^. 7.
that is worth a straw, in comparision of God, as says the Prophet Esaias. So
then, seeing that God has given himself unto us in the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells in that great
Sanctuary, Hebr. 9. c. 9.
which was figured by the visible Sanctuary of the Law: ought we not too be
fully satisfied when we have that, and too rest our selves wholly thereuppon?
And although our wits and our affections be fickle, yet ought they too be
hild in awe as prisoners, so as we may say, Let us cleave, let us cleave too
our God, Psalm. 73. ^. 28.
according too this saying of David, behold, all my felicity, and all my joy
is too be joined too my God. Likewise he says in another place, Psalm. 36. c.
9.
he is the welspring of life and light. Agein, we have s^ng this morning,
Psalm. 16. ^. 6.
he is my portion, I cannot have a better lotte, I must needs take all my
delight in him. Thus ye see what w^ have too remember in the first place.

Secondly, let us mark well the degrees that Saint Paul sets down here:
whereof the first is, that we must have faith. For although Jesus Christ have
opened the way and passage by his blud, Hebr. 10. c. 19.
too make us entrance unto God his father: yet is not the gap opened for all
men: Apo^. 3. b. 7.
for the unbelievers cannot enjoy that benefit, whereof he is the kye. True it
is, that the door is near hand, and the opening thereof is easy, when we have
the kye: that is to say, if we receive the Gospel in true obedience of faith.
And so ye se why Saint Paul tells us, that it is not enough for us that
Jesus Christ has laid forth the tresures of the infinite goodness and mercy
of God his father: but that it stands us on hand on our side, to receive the
same by faith. Not that we dan do it of our own power, nor yet that we can
come unto Jesus Christ, or be partakers of the benefits which he offers us
by the Gospel, except we have faith in him. And from belief we must proceed
too trust, that is too say, we must be fully persuaded, that God will always
receive us, and that we shall find favor at his hand, and that although we
be wretched sinners, and unworthy too live upon the earth: yet
nevertheless we shall find him still favorable too us when we come too
heaven. Lo how faith is linked with trust. And thereof springs this stoutnesse
of mind or boldness, which is as it were the highest step, so that although
we must needs. be as it were dis^^ayed, when we consider what we be of our
selves: yet we cease not to offer our selves unto God with our heads vpryght.
And why so? Because he looks upon us in the person of his only son. Math.
17. a. 5. and. 2. Pet. 1. d. 17.
And therefore it is said, that he is his well-beloved, howbeeit, not for himself
(only), ^ut (also) for our sakes that are members of his body. Ye see then
how we have too gather upon this text, that by receiving the doctrine of the
Gospel with true obedience of faith, we possess our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by his means shall be led unto God his father, too come too the perfection of
life, light, and all goodness. And by the way we be warned too go foreward
in faith, till we be thoroughly persuaded, that in fyghting against all the
temptations that can assail us, we shall get the upper hand by the means of
faith, Romans 8. g. 35.
and finally that we may brag (specially as S. Paul does in the eight too
the Romans) both against life, and against death, and against all powers both
above and beneath, and despyze all distresses, knowing full well that nothing
is able too disappoynt us of the love that Jesus Christ has showed us, and
which God his father also has uttered toward us in his person. And theruppon
also does it come, that our prayers must be grounded upon full certeintie.
For (as says S. James) James. (...) a. 6.
he that th^nketh too obtain any thing by doubting, deceyueth himself.
Therefore we must assure our selves by the promises of the Gospel, that God
is ready too receive us too mercy, whenever we come unto him. And thereby
we perceive, that S. Paul said not for naught, that if we have faith, we
must not seek any thing more than Jesus Christ, but he must be all our
treasure, because that in him we have all things that are requisite too our
joy and contentation.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our sins, praying him to make us so too feel them, as we may myslyke
them more and more, and yet notwithstanding not cease too be glad, in that he
has showed him self so pitiful toward us in the person of his only son,
that he has voutsafed too draw us out of the gulf of hell, too give us
entrance intoo his kingdom: and also too grant us the grace too come
theruntoo with true faith, and too withdraw our selves from all worldly
intycementes, which serve too turn us away from him, so as we may forsake all
vaynglory, and for as much as we be void of all goodness in our selves, seek
all our wantes in him, which is the true fountain of all goodness, that can
never be drawn dry. That it may please him too grant this grace, not only too
us, but also too all people. etc.

The.xix. Sermon, which is the fourth upon the third Chapter.
13. Wherefore I beseech ye faint not for my trubbles, which I endure for
your sake, which is your glory.

14. For the which thing I bovv my knees too the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ:

15. (Of whom all kindred is named in heaven and in earth.)

15. That according too the riches of his glory, he grant you too be
strengthened with power by his spirit in the inward man.


IT is a wonderful thing that men having so many means too come unto God,
labor too go from him as much as is possible, and every straw makes them too
turn head: and yet notwithstanding think themselves too have a very reasonable
excuce, if they can say, I was let by this and that (which shall be nothing
at all,) but the least occasion that can be, will serve, because their seeking
already is too shrink away from God. And this is too common now adays. For
they that are desirous too iustifye themselves, because they reject the
doctrine of the Gospel, will always find fault with the causes of offenses.
O say thy, this trubbleth me, this makes me too mislyke the doctrine of the
Gospel, this makes me too forsake it utterly. All that ever they can allege
shall be but tryfles, but yet had we need too labor so much the more, too
overcome all the lettes and stoppes which the devil indeuoreth too cast in our
way, so as we may still keep on our trade and course. And that is the thing
whereat S. Paul ameth here, exhorting the Ephesians not too be thrust out of
the way, but too hold on still truly and constantly in the faith of the
Gospel, notwithstanding that they might be offended too see him a prisoner,
and as good as condemned already. Now it is certain, that Saint Paul's
suffering in mayntenance of the things that he had preached, was not too make
them swerve from Gods pure truth: but contrariwyse he protests, that it was
too their glory, so as they might triumph aforehand, considering the invincible
constancy that was given him. But (as I have said already) besides the thing
that I have touched already, there is such a naughtiness rooted in our nature,
that we be well appayd, if we can have any outward color too shrink away
from God, and we bear our selves on hand, that we be quite and clean
discharged. Howbeit S. Paul spoke not this for that one people, but he gives
here an instruction that ought too serve us at this day: which is, that
although the most part of the world be mad at the Gospel, and fight as much as
they can, too quench the rememberaunce of our Lord Jesus Christ, and although
the faithful be persecuted, diffamed and tormented: Yet must we not swerve
aside, nor be out of heart, considering that it ought to confirm our faith the
more in our Lord Jesus Christ, and that we have whereof to glory, seeing God
holds up his Church by strong hand, so as it is not utterly oppressed and
overcome. If the Gospel were received without geinsaying, and with one common
accord, surely we should have cause to bliss God for it, and there should be
a melody between heaven and earth, so as both men and Angels might with full
mouth magnify Gods goodness so shi^ning forth upon all men: But yet the
fighting of men against the Gospel, is a sure record unto us, that God is
the author of it, inasmuch as they that are imprisoned for it, and drawn even
unto death, cease not for all that too stand steadfastly in it. 2. Kings. 6.
c. 16.
God then utters there a wounderfull power, and it appears, that for all
that ever Satan can do, we nevertheless have proof that God is on our side,
and fights for us, and vpholdeth us by his power. Not that he exempteth us
from affliction, but he will always give us victory, and that ought to suffize
us. Thus the thing which we have too remember upon this Text of S. Paul's,
is, that we must be ready too receive all the alarums that Satan shall make
upon us, and that although we see the doctrine of the Gospel ill received of
the world, so as it is not only despyzed and disdeyned, but also hated, and the
unbelievers are inflamed with a devilish rage too destroy it: Yet
notwithstanding we must not bear it the less reverence, for we must not
measure Gods majesty by the opinions of me^. Put the case that God were every
where despyzed, according as most men are in deed so churlish and unthankful,
that they be as monsters shaped against kind, yet must not God loze the right
that we owe him. For notwithstanding the rebelliousnesse of such as would wrap
God with them in their iniquities, we ought too honor him with all humility.
Even so is it also with the pure doctrine of the Gospel. Although then that
the world set themselves against it, and many men trample it underfoot, so as
some mock at it, some gnashe their teeth at it, and fires are kindled for it:
Yet let us still quietly and obediently receive the things which we know to
come from our God. Thus then ye see how our faith ought always too keep on
his way, and that although many practizes and enterprises be attempted against
the faithful, and a man shall every where hear of nothing but confederacies,
threatenings, outrages, and such other things: yet we must not cease too
fight stoutly under Christ's banner, Luke. 21. d. 19.
and to possess our souls in patience. And heereunto ought this saying of S.
Paul's to serve, that it is our glory: for our faith should be as good as
dead, if God tried it not. Nevertheless when we see the faithful so
examined, we have always so much the better warrant of the doctrine that is
given us of God. True it is, that it ought too be grounded in heaven, that is
too say, upon the authority of God alone, without having respect too any
creatures. For the very Angels of heaven were not able too authorize the
Gospel: Gods majesty must be feign too come forth for us too lean unto,
and then shall we never be shaken down. Notwithstanding, when the Martirs
stick not to give their lives in the witnessing of Gods truth: then (as I said
before) we be, or ought too be the more stirred up too receive the doctrine,
and it is as it were sealed up in our hearts. Forasmuch then as persecutions
serve too confirm the doctrine the better: therefore S. Paul says, it is our
glory, and that we ought too triumph at it, seeing that God does so mainteyne
and strengthen them whom he sends intoo that battle.

For it is certain, that in respect of the frayltie of the flesh, they
should quayle by and by. But that they get the upper hand, let us mark, that
it is Gods doing, who woorketh after so manifest a fashion, as we have cause
too glorify him for it. Now if when we be trubbled, we be tempted too
shrink, and too give over at every brunt that is put too us: it is a token that
we have not the skill too profit our selves by the means that God gives us,
too draw us to him, and to make us stick too him with true steadfastness.
Therefore let us fight against our own weakness, and against the naughtiness
of our nature, that when we see how the devil practyzeth too overthrow the
Gospel in manner every where, we may consider, that God forgets not those
that are his, but strengthens them in such wyze with his power, that their
faith gets the upper hand, to the end that we should hope for the like, and
that when we be at ease and rest, we should not cease too prepare our
selves after their example, that when it shall please God too reach out his
hand upon us, and too make us take our turn and course, we may be fenced a
long while aforehand, and not be possessed with such imagination as some be,
which bear themselves on hand, that they shall never feel any grief or
trubble: but that we may always be ready armed to fight. Herewithal S. Paul
shows, that it is not enough for us to be only taught: for we should not
cease for all that, to be always fretting, and to be as men more than half
out of their wits, until God made his doctrine too take such place, as we
were touched too the quick with it.

Now then, having exhorted the Ephesians, he says, I bow my knees before the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ. If exhorting too the end that every man might
be of courage, had bin enough: S. Paul would not have added that which he
speaks here of prayer. But to the intent too show what the Ephesians had
too do: he falls intoo the way before them too give them an example. And
therefore let us mark, that when we shall have had our ears beaten with Gods
word, to show us our dewtie, and thertoo not only bin instructed, but also
exhorted and spurred forward: yet will there always be some sloth, coldness
and rechlesnesse in us, so as the doctrine shall stand us in small stead, until
God touch us with his holy spirit. And this serves too beat down al pride in
us. For a number think themselves able too woork woonders, who feel
themselves beguyled, when they come too the pinch. We see what happened too
Peter. He promised, yea even unfeignedly, Math. 26. g. 35.
that he would not shrink from his Master, though he should dye for it. Ye
see how Peter made a stout brag. Surely he made it not but of a zeal, which a
man would say, is good and holy, and he meant too have had the same intent so
settled, as too have showed it at the need: and yet notwithstanding, the stout
words of a sillye wenche made him too deny Christ, and he was ready too have
denied him a hundred times, insomuch that he fell to cursing and banning.
Seeing we have such a looking glass, let us acknowledge our own weakness in
Peter's person, and (as S. Paul shows us here) let us resort too him that
has all power in him. For it is not enough for us too know our disease,
unless we seek the remedy of it. First of all then, let us rid our selves
of al foolish opinions, wherewith the world is imbrewed, as that a man may be
able too overcome all temptations by his own free will: and rather let us
learn too abace our selves utterly, knowing that when as God is so gracious to
us, as too teach us by his word, the same is not too enable us too do it,
but only too hold us the more guilty and convicted thereof, too the end we
should not make a sheeld of ignorance. Let that be one point.

Yet notwithstanding, let us not stay there: but for as much as we be weak of
our selves, and Godhath all strength in him: let us repair unto him. For it
is certain, that he calls and allureth us unto him. And therefore let us not
think that we shall be disapoynted, when we cast our selves down so as half
dead, or rather as stark dead at his feet, not doubting but that he will lift
us up agein. And so Saint Paul speaking of his praying too God here, was not
alonly too protest that he discharged his dewtie: but too the intent that the
same should serve for an example too all the faithful, that upon the knowing
of their wantes: they might resort only unto God, knowing that he holds us
up continually by strong hand, and that after he has once given us faith, he
adds also such invincible constancy, that we stand out too the end. This is
it in effect which we have too bear in mind. And therefore let us take
warning, not too trust too our own wit, nor too presume any whit upon our
own power and strength, when we come too hear Gods word: but too desire our
God, that like as he has voutsafed too have his word preached unto us by the
mouth of a man, so he will also speak unto us inwardly, and in secret by his
holy Ghost, that by that means the doctrine which we have heard, may take
root, and bring forth profit and fruit. And moreover, since we see by
experience, that God requires more of us than our power and ability can
auoord: let us desire him too supply our wantes, according too the example that
I have set down alredye, which is, that it is clean contrary too our fleshly
reason, that we should go too death if need be, and forsake the world and
our own life. This is not too be found in man, if he follow still his own
reason and will. God therefore must be feign too work in this case, and too
remedy our infirmity. But although that too suffer for the Gospel, and too
go too death as it were with blyndfolded eyes, and not too be turned away, nor
stricken down for any thing, be very hard things, and such as pass all
ability of man: yet will God stand by us in such sort, as we shall overcome
all distresses, if we arm our selves with the weapons that he gives us: that
is too say, if upon the knowing of his will, we being unable too walk as he
commands us, do pray him too give us legs, and too strengthen us in such
wise as we may overcome all. This done, a man cannot say, that this doctrine
is unprofitable. For why is it that our Lord gives us those things by his holy
spirit, which we have not by nature? Even too make the doctrine auaylable, so
as it may not disappoynt us. They then which do slanderously say, that if we
cannot follow God of our own freewill, it were better too forbear preaching,
because it is but lost labor: they (say I) wot not what order God keeps too
assure us too himself. And experience shows well enough, that the preaching
of the word is but an instrument whereby God works in secret. If we be fully
resolved of that, then shall we very well perceive, that God agrees very well
with himself, in that he will have the Gospel preached too us, and yet tells
us, that it should stand us in no stead, except it pleazed him too work in
our hearts by his holy spirit. Now in saying that the Gospel is an
instrument, it is all one as if a man should say, that a plowman with his
Plowgh (...) and all other things, 1. Cor. 3. b. 7.
were an instrument, and yet not therefore the cause why the earth brings
(...) fruits. Math. 6. b. 11.
And why? For God keeps that too himself: and in that respect do we ask him
our daily bread. For we must vnderst^^d, that as a father has care of his
children, and as ye would say, puts the meat intoo their mouths: so will God
have us too receive our sustenance at his hands. And for that cause he says,
that when the people should be come intoo the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 9. a. 4.
although they should till and manure the ground, yet should they not say, this
have I gotten with my own hand, but all acknowledge that they were may^teyned
by the word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, Deu. ^. a. 3.
that is too say, by the inward grace which God gives too his creatures, so as
we be fed thereby. For all the labor of man can nothing avail, unless God
bliss it. And what then shall we say of the thing that is much more
excellent? For is not the food of our souls much preciouser than that which
serves but for our bodies? therefore let us not think, that it is enough for
us to come to a sermon, or too read (Gods word) every man by himself: but we
must also resort unto God, that he may give us increace. And for the same cause
does Saint Paul set down this similitude, 1. Cor. 3. b. 6.
that he which planteth, is nothing, nor yet he that waters, but that it is
God that gives the increace from above. And he speaks not there of the
laborers of the ground, but of the sowers of Gods word, and of such as manure
his Church with continual exhortations. Albeit then that we take never so
great pain: yet shall we do no good at all with our labor, except God
work with it by his holy spirit. But when he woorketh with us, then is our
labor auaylable, and then it is said, Romans 1. b. 16.
that the Gospel is the power of God too the salvation of all that believe.
For God does so utter the power of his holy spirit, that the preaching of the
Gospel, and the secret and inward woorking of the holy Ghost, are things so
joined toogither, as they cannot be separated. And so ye see in effect what
we have too remember upon that saying of S. Paul.

Now having spoken of praying, he says, That ye may be strengthened in the
inward man, by the power of his holy spirit. Here he shows us the weakness
that I spoke of before: for if we perceive not our own need, we will never
voutsafe too resort unto God like poor beggets. We know that man being left
to himself, will never acknowledge his own poverty, except it be proved too
his face. To the end therefore that we should come unto him unfeignedly, and
with true lowelinesse: it is for our behof too feel by experience, that we can
do nothing at all, and that we be unprofitable in respect of all goodness,
until our Lord have renewed us. That is the thing which Saint Paul intended
too make us too understand. For though all the world generally do seek help
at Gods hand, yet is there scarce one too be fonnd among a hundred, that does
it truly and without hypocrisy. For if a man could search what is in some, he
should find them redye too burst like Toads, with pride and filthiness, and
that they presume woonderously upon themselves. They will go seek succor at
Gods hand, and yet think they have their seeking in themselves. Surely it is
too excessive a lewdness, but yet is it a vice that reygneth too much.
Howsoever we fare, if we desir God too reach out his hand too succor us:
let us learn first of all too abace our selves, and let us know, that we have
not sufficient strength of our own nature, but that the same must be feign
too come from above, and from his holy spirit, as S. Paul has expressed
here. That ye may be strengthened (says he) by the power of his holy
spirit. No doubt but he makes comparison here of things clean contrary. For
so long as a man can do ought of himself, Gods spirit needs not to supply
the room. But forasmuch as all power proceeds of Gods free goodness: therein
it is showed us, that we can do nothing of our selves, and that all the
strength which we surmyze our selves too have, is but smoke that vanishes
away, and a stark illuzion of Satan, who seeks too hold us fast in some
fond selfweening, too the intent we should not repair too our God, and so be
left utterly destitute. And besides this, Saint Paul shows further, that it
is a free bestowed benefyte, that is too say, a benefyte that proceeds of
Gods only free gift, too the intent we should not imagine, that when God
succoreth us, he has an eye too any thing else than our wretchedness, or that
he does it for any good disposition that he saw should be in us. And that is
the cause why he succoreth us in all our needs. And therefore Saint Paul
says here, that it stands us on hand too be strengthened by the power of
his holy spirit, and that the same is a free gift.

Now he says, acording too the richenesse of his glory. Wherefore is it, that
he magnifieth the riches of Gods goodness so much, but to beat down all the
fond opinions wherewith men besotte them selves, in weening too bring, I wot
not what, of their own, and by that mean too make themselves haylefellowe
with God? Therefore it behooves us to bear this thing well in mind. For S. Paul
speaks too such as had showed great strength already: but yet was it meet
that God should always have the praise of it. They were in great forwardness,
and had fought already for the Gospel: and yet Saint Paul wishes, that they
might be strengthened. Herein we see that we be so far unable too begin
too do good, that even when God has set us in the way, when he has reached
us his hand, yea and when he has continu^d his grace in us from day too day:
Phil. ^. b. 13.
Yet if he do but turn away his hand one minute, we be quite quayled. And so
we be warned (as we have seen before) that as God is the beginner of our
salvation, so is he the worker of it throughout, and there is nostedfa^^nesse
in us, furtherfoorth than we be vphild by him, and by his holy spirit. And
therefore we ought too be provoked too pray daily all the time of our life.
For they that forget themselves, and fall as^eepe, shall soon f^ele themselves
bereft of Gods grace. And why? They be not worthy of it, because they seek it
not with continual care. Therefore too waken us thoroughly both from our
slothfulness and from our rechelesnesse, we must bear in mind, that seeing
God has called us into his Church, and touched us to the quick, to receive
his Gospel with true obedience: the same ought to strengthen us so much the
more too the end. Let that serve for one point. Agein, let us understand, that
God must needs show the riches of his glory, when he increases so his holy
spirit in us by degrees. For must there not needs be an infinite treasure of
his goodness, when he draws us so to him at the first sight? In what plight
we are when God chozeth us and takes us too him? He draws us not only out
of a stinking puddle, but out of the bottom of hell. For behold, the thing that
we bring with us by inheritance from our mothers womb, is cursednesse, and to
be as enemies to God, and too have nothing but stark malice and
rebelliousnesse in us, and too be blind wretches, and (at a word) too be given
too all evil, so as Satan reigns over us, and we be his bond slaves, and
are hild down under the tyranny of sin. Now then seeing that God has pitied
us, in respect that we were so miserable creatures: Needs must it be, that he
uttered the great riches of his goodness in that behalf, and meet it is that
he should be glorified for the same. And (as I have said already) we ought
too be the better touched therewith, that like as he has adopted us for his
children, so we may show our selves willing too take him for our father. But
howsoever we fare, although he have reformed his image in us, yet must he be
feign too utter the riches of his goodness, and too increace his gifts in us,
and too make us too go on still with our course. And it stands us so much the
more on hand to bear this doctrine in mind, because we see the world has
bin beguiled with these toys and opinions, that every man might well put
forth himself through his own freewill, or at leastwyse prepare himself too
come unto God. And agein, that Gods ad^ing of grace upon grace, is, because
men have used well the grace that he had given and bestowed upon them before.
Now as touching the first point, how is it possible that we should bring aught
of our selves too win Gods favor withal? seeing we be like poor dead men,
and as ^otten carkesses, what preparation can we make too purchase favor at
Gods ha^^: Must not men need as be worse than be witched, when they conceive
such ^^^yes? Wherefore let us learn too father the beginning, continuance, and
end of our salvation upon God, and too shim all those devilish illusions,
(which seem to maynteyne) that God in adding of grace unto grace, has a
regard how every of us has deserved it. For contrariwyse S. Paul tells us,
that in this care we must have nothing before our eyes, but Gods goodness in
showing himself so liberal toward us, that he never ceasseth too do us
good. He is not like mortal men, which will say, I have done thee good enough
already, content thy self: but like as he has shed out the gifts of his holy
spirit intoo us, so he is moved too increace the measure of them, till we be
come too the full heyght of them, that is too wit, too full perfection.

Now hereunto Saint Paul adds expressly, the inward man: for we would feign
that God should always strengthen and increace us in this world, but in the
mean while the heaue^^y life is as nothing with us. For some would show
themselves valiant, and they be so ravished in their own conceyt, that they
ween themsel^es too be as Angels, so as men may speak of their deeds of
prowess, and that they may be taken for proper men, and purchase themselves
reputation. That is one kind of strength that men desire. Others desire too
increace their substance by merchandyse, or too get riches and possessions by
any means howsoever it be. Othersome covet too be in credit and authority.
Too be short, the means whereby we would have God too show himself
bountiful toward us, is in pleasing our sensuality and earthly lusts. But on
the contrary part, Saint Paul brings us too the inward man, that is too
say, too the spiritual life, which is unseen of us, saving that we have
record of it. For after the same manner does he speak of the inward man
likewise too the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4. d. 16.
saying, that the outward man corrupts, but yet the inward man is renewed.
What is it then that Saint Paul means by the outward man? Riches, bodily
health, honor, credit, authority, and (at a word) all that we covet of our
own nature. Those are the things that are meant by the outward man. Now (as I
said before) we would feign be strengthened in those things, but in the mean
while we despyze the inward man, that is too say, the things that belong too
the heavenly life. And why? For we see them not, because we be gross
witted, and entangled in this world. Therefore Saint Paul shows us here,
that if God list too diminish us too the worldward, we must be are it
patiently, and he says the like in the Text which I am about to allege. For
when the faythlesse and heathenish sort which have their treasure in this
world, do see themselves go too decay: they sygh and say, alas, where are the
arms that I had in time past? where be the legs? and thereupon they fall too
repyning against God. Agein, if a man that was rich be diminished, and God
cut of the things that he possessed: he is in horrible unquietness, and he
had lever too be alredye buried, than too see his wings clipped after that
fashyon. Agein, they that are led with ambition, and seek nothing but honor
and estimation in the world, if they be once out of their accustomed credit,
they think all is lost: But on the contrary part, Gods children, which shet
their eyes willingly at all the things which have a fair gloss here beneath,
and behold the heritage of heaven by faith, are not so vexed when they see
themselves diminished even in eysyght, and that God makes them to drop away by
little and little: they take al in good worth. 2. Cor. 1. a. 5.
And why? For they have an eye to the change: which is, that by that mean God
renews them, too give them the thing that is unseen, and too make them take
courage agein, as though the kingdom of heaven were hard at hand. So then, the
thing that Saint Paul shows us now, is, that look as every of us is carried
away with his own foolish lusts, so would he have God too yeelo to his
fondness. And contrariwyse, by his praying bnto God to strengthen us, he
shows us, that it must not grieve us, though we decay as in respect of our
bodies, so we have the spiritual cheerelynesse that may make us too draw
nearer and nearer unto our God, and too look still too the kingdom of
heaven, which cannot fail us, assuring our selves, that the bringing of us
low, is too the end we should be exalted on high, 2. Cor. 5. a. 1.
and that although we must go down into the grave, yet it is not too perish
there altoogither, but too be renewed agein. Wherefore let us suffer our selves
too be so abaced, that we may be set up agein by the power of our God. And
although we be poor despyred creature^ in this world, let us suffer it
patiently, and therwithall let us not cease too warrant our selves that God
will woork in us as he promises.

And furthermore let us mark well, what S. Paul sets down here: for he
uses not the single name of God, but says, The father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom all kindred is named in heaven and in earth. Now hereby he
shows us first of all, how familiarly we may go unto God, as has bin
touched alredye. And the last sunday this text was declared sufficiently, Ephe.
3. c. 12.
where he showed us, how we may come unto God. But there he did set faith in
the first place. Seeing then that we have assurance that the gate is opened
for us, we may be bold too go in unto God. And this faith ingendereth trust
in our hearts, and trust gives boldness. These are the three steps that
Saint Paul did set down there. And here he shows us how we obtain that
privilege: that is too wit, because God has not only his heavenly Majesty
too be worshipped of us: (for although we ought too honor him in that
respect, yet would it so astonishe us, as too make us shun his presence as much
as we possibly could:) but also adds the title of father, and says, that
he takes us for his children, by means whereof we he no more afraid of
him, but may come fa^^l^arly too him whenever occasion serves, forasmuch as
he has his arms open too receive us. This is an article well worthy too be
minded. For if we cannot call upon God, what will become of us? in what
plyght shall we be? It is said, that all our welfare lies in having our
recourse unto God. Now if we think that God will hear us, James. ^. a. 6.
when we pray doubtingly and debatingly: we beguile our selves, as says S.
James. Therefore we must not be as reeds that are shaken with every wind, or
like the waves of the sea. But we must be well and thoroughly assured, that
God which calls us too him will not disappoynt us. Wherefore when we pray
unto God, it must be with trust, that we shall not loze our labor. But how
may we come by that? For behold, God has (...) inco^prehensible (...), and
what a distance is there between him and us? Though we could (...) above the
clouds, yet could we not come nygh God, by reason of the infinite highness
that is in him, for the heavens comprehend it not.

Then should we be as folk forlorn and vainshed away, 1. Kings. 8. c. 27.
if Jesus Christ were not there as a mean to make us way. And that is it which
S. Paul means here, when he says, that he prays too the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, too the end we might (...), that he is not far from us,
if we hold the way that he shows us, that is too wit, if we make Jesus
Christ our advocate, to bear word for us, Hebr. 9. d. 24.
and speak as it were by his mouth. For he is entered intoo the Sanctuary of
the heavens, too present himself there on our behalf, that it might he all
one, as if he bare us upon his shoulders, and both we and our prayers be
accepted and allowed of God, and we be sure that they vanish not away intoo
the air, but that God (...) them as well as if he were hard by us, according
to his promise made in the Psalm, which is, that he will be near at hand to all
such as call upon him in truth. Psalm. 145. d. 18.
Had this bin well considered, the wretched world had not troubled it self so
much, in seeking too He Saints and She Saints, too be their patrons and
aduocats. As for example, when the wretched Papists say, that they must have
the Uirgin Mary and S. Michaell for their intercessors, and other Saints, whom
they have deuyzed of their own brain: ho (say they) we be not worthy too
come in Gods presence. It is very true: but his unworthiness of ours ought
also to make us too seek the remedy which God has appointed for us, that is
wit, too repair too our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the way that leads us too
his father, according too this saying of his, I am the way, John. 14. ^. 6.
the truth and the life: and whatsouer ye ask of Go^ my father in my name,
shall be granted you. There our Lord Jesus promises, that whatsoever we ask of
God his father in his name, shall be done unto us: and thereby he warranteth
this doctrine. Therefore let us mark at a word, that in as much as our Lord
Jesus offers and puts forth himself too be the way too lead us unto God
his father, we must not go raunging up and down, but if we will needs seek
any other way, we shall but stray, and never be at any certeinetie to come
unto God. Furthermore, too the intent we may be contented with Jesus Christ
alone: let us bear well in mind how he says, that all our requests shall be
heard, if they be grounded upon his (...). Ye see then, that the thing which
Saint Paul meant too show (...) first place, is, that as often as we pray unto
God, we must assure (...) selves, that although we be unworthy too come
unto him, yet notwithstanding he ceasseth not too accept us, and our prayers
are a sacrifyze of good and acceptable sent unto him, when we acknowledge him
too be the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. John. 17 ^. ^1.
But yet must (...) also add, that which the Gospel shows us, that is too
wit, that (...) be members of his only sons body. For had we no alliance
(...) Jesus Christ, we should gain nothing by knowing him too be the son of
God. But forasmuch as we be made one with him, and he boutsafeth too
communicate all his goods unto us: therefore we may well call God our father.
And for that cause also did he say (...) disciples, I go my way too my God and
your God, too my father and your father. John. 20. c. 17.
Thus much concerning the first point.

And heerewithall we must mark well also, how S. Paul adds for a larger
declaration, that all kindred both in heaven and earth is named of him. In
saying so, first he shows that the Jews ought to be joined unto the
Gentyles, and that for as much as the Trumpet of the Gospel is blown, Gods
grace must be preached abroad every where, that men of all Countries and
Nations may call upon God: And thereby also it is showed us, that although we
come of the heathen which were erst cut of from the kingdom of God: Ephe. 2.
d. 19.
yet we be now made his household folk, and registered among the Citizens of
heaven, and God auoweth us too be so. And so ye see that by the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, an also because Jesus Christ is made our head, and has
received us for his body: ye see (I say) that all kindred is named of him,
because God voutsafeth too take us too him, yea even us poor wretched
creatures, which are not worthy too be of the number of the woormes of the
earth, yet notwithstanding he not only voutsafeth too admit us intoo the
company of the Jews, Exodus 19. a. 6.
which were a holy lineage, the chozen people of God, and his own inheritance:
1. Pet. 2. b. 9.
but also has taken us intoo the fellowship of the Angels of heaven. Apo^. 5.
c. 10.
For Saint Paul is not contented here with setting down a kindred among men,
too show that he meane^t of the faithful is matched with Abraham, David,
Peter, and Paul: but he shows, that he is matched even with the Angels (of
heaven too.) And soothly we may well have that digniti^^ seeing that Jesus
Christ himself voutsafeth too be our brother, and has knit himself to us in
the bond of brotherhood. Thus ye see how we should be guyded in praying
unto God, that we may coin unto him in fear and reverence, considering his
majesty which is infinite, and more^uer not too be abashed at it, ne too
turn away, but understand that inasmuch as God has voutsafed too take us for
his children, and our Lord Jesus Christ is ordained our mediator, too the
intent we (...) come unto him* we may come with full trust before (...) of
grace, and not stick too call God our father with open mouth, ^^cause he has
showed, Hebr. 4. d. 16.
that he takes us for his children, and we have Jesus Christ for our brother
by adoption, Romans 8. c. 15.
and we need not too doubt but that all the Angels of heaven acknowledge and
auow us for their brethren, when we come too God so joined too our Lord Jesus
Christ: like as on the contrary part also if we swerue from that mark, we
must needs be cast of, and the Angels must beecome our enemies and
adversaries, and set themselves against all the prayers that we can make.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too voutsafe too reform our life in such wise, as
we may show by our deeds, that we have not lost our time in going too his
school, and indeuer and enforce our selves too please him in all things: and
that forasmuch as we be not able too serve him always in perfection, he will
voutsafe too bear with our infirmities, and to bear them up in the mean
while, so as we may not cease too resort still unto him, seeing the need
and necessity wherewith we be pinched. And so let us all say, Almyghtie God
heavenly father. etc.

The.xx. Sermon, which is the fifth upon the third Chapter.
14. For the which thing I bovv my knees too the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ:

15. (Of whom all kindred is named in heaven and in earth.)

16. That according too the riches of his glory, he grant you too be
strengthened with power by his spirit in the invvard^ man.

17. And that Christ may dvvell in your hearts by faith.

18. And that ye may be rooted and grounded in Love, too the intent ye may
comprehend with all the Saints, what the wydenesse, and the length, and the
deepth, and the heyght,

19. And know the louingnesse of Christ, which passes all knowledge, that
ye may be filled with all fullness of God.


We have seen this morning by what entrance we must offer our prayers unto
God, if we intend too be heard at his hand, and too have full assurance that
our prayers shall be well lyked: namely that Jesus Christ be our guide and
advocate, and make intercession for us, so as we speak not but as it were by
his mouth. Now he has set it down for a rule in praying unto God, Math. ^. b.
9.
that we must call him father. And how dare men be so bold or presumptuous,
as to call God their father? Surely we can allege no right whereby too claim
any such dignity. For not even the Angels have it, but by means of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Then is it impossible for us too pray too God, as he commands
us, and after the manner which he teaches us in his word except Jesus Christ
be our advocate. For on whether side are the Angels akyn too us? shall the
Uirgin Mary be found to be our great Aunt or Graundmother? What are the
Apostles? Too be short, we must resort too our Lord Jesus Christ, too have
his spiritual kindred, whereby God avoweth us for his adopted children. And when
we once have that, we must no more doubt whether God will hear our prayers
or no, seeing we come not to him upon a foolish rashness, by presuming upon
our own natural reason or selflyking, but with obedience too his
commandment. Agein, we have his promis, which can never deceive us.
Contrarywyse all they that think too obtain favor at Gods hand by any other
mean, do but run astray, and have shet them selves out of the door already.
And therefore there is now none excuce, but that we must simply hold the way
which the Gospel shows us, to come unto God by, that is too wit, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, without adding of any other creature, as we see done
by the whole world. In deed they that pester up a throng of patrons and
advocates, (as they term them,) hope too be well welcome unto God. But by
what warrant? Who has promised them, that God will accept their devotion, and
all that they offer unto him? For it is not in us too appoint officers in
heaven. In a Court of Justice of the world, it might well be a matter of
course (as they term it,) and it might lie in the power of a Judge, too give
leave too whom he lists, too plead men's caces, too the intent there might be
no confuzion. But if we will make advocates at our own pleasure, and upon
our own head (in heaven:) it is all one as if we would rob God of his
authority and souereintie. Yea, and we must bethink us how S. Paul says,
that all our prayers and supplications, shall never be aught worth, but utterly
unprofitable and vain, if they be not conformable to Gods word, so as we take
our rule from thence. For how shall we call upon a God (says he) whom we
know not, at all adventure? And how shall we know after what manner we should
pray, and what style and speech we should use? Romans 10. c. 14.
We must come too hearing, not of the things that men shall bring us of their
own brain, but of the things that God commands us. So then, we must use
this modesty and sobriety, and not speak at randon when we pray unto God,
but simply obey his word. Yea and we know that prayer is the chief sacrifice
that God requires. For whereas it is said, that we must worship the only one
God: Deuteronomy. 6. c. 13. and. 10. d. 20 and Math 4 b. ^0.
it is not alonly with ceremonies, as with kneeling down before him. In deed
that is requisite: for it is meet that we should honor our God both with our
body and with our mind, because they be both his. Howbeit in worshipping him,
we must acknowledge truly that we hold all good things of him: and that do
we in praying too him. For we come thither as poor souls utterly destitute
of all things that are meet for us, knowing that without him we be worse
than miserable. It is said in the law, that in offering sacrifyze too God,
men must not do any thing at all of their own head, but follow his
ordinance, insomuch that it was forbidden them too take strange fire too use
upon the altar: whereby it was meant in a figure, Leuit. 10. a. 2.
that men should utterly forbear all their own devotions, when they intend
too offer any thing unto God. Likewise they were forbidden too offer sacrifyze
without salt, Leuit. 2. d. 13. and. Mark. 9. g. 48.
thereby too show that we ought too have a sure instruction, so as all the
offerings which we offer up too God, be sauced or poudered with his word:
for without that, there will be another taste nor savor in them. But seeing
that we now adays have the substance and truth of the figures of the Law:
whenever we offer our prayers and supplications unto God, or yield him
praise and thanks, let us do all by our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 13. c. 15.
as the Apostle too the Hebrews exhorts us. This serves too finish up the
matter that was begun this morning.

And we must call to mind what S. Paul told us this morning: namely, that in
praying unto God, we must not be given too our wordly affections, but seek
that God may be glorified, and that the residue may be but as an
appurtenaunce too it. That is the cause why he spoke purposely of the inward
man. For if God should give us the bridle too ask whatsoever came in our head,
or if we on our side should take such liberty: what a thing were it? If he
should give us al our own asking, it would turn to our ruin and confuzion.
For we have our lusts further out of square, than little children or sick folks.
And all of us generally do by experyence find in our selves, that we be fast
settled here bylowe, and would feign be hild continually in this world: we
hang our heads groueling downward, and cannot lift them up. So much the more
therefore does it stand us on hand, to mark well the thing that S. Paul shows
us in this sentence: namely that we ought too pray God to renew us, and too
strengthen us by his holy spirit, and too increace his gifts in us more and
more, that in passing through this world, we may always ame at that mark, and
be here but as wayfarers, too the end that our Lord may auowe us for his
children, and the heritage be kept for us, which he has promised us, and
bought so dearly for us by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now heereuppon S. Paul infers, that Jesus Christ may dwell in our hearts by
faith. Whereby he shows, that without Christ we shall never be made
partakers of any one drop of Gods grace. It is true, that God has the whole
fullness of life, light, righteousness, and all goodness in himself. But
where is the head welspring? It is utterly hidden, and we shall never be able
too come at it of our selves. And if we think too do any good by our own
inventions: it is but a deceyuing of our selves: we shall but dig pits
continually, yea even such pits as are full of holes, and have no springs of
water in them. Behold, Ierem. 3. c. 13.
the thing that men gain by following their own inventions, is, that they make
much trotting up and down, and are never the nearer. But our Lord Jesus Christ
is a fountain wherout we may well draw ou^ fill: yea and we need too make
no long windlasses too come unto him, because he offers himself, saying: All
you that are a thirst come unto me and drink, for whosoever drinks of the
living water that I give him, John. 7. c. 37.
shall have enough, both for himself, and also too make it flow (...) his
neighbors. Now then, for as much as our Lord Jesus Christ do^th so (...) and
bountifully offer us the benefits which we receive of God his father: therefore
S. Paul says, that he must be feign too dwell in our hearts, that we may be
reformed by Gods spirit. And let us mark, that Jesus Christ has the full
perfection of all goodness in him, not only in respect that he is the
everlasting son of God, but also even in his humane nature which he took of
us, and wherein he became our brother, has he also received all fullness,
according too this saying of the Prophet Esaias, that upon him shall rest the
spirit of wisdom, Esaias. 11. a. 2. 3. 4.
the spirit of understanding, the spirit of the fear of God, the spirit of
righteousness, and the spirit of strength. And too what end? Is it for his own
use? He had no need of it: but (as it is said in another Text) it was to the
end that he should distribute it unto all his members, and we all of us from
the most too the least draw of his fullness, not fearing that fountain can
dry up. Seeing then that our Lord Jesus Christ does by the Gospel daily
communicate and offer unto us the things that we want, and are needful for
our salvation: it is not for naught that S. Paul having showed that we can do
nothing furtherfoorth than we be vphild by Gods grace: adds, that God must
be feign too dwell in our hearts.

Now upon these words, we have too gather first of all, that God thinking it
not enough too remedy all our defaultes and misdooyngs, and all our wantes,
has voutsafed too give himself too us in the person of his only son. If it
were told us that we be restored too the former state from whence our father
Adam fell, that were very much, and therein we should have an excellent record
of the goodness of our God: but he has not only given us both heaven and
earth, that is too say, all things that are fit for us both in respect of this
flyghtfull life, and of the everlasting salvation of our fowls: but also he
has given himself unto us. And how is that? Even by giving us our Lord Jesus
Christ, as is said of him in the nyenth of the Prophet Esaias. And all the
Scripture also leads us thither, when it shows us how God gives himself
unto us, and how we possess him, and have full fruition of him. And
theruppon we must conclude with that which S. Paul says, in the eight too
the Romans, namely, that inasmuch as Gods son who has all excellence and
dignity in him, is given unto us? shall any thing else be withhild from us:
Seeing that God has granted himself so f^rfoorth unto us, as too have his
son to dwell in us: shloud we now doubt (of the obteyning) of the things
which ^ee knows to be for our profit and behoof? Think we that* they shall be
denied us? Ye see then that the thing which we have to remember in the first
place, is, that God has showed himself so bountiful toowards us, Psalm. 119.
57. and Psalm. 16. b. 5.
that he has not thought it enough too put us in possession of all his goods,
but has voutsafed too become our portion and cup himself, as the scripture
says, which uses such similitudes, to show, that as a man seeks his
ordinary repast, and is well appayd when he has meat and drink, because he
is refreshed by it: so must we resort unto God, too have the true food: and
we must hold our selves contented with him, when he gives himself so unto
us. And heerewithall let us ever bear in mind what I have said, namely, that
we need not too sore in the air, nor too make any far fetches for the
possessing of God, because he has knit himself too us in the person of of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in him we are made partakers both of him and all his
benefits. And S. Paul sets down the word faith, too show us how dear the
doctrine of the Gospel ought too be unto us. For it is not enough too have
said, that Jesus Christ dwells in us, because we will always have our
replies (and say) How may that be? For we cannot stye up so high. He is in
the glory of heaven, and we be crawling here in the world, subject to
miseries without number. Seeing then that there is so long a distance between
him and us: how may he dwell in us? Now S. Paul adds purposely, that the
Gospel is of such power, as too unite us to Gods son, at leastwyse so we
receive it by faith: for it behooves us too consider the contents and
substance of the things that are preached unto us, concerning the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ. It is not only said, that it was Gods will too have him
offered in sacrifyzce, too the intent we might be reconcyled, and all our
suns be wyped out, so as they might never come too account, and (too be
short,) that full amends might be made for all our sins by his death and
passion, and that he was rayzed agein for our justification, as S. Paul says
in the fifth too the Romans: not only those things are said of Jesus Christ,
but it is also said, that he is our head, as we have seen already, and that we
live of his own substance, as a tree draws his sap from his root, and that
as the head of a man sheadeth forth his power through all the body, so have
we a secret union, and such a one as is wonderful and far above the order
of nature, because that although Jesus Christ be in heaven, yet he fails not
too dwell in us. And soothly if the Sun can so cheer us up by his beams
without fleeting out of his place, insomuch as we see that every morning we
be as it were refreshed and comforted (by his ryzing,) yea and eue^ sick
folks feel some cheerlinesse by him though they lie a long in their beds:
seeing that a creature which is not only transitory and corruptible, but also
senseless and immovable of it self, has notwithstanding such force and
property given it of God, too rejoice and refreshe us after that fashion: what
shall our Lord Jesus Christ do, who is ordained too have the fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him, Coloss. 2. b. 9.
and to shed forth all the gracious gifts of God his father upon us, too
deal them unto every of us according too his measure, as is said of him in
the.xiiii. Chapter of Saint John? Then if we come too Christ with belief in
him, that is too say, if we receive the promises of the Gospel: let us assure
our selves that he will dwell in us, even by the means of faith. But hereof
we shall treat more fully in the fifth Chapter. Notwithstanding, this text
could not have bin understood, unless I had noted the thing that I have
briefly touched even now: that is too wit, that Jesus Christ dwells in us by
faith, and that our receiving of him as he offers (himself with) all his
grace by the Gospel, is not alonely too look upon him aloof, or too have it
told us, that he has offered himself in sacrifyze for us once for all: but
too the end he should dwell in us by the power of his holy spirit, and we be
knit unto him, and feel that he does truly execute the office of a head
toward us, so as we be members of his body, and live of his proper
substance. That then is the cause why S. Paul added the word Faith, when he
said, that Jesus Christ ought too dwell in us.

Nevertheless we must not go about too pluck Jesus Christ out of his
heavenly glory, too the intent too be the nearer unto him, as the
vnbeeleeuers do, who will needs dwell ever still beneathe, and transfigure God
after their own lyking. And we see what is done in the popedom. For there
is no God among them, but a sort of puppets which they call Images and
reme^berances. And moreover, because they see well that those are but dead
stocks and stones: they have made another God, whom they have shet up in a box,
and too him they resort as too a living God. In deed if they had the supper of
our Lord Jesus Christ according too his institution, in stead of the
abominable Mass which they have brought in on their own head, Jesus Christ
would be present among them: howbeeit not as they imagine. For in the Supper
we do truly receive the body and blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, too be fed
of him, and of his own substance, so as he performs the thing which he
speaks by his word, namely, John. ^. f. 35.
that he is our spiritual bread and drink, and has wherewith too satisfy us
too the full. Yea, but yet are the bread and the wine of the Supper, as pledges
that our Lord Jesus gives himself too us, to the end we should seek him
above after a spirit^all fashyon. So then, Saint Paul shows us, that if we
will have Jesus Christ joined unto us, we must not be given too our own
beastliness, but our hearts and mynds must be lift up aloft too seek him
above, as has bin declared alredie. Coloss. ^. a. 1.
It is true, that he comes down too us by his word, and by the power of his
holy spirit: but that is too the end that we should mount up thither too him.

Howbeeit there is one thing more which we ought too mark well in Saint Paul's
saying, that Christ must dwell in our hearts. For many men have him in their
mouth, yea and also in their brain, as they understand him, and they think
themselves well discharged, when they can babble of him: but in the mean while
there is no lively root in them. Then is it not enough for us to have some
rouing knowledge of Christ, or too gaze at him in the air, as they say, and
too be able too talk of him with full mouth: but he must have his seat in our
hearts within, so as we be knit too him unfeignedly, and with a true affection.
That is the means for us to be made parttakers of Gods spirit.

And too be short, we may see here, that all such as ween too obtain aught
at Gods hand but by the mean of our lord Jesus Christ, do but rau^ge and
wander in vain, and shall always find themselves empty: insomuch that when
they think themselves too be full fed, it shall be but with wynd, that is too
say, with vain and tryfling imaginations, as I told you this morning. They
therefore which deuyze patrones of their own head, and surmyze that God will
favor them for it, and in the mean while let Jesus Christ alone: must
understand, that they be so far of from obteyning their requests, that God
does rather abhore them, insomuch that when they once swerve from the
ankerhold which is set forth for us in the scripture, (that is too wit, from
having our Lord Jesus Christ for their lodesman) the Angels of heaven must
needs forsake them, and the Saints also, to whom they behighted themselves,
must needs deny them, yea and al of them must set themselves against them as
adversary parties. For there is no means for us too be matched with the
Angels, Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, till we have true concord with them.
And how shall we have that? By faith: that is too say, according too the pure
doctrine of the Gospel. Not that it is enough for us too have our ears beaten
with it: but that we must receive the things that God promises us there, so
as we abhor all that ever Satan can set before us, and have none other guide
than only our Lord Jesus Christ, who has told us, that he is the light of the
world, John. 8. b. 12.
and that whosoever walks in him, cannot stray. But by the way we must
search and examine our selves narrowly, that we take not a vain cloak under
the name of Jesus Christ, as we see many do now adays, which protest
themselves to be Gospellers. And even among our selves, what a number are
there which will show signs great enough, that they be willing too follow
Gods word? But they think too discharge themselves with petie tryfles: and
when they have once given ear (too the doctrine) and spoken a few good words:
then, too their seeming, God is hyghly bound unto them. But here it is showed
us, that we have none acquayntance at all with him, until Jesus Christ dwell
in our hearts. And that is the very mean whereby too be filled with his
benefits, and too have his holy spirit dwelling and reigning in us. For
unless we fear God, and walk in his obedience, so as we behave our selves
according too his will, and all our wits and desires ame thitherward: it is a
token that we live after the flesh, Gala. 5. c. 16.
as Saint Paul says too the Galathians. Therefore we must show by our
outward fruits, that we be truly joined too Jesus Christ, Romans 8. a. 5.
and that he has made us partakers of his holy spirit.

Now hereuppon Saint Paul adds further, that we must be rooted and
grounded in charity. This word Charity or love, may be taken as well for
the love that God bears us, as for the mutual love which we ought to bear
one toward another. But the very true and native sense of Saint Paul here,
is, that he meant too have us knit toogither. For as he spoke heeretoofore of
Gods free love toward us, so now he shows how faith imports that we
should have brotherly love one toward another. And the holy Scripture brings
us always to that point: insomuch that when there is any speaking of the full
perfection of good life: faith goes before, and then comes Charity next unto
it. For the end that we must begin at, is the utter abacing of our selves, too
the end we may seek all our welfare at Gods hand, and that our seeking of it
there, may be, first too acknowledge that he gives us all things in the
person of his only son: and secondly, too call upon him too settle our
faith in him, too flee wholly for refuge too his mercy, and after as every man
feels himfelf bound unto him, (as all of us are exceedingly,) so to
acknowledge by our thanksgiving, that he is our righteousness, our holiness, our
victory, our joy, our glory, and our happiness, that we may perform the
thing which is said in Jeremy, whosoever glories, let him glory in the Lord,
Iere. ^. f. 24.
because it is he that woorketh ryghtuousnesse, Justice, and mercy. Ye see
then that we must rest wholly upon our God, or else all the vertuousnesse
which we seem too have before men, shall be but filth and dung. Now then, have
we faith? Charity must be matched with it, and we must live euenly and
vpryghtly one with another, and every of us acknowledge thus, I was not created
for my self, nor to seek mine own private benefyte and commodity, but for the
benefit of my neighbors also. And therefore let us absteyne from al guile,
wrong, outrage, and malice, and indeuer to serve each others turn, according
too our ability. That is the perfection of good life.

Saint Paul having spoken alredie of faith, adds now, that we must also be
grounded in Charity: as if he should say, we must not have alonly some fit
(or pang of love) as many men have: but there must be a steadfastness and
even holding on in it all our life long. For a thing may give a great blaze,
and yet quayle anon after. Behold, a huge building may be overthrown with one
blast of wynd, if it be not set upon a sure foundaton. Also a man may set up a
great tree: but if the root be cut asunder, what will come of it? It must
needs fall down out of hand, or else if it have some hold a the one end for
a time, it must needs wither at the heat of the Sun. Even so is it with us,
when we have a great zeal which is not well rooted in our hearts: for it
wilbee but as a mask or a gay show before men. That is the cause why Saint
Paul exhorts us purposely too be grounded in charity, too the intent too
correct the vice of loving, by startes or fits (as they say) which is too
common a thing. Nevertheless, it were a fondness too conclu^^ therefore, that
our salvation were grounded upon our good works. For here he treats not
of the cause of our salvation, but ^nly how we ought too rule our life. Agein,
we know there is but one only foundation of the Church, as S. Paul says
in the third chapter of the second Epistle too Cori^thians, and as we have
seen alredie in this selfsame Epistle, and specially as Jesus Christ himself
declares in the sixteenth chapter of Saint Matthew. And which is that
foundation? It is Jesus Christ, and no man can lay any other than that which
the Prophets and Apostles have laid, and we must hold our selves too it at
this day, and even unto the worlds end. And yet may we not cease too be
rooted in love by means of our Lord Jesus Christ. When men demand what is the
cause of our salvation, by what mean we be brought into his favor, and how
we may come unto him, and call upon him with full trust: Coloss. 2. b. 9.
(we must answer) it is, because our Lord Jesus Christ is given us, and it
is he in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells. Now we be yet far of
from such perfection: Howbeit, forasmuch as we be grounded upon our Lord
Jesus Christ, we have a steadynesse that continues all our life. So then let
us mark, that Saint Paul exhorts us here too true steadfastness, too the
intent we should never be weery of well doing, though we have never so many
occasions too thrust us aside. For even such as are best minded (too see too)
do nevertheless take pritch at it, when men show themselves unkind toward
them: and when they consider, that for their well doing men will requite them
with all evil, they be sore grieved at it, and become quite out of heart. And
that is a cause why so few continue in the fear of God, and walk as they
ought too do: for it seems too them, that they have lost their labor in
doing well. Agein, there follows this inconvenience also, that the wicked take
occasion too rush out so much more intoo all manner of harmfulnesse: so that if
a man live in simplicity, and bear the wrongs patiently that are done unto
him: all men will be doing with him, and every man would eat him up, as if
he were a sheep among an hundred Woolues. Such as are easily entreated too
give of their goods too their neighbors, seem too be set out too the
spoil, and every man will be catching all that ever he can from them. When men
see so lea^de dealings in the world, it makes every man too take out his own
share, as men say. But contrariwise it is told us here, that if we be rooted
and grounded in charity, although men thrust us aside, and discorage us by
their unthankfulness: yet will we not cease too hold out in well doing,
because we have a good and deep root.

And S. Paul having spoken so of the good will that we ought (...) bear
toward our neighbors, returns too his matter of faith. And surely the
cheef point for us, is too know that God auoweth us for his children, and that
our sins are forgiven us, so as he takes us for ryghtuous. If we have not
that, how can we find any sweetness in serving and honoring of him? And how or
with what courage can we pray to him? What praise can we offer to him? Too be
short, it stands us on hand too be certified of the infinite good that is
done us by our Lord Jesus Christ, too the end we may be ravished in love
with our God, and inflamed with a right zeal to obey him, and hold our selves
short under his awe, too honor him with all our thoughts, with all our
affections, and with all our hearts. The cause then why S. Paul contineweth
this matter, is to prynt it in the minds of the faithful, where their
salvation lies, and how they may be sure of it. And so much the more do we
see what the wretchedness of the world is. For there is none other assurance,
than the calling upon God on this groundworke, so as a man be lifted up by
faith too offer himself into his presence. But on the contrary part, we see how
men have gone too work. And in deed they have not bin ashamed in the
popedom, too say, that we ought too be always doubtful of our salvation,
and that we cannot have a sure belief of it. And it is not the ignorant sort
which say so: but all the doctors of their Sinagoges hold it for an article of
their faith, that we ought too be always in a mamering and doubtful. And
that is even as much as too cast men up at adventure unto Satan. So much the
more therefore behooves it us too bear well in mind the doctrine that is
contained here, that is to wit, that when we once know the love that God
bears us in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in such wise as he has witnessed it
too us by his death and passion, and does still daily warrant it by his
Gospel: we have the perfect knowledge, and such as shall give us full
happiness. And that is the cause why he says, too the end ye may learn
with all the Sayncts, what his heyght, and depth, and wydnesse, and thickness
is: that ye may know all this, says he. How now? Meant S. Paul too make us
Carpenters or Masons, that he speaks here as of the heygth of a buylding?
Intendes he to teach us the science of Masourie, that he speaks thus of
wydenesse? No: but he opens his own meaning by and by, saying: It is the
Love that has bin shevved us in Jesus Christ. Therefore when we once know how
well God loves us, and how inestimable the mercy is, whereof he has given us
so good a pledge, in the person of his only son: we have all that can be,
says he. Let us enforce all our wits both upward and downward, let us stye
above the clouds, let us pierce too the Center of the earth, let us go down
too the bottoms of the deepes, and let us rake over sea and land, yet shall
there be nothing but vanity and leazing. When we have ended all our
wyndlasses, surely weee may peradventure discourse like folk that are very
subtle, and have learned the understanding of many things: but yet shall there
be no substance in us. But when we once know that God is our father in Jesus
Christ, and how that comes too pass, and by what means we obtain so
great a benefyte: that is the thing (says he) whertoo we must hold us. For
it is the true measure of our faith, they be the bonds of it, and whosoever
couers too know more, does but go astray, as though he would wilfully enter
intoo a maze, wheroutof he could never wynd himself agein. Wherefore let us hold
our selves contented with Jesus Christ as he is, and as he utters himself by
his Gospel, and then shall we be filled full, says S. Paul. With what
filling? Even with the fullness of God, says he. As if he should say,
Wretched folk as we be, there is none of us but he coueteth knowledge, and
it is a natural desire which burns all men. Insomuch that we shall see many
which consume all their goods, and spare another their bodies nor their lives.
And what too do? Too get knowledge. We shall see othersome trot from place
too place. And what too do? Too get knowledge. All men then have that desire,
some more, and some less, and there is not so ignorant a person, which would
not feign come too knowledge. Now then, seeing we be all inclyned thertoo of
nature: let us learn which is the true knowledge. In deed there are sciences
which are behoofefull too pass this world withal, and requisite it is that
men should have arts and trades, and also the liberal sciences, as they be
termed. All these are good, if they be referred too their dew ends. But yet
notwithstanding we must come too the Science of Sciences: for that is it which
will never fail. For when a man shall have trotted all the earth over, (about
other Sciences,) what profyt^ will come of it? It will be but vanity, as I
said before. Wherefore let us not seek any thing out of Jesus Christ, but let
us rest wholly there, and not swerve any whit at all from him.

And here we see first of all, the thing that I have touched already
heeretoofore: namely, that if we knew well what our Lord Jesus Christ is, we
would easly give over all other things, according as it is said in the third
too the Philippians, Phil. 3. b. 8.
that S. Paul counted all his former high esteemed things as loss and dung,
to the end he might hold himself too Jesus Christ, and that he went forewarde
therein all the time of his life, yea and did as it were hold his arms
stretched out too catch it, as he himself protests. Ye see then, that the
thing which we have too mark here, is, that when we once know that Jesus
Christ, and the benefits that he brings us, namely that we may resort too
God in his name with full trust: we shall no more have our mynds so vexed with
unquietness, but we shall stand fast and stedy in pure simplicity of the
Gospel. Howbeit, for the better understanding hereof, let us see how men
speak of our Lord Jesus Christ. In deed they will call him the son of God,
and they will take him for their Redeemer: but in the mean while they will make
a doale of his offices, and part them here and there as a pray. The holy
Scripture calls him the only Priest, because it belongs alonly unto him
too reconcyle us unto God. And how many do now adays take that upon them?
Even as many Moonks, Freers, Mass Priests, and Hipocrites as be in the world:
for they sell their prayers, as though Jesus Christ had resigned his place unto
them. And under pretense thereof, they devour all the wealth of the world, and
in the mean while Jesus Christ is thrust a great way of. Agein, it is said,
that by the one sacrifize which he offered once for all, he has gotten us
grace and salvation, yea even for ever, so that his death and passion appeaseth
Gods wrath, because that thereby we have full righteousness. But yet for all
this, the Mass is brought in, as though the sacrifize that Jesus Christ
offered in his own person, were but a bare figure, and that the thing which
the Papists have invented, were the only mean (as they say) too purchase
favor at Gods hand. For the whoremaster goes thither too pay his ransom: so
does the drunkard, the wicked swearer, the looce liver, the pillar and poller,
the quareller, the glutton, the eater up of his neighbor: all these resort too
the Mass for their ransom, and bear them selves on hand, that God is well
appayd.

And in the mean while what becomes of the sacrifize of Jesus Christ? Tush,
that must be thrust under foot. Agein, it is said, that Jesus Christ is our
only Advocate, which makes intercession for us unto God his father. Yet
notwithstanding, in the Popedom there are whole warreins and Swarms of
Patrons, which every man has forged of his own brain. And they be not
contented alonly with the Apostles and Martirs: but they must also have their
S. Christopher, and their S. Catherin, which are night Ghosts that were never
borne in the world: but look whatsoever the devil did put in their heads, ^.
Cor. 1. d. 30.
it was received. Agein, it is said, that Jesus Christ is our righteousness.
But what for that? Yet nevertheless every man takes upon him too make
atonement with God by his own woorks. And therevppon sprang the ground work
of merits and of all the rest. Agein, John. 14. a. 6.
it is said that Jesus Christ is our loadestarre, and the way whereby we must
come too God his father, and finally too everlasting salvation: and yet will
they needs have whatsoever comes in their own imagination. O (say they) me
thinks this is good, and seeing I do it of a good intent, why should not God
take it in good worth? Thus they make God a pretty fellow to stoop at their
appointment, and as a Jack to creep under their sleeue (at their pleasure.)
See how proud men are, when they once turn away from Gods pure truth unto
their own foolish inventions, so as there is not so pure and sound a thing,
which they corrupt not. What is then the cause that all things have bin turned
vpside down in Popery? It is for that they knew not Jesus Christ for such a
one as he is set forth in the Gospel, but only have made, I wot not what, a
dead and vnauaylable thing of him, and kept no more but the bare name and
titles of him.

Then is it not enough for us to say, we believe in Jesus Christ, and that we
take him for our redeemer: but we must also know to wha^ purpose he is sent
us of God his father, and what benef^ts he has brought us. When we once
know all this: then shall we be filled with him. We shall not need to go
bibbling here and there, nor to lap or lick up mudde and stinking water one
where or other, for want of meat ad drink that is fit for us. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has told us, that we shall find both meat and drink in him, so as
we may thoroughly satisfye our selves both with meat and drink that is good
and wholesome for the nurrishme^t of our souls. So much the more therefore
behooves it us to go thither: and when we read the holy scripture, let the
mark that we look at, be always too know what the grace of God is which he
has showed us in the person of his only son: and when we once know it, we
shall have profited very well in Gods (...), and may well cast away all other
things as filth and poison. In deed (...) doctrines will have some savor at
the first sight, for we see (...) do always follow that which Saint Paul
speaks in the second too the Colossians, that is to wit, that because their
dreams and dotages have some show of wisdom, Coloss. 2. d. 23.
therefore they give themselves unto them. But we must understand that there is
no true food, but that which God gives us, and that it is his will to provide
us of all things which he knows too be needful for us. Will we then be
filled without him? Think we, that if we seek too the Uirgin marie, and call
her the moother of grace (after the manner of the papists, which do commonly
give her that title): we shall there find the things that we want: Surely it
is all one as if we would go seek food, and snatch here a bit and there a bit
by morsels and gobbets. But Jesus Christ says, Come unto me, and ye shall find
all that you have need of: according whereunto, it is said, that all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are inclozed in him. Coloss. ^. a. 3.
The^ if we once know the love that God his father has showed us in his
person: we shall have the fullness of all wisdom, we shall no more need too
trot here and there, we shall no more need too go up nor down, nor far,
nor wide: for we shall have wholly whatsoever is good and requisite for our
welfare. When we hear this, must it not needs be, that we be as good as
bewitched, if we believe not God, too rest wholly upon his sayings, without
flinging abroad after that fashyon, and without making of so many wyndlasss to
trubble and tire our selves too no purpose? And that it is which is meant in the
Prophet Esaias, where he says, Go tread in your own ways: and when ye have
compassed and gone about both heaven and earth, Esai. 66. a. 3.
what shall it boot ye? Then if we be so blind as too stray out here and
there, and cannot keep the way that is showed us, but will needs go dig pits
at our own pleasure, Ierem. 8. c. 13.
and forsake the spring of living water, which God has set before our eyes: it
is good reason that we should be both ahungered and athirst, and ly broyling
in our own foolish lusts, to trot to and fro like women with child, which long
too eat char Coals, and had lever drink the water of some puddle, tha^ the
water of a fair clear spring. If we fall too gadding in that manner after
Satan, and be ^gre of his illuzions and trumperie, and cannot content our
selves with the good that our Lord sets before us: must it not needs be,
that we be worse than bewitched, and that the devil has made us stark beasts?
So then, let us understand first of all, that all things which men can bring us
of their own behalf, are but tryfles or rather illuzions of Satan. And
secondly, that when the ^ori^ture ^etteth Jesus Christ before us, it is not for
naught told us, that we must rest wholly upon him, and hold us too him, when
we be come thither, because he has the fullness of all goodness in him, and
therefore we need not too be haled too and fro, or too take too great pain
in seeking the things that are needful for us, nor finally too wander any more
abroad, but to stick wholly unto him, as too our perfect and souere in
blissfulness.

Thirdly, we must consider in Jesus Christ, the infinite grace that is brought
us, and imparted too us by his means. And Saint Paul in saying here the
Love, sends us too the wellspring. For though we knew all Gods secrets, and
were privy too the rest of his will: what were it, till we were persuaded of
the love that he bears us? For we see that when any man speaks of God too
the unbelievers, it does so grieve them, that they wot not where too become,
and it is but a matter of heaviness too them, because they conceive nothing
but rigor in him. But when his grace and fatherly goodness is uttered unto
us, as he has showed it in our Lord Jesus Christ: then come we boldly unto
him, and we be no more afraid of his seat, but have familiar access to it:
and therein he does us an inestimable good turn, such a one as surmounteth all
that ever we can wish in this world, according as S. Paul sets us it down
here. And so ye see what this saying, the Love of God, imports. And he
says purposely, in Jesus Christ, because that without him we could not be
beloved of God. For let Jesus Christ be (as ye would say) let alone, and let
us put the case that we thought upon God, and that we did apply all our wits
theraboutes, and therwithall that we bethought us of our selves also: what
were all this? We shall find such an incomprehensible majesty in God, as
shall swallowe us up like a deep gulf. Agein, his Justice is so perfect, as it
wilbee much less possible for us to stand before it, than for Snow to abide
against the Sun. Now when we come too our selves, we must needs see a sea
of all misery before us, that is to wit, that our senses are blind, that we
be utterly unfurnished of all vertew, that we be given too all evil, that
we be hild down under the thraldom of sin, and that nothing in us (no not
even of the excellentest things that we think our selves too have) which is
not loathsome before God. Therefore when we once know these two things, that is
too wit, when we have once conceived a terror of Gods majesty, and be
drowned in despair at the sight of our selves, then let us afterward go seek
all the means that can be, and let us call the Angels too help, and they will
come never the nearer us for all that. Let us take the He saints and She
saints, and by what title can they belong too us? Nay rather we be separated
from them. And agein, will God who is the fountain of all pureness receive
us, us (I say) which are so wretched creatures? Think we that he will
intermeddle himself with our filth and uncleanness? No: but contrariwyse he
must needs abhor us. So then, it is not without cause that Saint Paul
having spoken here expressly of Gods Love, to the intent we might know that he
does justly hate us, so long as he beholds us in our own natural state:
adds immediately, that the same love is grounded upon the bludshed of our Lord
Jesus Christ, too the end that all our spots should be scoured away thereby,
and we be so clenzed, as we might not bring any thing hensfoorth before
God, which might displease him

And by that means are we discharged and quit of all our dettes, because he
has yielded perfect obedience. Lo how our stubbornness is done away, and
shall never come too account, because he offered himself in sacrifice for us.
Lo how we be set free from all thraldom, because he has overcome both the
devil and death, and sin, too our benefit. Lo how we at this day enjoy his
victory, and make our tryumphe of it. And so we see briefly, how God has
loved us in Jesus Christ. Agein, when we know this, we must understand also,
that we must not make long fetches any more, ne trubble our selves in vain, in
stying upward by our fond speculations, or in going downward by our
fantastical imaginations, and in the mean while let Jesus Christ alone, as
though he were too far of from us. For he comes near us, yea he dwells
in us, he will have us knit ^ntoo him, so as we should be his body, and
lively members of his own substance. Since it is so, let us learn to hold our
selves in such wise unto him, as nothing may turn us from him. And although
we may be tempted by our own fancies, too shrink away from him: yet let us
cut of all such occasion, and get the upper hand by faith. And when we have so
done, let us understand, that God will still show himself a loving, and
kindharted father toward us, and that Jesus Christ also will do the dewtie
of a shepherd toward us, if we harken too his voice, and rest wholly upon
him, not doubting but that he will preserve us, so as we shallbee safe under
his protection, as he himself protests, saying, that he will receive all that
are given him of God his father, John. 7. d. 37.
and so keep them when he has received them, as none of them shall perish,
but he will rayze him up agein, at the last day.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us perceive them more and
more, that our miseries may drive us to seek the good things that he offers
us, even with true singleness of faith, and that we may not wander here and
there, in our own fond speculations and gazes, but abide so settled upon his
word, as it may be our only leaning stock, and take such root in our hearts,
as it may not only make us too walk in all pureness before him, and too ^eeke
his mercy in the person of his only son, but also make us to live uprightly,
and indifferently one with another, and that we may so profit therein, as we
may abhor all the abuses of the world, assuring our selves that seeing we
have Jesus Christ for our guide, we cannot fail to come thither, as he is
ascended already in our behalf, that is too wit, too the everlasting heritage
which he has purchased for us, according as it is his will, that we being
made his fellowheires, should in the end come too the same perfection wherintoo
he is gone before us. That it may please him too grant this grace, not only
too us, but also to all people. etc.

The.xxi. Sermon, which is the sixth upon the third Chapter, and the first
upon the fourth.
20. Now unto him that is able too do most abundantly above all things that
we ask or think, according too the power that works in us,

21. Be praise in the Church through Jesus Christ throughout all generations
for ever more. Amen.

The fourth Chapter. 1. I therefore which am a prisoner in our Lord, vvarne
you too vvalkeas becomes you in the calling vvhervvith ye be called.


2. With all lovvelinesse and meekness, with patience. etc.

WHen God has done us never so much good, although we feel our selves
beholden unto him, and bound too yield him his dew praise: yet can we not
discharge our selves of our dewtie with a free heart, except we hope that he
will hold on still hereafter, and show himself the same too the end, which
we have known him too be heretoofore. Now, without faith we cannot hope, and
so is it impossible that God should have his dew praise at men's hands. Put the
case we had found Gods help at our need, and whatsoever we could wish: and
in the mean while we think it was but a sodein brayd which is vanished away
out of hand, and that hensfoorth we may look for no more at his hand, and
that it shall be in vain for us too require it: it is certain, that we would
come no more at him, because we should be pinched and pressed with heaviness
and grief. Therefore, that we may hold out in praising Gods name, we must
cupple these two things toogither: that is too wit, that on the one side we
bethink us of the good that we have received of him, and that on the other
side we hope still that he will always be steadfast and constant in his
purpose unto the end, and never cease to do us good. And that is the order
which S. Paul keeps here, saying, Praise and glory be yielded unto God.
And how? unto him (says he) which is able too do all things, beyond our
asking, yea and beyond our thinking too. Now it is certain, that here Saint
Paul had an eye back too that which we have seen before, which is, that God
did then utter the infinite riches of his goodness, when he voutsafed too have
the Gospel (which is the message of salvation) published throughout the world.
Nevertheless, he quickens up the faithful, to discharge themselves
cheerfully, by telling them that they must not mistrust that God will
withdraw his hand, as though his showing of himself liberal toward them,
had bin but for once and away. His meaning then is, that God will go through
with his work, and therefore that we may give our selves too the praising of
his name without any stop, as well in respect of the good that we have
received already, as upon belief that he will hold on without ever failing
us. That is the effect of the matter which we have too gather upon this
streyne.

Now his saying is, Let glory be yielded to God in the Church: whereby he
shows, that it is not enough that every of us do privately acknowledge the
benefits that God has bestowed upon him: but that we must also join
toogither in that mind. For if the body be well at ease, surely no member will
be so addicted too it self, but that it will have regard of all the rest. Now
then, when as God has made his Church too prosper, so as the number thereof is
multiplied, and it is also increaced in spiritual gifts: not only they that
have received those benefits, must enforce themselves too praise God: but also
all the rest of the body, for so much as it becomes us too be knit together
with the holy bond, whereof S. Paul will speak hereafter. That then is the
cause why he speaks purposely of the Church: as if he should say, that seeing
God does so utter his goodness, every man ought too be inflamed too glorify
him, because that look whatsoever he does too our neighbors, we ought too
take it as done too our selves. And verily he had an eye here too that which
might hinder the praising of God with one true consent. For the Jews had
always a certain disdeyne against the Gentiles, because they thought it was
meet that themselves should keep still the birthryght, and that they had
wrong, if any of those were made equal with them, which had bin utterly shaken
of before. And likewise the Gentyles perceiving the Jews too be given too
foolish bragging of the law, which had taken an end, might have despyzed them
on the other side. Saint Paul therefore tells them here, that inasmuch as
God had called them as brethren too the heritaunce of salvation, it became them
too agree in such wise in the praising of him, as his praise might sound
euerywhere.

And he says, Let prayze be yielded too God, yea even for evermore, from
world too world, and by Jesus Christ. For So Much as Saint Paul has treated
hertoofore of the grace that served to guide the faithful too the kingdom of
heaven: therefore does he of good right say, that men must not only praise God
for once and away, but also that there is cause too continewe the same, not the
life of one man but throughout all ages. Yea and moreover S. Paul meant to do
us too understand, that the Church should be preserved for^ ever, and that
there should always remain some seed of it in the world, so as the record of
sauation should never be frutelesse, but there should be some people still
too be gathered toogither, which should be a looking glass, wherein too
behold the inestimable mercy which our God shows us in our Lord Jesus
Christ. So then, we see Saint Paul's meaning, whereby we ought too be assured,
that although Satan practyze all that is possible, too wype away the
remembering of God, and too make havoc in the Church, as the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ may be as good as defaced: yet will God overcome all by his
power, so as the Church shall continue still, and the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ shall be auaylable, notwithstanding the cruelty of
Tyrants, and the practyzes of household enemies, and of such as would
overthrow the whole buylding. And that also is the cause why Saint Paul
sets us down the name of Jesus Christ. It is true, that we cannot yield
God thanks but by that mean: for it is certain that we should not be meet
too receive one drop of good, but by the mean of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Coloss. ^. c. 21.
because we be enemies too God by nature. Insomuch that although he be
freeharted even too the unbelievers: yet shall the same turn too their greater
condemnation, so that they be dubble accursed, in being partakers of Gods
blissynges: Titus. 1. c. 15.
for too him that is unclean, all things are unclean, as says Saint Paul in
an other place. And therefore we can never give God thanks but in the name of
Jesus Christ, by whom we rereyue all good things. Howbeit, Saint Paul's
meaning was too do us too understand in this Text, that Gods once showing of
him self too be a father too all men in the person of his only son, by
ordeinyng him too make the atonement, was too last for ever, and too continue
world without end, insomuch that we must assure our selves (as I said before)
that God will mainteyne his truth in this world, and by that means have
always some flock gathered unto him, among whom his name shall be called upon.

But let us come now too the second part. He shows that it is not enough for
us too have known Gods goodness by experience for the time past: unless we
be strengthened in such hope by it, as we doubt not but that God will show
himself merciful toowards us ever after. And that is the cause why he says,
Too him that is able too do al things exceeding abundantly, above our asking
or thinking. Now we see here how S. Paul warns us, that if God have used
great mercifulness toward us heeretoofore, we must not doubt of his
continuing of the same, because he is not like mortal men, which be fickle
minded: another must we be afraid that his fountain will dry, when he shall
have bestowed great benefits upon us already. Why so? for he has such store
of them, that the more we take to our contentation, the greater abundaunce
has he still. We see then the mean too dispoze our selves too acknowledge
the good that God has done us, at leastwyse too honor him for them, is too
be always fully resolved and persuaded that we shall ever find him a father,
because he has promised so too be.

And whereas he speaks of Gods power or might: we must not imagine it too be
an idle power, as the worldlings do. They will grant well enough that God is
almyghtie: but yet in the mean while they trust never the more in him. Too
their seeming he takes his rest in heaven, or else he dispozeth not things in
this world, but (at starts) when he bethinks himself of them. But contrariwyse,
when God speaks unto us of his power, it is, too the end we should make it
our sheeld against all the distresses, hindrances, and lets, which the devil
casts before our eyes, too make us distrust Gods promises. Like as when it is
said, that Abraham believed that God is almighty: it was not generally and
confuzedly, but with an applying of Gods infinite power too the thing that had
bin promised him: which was, that in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blissed. Abraham looking upon himself, saw he was a man as fast
decaying as might be: He drooped, and (as ye would say) dragged his wings
after him: too be short, he was hard at deaths door: His wife had bin
barrein all her life long: she was past the age of teeming any more, insomuch
that the thing which was told him by Gods own mouth, seemed utterly impossible.
And why is it that Abraham does nevertheless believe assuredly, Romans 4. a. 3.
that God will keep promis with him? It is, because he had an eye too his
infinite power, which is able too overcome all lets and hindrances. We see
then how Abraham applied Gods power too his own behoof, assuring himself, that
Gods truth and his power are things inseparable. ^. Tim. 1. c. ^2.
After that manner also does S. Paul say, that he whom he has put in trust
with his gage, is myghtie. For he saw himself too be a poor and frail
creature, he saw how he was hunted at all hands, (he saw) that he was shaken
of and despyzed, (he saw) how the doctrine that he bare abroad, was hated and
abhorred, he saw how his life hung as by a threede, and he had such a number
of trubbles, as were able too ouerwhelm him, yea and finally too confound him
and dispatch him quyte. And how overcame he all this, and abode invincible, yea
and even tryumphed over them, being in prison, and seeing himself at deaths
door? How could he have such victory against so many temptations and
incounters? It was by knowing that God was the keeper of his soul, whereupon he
conceived his infinite power, which is able too perform all that he
appoynteth. Ye see then, that Saint Paul imagined not a power in the air,
but knew that God wrought so in him, as he should never fall but upon his
feet (as men say.) And why? For he had promis of it. Wherefore let us learn to
put this lesson as well in ure, as it is common in the scripture. The repeting
thereof so often is not for naught. For we see the frowardness that is in our
selves, insomuch that although God have promised too keep us, yet if never so
little a blast of wynd come upon us, we be dismayed by and by. And howso?
Surely if we yielded God the honor that he deserves, and acknowledge him
too be almighty (in deed:) we should boldly defye all that seems too be
against us. And why? For if God be on our side, who shall be against us, says
Saint Paul? Romans 8. c. 30.
And we see also how David defyeth, both all his enemies, and also death,
saying: though I should walk in the shadow of death, and within the grave:
Psalm. 2^. a. 4.
yet should I be safe, because God is my shepherd, and has his sheephooke too
guide me withal. And in another place he says agein. Psalm. 3. a. 7.
Though I were beset round about with a million of enemies, yet should I not
shrink. And why? for God is with me. Were we then as well persuaded of Gods
almyghtinesse, as we confess it with our mouth: surely we should not be so
soon dismayed, another should our faith be shaken at every brunt. So then let
us conclude, that inasmuch as we be so weak, and every thing of nothing,
will scare us out of our wits: there is nothing but hypocrisy in us, and our
confessing that God is almighty, comes not from our heart. So much the more
therefore behooves it us too put this lesson in ure, and too exercyze it night
and day, that we may taste it thoroughly. And that is the cause why it is so
often mentioned unto us, for we take it not too be a matter of so great
importance. But when our Lord does so often tell us, that he has al things in
his hand, that he disposes of his creatures (as he lists himself), and that
nothing is able too let his determination, nor the performance of the things
that he has promised: it is too the end that we should yield unto his
promises, that which they behyght us: that is too say, whenever we shall
seem too be at the point of undoing, and the devil shall give us so whole
skirmishes, as we shall see no way too escape, nor any end of our distresses:
let us think thus with our selves, who is he that has spoken it? Who is he
that has promised too be our defender? Is it not he that is almyghtie? Could
not he with one blast blow away all that the devil practizeth? Though all the
world were against us, what could it do, so our Lord voutsafed too maynteyne
our part? After that manner must we advance Gods power above the whole world,
that we may rest upon his promises. For (as I have said alredye) Gods word,
and the power of bringing too pass the things contained therein, are things
inseperable. And we blaspheme God, as often as we be in dout and perplexity,
whether he be able too perform his defending of us or no. For since he has
promised it: out of all doubt he will perform it, or else should his power
be shortened, which is impossible. And so ye see why Saint Paul has spoken
here of Gods power. And that also is the cause why the prophets, in speaking
of the succor which God has always in readiness, too reskew the faithful
withal from death, when they be plundged in it, E^ay. 45. ^. 18.
have commonly said, Is it not the God which has made both heaven and earth?
This should seem too be far fet. For the case is, that I am in some
trubble, and have none other refuge, but only Gods pitying of me, whereof I
seek too be assured: and he tells me, I have created heaven and earth. He
seems too send me very far, and too make me leap out of Gods blissing
intoo the warm sun. But Gods telling of us that he created heaven and earth,
is too do us too understand, that it belonges too him also too rule his
creatures, that he has a care of us as of his children, that there is not any
thing above or beneath, which is not subject too him, and that he turns all
things round about, and too and fro as he lists. Says he so? Then must we
out of hand apply it too our benefyte, so as we doubt not but that his power
has such pre-eminence, as he is well able too root out whatsoever seems too
be against us. And so ye see how ye must always have the said cheyne to
tie Gods promyses, and the truth of the brynging of them to pass together.

And S. Paul says, that he can do all things above our asking, and our
thinking. Not without cause has he inclozed here all that belongs too our
salvation. For he that trusts in God for one thing, will not miss too enter
into debating, whether he will add a second benefit, or a third. That
therefore is the cause why S. Paul will have us too look for all things at the
hand of our God. And he says, Above our asking. True it is that we must not
fall asleep, when we would be succored and governed at Gods hand, or be
filled with his benefits: but if we believe in his word, we must also be
moved too pray: for it is a true proof of our faith, when we resort so unto
our God. Psalm. 55. d. 23.
And for that cause is it said, that the faithful must discharge all their
cares intoo his lap. For it is the true record of it, when at all times of
our need, we resort too him, who will have us too seek all our welfare in
him alone. The faithful therefore must be diligent in praying, Coloss. 4. a. 2.
according as S. Paul says in another text, where he exhorts us too prayer
and supplication, and sets down this diligence also, too the intent we
should have no slothfulness too pluck us back. But albeeit we give over all
our wits too praying unto God: yet notwithstanding, considering the
necessities that compel us too resort unto him, God must be feign too outgo
our requests, and too do much more for us than we require. And for proof
thereof, when any (of the faithful) feels his own infirmities, he will streyt
ways humble himself, and theruppon repair unto God, and that not for once
only, but every minute of an hour. And afterward he will resort to him both
for his body and his soul, and think thus: Alas, yet want I such a thing, I
must too him agein. Lo how the faithful do thoroughly sift out the miseries
and wantes wheruntoo they be subject, thereby too provoke themselves too pray
unto God. But do not we think that the devil has a hundred thousand wyles
which we perceive not? And God must be feign too provide for them, or else
what would become of us? For although we feel that diverse things do pinch
us, yet are there many other things that are unknown and hidden from us. So
then it will always be found true, that God outgoeth all our prayers, and all
our wishes. Mark that for one point. Therefore let us do what we can, and
indeuer too resort continewally unto God: and yet therwithall let us be fully
persuaded, that he must be feign too watch over us, and too be much more
sharp syghted than we, in espying what we have need of, and the means also
that are fit too compass it to our behoof: all these things must God be feign
too look too. And so must we cast all our cares upon him, Psalm. 55. d. 23.
as I alleged before out of the Psalm.

And soothly his adding of above our ability too think, is too show that
although men be inlyghtened by the Gospel, too distrust themselves, too walk
in fear, yea, and too be abashed at the sight of their own wretchedness:
yet perceive they not the hundredth part of it, but must be feign too refer
the residew unto God, and too look for more at his hand, than they can wish.
And herewithall S. Paul shows us, that we cannot pass measure, in trusting
unto God, and in asking him the things that we have need of. In deed we
must not use a foolish liberty, too pray too God too give us this, or that, as
our fleshly desire provoke us. For we must refer our selves wholly unto
him: and specially we must in praying, fight against all our own lusts, that
we be not too importunate in them. And in good sooth, weee see what has
befalne too such as would needs have God too grant all their demaundes too
pleasure them withal. The children of Israel were fed with flesh, Exodus 16.
c. 13. and Number. 11. ^. 31.
and were glutted with it, till they were redye too burst: but while the meat
was yet in their throtes, Gods wrath and vengeance fell upon them. It had bin
much better for them, that their request had bin denied, than granted.
Therefore when we pray, we must not take such liberty, as too say, that God
should be subject too our affections and desires, but we must ask him the
things that he has promised us, assuring our selves that he will like well of
our requests. And (as I said before) let us not fear that we shall be too
excessive, for we see that he will do yet more, and so had he need too do.
And let us not be afraid too be blamed of any presumption or malapertnesse,
in assuring our selves of his promises. In deed if men warrant themselves more
than Gods word will bear them out in, or bear themselves on hand that they
shall obtain whatsoever they imagine in their own brain: all such hope shall
doubtless be a s^ope. But if we ground our selves upon Gods truth, which is
sure and vndeceytfull: let us hardily reach out the trust far and wide which
we have in him, and let us not doubt but he will perform it too the full,
yea, and much more too, as S. Paul shows us here. Ye see then, that the
sum of the things which we have too remember in this streyne, is, that we
must behold Gods benefits, not only those which we have had experience of,
but also which are seen through the whole world, that they may move us to
praise Gods name, and that there may be such an agreeable melody among all
the faithful, as they may honor God for all the benefits which he bestows
generally upon the whole body of his Church. And agein, that we must hope
that he will go through with all that ever he has once begun: and that
inasmuch as we have already felt how merciful he is unto us, so that he has
sought us out when we were strayed away from him, and pulled us out of the
bottom of hell: we must not doubt but that he will hold on still, and
increace the benefits more and more which we have felt already in part: And
furthermore that in praying unto him, we must have an eye too the great
number of necessities, which move and constreyne us too come unto him, and
theruppon consider, that he will do much more for us, than we can wish, and
that we be so weak witted, and so unskillful, that we wot not what is meet
for us: howbeeit that he remedyeth the same two ways, namely, by stirring up
unutterable gronings in us, as is said more fully in the eight too the
Romans: Romans ^. c. 25.
and on the other side by supplying such unskillfulness, so as he taryeth not
till we crave his succor, but preuenteth us through his mercy,
notwithstanding that we welter in our wretchedness, and perceive not the
tenth part of the things that we want.

Now heervppon Saint Paul exhorts the faithful, too walk as becomes
their Calling, vvherin they be called. This is not only too the intent they
should thank God with their mouths, as he warned them too do: but also too
profit themselves by the spiritual gifts which they receive, and too put them
too such use as God may be glorified by them. For if we should set forth all
Gods praises, and in the mean while men could perceive no zeal of honoring
and serving him in all our life: it were but a feyning, and such a confession
were but an vnhalowing of Gods name, when our life were not answerable
theruntoo. Not without cause therefore does Saint Paul add here, that men
should walk according too the calling wheruntoo they be called. And theruppon
we have too mark, first that forasmuch as we be slow, and there is ever
too much sloth and coldness in us: we cannot deuyse a better way, nor which
may touch us more too the quick, too make us go on forewarde in the obedience
of God, than too think upon his infinite mercy which he has showed toward
us. Romans 1^. a. 1.
According wheruntoo, Saint Paul in the twelfth too the Romans, intending too
win the faithful too teachablenesse, and too put their trust in God, sets
before them the mercy that they had received at his hand. As if he should say,
that whenever we hear of the stone that ought too be removed, or think
upon the inestimable goodness which God has used toward us, in that he
spared not his only son, but gave him for our salvation, voutsafing too have
him offered up in sacrifize, too put away the rememberance of our offenses and
misdeedes: it ought too clyue our hearts asunder. Therefore in this text he
sets Gods calling of us before our eyes. Truth it is that we be
sufficiently bound aforehand by nature too serve and honor God: for we have
our life of him, and we live here at his cost: and we see how all his
creatures serve us. That therefore is bond great enough whenever the ruling
of our life according too Gods will, comes in question. But seeing he thinks
it not enough too have set us in the world, and too give us sustenance for our
bodies, but also takes us too be his own children, too bring us up in his
Church, which is his house, and upon his adopting of us behyghteth us the
inheritance of heaven, and too assure us of it, has given us the pledge that I
spoke of, that is too wit, our Lord Jesus Christ: seeing we know that God
has so many ways uttered the infinite love that he bare us: ought it not too
inflame bs too run unto him, too the end that by renouncing our selves more
and more, we may* indeuer too give our selves so unto him, as he may quietly
have the use of our whole life, and we mind none other thing than the exalting
of his name? Ye see then whereat Saint Paul looked, when he says, that he
warns the Ephesians too walk agreeable too the vocation wherein God had set
them. So then, we have too gather upon this text, that to correct the
slothfulness that is in us, and specially to subdew the stubbornness that
hinders our pleasing of God in all points, (for it is certain, that all our
thoughts, and all the disposition of our nature are inclyned unto evil, and
do both draw us back and drive us far of from the obedience which we ought
too yield unto our maker:) (I say) too correct all this thoroughly, and too
come unto God, we must learn to lift up onr senses too the infinite grace
that God has, showed us, in making us parttakers of the spiritual goods of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by voutsafing too hane us too be members of his body,
and too adopt us too be his children and heirs.

Furthermore let us consider the end whereat he amed, too the intent God
complain not of us, as he does of the Israelites by his Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 5.
a. 4.
because of the unthankfulness which they had showed toward him. He says,
that he had taken them as his Uyneyard, or as a costly heritage. And he tells
them, that for all his manuring of them, they had brought him forth nothing
but wyld Grapes and bitter fruit. Let us beware (say I) that God have not just
cause too blame us now adays, as well as he did them. For if the people of
Israel received excellent gifts: much more are we bound unto God now adays
since the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. For look what he gave too the
Fathers of old time in figures and shadows: that have we at these days in
truth and substance, we be in the full time wherein it was Gods will too power
out al his benefits upon us too the full. Since it is so, we shall be the
less excusable, if we be unthankful, and acknowledge not the good that God
has done us. That is the thing which we have too bear in mind.

And moreover, 1. Pet. 2. b. ^.
let us consider that (as says Saint Peter) our Lord has drawn us out, and
reskewed us from the tyranny of death, and called us too his kingdom of
light, too the intent that we should blaze abroad his vertewes, and bestow
our whole life in magnifying him too the uttermost: according too this present
text, where it is said, that we must walk according too the vocation that God
has called us unto. Now this imports a gathering and drawing of us out by
our selves, as though God meant too make a new world of us. And in very deed
the thing whertoo the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ tends, is,
that we should be sholed out from the vnclenenesse of the world. Seeing then
that we be as it were sorted out by our selves, and God has dedicated us too
himself, intending too have us for his inheritance: let us learn not too
disappoynt him of his purpose. And if we be the children of light, (as he
says in another place: Ephe. 5. b. 8.
) let us walk no more in darkness, as the unbelievers do, but let us make
the grace effectual which we have received. That is it in effect which we
have to remember concerning the word Uocation or Calling. Too be short, we
shall be much more blame-woorthie than the sis^ie ignorant and blind souls, if
we indeuer not too hold our selves as it were locked up under Gods hand, and
under his guyding. Truth it is, that at this day there is no corner of the
world, but it is so corrupted, as is horrible too see: insomuch that even they
that have had no taste at all of the Gospel, but have bin nuzzeled and imbrewed
continually with superstition, shall not fail to be justly condemned at Gods
hand. And as for us, it is certain, that we shall have a much harder account
too make, for that God inlyghtneth us with his word, and whereas other folks
stray and wander in destruction, he shows us the way of salvation, calling
and alluring us daily unto him. Seeing then that we have such a privilege:
we ought too bethink our selves well, that we quench not the light, by
thrusting it underfoot, and so put away the special grace that was granted
us, and which God voutsafed too direct unto us, too the end we should be the
more provoked too serve him.

But by the way we must mark well how S. Paul says, that this must be
done with all submission and lowelinesse, with patience and meekness. Hereby
he meant too express that it is not enough for every man too imploye himself
too the doing of his dewtie: but that we must also reach out our hands each
one too his neighbor and brother, so as God may be served with one common
consent among us. Let us mark well therefore (forasmuch as the residue cannot
be dispatched at this time) that S. Paul speaks not here too every man
severally, but that he comprehends all the whole body and company of the
Church. As if he should say, my friends, it is not enough for every of us too
withdraw himself and too abstein from all evil, and too show himself well
minded and zealous too live in the fear of God, and in all uprightness: but
we must also have a mutual care one of another, and be fully resolved that
it is no serving of God, if we indeuer not by all the means we can, that
others may do the like. And so we see here how it is the rule of all the
faithful (first) that every man look too himself, and though all the world be
mad in doing evil, yet notwithstanding that he which is taught in Gods
school, do hold himself in awe and under subjection, and consider whertoo he
is called: and therwithall that if there be many of us, and God have shed out
his grace so as he has gotten himself a Church, we must to the uttermost of
our power, seek to join with them whom God calls, as well as us, so that he
which goes formest, reach his hand too him that is next him, and say, let us
go altogether, and one of us incorage another, that he which goes faintly and
has infirmities in him, be tarried for by those that go swifter, and be borne
up also if need be^, so as we may all be drawn unto God. And this must not
only be done in every town and village, but also we must look yet further
of, and consider that they whom we know not are neuerthelater of the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore we must serve them for looking glasses and
examples, and confirm them so much the more too lead a godly conversation, by
showing them the way that they may follow us. And let us also profit our
selves, so as if we see any other men more virtuous, zealous, and constant
than we be, every of us may be ashamed of it, and say thus too our selves:
How now? Is it meet that thou should lag behynd, when other folks march
on so fast before, and run so cheerfully toowards God? Ye see then that the
thing in effect which we have too bear away here, is that inasmuch as God
has not called us eft one man alone, and eft another, as though he meant too
set us a sunder, but directs his voice too all, and will have it serve for
a holy bond unto all: we also must answer him, not only with our mouth, but
also with our whole life, and there must be true unity among us, and we must
indeuer to bring to pass, that God may be purely worshipped every where, and
consider that since we be called all too one inheritance, there ought too be
a right brotherhood among us, and that since we call upon God as our father,
it becomes us as his children too be joined too our head, that is to wit, to
our Lord Jesus Christ. And when we be so joined unto him, it is certain that
we shall not be cut of from those whom he will have too be of his body,
another shall the hand despyze the foot, nor the foot hold scorn of the
hand: but forasmuch as we know that our life rests only in Jesus Christ,
we shall indeuer as much as we can too uphold one another, and pray too God
too strengthen us against all Satan's assaults, and against all that he can
practice to set us at ods, that we may mainteyne the battle, and with
invincible constancy follow still the way which God has showed us, until
we attain too the heritage which he has promised us, and purchaced so deerly
by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknoweledgement of our sins, praying him to draw us too true repentance,
so as we may be utterly cast down in our selves, too be set up agein too
serve him, and that not for one day, but so as we may hold out too the end,
that as his grace never fades, so we on our side may never cease too serve
him, but according as he increases his gifts in us, so we also may be more
and more inflamed to come nerer too him, and too be thoroughly knit unto him.
And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father. etc.

The.xxii. Sermon, which is the second upon the fourth Chapter.
1. I therefore which am a prisoner in our Lord, vvarne you too walk as
becomes you, in the calling vvhertoo you be called,

2. With all lovvelinesse and meekness, with patience, bearing one with
another in charity,

3. Being diligent too keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace.

4. Be ye one body and one spirit, even as ye be called in hope of your
calling.

5. There is (but) one Lord, one Faith, one Baptim.


We have seen this morning how Gods children ought too be linked toogither,
so as every man may help his fellow, and harten and strengthen him, and all
of us indeuer with one accord too serve God. Now for performance hereof, we
have need to correct the vices that are in us. For on the one side we see how
men are well near all inclyned too loftiness, selfsoothing, and selfweening,
whereof by and by breeds scornefulnesse. For he that couets too advance
himself, must needs abace his fellows, too make himself their superior. Then
is it impossible that there should be agreement among us, until we have rid
our selves of this pride and ouerweening, wheruntoo we be too much given. But
if we be once knit toogither: then will we also be meek. For what is the
cause that we be so stern toward our neighbors, and that there is nothing
but rigor and roughness with us, but for that every of us coueteth too
ouermayster other? That then is the cause why there is no gentleness among us.
And therefore S. Paul has matched meekness with lowelinesse: for
lowelinesse is the moother of meekness. Last of all, he sets down
patience or sufferance, in bearing long with men's infirmities and vices. For if
we will needs search out by parcel meal whatsoever we shall see to be
amiss in every man: surely we shall have occasion to reject both great and
small: for there is not that man which is not blemished with some evil. But
have we once abated the pride that I spoke of, and thereuppon conformed our
selves too meekness, and gentleness, so as we can find in our hearts too
be warned and too bear with others: and none of us is so hindered by his
infirmities, but that he can abide too make account of other men as of his
brethren: then shall the Church by that mean abide always in good plyght.

Now hereuppon S. Paul adds, that if we intend too keep the unity of
spirit, we must live toogither in peace. For we know, that when any fire of
strife is kindled, every man would have his enemies drowned in the bottom of
hell. So soon then as we give the bridle too our affections, so as we fall
too spyting of this man or that man, and there grows any hartburning or
grudge against us: then follows parttaking in the Church, too the breach of
all concord. Therefore if we desire too be at one (as we ^eedes must, if we
will be Gods children) let us take good heed that Satan set no odds or
variance among us, and let us be quiet, and indeuer too prevent trubbles where
we see any likelihood of them. And so ye see, what we ought too observe, if
we mind too help our neighbors, and too bring too pass that God may be
honored among us with one accord.

And here we have too mark first of all, how Saint Paul in speaking of
Lowelinesse, meekness, and patience, warns us, that if we be not ware, and
every man bridle himself, the devil shall always have easy access and
entrance intoo us, too trubble us. And why? For as I said, every of us shall
find the disease of ambition rooted in him, so as there is none of us but he
would feign bear some cou^tena^ce of superiority, at leastwyse till God have
laid his hand upon him, and by his holy spirit beaten down al pride in him,
and made him ^leane. But take me all those that follow their own natural
sway, and surely they are ever so high minded, as thy will not be contented,
except they be exalted and much made of Saint Paul therefore thought good too
warn us hereof, too the end we should learn too mis^^ke of that vice, and
indeuer too rid our selves of it, which thing will not be done very easly, for
it is a hard battle. But howsoever the world go, we must not give over, till
we have gotten so much advantage of our selves, as too know that there is
nothing in us why we should be esteemed, but rather that he which thinks
himself too be excellentest of all, ought (by that time that he has sifted
and examined himself thoroughly,) too be ashamed and abashed at his own
wretchedness. And for proof thereof, when we have thoroughly vewed all that we
ween our selves too have, wherewith too win us any favor, dignity or
reputation among men: certainly we shall find that every whit of it is the
free gift of God. Now then, so much the more need have we too humble our
selves, seeing that God byndeth us so unto him. What have thou (says S. Paul)
too boast of above other men, 1. Cor. 4. b. 7.
and to chalendge as thine own? It is certain that God has given it thee,
therefore honor him for it, which thing thou can not do, so long as thou art
puffed up with pride. So then, considering that all the virtues for which we
might be praised, are all records of Gods goodness, and that he has showed
himself a loving father toward us, in that it has pleased him to have us come
near him after that fashion: it ought too make us cast down our eyes, and too
walk in all meeldnesse. And if we compare our virtues with our vices, surely
we shall find much more wherewith too beat down our horns, than wherefore too
set them up. For when a man has cast his cards thoroughly: he shall perceive
that although he have some good zele too serve God, yet does he but llmp and
halt still in that behalf, and that he has no virtue in him, which is not
blemished with some spot, so as there is always one thing or other in him, too
put him in mind that he ought not too be proud. Agein, his vices are ever mo
in number a great way, tha^ his virtues. What shall we then do, but be
ashamed of our selves? For we do after a sort defyle the holy things, when
we mingle our own deformities in that wise with the gifts of Gods spirit. And
therefore he that does most excel, has cause too be the more lowely, for
that he is so much the more bound unto God. Ye see then that they which are
esteemed as peerlesse perles, and exalted as little worse than Angels, ought
always too bridle themselves short, knowing that there is not so little a
blemish in them, which ought not too be taken for greeuouser in them, than in
such as have not received so great gifts, ne be so excellent. Besy^s this,
there are also vices in us even of our selves (as I said before): and if there
be any good in us, God has given it us of his own mere and freebestowed
mercy. And therefore it is not for us too presume, but we must impute all
evil to our selves. He then that makes such comparison, will sone beat
down his ouerweening wherewith he was puffed up or deceived.

Now if the excelle^test sort of al, have not whereof to vaunt themselves: what
shall the meaner sort do, and such as are dispyzed too the worldward, and have
nothing too set themselves out withal? They fight against nature, if they will
needs vaunt themselves. Too be short, a man shall always find this ancient
proverb true, that he which knows himself best, will esteem himself least.
But we must pass yet further: which is, that we must understand how we be not
any thing of our selves, nor can do aught that is any thing worth, and that
the good which God has put intoo us, ought too serve too teach us meekness.
When we once know that well, then shall we be thoroughly humbled, say I. And
the true Lowlynesse or humility is not too make a fair face, or too pretend a
myld countenance, as many do, who will speak gently and lovingly, and look
rufully, and yet for all that, cease not too be as full of pride, as toades
within. Too be short, humility imports such a meekness, as pulls us down
in our selves, and suffers us not too advance our selves for any degree of
honor, nor too seek estimation above our neighbors. Now I have told you,
that we shall never be meek, nor never have any gentleness and myldnesse in
us, until we be brought low. For pride does ever hold scorn of all the
world. And we see also, that such as are ouerweening, and stand in their own
conceyt, believing themselves too be well worthy, and too deserve too be
exalted above the common array, do therewithal become very strange, insomuch
that men dare scarce look upon them: they thrust away one, and drive away
another a great way of. Therefore we must have learned too humble our selves,
too the end we embrace such as are our true brothers, specially since we know
that we have need too be borne with at their hands. For behold, it is said
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he does easily let us come unto him, Math. 4.
a. 1.
because he himself was tempted, and made like unto us, and that he bears
with our weakness and infirmities, because he has had experience of them in
himself. Now it is certain, that our Lord had not any vice in him, for he is
the welspring of all goodness. Yet notwithstanding, too the intent that we on
our side should not stick too resort too him familiarly, and too the end we
should be heard of God his father for his sake, it is said, that he had
compassion on us, Hebr. 4. d. 15.
because he had felt what man and man's infirmities are, howbeit, without any
spot of sin, as I said before. Now then, how shall we do, if we have this
foolish belief, that we be thoroughly perfect? Seeing that pride is so rooted
in our nature, how shall we pity such as we see in myserie, if we consider
not first, that we be no better worth than they? So then, let us mark well,
that too be kyndharted, gentle, and freendly, all pride must first be beaten
down in us.

Furthermore let us mark also, that kind heartedness is the mother of
patience, and the continual bringer forth of that fruit: and that if we be
too stern, it is a sign that there is cruelty in us, and that we be as wild
beasts. And thereby also we be convicted of pride and ouerweening, and that we
have not well learned the Lesson that S. Paul copyeth us out here. In deed
we ought too be grieved at the faults of our neighbors, and we must not
feed them by our flattery, as the common fashion of the world is. But yet must
our zeal be so measured, as we must bear with a great sort (for we our
selves also have need too be borne withal) and not be hastier with other
folks, then we would that they should be with us, but always keep this
natural uprightness, of not doing that thing to our neighbor, which we
would not have done too our selves, which is the sum of the Law and the
Prophets as our Lord Jesus Christ says. Ye see then how our zeal ought too
be mingled with kind hartednesse: Math. 7. ^. 12.
for if it be sauced altoogither with vinegar, what will come of it? There
wilbee no taste or savor in it. Therefore it must have some oil put unto it.
And so there must be some temperature in all corrections too sweeten them
withal, that they be not over rigorous. Too be short, S. Paul meant too show
us here, that although we ought not too bolster out any evil, but rather too
be moved with Godly zeal to condemn such as deserve it: yet notwithstanding
we must not reject the weakelings, as though they were utter reprobates or
castawayes, but labor too win them too our God, according as we have seen
already, that that way ought too be obserned. For there are two evil
extremities: but look whatsoever God has ordained by his holy spirit, that
will always be found too be for every man's welfare.

The one of these evil customs, is, that a man cannot be well taken with the
world, except he flatter. Who so intends to mainteyne himself, must play the
blinkard and shut his eyes, when he sees a number of things in his friends
worthy of blame. And yet in the mean while is not such silence a secret
betraying? For we see, that they whom we pretend to love, are in the high way
to destruction, and wholly hardened in their naughtiness: and yet
notwithstanding, whereas we ought to waken them, or else too set a looking
glass before them, that they might behold their leaudenesse, and be ashamed of
it, we wink at it. In stead of so doing, every of us does cokes other, and
cloketh the things that ought too be sharply rebuked: insomuch that those
flatteries are no better but playsters too ease the sore, and in the mean
while to feed the root of it within.

The other evil extremity, is when we be so rigorous, that every little
fault is enough too make us too storm. Since it is so, we shall never have the
spirit of meekness aforesaid, if we be not guided and governed by Gods
spirit (as I said before.) And heerby a man may see and judge, that there is a
certain pride lurking within us, wherethrough we take to much upon our selves.
To be short, there is never any over great rigor without cruelty, nor
cruelty without pride. Whosoever dispyzeth his neighbors, sets to much by
himself: and he that ca^ bear with nothing, but is so terribly stern, that al
sins are (in his opinion) unpardonable: shows also that there is no manhood
or humanity in him. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand, to
bear in mind that which S. Paul shows us here, which is, too forgive and
forbear. Not that we should allow men's vices (as I said before) nor that they
should have leave too do evil without rebuking, but that we should patiently
rebuke men's faults and be sorry for them, and in so doing of our dewtie, not
forget also to bear with the frayltie and weakness of our neighbors, so as
we shame them not, ne stryke them intoo such ^eauinesse, that they fall into
despair, when they see there is no forbearing, nor any forgiving at our hands.
That then is the thing that we ought to bear in mind. And it is the very
cause why S. Paul adds, that men should bear one with another in charity
or love. As if he should say, that forasmuch as we be brothers toogither,
there should need none other rule than that, too make us as well kind hearted,
as also pacient and lowely. And for proof thereof he says in the thirteenth of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 13. b. 4.
that Charity has these three things: First, that it is gentle and kind
hearted: Secondly, that it moves us too be lowely and meek, and thirdly, that
it is pacient, and suffers al things. Those are three qualities which Paul
attributes unto louingnesse. For if we demand what is the rule of holy
life: Coloss. 3. c. 14.
the Scripture tells us, that love is the full performaunce thereof, 1. Tim.
1. a. 5.
because it is the bond of perfection, and the end and fulfilling of the Law.
Lo how these Texts do teach us Charity. Agein, our Lord also intending too
conclude the doctrine of the Law, Math. 22. d. 39.
sets down these two points: Namely that we should love him with all our
heart, with all our mind, and with all our power and strength: and our
neighbors as our selves. Then if we think too be allowed of God, and
charity reign not in us, we deceive our selves. The world may like well of
us, but all our whole life shall be utterly loathsome before God, until
Charity be settled in our hearts, so as she govern us, and we tend always
unto her, yea and work all our works by her. Now then, seeing that love is
the true perfection of the faithful, and of all Gods children: let us see what
it imports. For if a man brag that he has it, and in the mean while have
another lowliness, nor gentleness, nor patience: he makes the holy Ghost a
liar, who not without cause shows, what is betokened by Charity or love. For
he has not set down the bare word, and only said, be ye charitable: but he
has also showed us what is meant by it. Namely first of all, that we must
beat down this pride which beguyleth us, and makes us dosse with our horns
against God, insomuch that it were right hard for us too be lowely minded
toward men, when we cannot hold our selves meekely in obedience under God.
Now then, let us fight in such wise, as all pride may be corrected in us: and
therwithall enforce our selves always too humility, that we may be kind
hearted and fellowlyke with the faithful: which cannot be done but by bearing
one with another. The very heathen men had the skill too say, that if we had
the wit and discretion too see the vices that are in our selves, we should be
pacient toward others. For why? I have need too be borne withal my self,
and if I do not the like too other folks, how partially do I deal? This
consideration alone ought too tame us sufficiently, though there were another
Law nor Gospel. Wherefore in as much as we know that charity imports
these three things: let us learn too be pacient, not only when any wrong is
done us, but also when we see our neighbors too be weak and feeble, and
not yet come too such perfection as were requisite. And though they be not so
well foreward and settled in Gods word (as we would wish,) yet let us pity
them, and with all meekness indeuer too use such correction toward them, as
another their vices may be nurrished, nor the parties themselves be cast in
despair. Thus ye see what we have to mark upon that streyne.

Now heervppon Saint Paul infers further, that (as I have touched
heertoofore) we must keep the unity of the spirit, or the bond of peace. For
he sets here the unity of spirit, as a mark that is requisyte in the
Church and flock of God: insomuch that if we be at odds among our selves,
we be at odds with God. And therewithal he shows us the thing that we
have seen breefly before: which is, that if we be not at one among our
selves, God disclaymeth us, and tells us we belong not unto him. This
unity therefore is a thing that ought too be much set by now adays, seeing it
is the mean in respect whereof we be acknowledged for Gods children. True it
is that the wicked and the unbelievers have their confederacies, and are so
linked one too another, as there is not a streyter alliance too be found in
the world. For even their evil doings do bynd them one too another, as
though they were fast sowed toogither, because they perceive themselves too be
hampered, insomuch that he which has conspyred in some mischeef with another
naughtipacke, will be afraid of him, and that fear is as a bond that cannot
be broken. Howbeeit Saint Paul presupposes here, that the faithful are at
one in God, as he will declare anon. For this cause he shows them how the
same unity may be kept. It is (says he) the bond of peace. For when a fire
is once kindled, it is not so soon quenched ageine. We imagine that when we
cast our selves intoo a chafe, we can come too our selves agein by and by, and
all shall be whist and still out of hand agein. No: for the devil does so
set in his foot, that the strife and contention turns too a deadly sting, so
as men are inuenimed with it more and more, and although they show it not
outwardly, ne cast up their rage and froth: yet notwithstanding some hartbyting
and hartburning will lurk still within, when there has bin any debate. And
therefore (as I said) let us not think that when any trubble is stirred up, it
wilbee pacifyed so soon as we would have it. In consideration whereof Saint
Paul tells us, that the Church shall perish every turning of a hand,
through that fire, if we continue not in quiet, and shun all strife and debate.

And now he shows what manner of atonement or union it is that he has spoken
of, saying, that there is (but) one God, and one faith, and one Baptime: that
there is (but) one hope vvheruntoo we be called: and that there is (but) one
God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is above us all, and in us all.
It was very requisite that this should be added, too show that peace shall
never be good nor allowed of God, but rather accursed, unless it have a good
groundwoorke. For what a peace were it, if we would now adays link in with
the Papists? We should be feign too forsake the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, and too bend our selves against God, and too defyle our selves with
all manner of filthiness and abomination. But it were better that the whole
world were sunk; and we with it, than too seek such peace. As much should we
be feign too do in respect of the Turks: for there is none of them both but
he seeks too wrappe us in destruction, and too pluck us away from God. Now
if there be such atonement among us, as we will needs enjoy all that our
fleshly lust craves: what confuzion will there be? Uerely oftentimes Gods
servants are accuzed of conspiracy, and of spytefull malice and
stubbornness, because they cannot find in their hearts too consent too any
wickedness: insomuch that they which are in any authority and credit, would
vsurp any manner of tyranny too hinder the preaching of Gods word, as it
ought too be, and deuyze what they list of their own brain, so that albeeit
there be preaching still, yet shall it not be free according too Gods word.
If Gods servants be driven too this: needs must we be trubbled by Satan and
his champions: and we shall be both blamed and diffamed euerywhere. For such
folk will always do their office, in turning good intoo evil by their false
reports and flaunders. Howsoever the world go, no peace is commendable, but
such as doo^h so join us toogither, as God reigns over us, and we become
all one in him: for without that, it shall be but cursednesse. And so ye see
why Saint Paul calls us back here too God, and too our Lord Jesus Christ,
and unto faith of the Gospel and to Baptim, too show how we ought to agree
among our selves.

Now then, we have here two points too bear in mind. The one is, that in
seeking atonement with men, we must always have our eye upon God, and when
we be come too it, we must be settled in it more and more. That is a thing
which we must ever have a care of. Now in general it is true, that peace is
too be desired, and that the very name of it is had in estimation among men.
But yet for all that, we must not so shroud our selves under the shadow of
peace, as too separate our selves from God, that in the end we make war
against him, and he proclayme us too be his enemies. And for that cause it is
said, that we must be at continual battle with the wicked. For in as much as
they serve Satan, they will not cease to fight against God and our salvation.
And therefore we must not be cold and negligent in that behalf, but zealous in
setting our selves against them: insomuch that although they be in honor and
credit, yet let us abhor them, as it is said in the Psalm: let them be unto
us as stinking and loathsome things, and full of filth and uncleanness. Though
they boast never so much of their greatness, yet let us assure our selves, it
were much better that they were drowned with all their bravery in the bottom
of hell, than that they should so exalt themselves against God. Ye see then
that we must esteem the greatest men of the world, no better than Woormes,
when they dare so bend their horns against God: and consequently that we can
have no peace with them, seeing we should be feign too forsake God for their
pleasure. But (as I said before) it were better that the world were turned
vpsyde down, than it should be so. Now then if we knit toogither in God, let
us follow the rule that is given us here: that is too wit, too be so abaced
in our selves, as the world may perceive by our myldnesse, that there is no
more loftiness in us too set us at odds. And like as kyndhartednesse brings
patience, so also let us condemn men's vices, and yet labor always to draw
the parties unto God, and too win them unto him, rather than too set them of
through sharpness.

But now let us come too the words that are couched here by S. Paul. He
says, that we be one body and one spirit, as we be called too one hope of
our calling. First and formest he shows us, upon what condition we be
called of God: that is too wit, that there should be such a knot among us, as
might show that we be in very deed the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. For
it is not enough for us to be cast up together like a heap of stones: but we
must be knit toogither with a hearty good will. And like as it is said, that
there was but one heart and one mind among the faithful (in the primitive
Church: Acts. 4. ^. 32.
) so must the same appear among us too at this day. Saint Paul then in telling
us that we be one spirit, and one body, means that we be made as it were
all one man in Jesus Christ. For Jesus Christ can well find in his heart too
communicate his name too all the company of the faithful, and that is too the
end too draw us the more too the said affection of living toogither in
concord and brotherly love, even with such atonement as we may be brethren,
that is to say, so knit toogither, as the fingers of a hand: for without that,
we can never show that we be desirous too atteyne too the kingdom of
heaven. That therefore is the thing which he meant by the two words Body and
Spirit.

True it is, that when Gods spirit governs us, he reformeth our affections in
such wise, that our mynds are knit toogither. But howsoever the case stand,
Saint Paul meant too declare, that all the whole body of the faithful is but
as one man. For it is not for any man to put forth himself there, but we must
be linked all toogither, every man in his office or calling. Too be short, we
must be but all as one, as shall be declared anon more at length. Forasmuch then
as there is none other too govern us, but Jesus Christ: we must needs be
made all as one man in him. And soothly we know that the thing which was said
of Adam and Eve, and of all married folks and their wives, must also be
accomplished in the Church: which is, that the Church is bone of our Lord
Jesus Christ's bone, and flesh of his flesh, and so there is a marriage betwixt
them. Now if we be so knit all together to the son of God: it is reason also
that we should agree among our selves, and that one union should extend through
all the whole body: for it is impossible that our Lord Jesus Christ should
reign over us, and yet notwithstanding that we should be diuyded among our
selves, seeing that he is but one. Let that therefore serve for the first point.

Now Saint Paul too stir us up the better heruntoo, tells us, that we be
called unto an inheritance. In saying so, he shows that there is a much
holyer atonement between us, than there is between the (natural) brothers
of this world. For although they be borne of one father and one moother, so as
they be but one blud: Yet notwithstanding, eueryman shifts for himself anon
after, and the inheritance is parted among them, so as the brethren seem too
be separated asunder, and the natural bond that was among them before, too be
half broken. But we have an inheritance that cannot be broken. A man cannot
say, I have that which belongs too me, I will get me away, and I will dwell
alone by my self. For what is our inheritance? It is God himself. And moreover
the heavenly life, which is purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
wherintoo he himself is gone before us, too gather us thither too him. Seeing
then that we be all called too one selfsame inheritance, if any of us shrink
aside from his brethren, it is all one as if he gave over his part in the
Kingdom of heaven. But we would abhor such a blasphemy. If a man should
demand of any of us whether he would renounce his part of paradyce, it would
make the hears too stand up upon his head, I mean even of them that have no
fear of God at al. No dout but there are some so wicked and monstrous beasts,
that they will flush out this blasphemy out of their mouth, that they renounce
their salvation. But if ye ask it of a man that is well aduyzed: he will
always abhor and detest it. Yet notwithstanding, in very deed we go about
too shet our selves out of the gate, and too bar our selves from coming in
the kingdom of God, and we wype away the hope of it that is given us by the
Gospel, when we be not knit toogither among our selves. Were this througly
printed in our hearts: surely there would be another manner of freendship and
brotherlinesse among us, than there is: and men should see other manner of
meekness, meeldnesse, and pacientnesse. Now though we have hithertoo bin
misaduyzed, yet is it much better too take warning late than never. Wherefore
let us learn by this doctrine of Saint Paul's, that whenever we be provoked
too displeasure, so as we seem too have some cause too reject one, too leave
another, and too separate our selves from him or her: we must understand, that
we have all one hope of the kingdom of heaven, and that Jesus Christ who is
our head, calls us all unto him, with this condition set before us, without
which we cannot come at him, which is, that we must show truly, and by our
deeds, that we make account of all such as are partakers of the Gospel with
us, as of our brethren, and as though they were our own flesh and blud, and
also that we be so joined toogither, as the fingers of one hand, as I said
before.

And heeruppon, S. Paul going foreward with the same doctrine, says, there is
but one Lord. It is certain that heerby he means one God, who has
sovereign dominion over us, and is our master too keep us in unity, 1. Cor.
12. ^. 6.
because he cannot abide that we should be at ods. In the Twelfth Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, S. Paul says, that there is but one
God, too show the service which we owe unto God, specially for granting us
of his gifts wherewith too edify his Church. But his attributing of
souereyntie unto God in this Text, is too do us too wit, that we cannot serve
God, unless we be at unity among our selves. And why? For although a
mortal man be variable, and change his mind from morning too night: yet will
he not have any discord in his house: if there be any broyle, or if there rise
any strife, he cannot away with it. And what shall God do, Romans 15. g. 33.
who is the God of peace (as he names himself in the Scripture) seeing he will
have us too gather toogither under him, and tells us, 1. Cor. 14. f. 33.
that he sits among us, and that we be his house? Think we that we can
wynd him intoo our troubles, contentions, skirmishings, Phil. 4. b. 9.
hurliburlies, and heats with us? Then should he be feign too transfigure
himself, and to change his nature. But let us not imagine that he will deny
himself (as S. Paul says) but he shall be feign too cut us of as rotten
members, and too show that we belong not unto him, when he sees that we
come nothing near him. And therefore let us resort too the said souereintie and
dominion which God has over us, too the intent too alay all strifes and
variances that Satan shall indeuer too rayze up among us. For if Servants,
although they be disconte^ted with another, and have hartburning, grudge, or
such other things among them selves, do nevertheless bridle them selves for
love of their master, and agree agein among them selves: what shall we do, when
as the case concerns the pleasing of our God? So then S. Paul declares in
effect, that when we be so wayward and can bear with nothing, but will fall
out for every small and light occasion: it is a token, not only that we
dispyze men, but also that we rebel against God, and are loathe to yield him
any subjection. Thus ye see in effect what we have too consider upon that
saying.

Now he adds, that there is (but) one faith, and (but) one Baptim, and (but)
one God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. His saying that there is but one
faith, is too show, that we have one common treasure, even in this world. For
he has spoken already of the heritage which we hope for, and which is
warranted us in heaven, though it be not manifested too us as yet. Now what is
the pledge of the endless life, but the Gospel? And that have we in common
toogither. Seeing it is so: then if the faithful should forsake one another
company, surely the Gospel should be as good as torn in pieces. For we must
always wey well this word One, which S. Paul has couched here, and so
often repeted, in saying, that there is but one hope of our calling. And how?
Hereby he shows that we go about too break and disperse the kingdom of
heaven, (as much as in us is) when we live not in concord. It is said, that
there is but one God: it is then as it were a heawing of the hope of our
salvation in pieces, when we cannot suffer God too govern us, and too hold
us under his protection. So now, when he says, that there is but one faith:
surely it is not long of us that the Gospel is not torn in pieces and
gobbets, and rent all to fitters, as they say, when we cannot agree with our
brethren, nor bear with them gently and patiently, as was commannded
heeretoofore. That then is the thing whereuntto God calls us.

Now we ought too profit our selves by it dubble. The one way is, by abhorring
all diversities of opinions, and by looking well to our selves, that we have
but one faith in our heart, and but one confession in our mouth. For if the
faithful do contrary one another, it is certain that they show
sufficiently, that they have not the Gospel on their side: at least the one
part must needs err from the truth of God. It is true, that erewhyles it may
well happen, that all of us shall not conceive one selfsame thing: and in that
case S. Paul shows us a remedy, which is, that he which is not sure that God
has revealed the truth unto him, should hold himself in quiet, and pray God
too lead him further. But yet in the mean while, it behooves us too be fully
resolved of the Articles of our faith, and too agree so toogither in them, that
if every of us be demanded severally, he may show, that he holds none other
thing, than that which is the general belief of the Church. That then is the
first point which we have too mark, in S. Paul's telling of us that there is
but one faith. Howbeit, this faith is not one, because men have found means in
their brain too unite themselves toogither (by it:) for God must be feign too
bring them too it, because they cannot come thither, nor abide in it one
minute, except God strengthen them in his truth. Then must there needs be an
interchaungeable bond between faith and the Gospel: that like as the Gospel
(whereof God is the author) is but one, so our faith also must be but one. Also
as touching the doctrine, it is not enough for us too confess God altoogither
with one mouth: but it must also teach us too hold our selves so linked
toogither all in one unity, as every of us do travel too his neighbors
benefit, and consider wherein we may serve his turn, and apply our selves
faithfully thereunto, bearing with them that are weak, honoring them that have
received more largely of Gods gifts than we, and making none account of our
selves, that we may atteyne too the highness wheruntoo God calls us, which
is, that we may be parttakers of his glory, when we have so humbled our
selves, and walked in this world with all lowliness and modesty. Thus much
concerning that it is said in this text, that there is but one faith.

Herevppon S. Paul tells us also, ^ala. 3. d. 23.
that there is but one Baptim. By Baptim we put on Jesus Christ, (as he
says in another place) and be joined unto him, to be parttakers of his life,
and of all his benefytes. Now there is but one only Baptim, wherein the name of
Jesus Christ is always called upon, as he is our Redeemer. We be Baptized in
the name of the father, as the author of our salvation: in the name of the
son, as of him that has performed all that belonged too our Redemption: and
in the name of the holy Ghost, by whom we be sanctified, too possess and
enjoy the incomprehensible benefytes that are purchaced for us by our Lord
Jesus Christ. Seeing then that God does so call us too him by a visible sign:
must it not needs be that we be too froward, like wyld and mad beasts, if
we continue not in such unity as he commands? And not without cause has
Saint Paul matched Baptim and belief of the Gospel here toogither. For he
had respect of our rudeness. We be so dull, that we conceive not spiritual
things, unless they be set down agreeably too our nature. Saint Paul spoke
heertoofore of hope too Godward: and now because we perceive not the things
that are above the world, or do not easly understand the doctrine: he spoke
likewise of the union of faith, and of the union of the body and the soul.
Well (will some man say still) all this is spiritual, and passes man's
understanding. Ye see then, that the things which he has spoken heertoofore
might seem somewhat dark, so as we might not find such savor in them as were
requisyte. But Saint Paul brings us back too the visible sign, whereby God
gives us an incling of himself, according too the infirmity of our flesh. For
in Baptim we see the water, which shows us that we be washed in the blud
of Jesus Christ. For in as much as by (...) we be all unclean, and utterly
rejected and cursed of God: in the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
we be reconeiled unto God his father, and by that mean are called too the
glory of heaven, and renewed by the power of his holy Ghost. Ye see then that
we must needs be too dull and brutish, if we perceive not the thing that is
so visible and opens For it is all one as if God had set us forth an image in
shape of the thing that is too high for us, by reason of our frayltie. Too be
short Saint Paul's intent here is not too separate Baptim and the Gospel
asunder: but he has rather added it as a visible mark, to the intent that if
we at the first brunt understand not the unity of faith, wheruntoo we be
led by Baptim, he may do us too wit, that it is all one as if God had printed
the mark of adoption in our heart, too show that we be his: for being once
Baptized with water, we do all hear Jesus Christ, according as it showed us
by that visible sign. And now that Baptin is ordained, shall every man have a
Baptim of his own by himself: No: but Baptim is always but me. And therefore
we must have an eye too our selves, and dedicate our selves too the one only
God, and too the one only Sa^iour Jesus Christ, and for performance thereof we
must also be well united together. And by these words of S. Paul's, we may
see plainly, that the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, are but one God.
For if Baptim be in such wise one, as it serves too bring us too an unity of
body and soul, that is to say, to a brotherhood that passes all the allyances
of the world: what shall it be when we come unto God, of whom Baptim takes
all the power that it has* And what is God? He is not only the father, but
Jesus Christ is joined with him, and also the holy Ghost, So the^ let us mark,
that there is truly (...) in the essence of God, and that although there be
distinction of persons, yet is not God separated nor divided in himself. And
although the father be named simply God, (as Saint Paul will speak thereof
hereafter:) that is in respect of the (...) and order, and for that be is the
head of him which was sent too be the mediator, because Jesus Christ abaced
himself, Phil. 2. a. 6.
and although he had (...) shape unto God (as says Saint Paul) and that it
had hi^ (...) for him too have showed himself in such souerein majesty: yet it
was his will (...) himself, yea and too empty himself utterly. But howsoever
it be, yet we see that Baptim leads us right unto God. And thereby we see
that which we have touched heertoofore* which is, that if our peace and
concord be not grounded in God, and we governed by him according to his word,
and by the power of his holy spirit: there is nothing but lothlynesse in us.
But if we be touched too the quick with that which is said unto us here,
that is to wit, that Jesus Christ has linked us too him, with condition that
we also should link one with another: we shall be hild in such concord, as
the devil shall not be able too win so much at our hands, as too separate us
from the flock, but we shall overcome all temptations, and where there be
any vices and infirmities, we shall bear with them myldly and patiently, and
continue in the holy union, whertoo we be daily exhorted by the Gospel, and
by the common Baptim which we have received.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make us so too perceive them, as
we may mislyke more and more of them, and run back unto him with true
repentance, too obtain such grace of him, as we may withdraw our selves from
all defylementes: and by that mean learn too be vnabashed or vndismayed for
any assaults of Satan, and be able too overcome them all, with all the
hardness that he can trump in out way, too turn us out of the pathe of
salvation. That it may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but
also to all people and nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxiii. Sermon, which is the third upon the fourth Chapter.
6. There is one God and father of all, which is above all things* and through
all things, and in you all:

7. But grace is given too every one of us, according too the measure of
Christ's gift.

8. For the which thing he says, When he went up on high, he led a multitude
of prisoners into captivity, and gave gi^ts unto men.


We have seen heeretoofore, that God forgot not any mean that might knit us
together in true concord and brotherhood. For he has dedicated us all too
himself by Baptim, Galat. 3. d. 27.
wherein we put on Christ. Forasmuch as we he come toogither intoo the
Church, like as we be called unto one selfsame life too be heirs all
together of the kingdom of heaven: so ought we too know who is the Master
that has authority over us. Too be short, God is in such wise our father,
and we his children, as he will not have us too be at discord: for otherwise
it were but a setting of trubble in his own house and Church. Seeing we be
members of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is meet that we should link toogither in
true unity, or else we shall (as much as in us lies) tear his body in
pieces. Yet notwithstanding too the intent that this unity might touch us the
better: S. Paul adds now, that God being the father of all the faithful,
sheadeth out his power and grace upon them, and is above all things, as it
were too gather them intoo one. Too be short, he so dwells in them by his
holy spirit, that they must needs be one body, unless they will needs turn
away from him. Ye see then that the reason why God is our father, is not only
that he has once created us, or that he has begotten us agein by his Gospel:
but because he has shed out his grace upon us, as I said, and agein, for that
he is above all. Ye see then, that the mean whereby God linketh us one with
another, is his casting of his beams (as it were sun beams) from heaven, so
as we must needs come toogither intoo one, since we know whence the things
come that belong too our spiritual life, namely, of Gods gift toward us. And
this is not too scatter us a sunder, but rather too gather us toogither intoo
one body. But the last words do yet better lay open the mind of S. Paul,
namely, that God is in us. Then if every of v^ know that God does him so much
grace and honor, Hebr. 3. 6. b.
as to take him for his house too dwell in: there is no excuce for us, if we
be at variance and hatred, and every man would be separated from other, and
live too himself, too the utter overthrow of all order which God has set, if
it were possible.

Besyds this, Saint Paul speaks not here of the grace that is common too
all men: but he treats of the Churh, and shows that we ought too link
toogither, because God has adopted us and taken us too be of his household. It
is true that God has declared sufficiently that we have another strength nor
liveliness but a^ his hand: and for that cause does Saint Paul say, Acts.
17. f. 28.
that it is he in whom we have our life, moving, and being. But this is
general to all things. John. 1. a. 4.


And in that respe^^ also is it said in the first of Saint John, that our Lord
Jesus has bin the life of men from the Creation of the world. Howbeeit
forasmuch as men have a more excellent privilege than the bruce beasts: it is
said, that he is their life and all their light. But here the case concerns
the spiritual state of the Church. For whereas all Adams race is corrupted and
accursed by nature: God has sholed us out from it by vou^safing too chooze us,
too the end too show that we be joined unto him with a much streyter and
holyer bond, tha^ the rest of mortal men are, which have but their first
birth. And this joining is spoken of in the John. 17. d. 21.
.xvii. of Saint John, where it is said, Holy father, sanctify thou them, as I
have sanctified my self for them, that they may become one in us, as thou and I
are but one. Our Lord Jesus protests there, that he speak^th not of the
world, nor of them that are not of his retinew and heritage. He lets those
go too destruction: but he will have the body of his Churhe too be truly knit
toogither. And how may that be done? In deed it appears not: we be so set
asunder here, that the nerest of us thinks but every man on himself. But if we
considered how God has reformed us by his holy spirit, and given us a special
life: which is, that his grace should show it self in us, and that this holy
spirit should utter his power in us: if we co^^idered that: then should we
think, that although we wander here and there in this world, and every of us
be put asunder from his neighbors, according too the necessity of this
present life: yet must not that let us to be so joined under our Lord Jesus
Christ, as none of us be wedded too his own profit, nor none of us so love
him self, as that he should despyze his brethren, but suffer our selves too
be gathered toogither under the maystership of our God. And that forasmuch as
he dwells in us, we also must show by our doings, that we be desirous too
be all one in the power of that grace, which he has so spread out euerywhere.
Therefore we see here how Saint Paul exhorts us too help one another, to the
attey^e^^ent of the perfect unity which God has begun in us alredie. And
too bring that too pass, he shows us, that we be sholed out of the world,
too the intent we should be wholly dedicated too our God. Now I have told you
alredie, that forasmuch as God is the Creator, he must be feign to breath
strength intoo all things both above and beneathe, according as it is said in
the Psalm, Psalm. 104. d. 29.
that when he withdraws his spirit, all things are trubbled, and finally
turn intoo nothing. There is not then any brute beast, nor any tree on the
earth, nor any bird in the air, nor any fish in the water, which has not
his being and continuance by the secret power of God, because he has not only
given them their being for once (at the first:) but also maynteyneth and
vpholdeth them still. As for us, we have much more (as I said even now:) for
we not only live in this world, and enjoy the benefits that God has given us
here, insomuch that we have eyes too receive light, and ears to hear, and
the fruition of all our senses: but also Gods spirit dwells in us, too gather
us unto him, and too do us too understand, that he has not only made us
mortal men, and that we hold this present transitory life of him: Apoc. ^*
a. 4.
but also printed his mark in us, too take us and auow us for his children,
and thertoo governs us him self, and is so gracious unto us, as too make his
own ryghtuousenesse dwell in us, because there is nothing but corruption in
our selves. Thus ye see, that the thing which we have too remember in the first
place, is, that forasmuch as God is come so near unto us, and not only
allureth us familiarly too him, John. 14. c. 23.
but also voutsafeth too have his dwelling in us, insomuch that we be his
temples (as I have showed before) because he dwells in us by his holy Ghost:
1. Cor. 3. c. 16.
we ought to separate our selves from all the defylements of the world. Yet
notwithstanding it is not enough for every of us too acknowledge the grace that
he has received: but we must also indeuer too govern our selves always in
such unity and brotherly love, as every of us may help his neighbor, too go
through in the Calling that we be entered intoo. For woe worth him (as I
said) which separateth himself, because he renounceth God by that mean.
Wherefore let us learn too offer our selves in such wise unto God, every man
for himself too be governed of him, as we may also do the best we can too
link our selves in one, and too gather toogither, that we may with one common
accord show by our dooyngs, that we be the true body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that having him too our head, we ^^e all at God, and aspyre unto
him, desyring nothing but too be one with him, John. 7. d. 21.
as I alleged even now out of the text of S. John.

Now too confirm the matter yet better, he says, that every of us has
received grace according too the measure of Christ's gift, or giving. Wherein S.
Paul shows us, that God uses a wonderful manner too draw us too him: which
is, by dealing forth his gifts in such wise unto us, as every of us has
need too be helped and succored of his neighbors. For of our selves we be
so wedded too our selves, as there is none of us but he would be as alone, were
it not that necessity constreyneth and byndeth us too those whom we have
need of. God therefore too correct the pride and presumption that are too
deeply rooted in mankind, has so dealt forth his gifts by certain measure,
as every man perceyueth well, that he is bound and beholden too him for the
things he has received, Math. 25. c. 27.
and that there is no such perfection in himself that he can forbear other
men, but that we must be feign too communicate toogither, and that with such
mutual good will, as every of us indeuer too make the things that God has
given him, auaylable too the profit and furtherance of his brethren: and
therwithall be contented too borrowe of other men, and too suffer himself too
be helped and succored at their hands, according as he sees himself too
have need thereof. And this serves too bring us back agein, too the thing
that we have seen before, namely, that we shall never have agreement among
us, without humility and meekness. We see then whereat S. Paul amed. He
handles the same matter in the.xii. Chapter of the first Epistle too the
Corinthians. For there he takes the similitude of a man's body, 2. Co^. 12. b.
12.
too show that we be too far out of our wits, when every of us despyzeth
his neighbors and is wedded too himself. How now, says he? Our members or
limbs have no particular understanding by themselves: the hand has no wit
too conceive by reason what his office is: no more have the fingers that are
fastened too it, no nor yet the legs, nor the feet. Then is there not any
part of the body that has any private understanding too it self. But yet
notwithstanding, the hand does willingly acknowledge it self bound too serve
all the rest of the body, so as it never refuzeth too do it. If there be any
ache, if there be any disease, or if there be any other need, always the
hand is walking from to side too the other. Now up, now down, and is continually
occupied. The feet also, without having any other understanding, that only a
secret selfmouing of nature, can skill too bear up the rest of the body, and
are never looth too do it or grieved at it. Likewise the hand disdeyneth not
too borrowe help of the other members, as knowing full well, that it is not
able too maintain it self alone. Lo what an interchaungable companionship
there is among the members of a body. And now has God so called us too him,
that he will have us too bec^me all one in Jesus Christ, as has bin said
before. Does it then follow, that every of us should be a whole body by
himself? No: for we see on the contrary part, how God has so dealt unto
every man his portion, and unto all in general: that it is as a bond too hold
us toogither in concord, too the intent we should not be puffed up with so
fond ouerweening, as too say, I have enough of mine own, I pass for no body
else. Gods will then is not, that every man should be a whole and perfect body
of himself: but that one should be as a hand, another as a finger, another as
an arm, another as a leg, another as a shoulder, and another as a foot. Too
be short, God has so dispozed his gifts among us, as we must needs
perceive, that if every of us will draw alone by himself, he shall by and by
be as a rotten member, because he can have no firm continuance in the whole
body, if he will needs be separated from the rest of the members. And what
will follow of it? It must needs perish. Even so is it with us. That
therefore is S. Paul's meaning, when he says, that Gods grace is given too
every of us.

Then shows he first of all, that if we have any excellency, it serves not
too make us proud, 1. Cor. 4. b. 7.
for we be beholden too God for it: we have nothing of our own, as we have
seen alredie by his using of the same reason, to the intent that no man should
presume too much of himself, but walk meekely and soberly, giving all the
glory unto God. So then, he says agein, that whosoever is most excellent,
has no cause too exalt himself above his neighbors, for he has nothing of
his own, but must accknowledge that he has all of God. And after what manner?
Even by confessing that it is his freebestowed gift. Ye see then, that for the
first point, Saint Paul meant too rid men of the vice which they be too much
inclyned too, that every man might beware of exalting himself. True it is, that
there is none of us al, but he could find in his heart too be a master over
other men: but S. Paul says unto them, ye wretches, what are ye? What is it
that you can claim, too say, I have this or that of mine own? for ye hold
all things of the mere free gift of your God. And therefore cast down your
heads every one of you, and consider there is none but only God, which ought
too have all pre-eminence. As for you, ye must learn too stoop too him, and
too hold your selves contented every man with his degree, so as ye labor and
indeuer too serve your neighbors, and all the whole commonaltie or body of the
Church.

Howbeeit Saint Paul adds moreover, that it is according too the meazure of
Christ, according unto that which I have declared: that is too wit, that we
shall not find perfection in any man alive, but every man has need too be
succored, and that not only in respect of this common life. True it is, that
our Lord shows us aforehand, how it is his will too hold us linked toogither,
because we would be too fleeting too separate our selves asunder. For every
of us cannot be a Baker, every of us cannot be a Husbandman, every of us
cannot be a Cutler: insomuch that there is not that man which needs not the
help of one that seems his inferior, yea and a rascal in comparison of
himself, another could we live one day in this world, without communicating
toogither. Our Lord brydleth us in this aforehand, because he sees we be as
it were harebrayned, and would hardly be kept in unity. But here he treats
of the spiritual gifts, whereby God shows that he is a father too us, and
holds us as the housholdfolke of his Church. Let the perfectest man that is,
examine himself and he shall find, that his receiving of more than other men
have, is in such wise, that it is by meazure. Howsoever the case stand, let
none of us presume too have all: for it must needs be, that a man is too much
blinded with pride, if he be of that mind. But when we have our meazure, let
us consider the two points which I have touched before: Luke. 7. g. 43.
namely, that he which has received the larger meazure, is the more streytly
bound too employ every whit of it too the common benefyte of the Church. And
moreover that he must help himself by his neighbors, and consider that he
cannot forbear them, and therefore conform himself quietly unto them, and
seek no more but to be as a member of the body, that all of us may hold on
toogither too our head, desirous that Jesus Christ may have such pre-eminence
over us, as every of us may obey him, and he lead us too God his father. And
so ye see what Saint Paul meant in speaking of the said meazure.

Now it stands us on hand too mark well how he says, that it is in Jesus
Christ, because it is he in whom we be linked toogither. For (as has bin
showed heertoofore) what is our spiritual kindred? Although it spring of God,
as of the fountain of all goodness: yet could it not flow down unto us,
except Jesus Christ were among us, Ephe. ^. b. 10.
and that we were gathered toogither by his mean. Accordingly also as we
have seen in the first Chapter, how it is his office too gather all things
toogither (both in heaven and earth,) that were scattered asunder before. Then
let us mark, that for as much as God has not given men such perfection, that
every one of us can live of himself alone, we must cling toogither in peace
and concord: For it is certain that God could well have made us perfect out of
hand, so as nothing should have wanted in us: and that he is no nigard in
enriching us with his goods, so far forth as he knows too be for our
behoof. Seeing then that there is infirmity in us, why does not God knit us
too him out of hand? Why holds he us still in such weakness? Why gives he
us not an Angelical power and perfection? As I said before, he will have us to
learn too live warely and awefully, knowing that it stands us on hand to
have him go through with the thing that he has begun. And therwithall we must
also live meekly and gently one with another, and not be so proud as to despyze
other men, and too draw aloof from them, but rather consider that they may
help us, and that there is not so bace a person in Gods Church, which has not
received some thing wherewith he may be able to do seruis too his neighbors.
That then is the thing that we have seen alredye. Agein, if we think that a
poor silly soul has no learning too teach us, and that we can receive
nothing at his hand: let us beware that we do not prejudice the grace of God.
For it is certain, that look how many have any taste and feeling of the
Gospel, we have record, that God dwells in them by his holy spirit. For
faith is the singular gift of God: Romans 10. a. 3.
and it is a sure token that God dwells in every man, where we see any
feeling and knowledge of the Gospel. Also it is certain that every little
drop of Gods grace is worthy too be esteemed, so as there is no cause in
this beehalfe why pride should hinder our linking toogither, or that we should
not consider that all of us are members of one body. Let that serve for one
point.

And therwithall on the other side, Luke. (...). a. 2.
let every of us look well to himself, for we shall yield account of the
benefyts that God has bestowed upon us, and the more a man has received, the
more blamed shall he be, if he indeuer not too discharge himself of his duty
in serving of his neighbors, as I said before. For the end of all Gods gifts
is always too edifye one another, that Gods Temple may gr^we among us, and be
still rered too his full perfection. And so ye see how we ought too bestow
the spiritual gifts that we have received at Gods hand. For the same cause
also it is said, that such as know the Gospel, Luke. 16. b. 8.
ought too show by the conversation of their whole life, that they be the
children of light, and not as blind wretches that wander in darkness. Wherefore
let us learn to make Gods gifts auaylable in such wise, as he may be
glorified by them. And in that respect is mention made expressly of meazure, too
the intent we should not allege for our excuce, that this man or that man
gave us no good example. For when it stands upon commendation, then every of
us bears hymfelf on hand, and would persuade all the world too believe, that
he is very excellent. And yet in the mean while we consider not, that God
has bound us dubble, in voutsafing too show so large bountifulness toowardes
us, as too set us in higher degree than our neighbors. Therefore let us
bethink us better of it, both generally and particularly, than we have done.
Generally, for that we have the Gospel freely preached here among us, and
for that we ought universally too be as a burning Cresset, too show the way
of salvation. John. 5. ^. 35.
And particularly, by discharging every man his own duty, that we give no
cause of stumbling too our neighbors, but rather indeuer too draw them too
us, which are aloof from God and his truth, and also take pain too confirm
and put foreward them whom God has set alredie in a good trade, and in the
right way. But alas: Men discharge themselves ill of that. For according as any
man has the excellenter gifts, so will he needs ouermayster all others, and
be woorshipped as an Idol: and so in the mean while the union is broken, in
manner of all hands. And yet for all that, (as I said before) it is impossible
that we should link toogither in brotherly concord, but by conforming our
selves too such as are of the Church, as too our own members. Without that, it
is impossible for us too be truly linked in one, and yet ye shall see that
every man couets too be had in estimation. Agein, when it comes too the
edifying of others, we do clean contrary too that which Saint Paul tells
us here. For in the fourteenth and fifteenth too the Romans, Romans 14. a. 1.
and 15. a. ^.
he shows that we must deal, as if a strong man should see another man
weak: so little ought he too utter his strength too the broozing of his
neighbor, that he ought rather too bear him up. As who should say, that if I
had a little child to lead, I should break both his arms and his legs in
running hastily with him. And if another man that is much stronger than I,
would needs tire me, under color that he is lustyer than I, by trying his
ability and force against me: is it meet that I should be cast down by
him? Therefore we must (as I said) have a care too fashyon our selves in such
wise too our brethren, as the stronger sort do not shoulder their neighbors
that are feeble and weak, nor vex them by laboring too ouercrop the^ by
force: Ezech. 34* c. 21.
ne do as the Prophet Ezechiell vpbraydeth, namely that such as abuse their
courage and strength after that sort, are as Goats that dosse with their horns
against the silly Lambs, which have none other intent, but too be meek.
That is the thing which we ought too do, and wherfrom we be far of.

Also it is certain that the City of Geneua ought generally too be as a
burning Cresset, too give light too such as are yet far of from the Gospel.
But it appears how the world goes with us: I report me too yisterdayes
dealing: I must needs speak of it. For if I concealed it in the pulpet, and in
the mean while the Countrifolke can make report of it in the streets, yea and
give judgment of it: were I not much to blame? Seeing then that the little
children can sing of it, (as they say) should I not be too rank a traitor to
God and his people, Esaias. 3^* c. 10.
if I, if I (I say) and my fellows should play the dumb dogs? If a goldsmith
should make a Cross or a Chalice, he should be punished, as he deserves. If
some other man do make a thing that serves too popish superstition, it shall
not be abidden. If a marchantman sell beads, he shall have his punishment as
he is worthy. But if a man sell Chesibles, Awbes, and all other trinkets of
the mass, that shall be suffered and borne with. Nevertheless this has bin
done. And in whose name? Even of them which ought too bridle others, and too
punish them that had offended. And in what place? In the place which is
dedicated and consecrated too God for the executing of Justice. Yet
notwithstanding, it will perchance be said, that it was done through
ouersyght: and I beeleeue it. For had the party bin well aduyzed, surely he
would have kept himself from doing so unlawful and utterly inexcusable a
deed. And therefore let us beware, let us (I say) beware, that we suffer not
our selves too be blinded after that fashyon by Satan, and so rocked aslepe,
as we consider not what is told us here, namely that if we have received any
grace or gift at Gods hand, we must set more store by it, and put it too such
use, as God may be glorified, and his Church furthered by it: or else we
shall have a dreafull account too make, for giving cause so of offense too the
weak. And it had bin better that that filthy trash had bin consumed a hundred
times with fire, than too have bin so brought forth in open place, in the
sight of all such as lie in wayt for us a far of. For of a truth we know
well enough that there are many which watch us, and seek nothing but too spy
some cause too speak evil of us, not only too mock us for our labor, for
we be worthy of that: but too blaspheme Gods name. Therefore if a man have
ouershot himself once, it is good that he should be warned of it, that he may
take better heed hereafter: and that we knowing that God has bound us so
deeply unto him, by exalting us, and by doing us more honor than we deserve,
in voutsafing too have us too be his people, and too make us glory of the
having of the pure doctrine of his Gospel, we may profit our selves the better
by it, and be afraid least if we change after that sort, and become so
rechelesse as too fall too taking of leave too do what we list: God show us
that he is able too take away the things that he has given us, and too
dispossess us of them when he lists.

Now Saint Paul adds here the manner how God is so liberal unto us in
Jesus Christ, and yet notwithstanding deals the gifts of his holy spirit too
each man by certain meazure, and not to every man alyke, but as he him self
thinks good. He says, that this was done by our Lord lesus Christ's
ascending up intoo Heaven. For then did he obtain souerein dominion, Phil. 2.
b. 9.
and the father gave him a name which is above all names, that all knees should
how before him, as it is said in another place. In deed our Lord Jesus Christ
received al fullness of grace at his coming intoo the world, accordingly as S.
John says in his first Chapter, John. 1. b. 14.
that al of us receive of him, to the end we may have our fill of the good
things whereof we were hungry and empty before. John. 1. ^. ^6.
That was the cause then why the spirit was given him without measure, as it is
said in the same text. And the faithful, because they be members of the
Church, have received thereof, and God has given too every man his portion, and
according too the mesure of his only son. But as for him, God has not given
him his spirit by measure. And why? For he is the head, and every man must
take his lyuelines from thence, and he therwithal have all power over us.
Wherefore let us be contented that every of us has his portion, that we may
walk in fear before God: and therwithall let us understand that the
perfectness is in Jesus Christ, Esaias. 6*. a. 1. and Luke. 4. c. 18. and Math.
3. d. 16.
because Gods spirit rests in him, and both great and small must be feign
too repair too him, with acknowledgment of their poverty, too obtain there
the things that they want, and not be ashamed to receive Christ's Alms, as
they that are destitute of all good things. Furthermore, although our Lord
Jesus Christ showed himself too be the only son of God while he was
conversant in this world, and proved the same by his wonders, miracles, and
gifts: Yet notwithstanding, when he ascended intoo heaven, he showed himself
too be the very party in deed which had commission of God his father, Ephe.
4. b. 8.
too deal unto us all things that we have need of. And that is the cause why
it is said in the seventh of Saint John, that the holy Ghost was not yet
given, John. 7. f. 39.
because Jesus Christ was not yet glorified. It is very certain that our Lord
wrought even then by the power of his holy spirit. Math. 16. c. 16.
For when Saint Peter confessed him too be the son of the living God: it was
answered him, Flesh and blud has not reveled this thing unto thee, but my
heavenly father. Too be short, we know well that there is nothing but evil
in us, and that the good which God gives us, is by his holy spirit, and that
all things are committed too our Lord Jesus Christ, and that it belongs too
him too deal forth his doctrine unto us, according as it is told us, that it
is his office, and that the father has given him special commission too deal
his gifts unto us. And in deed it is a cause also why the Prophet Esaias says,
that Gods spirit rested upon him, namely too show that if we be separated
from him, we must needs perish as it were through drought and emptiness. But
howsoever the case stand, we must always come back too his point, that the
holy Ghost was then powered out upon all the faithful, when our Lord Jesus
Christ was exalted, as it is said in the other text. So then let us mark, that
when our Lord Jesus Christ left the world, and was received up intoo his
heavenly glory: it was too the end that we should thenfforth enjoy his goods
so much the better. And that is also the cause why he said too his disciples,
John. 16. a. 7.
it is erpedient for you that I go away, for if I tarried still with you, the
holy Ghost should not come. It is true that our Lord Jesus Christ could well
have given them his spirit while he was conversant with them after a visible
fashyon, as well as he did when he was gone out of the world. But we must not
dispute of this matter after our own fancy: Phil. 2. a. ^.
we must understand that our Lord Jesus was humbled for a time, yea and utterly
emptyed, as we shall see more at length agein hereafter: but yet was he
received intoo his heavenly glory, too the intent he should have souerein
dominion, and be so exalted, as all creatures might stoop too him. Thus ye
see how our Lord Jesus Christ's will was to absent himself from us in his
body, too the intent we might the better feel his presence through his
dwelling in us by his holy spirit. And that is the thing which S. Paul
treats of as now, when he says, that for the same cause, it is said, that
he went up, and gave his gifts too men, after he had led away his enemies
prisoners.

Now this text (which is alleged out of the threescore and eight Psalm)
shows, that God is verily exalted in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ. In
deed in that song David preaches and sings the praise of God, because that
being stablished King of Israel, and bearing the figure of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he had set up Gods service in his pureness agein, redressed the great
number of disorders that had bin under the reign of Saul, and finally
prospered in a great sort of victories, insomuch that God had uttered such
grace upon him, as it appeared plainly, that his kingdom was not the kingdom
of a mortal and transitory man, b^t rather that God minded too have his
glory known there. That is David's proper meaning. Therefore whereas he says,
first of all, that God is gone up, he follows the common manner of the
speaking of the Scripture: for inasmuch as all things had gone tootoo much too
havoc in the time of Saul: God seemed too have bin asleep. Agein, Religion
was as good as beaten down: and there was such excessive liberty of doing
evil, that a man would have said, that God governed not that people any more.
David then shows a wonderful change, in that he says, that God is gone
up: that is to say, that he showed by effect that he had a care of his Church,
that he intented too keep it under his protection, and meant too have his
majesty known there. That is one point. Hereuntoo he adds, thou have led
captivity captive: meaning thereby, that God had subdewed his enemies round
about him, of whom there had bin a great number, which sought nothing else but
the ruin and desolation of the people. Therefore David means that as soon as
God went up, by and by he brake and bruzed the heads of his enemies, so as they
came no more too trubble his people, as who should say, they had found by
experience, that all their practizes, force, and assaults had booted them
nothing at all. Theruppon he adds, that immediately also he received gifts of
men: too betoken that they which had bin so overcome, had offered tribute unto
God, as to their souerein King. True it is, that this was done in David's
person. Nevertheless it was Gods mind too have his glory shine forth in that
man, whom he had so chozen and sholed out, and whom it was his pleasure to have
anointed of Samuel. 1 Samuel 15. c. 12.
Too be short, we see what David meant to declare in that verse. S. Paul
therefore applies the same too our Lord Jesus Christ, and not without cause.
For look what was figured in the person of David, must be referred too Jesus
Christ, because he is the truth and substance of all those shadows, and we
have in him a much more royal performance of the things that are mentioned in
that Psalm. S. Paul therefore abused not that text, when he appropryed it too
the only son of God, in saying, that he was exalted up on high. For (as he
will declare hereafter) Jesus Christ was first abaced, and afterward exalted.
Ye see then, that God took as it were a new possession of his Souereintie,
not over all the world, but over his own people, too the end too govern them
with their own good wills. And afterward he took possession of it over his
enemies too. For in the Psalm it is said, Psalm. (...)* f. 39.
not only that he received tribute and gifts, to the end that every man
should do him homage: but also that he subdewed the rebels. For there are
another devils nor reprobates, but they be so beaten down by the myghtie hand
of God, as we may well perceive that our Lord Jesus Christ is he of whom David
was the figure. So then, S. Paul tells us here in effect, that although our
Lord Jesus Christ dwell not among us after the manner of men, nor we do see
him with our bodily eyes: yet must we not therefore be separated from him in
mind. He is gone up too fill all things, not with his body, but with his
benefits and gifts. For how great distance so ever there be between our
Lord Jesus Christ and us, as in respect of the places of heaven and earth: yet
notwithstanding he ceass^th not too dwell in us, but will have us also too be
all one with him, which thing he shows us by the gifts which he bestows
upon us, so as we ought of duty too be drawn to the union that he has
spoken of. This then is the effect of the things which we have to gather upon
this streyne, for as now the matter must be broken of, but it shall be gone
through with agein hereafter.

But howsoever the case stand, let us mark for a conclusion, that Jesus Christ
is not so far from us now adays, but that we may perceive by experience,
that we be knit unto him, and that he utters his riches too make us
parttakers of them, and that he fylleth us with them as much as need requyres,
at leastwyse according too the measure and portion that has bin spoken of. And
therefore let us labor too serve our neighbors, let us foresee what may do
them good, and let us follow the order that God has set among us, assuring
our selves that although our Lord Jesus is gone up, yet is he not therefore so
far of from us, that he has forsaken and given over his Church, but that he
is exalted, too the end we should honor him by acknowledging him for our
head. And seeing we be members of his body, we must serve one another, and
not be so v^happie as too bar our selves from coming too him, but rather
resort every one of us too him, and indeuer too draw others with us, so as the
stronger sort discorage not the feeble and weak, but rather stre^gthen them,
and the lusty sort bear the faynter sort, and they that are already in good
forwardness, lend their hand too such as come lagging after, and have much
adoo too draw their legs after them: so as we may al come too the
perfection whereunto we be called.

Now let us cast our selves down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him that we may be so touched with
them, as we may yield our selves too him with true repentance, too our
further profyting and strengthening all our life long, by acknowledging the
miseries that are in us: and that it may please him so too bear with us, that
in the end having obtained releasement of our sins, we may be provoked too
come unto him, not doubting but he will always acknowledge us for his
children, too make us enjoy the heritage which he has bought so dearly for
us. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father. etc.

The.xxiiii. Sermon, which is the fourth upon the fourth Chapter.
7. But grace is given too every of us, according too the measure of Christ's
gift.

8. For the which thing he says, when he went up on high he led a
multitude of prisoners intoo captivity, and gave gifts too men.

9. Now, that he went up, what means it, but that he first went down intoo
the low parts of the earth?

10. He that went down, is the same that went up above all the heavens, too
the end to fulfill all things.


I Began this morning too expound the text of the Psalm alleged here by S.
Paul, Psalm. 68. d. 19.
showing that all the things which are spoken there, agree too the person of
the only son of God. For although he say oftentimes by way of similitude,
that God goes up, when he shows himself judge of the world, and defender of
his Church: yet notwithstanding inasmuch as when our Lord Jesus Christ was come
down, he was abaced as one that was beneath all men, and afterward was exalted
by the power of God his father: therein we see most fully, how God voutsafed too
be abaced, for a time in the person of his son, and too be in a state
despyzed before men, and afterward would be crowned agein with glory and
honor, as the Apostle says of him in the Epistle too the Hebrews: and that
is the cause why S. Paul says here, Hebr. 2. b. 7.
that it behooved him first too descend, too be so exalted. Psalm. 8. b. 6.
But before we goo any further, we must mark that here S. Paul has
changed the word. For whereas David says, that God Received gifts and
presents, that is too say, tribute and homage of those whom he had subdewed
too his majesty: S. Paul in stead thereof says, that he gave. And so this
is not rehearced as it lies in the Psalm: but the Apostle meant too show that
the triumph which our Lord Jesus Christ made when he rose from death,
surmounted all David's victories, and all that ever had bin done in shadows
and figures under the law. For it is much more too give than too take. Also
whereas it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 16. a. 2.
that God received: that was not for himself, nor too his own use: for we
know he has no need of any thing: but his receiving was too inriche his
Church. And that is the cause why it is said, a. Mac. 8 f. 28.
that the women which never stepped out of their doors, shall have their part
of the pray or booty. Psalm. 68 d. 13.
There therefore David shows that God was not glorified for any profit or
advantage that he pretended on his own behalf, accordingly as it is said
that he is contented with his own perfection, for he can another increace nor
diminishe: but all redounded too the welfare of his Church. For Gods showing of
himself too be rich, is not by keeping of his treasures under dubble locks
(as men say:) but by setting them forth for all comers, at leastwyse if we
seek them with true faith. And forasmuch as his riches diminish not, nor yet
his liberality which he uses toward us: thereby we know that he passes
all the men in the world. Then if we will defyne in one word how God is
rich: it is in being liberal unto us, using bountifulness, and by alluring
us too him too succor us in all our needs and wantes, according too this
saying of his by his Prophet, Esaias. 55 a. 1.
Come all ye that are thirsty, and drink your fill: ye shall have your
fill, not only of water, but also of wine and mylk. Too be short, he shows
that they can want nothing, which wayt upon him, and put their trust in him.
Therefore it is said in the Psalm, that all shall have their part of the
spoil, Psalm. 34 b. 10.
not only the men of war, (for they might hap too boast that they had gotten
the whole pray by their own manhood and policy) but that the women which
never stird out of the house, Psalm. 68 d. 13.
and which did nothing but spin upon their distaues, shall have part of the
booty, as though they had gotten the victory. Hereby (I say) he shows, that
Gods receiving of tributes and taxes of such as he had subdewed too his
dominion, was not too increace himself withal, but too make us parttakers of
all the benefytes that belong too our salvation. And herewithall let us mark
well, how it is alleged, that when God gives us his gifts, it is not to the
intent that we might father any thing upon our own virtue or prowess: but
that we should think our selves beholden too his mere free goodness for all
things. And so must all things be referred too his glory. For the more that he
bestows upon us, the more ought we too be forward and ready too confess
how much we be bound unto him. But the chief point is, that we indeuer too
make the gifts that we have received, auaylable too the common edifying of
the Church: that is too say, that God may still be more and more exalted, and
the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ increaced and augmented among men. And so
the condition (say I) wheruppon our Lord distributeth too every of us the
things that belong too him, and are his own, and which he could keep still
too himself, is, that we should do him homage for them both in word and
deed.

But now let us come to that whch Saint Paul adds. He says, that it behooved
Jesus Christ to descend, according also as he descended intoo the low parts
of the earth, and that thereupon he was exalted. Many have made over violent
glozes upon this place, saying that Jesus Christ went down, not only, into the
grave, but also even intoo Limbo, Phil. 2. a. 8.
a place forged of their own brain. But Saint Paul speaks simply, namely,
(as it is said in the second too the Philippians) that because Jesus Christ was
abaced, therefore God his father exalted him too his right hand, and gave him a
souerein dominion, too the end that all knees should thensfoorthe bow before
him. Therefore whereas S. Paul says, that Jesus Christ was abaced, he means
it of his clothing of himself with our nature, wherein he became despyzed,
without any dignity, and without any reputation too the worldward. Psalm. 22.
b. 7.
According wheruntoo it is said in the Psalm, that he was counted as a woorme
of the earth, and not as a man, insomuch that men took scorn too look upon
him (as says the Prophet Esaias,) and there was nothing in him that men could
like of. Esaias. 53. a. 2.
Ye see then that Jesus Christ did so submit himself to all reproach, that he
was disfigured, Marc. 14 g. 65.
and men did spit at him, and mock him, and do him all the wrongs that they
could, and afterward he was exalted. And no dubt but Saint Paul has touched
the thing here which he discourses more at the length in the forealledged
place: Phil. 2. a. 8.
which is, that the example of the son of God ought too teach us
lowelinesse, and too make us walk plainly without taking any thing upon us
above other men. For who are we? What is our state? When every of us has
sifted himself thoroughly, what shall he find in him too boast of? We have many
things too thank God for: but too take upon us that which is his, were a
villainous treachery. So is there nothing for us too do but too cast down our
eyes. For behold, the son of God could have showed himself in his heavenly
glory and majesty; so as he could have made all the world too quake: and yet
we see that being borne in a stable, Luke 2. a. 7.
he walked all his life time as one unknown and vnesteemed, and in the end was
put too death, and that not a common death, but a death that was so
reproachful, yea and cursed of Gods own mouth, Deuteronomy. 21. d. 25.
that he was hild for accursed before God and his Angels, too the intent that
we might be blissed for his sake and by his means. Gal. 3. b. 13.
Seeing then that Gods son was so abaced, have not we good cause too stoop
low? For God requires not that we should forgo any thing of our own, when
he exhorts us too lowliness. And why? for if we knew what we be, we
would stoop low enough. Our head was not in like plyght when he came down
hither. For why? John. 17 d. 24.
As it is said in the.xvii. of Saint John, he possessed his divine glory and
majesty before the making of the world. And yet for all that, he voutsafed too
abace himself in such wyze (as in the sight and opinion of men) that too
outward apperance he seemed too have utterly given over his majesty. It is
true that he continued still in his perfect state, but that appeered not. And
that is the cause why Saint Paul uses the word Figure or Shape: he appeered
(says he) in the shape of man. For he means that our Lord Jesus Christ's
clothing of himself with our flesh, and his being despyzed and rejected, were
no derogation at all too his divine essence. And why? for it was but an outward
shape. Then did he continue always vnappayred, and yet nevertheless he was
seen too be under all men. Who will then refuze the same state, that we
should not be lowly after his example? The fathers that lived under the Law
perceived alredye that it behooved them too be fashyoned like unto the image
and pattern of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was their head, and yet they had but
very dark figures. Now then, seeing that Jesus Christ shows us the way,
Act. 14. d. 22.
so as he is entered intoo the kingdom of heaven through many tribulations,
and intoo life by death, and is exalted on high after abacing low: what excuce
shall we have, if we seeing those things, be still puffed up with pride, and
cannot find in our hearts too walk in meekness, considering that we be
nothing? So then, whereas Saint Paul speaks of the low places of the earth:
he means the humane nature which our Lord Jesus took upon him for our
salvation, yea even with addition of all the things that I have to^ched. For he
showed not himself as a great prince, another used he any pomp or traynes of
men too make himself dread in the world: but (as it is said in the two and
fortith of Esaias) he brake not the broozed reed, Esaias. 42. a. 3.
he quenched not the smoking flax, another was his voice or cry heard in the
streets. Math. 12. b. 20.
Agein, besides this we see how he suffered reproach, and how he abode it
patiently: when he came too his death, all men seemed too have conspyred
against him. Therefore we must add all these qualities too know how Jesus
Christ descended into the low parts of the earth. Howbeit, if we compare his
divine majesty with our nature, we may well call all the earth the low
places: and although Jesus Christ had possessed the whole world: yet had it bin
nothing in comparison of his heavenly glory. For what are they which are in
highest state of dignity? They do but craule here like Frogs, Esaias. 4. d.
22.
or (leap) like Gressehoppers, as says the Prophet Esaias. No marvel than
though the whole earth be termed a low and bace place in respect of heaven.
Howbeeit Saint Paul's intent here was too note breefly, that Jesus Christ
voutsafed too stoop so low, as too become a mocking stock too the
unbelievers, yea and even too be condemned and esteemed as a man accursed and
forsaken of God, all which things he endured for our salvation. It is good
reason therefore that we should myldly and without geynsaying receive Gods
humbling of us, Gala. 6. d. 17.
and bear in our selves the image of our Lord Jesus Christ, by being shaken
of, despyzed, and mocked for our simplicity, and that no man should ^^ke upon
him, or chalendge too himself the things that are none of his. That, is the
effect of Saint Paul's meaning.

Now he says, John. 18. g. 36.
that he is gone up above all heavens. Wherein we see that the son of God has
not as now the lordship of this world. For Saint Paul's declaring that he is
above all the heavens, is too show, that the dominion which he has, is
heavenly, and divine, and everlasting. For the heavens themselves shall pass
away, Math. 24. c. 35.
and they must needs vanish, Mark. 13. d. 22.
as Jesus Christ auoweth with his own mouth. Now if the heaues be snbiect too
changing, and must be done away, too be renewed agein: 2. Pet. 3. b. 13.
if Jesus Christ dwelt in heaven, he should be subject too the same state,
that is too say, he should be frail and transitory. James. 1. c. 13.
Then is he above all the heavens in his infinite glory, wherein there is
another change nor turning about.

And theruppon he adds, that it is too fill all things. By this word Fill,
he means that Jesus Christ is not so locked up in any one place, but that
we may feel him present, and that he dwells in us, and that he fills all
things. But surely that is not with his body as some have grossly imagined:
but it is with his power, and with his spiritual benefyts and gifts. Yet
nevertheless Saint Paul's intent here is too betoken a presence of Christ,
too the end that we may know that we have not lost any thing by his
absenting of himself from the earth, so as he dwells here no more after a
visible fashyon. And why? For he ceasseth not for all that, too execute his
power every where, and to fill all things: insomuch that we have all things of
him which are requisite for our salvation. That is in effect the very meaning
of S. Paul.

Wherefore let us here put in practice the exhortation that has bin touched
before: which is, that we cannot be taken for Gods children, except we become
like too him that has the right of the first borne. Since it is so: let us
willingly suffer our selves too be abaced, that God may exalt us: for by that
mean did our Lord Jesus come too his glory. Agein, let us apply all our
senses to taste thoroughly what the mercy of God is, in that it has pleased him
that his son which was his image, should be so abaced. Let us consider how
great the love of our Lord Jesus Christ is, in that he voutsafed to hide his
divine essence for a time, and took not upon him as belonged unto him, but
did as it were stoop down too the sight of the world. Since we see this, let
us consider first of all, how precious (...) souls were too the son of God,
seeing he voutsafed too stoop so low for our saks, and let us esteem of the
Gospel whereby so great a benefyte is communicated unto us, assuring our
selves, that if Gods son had not come down unto us, there had bin no mean
for us too have come unto God his father. For besyds that we be plundged
here in mire, and have nothings in us but utter frayltie: it is certain, that
we bear as good as a hell about us, because the devil is not without cause
called the prince of this world. John. 16. b. 11.
So then, seeing we be under the tyranny of Satan and of sin, how could
we mount upward, if Jesus Christ drew us not? But first it behooved Christ too
come down hither. And thereby are we taught to woorship our Lord Jesus Christ
always in the person which he has taken of the mediator: and whereas the
unbelievers and unholy folk take occasion too despyze him, because he was
crucified: let us honor him still as he deserves. For whereas his greatness
and majesty were after a sort darkened for a time: that was too give the
greater beauty too his mercy and loving kindness: which selfsame word S.
Paul uses when he purposes too express well what earnestness of mind and
care God had, too ransom us from the dungeons of death. And so ye see in
effect what we have too consider upon the Apostles words, where he says,
that Jesus Christ was so abaced.

And whereas he adds, that he went up above all the heavens: I have told you
alredye in one word, that it is all one as if he meant too exempt him from the
array of creatures, knowing that as now he is not subject too any change. And
for the same cause is it said in the sixth too the Romans, Romans 6. b. 10.
that he suffered once in dying for our sins: but yet for all that, dyed not
(for ever,) because he is entered into the life of God, that is to say, he is
made parttaker of the immortal glory, so as we have just cause to cast down
our eyes. And because we conceive not this so high souereintie which was given
him, let us honor it, seeing that even the Angels of heaven do bear us
company therein. Psalm. 96. b. 8.
For it is not for naught said in the Psalm, that all the Angels of God
worshipped him, when he showed him self too the world: which text the Apostle
also applies to his person in the first chapter too the Hebrews. Hebr. 1. a. 6.
Herewithall let us mark, that although Jesus Christ be not shet up in any
place certain: yet he ceasseth not too keep still the true nature of his
body. For the Papists have imagined, that although he be in heaven, yet he is
euerywhere else as well as there: yea and therwithall they have their
speculations, too show how it is no inconvenience at all, that God should have
his being above, and therewithal also be beneathe ^eere with us. And
theruppon they imagine themselves too have the body of Jesus Christ in Almbrye:
by reason whereof they bear it abroad in the streates, and cause all men too
woorship it: and yet in the mean while men know it is but a morsel of bread:
Yis (say they), it is God. But, that is an utter ad^ichilating of the trwe
nature of our Lord Jesus Christ. In defense thereof they allege, that if it had
the property of a body, it must needs be in one place certain. But above
the heaueus there is no place, (too speak after the manner of the
philo^ophers:) and it is said, that Jesus Christ is there: (ergo (say they) his
body has not the properties of a body.) Yis, and we know that the Angels
have no bodies, and yet are they not euerywhere, for they be feign to go
whether soever God appoints them. Now seeing that the Angels are not tied too
any place, notwithstanding that their essence is not infinite, but comprehended
within a certain measure, though they have no proportion of members: why
should not Jesus Christ be above all the elements of this world, yea and above
all the heavens, and yet not cease too be very man? Not that he can dye any
more, or be subject too any of our passions and infirmities, as he was
heertoofore, when he listed too be conversant in the world: for as now he is
quyte rid of all those things: but that howsoever the case stand, he holds
still his true nature of man. And although he be above the heavens: yet let us
assure our selves, that that distance hinders not his prese^tnesse with us
and in us. As how: We must mark what has bin touched before. It is said, that
he fills all things: yea, but that is with the power of his spirit. Ye see
then that the filling whereof Saint Paul speaks, Ierem. 23. ^. 24.
is that we should have our fill of the benefyts of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that when we be graffed intoo his body, and made one with him by belief of
the Gospel, then may we assure our selves that he is the fountain which never
dries, nor can never be emptyed with drawing, and that in him we have, all
variety of good things, and all perfection. Now then, if Saint Paul had meant
as the papists have forged, and as is maynteyned now adays of many ignorant
and wilful persons, namely that Jesus Christ fills all things with his
humane nature: surely he would not have forgotten it: but he lets it alone
as an absurdity. Wherefore let us mark well the the two sayings that are set
down here: that is too wit, on the one side, that Jesus Christ is gone up
above all the heavens, and yet notwithstanding that he ceasseth not too fill
all things. It is said, that he is gone up above the heavens, even to the end
that we should not be tied too this world and too our fleshly fancies, when we
intend too resort too Jesus Christ: but that we should lift up our mynds on
high, Math. 6. b. 9.
and seek him there by faith. Psalm. 115. a. 3.
Insomuch that when the holy scripture says, that God is in heaven, it
intends not too assign him some peculiar place. The respect is far
differing, and altoogither unlike, between God in his spiritual essence, and
Jesus Christ in respect of the body and humane nature which he took of us.
For when we speak of God, we must always lay this ground, that he has an
infinite essence which fills al things, Esaias. 66. ^. 1.
so that heaven is as his royal throne, and the earth is his footestoole. Not
that he has any feet, nor any seat to sit on: but it serves to show that
there is no distance so far or wide, that can conteyne the majesty of God,
which is infinite, as I said. That is a thing which we must bear in mind,
when God is spoken of unto us. And why then is it said, that God is above all the heavens, and why does Saint Paul speak after the same manner here of Jesus
Christ: It is because that we be dull and earthly, that if God should not
tell us that he has his temple and palace in heaven, we would tie him too
every pyller, to every stone, too every waterspring, too every tree, and (too
be short) too every thing that we see. Therefore too correct such vice, our
Lord says too us, mount up, mount up aloft: as though he lifted us by the
chi^^es, and said, wretched beasts, why seek ye too see me here beneathe.
What intend ye too lyken me too? Assure your selves, ye must be conveyed up
above all the world, when ye think upon me and my majesty. Therefore ye
cannot woorship me, except ye be rapt up aloft, and consider that I am
incomprehensible. Lo how the scripture speaks of him. Luke. 11. a. 9.
And when we say, Our father which art in heaven: it is too the intent we
should lift up our mynds unto him, as he calls us at all hours. Not that
we must imagine as the papists do, who think too please God with their much
babbling, and with their using of many Ceremonies, which may have a gay gloss
to the worldward: I say, we must not think too please God so: for let us be
sure, that that were a transfiguring of God, to make him like our selves: but
we must rather bethink us, that in sted of having our mynds weyed down to the
world, we must strive to lift the^ up on high. And as for Jesus Christ, it is
said, that he is above all the Heavens, even in his humane nature. And how is
that? Being God in respect of his essence, he is equal too his father, so as
he fills all things: but in respect that he has put on a humane body, he is
above the heavens, so as he is not in the world. And it is too fond a grosnesse
too say, Why then, and are not the two natures so knit together, as they
cannot be put asunder? All this is true: but yet does it not follow, that
they cannot be distinguished. So long as we remain alive, our soul and
body are joined toogither: and yet it does not therefore follow, that the soul
is not of another nature than the body, or that they cannot be distinguished.
Even so is it with Jesus Christ. If a man demand, why then? Is not our Lord
Jesus Christ all whole with us, according as he is our head and mediator, and
has gathered us too him in such wise, as we live of his own substance? Yis,
he is with us al whole, if we take him in the person of the mediator. But if a
man demand, is every part of him among us, which is in himself: No: another is
it requisite that he should any more be so conversant among us, as too be
subject too the suffering of any thing, but he must be quyte and clean
exempted from all that geere. And that is the cause why the Apostle tells us,
Hebr. 7. ^. 27.
that he is appeared once, and that hensforth we wayt for him. And so ye see
what we have to consider upon this saying, that Jesus Christ is exalted above
all the heavens.

Now let us go back agein to the word fill: for therein Saint Paul shows
us, that the souereintie of our Lord Jesus Christ has no bounds too be
locked up in: but that it reaches even unto us. Therefore (as I have said
twyce already) our Lord Jesus Christ's filling of all things, is by his power.
For he is not a King after the manner of those whom we see in this world. They
be subject to hunger and thirst, they be subject too diseases and other
things: so as they must have officers at every stones cast, or else they shall
not be obeyed. They then are feign to do their affairs by other men, which
they cannot do by themselves, and too borrowe help at other folks hands.
But it is not so with Jesus Christ: for he reigns not by force of arms, nor
after the manner of worldly princes. Now then? He reygneth by his spirit, and
by the mean of his word. And by that means are al things filled with him, 1.
Cor. 2. a. 9.
even by the Gospel. Saint Paul says in the first too the Corinthians, that
we communicate with him. And too that end also does God call us day by day,
namely too make us parttakers of his only son. And how may that be, unless
he extend his power unto us? Now truly, in this case it stands us on hand
to have more than our senses can receive. For the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ caryeth with it a woonderfulnesse above all our understanding, as Saint
Paul will show yet agein hereafter. For when he has said, that Christ is the
head of the Church, and as it were a husband (which is all one person with
his wife: Ephe. 5. g. 35.
) he cries out, It is a great misterye or secret, between Jesus Christ and
his Church. If it be a secret, surely than can we never atteyne too it by our
own mother wit, nor by our own conceytes. And therefore whereas Saint Paul
says, that he fills all things: let us assure our selves, that in sted of
common reason and common opinion, we must have the experience of faith, if we
intend to know how Jesus Christ dwells in us, and too be persuaded of it,
as has bin said thereof alredie. Howsoever we fare, let us not think that
any distance can separate us from the son of God. And why? For his dominion
extends high and low, and therefore we shall feel that he is in us, and we
in him, that we shall be made all one toogither, yea even too be joined unto
God his father, and too be brought too the perfection that is spoken of in
Saint John, John. 14. d. 28.
where he says, it is expedient for you, that I go my way, for my father is
greater than I. Our Lord Jesus Christ's meaning there, is not too make himself
inferior too his father as in respect of his divine essence: (for we know
there is but one God) but he takes us there, too lift us up according too our
rudeness and infirmity, as if he should lead us pace by pace, and step by
step, like little chilldren. After that manner then does he join us too God
his father, till we be ryghtly transformed intoo his glory, whereof we
enjoy part alredye by the Gospel. 1. Cor. 13. d. 12.
For we see not yet but as it were through a glass, and darkelye, as Saint
Paul says in another place. That then is the thing which we have too bear
in mind.

Now it behooves us too honor well this King, Psalm. 2. c. 12*
which is set over us by God his father, and consider that we ought too be
his people in deed, yea and even his own body. Seeing he does us such
honor, let us look that we be so much the more inflamed with the love of
him, and consider that Jesus Christ being exalted abo^e all the heavens, is
also judge of the world, yea even too call us too account, not only of our
outward deeds, but also even of all our thoughts. And therefore let us walk
in his fear and obedience, 1. Cor. 15. g. 52.
assuring our selves, that when the Trumpet sounds at the last day, we must
all appear before him.

And further let us consider also, that he fills all things in such wise, as
it is to the overthrow of all our enemies, and to the brydling, or rather too
the fettering of them, so as they cannot hurt us, do what they can. Therefore
according too that which is contained here from out of the Psalm, it is very
requisite, that he should be above, too obtain the upper hand of our enemies:
for else what would become of us? And in deed let us consider what they might
be able too do, having infinite hosts too overthrow our salvation
continually withal. For the devil is not as a mortal man: he has such
force, as is terrible out of measure. What might he do, were it not that Jesus
Christ fills all things? yea even too show that he has power both over
Satan, and over all his vpholders, insomuch that practyze they, prepare they,
and turmoyle they what they can against the Church, yet shall they never bring
their enterpryze too pass, because Jesus Christ holds them (at the staves
end,) as it were with his foot upon their throat. Ye see then the kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ was given him, with full warrant, that we shall ever be
defended by his strong and invincible hand, because he has taken us intoo his
perfection, even he that is exalted above all the heavens. And that also is the
cause why Saint Paul says expressly, Phil. 2. b. 12.
that all knees shall bow before him, as well of creatures in heaven, as of
creatures in earth, yea and even of creatures under the earth. Now when we
hear that the Angels stoop too our Lord Jesus Christ: let us understand,
that he applies them too our service, so as they be our keepers, and watch
too defend us against Satan. And seeing that that charge is committed too them
by our Lord Jesus Christ who is their head: we ought too be well assured of
our salvation. And so ye see how we ought too put this text in ure. Moreover,
let us walk so under the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, as we may feel
that he fylleth us in deed, (as I said before) because he is above all things,
through all things, and in all things. This was spoken of God his father,
howbeeit we know that Jesus Christ is the mean whereby God dwells in us.
Wherefore let us be his true Temples, and since that he being the welspring of
all pureness, voutsafeth us the grace and privilege too dwell in us: let us
indeuer too keep our selves holy unto him both in body and soul. For if we
give our selves too our own uncleanness, it is all one as if we went about
too drive away the son of God, who cannot be intermedled with our
corruptions and filthiness. Not that we can be clear from all spot and
blemish: but that we must not delyght in them, but rather fight against them,
and labor more and more too fashyon our selves after the pureness that is in
our Lord Jesus Christ. And like as he sanctified himself in our behalf: so also
let us be holy, namely by the grace and power of his holy spirit, and let the
same holiness be consecrated by the doctrine of the gospel, John. 17. c. 17.
as is said of it in another place. Now then, as touching this fylling, ye see
that in so much as we know that our Lord Jesus Christ holds the diuelles,
and all the despyzers of his majesty fettered in subjection: we may assure
our selves, that he dwells verily in us, and that the same is peculiar too
us, because he has chozen us for his Temples, and intends too show that the
conjunction which he has taken upon him with mankind, is proper to us in
respect of the humane nature, and also in respect of his spirit, because he
makes it too take place in us: and not only that he is man (still) as he was:
but that there is yet more, that is too wit, that we be bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh: not that we be created of his substance, but that by the
power of his holy spirit he makes the substance of his body and blud too flow
down unto us, wherewith we be filled: insomuch that we have there not only
meat too eat, but also drink too drink, so as there is sufficient too
content us withal, condicionally that we consider the benefits wheruntoo he
allureth us, and which he offers us, and will have us too enjoy, so we be
not let by our own unbelief.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too touch us more too the quick with a true
knowledge of our selves and of our wretchedness, that we may be so cast
down in our selves, as we may resort too him with all lowelinesse, and
confess our selves too be beholden too him for all good things, and have none
other shooteanker than our Lord Jesus Christ, since it is he that we be called
unto, but that we may be so clothed with him, as it may put away all our
fleshly lusts and affections, which hinder our uniting unto God, and we
continue in the hope that is given us, until that being taken our of this
world, we enjoy the everlasting rest that he has purchaced for us. That it
may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people
and Nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxv. Sermon, which is the fifth upon the fourth Chapter.
11. And the very same has given, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Shepherdes and Teachers.

12. For the reparation of the Saints, too the work of administration, and
for the edifying of the body of Christ.


We have seen heertoofore how our Lord Jesus Christ has not withdrawn his
power far from us, though he be exalted above the heavens. There is a great
distance betwixt him and us, as in respect of the absence of his body out of
the world: but yet do we find him always present by the power of his holy
spirit, and by that means does he fill all things. And now S. Paul shows,
that this manner of filling, is too the intent that every faithful man, should
with all lowliness serve his own turn, with the gifts and grace which it
has pleased our Lord too bestow upon those whom he has set in his Church
too govern it: and that on the other side, they that have received the larger
measure, should not advance themselves for all that, nor draw alone by
themselves, but indeuer too do service too the common benefyte, salvation, and
welfare of all Gods children. The sum therefore of that which S. Paul was
minded too say, is, that Jesus Christ having all riches in him, has not dealt
thereof unto every of us part and partlyke, at leastwyse so as we should all
be thoroughly perfect: (for he meant it not) but that he has distributed them
by measure. 1. Cor. 12 b. 11.
And in very deed, the order which he has set in his Church shows it. For
all are not Prophets, 1. Cor. 12 d. 17.
all are not Teachers, all are not Evangelists. Then does it follow, that
Christ intends too distribute his gifts by certain measure. And theruppon
we have too conclude, that he which presumes of himself, and surmizeth that
he has all that is requisite: does foully deceive himself two ways. For
there is not that man which has received such perfection, but that he has
need too profit still with his brethren. That is one point. Agein, he that is
the excellentest of all others, is most bound too do good with the things that
God has committed to his charge, or to his trust as a pa^^n. On the contrary
part, the meaner and the ignorant sort, must not envy them that go before them
in lerning and wisdom, because it is Jesus Christ's will, too have it so, and
so must it be, seeing he will have his Church governed by the means of men.
Now then we see whereat the Prophet amed: namely that we should so suffer our
selves too be filled with the spiritual gifts that belong too our salvation,
as none of us refuze too be taught by the means of men. Let us not belyke
these fantastical persons, who would have God too send them some revelation
from heaven, and that they might have no need of preaching or reading. Let us
not be carried away with such foolish ouerweening: but let all of us both great
and small, submit our selves soberly too the order that our Lord Jesus Christ
has set: which is, that such as have great skill, and are well seen in thee
holy scriptures, and have the gift of teaching, should streyne themselves too
serve the whole Church as they be bound too do: John. 1^ b. 8.
for too that end has God advanced them above others. And that the meaner
sort and the ignorant, be not envious for that they see not them selves too
have like portion: but consider that it is enough for them that God forgot them
not, but that the dealing of his gracious gifts (after that manner,) was too
their profit and salvation. It was Gods will that all things should be made
common, and that every member of the body should have his part of them, at
leastwyse so the order be always kept.

Now S. Paul in saying, that our Lord Jesus Christ gave Apostles, and
Prophets, and Evangelists, and Shepherds, and Teachers, does us to
understand, that the preaching of the Gospel, and the meeting of men toogither
too hear the holy Scripture expounded, is not a thing invented by men: but
that God has so ordained it, and our Lord Jesus has set it down for a law,
and we must keep it without breaking of it. For in good sooth, were it not
set down by the souereine authority of the son of God, men are so high
minded, that many of them would shake of that yoke. What have I too do (would
every man say) too be taught by my fellow? Seeing we have the holy Scripture
among us, ought we not too fetch thence whatsoever is meet for us too know?
Why then should any one man be preferred before the rest of the company? Thus
would there be an horrible disorder in the Church, so as no man would submit
himself too be taught. No man would be a learner, too have a master or
teacher over him, unless we were fully persuaded and resolved, that that
order was not of man's deuyce, but that it is a government set down for all the
faithful by the son of God, Math. 1^ d. 40.
who will have them heard, which have the charge of teaching, Luke 10. c. 16.
as men sent by him, telling men that they despyze him, and do him wrong, and
rebel against him and his father, if they receive not his doctrine with all
humbleness, and that whosoever will be taken for a Christian, must also be a
child of the Church. And so ye see in effect what we have too remember, when
S. Paul imputes the having of Prophets, Teachers, and (...), unto the person
of Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, too the intent we should be the more gentle and tractable, and
make no sticking too receive the doctrine that has bin preched unto us, and
to be always lerners in the scoole of our Lord Jesus Christ: Saint Paul
tells us also, that when we have good and faythfullteachers, and others that
labor too show us the way of salvation: it is a sign that our Lord Ie^^s
Christ has not left us, nor forgotten us, but that he is present with us*
(...) watches for our salvation and welfare. Therefore let us not (...) men can
put them selves forth of their own head: for (...) too speak one word too
the glory of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 12 a. 3.
except it (...) given him (from above) and that the holy Ghost govern his
tung* And in very deed it is for the same cause that it is said, Psalm. 119. 99.
that the holy (...) is a wisdom which passes all wit of man, 1. Cor. 2. d.
14.
and that the (...) man understands no whit of it, but that God must be
feign too reuele the things too us which else are too high and hidden from us.
Now then, when we see the holy scripture truly expounded, and applied
ryghtly too our use: let us assure our selves that Gods spirit gives us record
that he abides among us. Wherefore let us learn to receive so excellent a gift,
assuring our selves that it is the homage which our Lord Jesus demands at
our hands. And that is a cause also why the Gospel is called the kingdom of
heaven. Math. 3 ^. 2.
For we beewray right well, that we take not God for our king, nor are
willing too honor our Lord Jesus Christ when he is sent unto us, if we suffer
not our selves too be governed by the means that he commands and allows,
which is, the preaching of the Gospel, wheruntoo we must yield such
obedience, as too receive the doctrine of it without geynsaying, so that he
which has the charge of teaching acquit him self faithfully, and the residew
be not so high minded, as to say, tush, I may forbear it well ynongh, but
receive the things willingly which are spoken too them, and suffer themselves
too be taught, for fear least they should resist the son of God, that we
may continue in them all the time of our life, as shall be declared more at
length agein anon.

Now besides this, Saint Paul by the diversity of the offices which he
sets down, expresses yet better how greatly forecasting our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed himself for the salvation of those that are his, in that he
has left nothing behynd, which was requisite and convenient too bring them too
the heritage of salvation* We must note here concerning these offices which S.
Paul reherceth, that some of the^ served but for a time, as the office of
Apostleship. For they were not chozen of purpose too continue too the worlds
end, ^ut only too publish abroad the doctrine of the Gospel, until it was
received through the whole world (I mean in all kingdoms and Countries)
though every man showed not himself obedient unto it. Math. 10. a 1.
Then was there that special reason why our Lord Jesus Christ ordained the
twelve Apostles, Gala. 2. b. 7.
unto whom Saint Paul was joined afterward to preach among the Gentyles: and
it was as an entering intoo the possession of his kingdom. But after that the
Gospel was once authorized after that manner, the office of Apostleship
ceased. Yet notwithstanding, they had companions and helpfellowes, who were
not of equal degree (...) in commission with them, too sow abroad the seed
of (...) them does Saint Paul name Evangelists or Gospellers. According
wheruntoo, 2. Tim. 4. b. 5.
writing unto Timothy he says* Go through diligently with the woork of an
Evangelist, Those two Offices then served but for that time.

Now as touching the Office of Prophets: we have it not so excellent now
adays (as it was then,) as men see. For God has abated his gifts, because of
the unthankfulness of the world. Not that he shows not him self as liberal
as is requisite for our salvation: but because that howsoever the world go, we
be unworthy too have his treasures so largely powered out, as they had them at
the first vpspring of the Gospel: therefore does he give us but a small
portion of them* Howsoever we fare, the Prophets served too be as it were
expounders of Gods will, and had a much higher understanding in the scriptures,
than the common Teachers had, whose office was too instruct.

As for the Shepeherdes which S. Paul speaks of, they be the Ministers of
the word, which have ordinary charge to teach in some place. As much is too be
said of the Teachers, as we see by example of the Church of Antioche, in the
thirteenth of the Acts. (...)
True it is, that none can be a Shepeherd except he teach: but yet for all
that, the Teachers have a several charge by the selves: which is to expound the
scripture, that there may be always a good and sound understanding of them,
and that the same may have his (...) in the Church, so as ^erisies and false
opinions (...) that the faith may abide (...) and sure above all things. (...)
the Teachers*

Therefore we see by the report of S. Luke, that the Apostles were not tied to
any one certain place, another did Jesus Christ ordeyn the^ to that end. Mark.
16. c. 15.
Preach ye the Gospel (says he) too all creatures. And for that cause,
according as occasion was given them, and as gappes were opened unto them for
the preaching of the Gospel, they employed them selves about it, and were not
tied any certain place. And why? For their commission reached further. Ye see
then that the Apostles had charge too go too and fro, and had no resting place:
that is too say, they had not the charge of any several Church committed unto
them, so as they might say, here will I abide. As much is too be said of the
Evangelists: for they went about the world too, except it were when they were
called particularly too some place. After that manner had Timothy bin chozen
for a time: howbeeit for as much as he could ill be forborne in the office of
an Evangelist, he was feign too shift his place, Ti^ 1. b. 5.
now one where, and now another where. Titus was alloted too the I Will of Candie.
True it is that he was not yet altoogither settled there: but yet was he feign
to hold him to that church, howbeeit that he was removed too and fro, according
as the present opportunity and need required. And heerin we see how these
leaud folk which would pervert all order of gounerment, and seek nothing but
confuzion, do spyte God, in saying that a man must not tarry always in one
place, but follow the example of the Apostles. But that is a flat mocking of
Jesus Christ, as we see by this text. Ye see then how we have too mark,
that the Apostles were as Trumpets too proclayme the Gospel every where, and
that they had Evangelists in like charge with them, too bear them company.
But yet in the mean while there were Prophets also, which were conversant
more in one place than in another, after as it pleased God to distribute his
grace. Yet nevertheless there were of them in every Church, according as we
see that in the Epistle too the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 13. ^. ^.
that S. Paul stands myghtyly upon that point, showing that the gift of
prophesying ought too be preferred before all other gifts, because it is more
profitable, Act. 14. d. 23.
and serves more too the edifying of the Church. As touching Shepherdes, Tit.
1. b. 5. and ^. Tim. ^. d. 2^.
we see how S. Paul and his companion Barnabas ordained of them every where,
and also how he commands Titus and Timothy to cause the churches to be so
provided, as they might always have some Shepherd too guide them: for
otherwise there would be nothing but disorder. Now then since we see that the
choice of Ministers and Shepherdes was made by the authority of Jesus Christ,
and they had as it were their place appointed them, too say, Thou must look
about thee here, as if a man were set in a bulwark or in some Tower to keep
it, when it were in any danger: it becomes every man to keep his place, and
not to covet too gad here and there, but too hold him self bound too the place
where he is. This (say I) is the thing which we have too mark, when S. Paul
speaks of such a variety.

Too be short, let us learn that our Lord Jesus knew whatsoever was
profitable for the welfare of his church, and that he showed it in having a
care that the faithful might not want any thing, but that they might have
sufficient and convenient means too draw them too the kingdom of heaven. Now
a days we have no more the office of Apostleship (as I told you before:)
another have we any ordinary Evangelists: but yet for all that, God does
nevertheless draw us unto him, and give us all helps that are meet for us.
In deed he chastyzeth our vnthankefulness, and because he sees his word
despyzed, he gives us the things with a wet finger (as they say,) which we
should have more fully, if we had such zele to them as were requisyte. Yet
notwithstanding let us not think our state too be the worse, because we have
none Apostles now adays: for it were more than needs. It was right
necessary, considering the confuzion and disorder of the popedom, that God
should stir up men which were not chozen according to the order of the
Church: but yet he gave them grace, and they served his turn. But now that
there is order set both here and elsewhere where the Gospel is preached: we
must come back too the thing before alleged, namely that when God gives us
such Shepherdes as labor too guide us faithfully, and thervntoo we have
Teachers also, which are able too mayntaine the pureness of the doctrine among
us, and too strengthen us in the pure truth of the Gospel, and too withstand
all sects and errors: we must understand that that grace ought too be so
esteemed, we must not grudge against God. Moreover it is very certain, that
if the Gospel were received with such reverence and earnestness, as it
deserves: God also would be more bountiful on his side. Whereas we see now
so few good Preachers, yea and that there step up a sort of dirtdaubers worse
than naught, and far leauder than the Moonkes in the poppedome, which are as
ready to preach Mahomets Alcoran, as Christ's Gospel, so they may keep their
livings still: and when besides those, we see also a sort of drunkardes that
have no more zeal than Swyne, but are as mastiues that bark not, ne never
open their lipes but too confound light and darkness toogither, that all
things might be put out of order: Let us understand that God executes just
vengeance upon the despyzing of his Gospel. For let us see a little what the
humility and submission is which men yield unto God for all their hearing of
the sound of this doctrine, and for all his setting up of the scepter of his
Gospel, to show that he is minded too reign over us. We see that most men
could find in their hearts to have no religion at al. Agein, they that make
fairest countenance, would yet full feign that the Gospel were still but a
shadowing place of Ceremonies. And howsoever the world go, they be loath too
bear any yoke, they cannot abide too be rebuked for their vices, but they
would have a beastly licenciousnesse: condicionally that they might do what
they list, they would be contented that the Gospel should be preached, as
who should say, they would grant it unto Jesus Christ by composition and
covenant. But in the mean while, all is but hypocrisy, and they cannot so
conceal their counterfetting, but that the world does well see that they be
as shameless as harlots. For doubtless, a man shall find more religion and
fear of God in the popedom, than among those that are in the places where the
Gospel is preached. But the mischeef of all mischeeues is, that a sort of
these naughtipackes step up intoo the chair of truth, of whom some are
drunkardes, some whoremongers, and some blasphemers: and too be short, there
is such wickedness among them, as is horrible to see* Since we know this, let
us cast down our eyes, and condemn the unthankfulness and rebelliousnesse
that is in us, as the cause of all the disorder that we see. But howsoever the
world go with us, yet if our Lord be so benificiall too us still, as too have
his doctrine preached too us: therein we have a sure and infallible token, that
he is near at hand with us, and that he seeks our salvation, by calling us
unto him, as though he spoke with open mouth, and that we saw him personally
before us. Then can we not fail nor be deceived, in assuring our selves that
Jesus Christ calls us too him, and that he holds out his arms open too
receive us, as often as the Gospel is preached unto us. And we need not too
seek revelations from heaven, Deuteronomy. 32. c. ^4.
nor too wander abroad: for seeing that the word is in our heart and mouth,
what would we more? Who shall fly up above the clouds? Romans 10. b. 8.
Who shall go down into the deepes? let us assure our selves that God offers
himself unto us in the person of his only son, when he sends us preachers
and teachers.

And herwithall let us still have an eye too that which I said before: which is,
that they too whom God gives most of his grace, must consider that by that
means they be the more bound to employ them selves in the place that our Lord
has assigned them too, and wheruntoo it is his pleasure too appropriate them.
He then that has knowledge, must not exalt himself for it, but consider that
he is a better too the whole body, Romans 2. b. 14.
and (theruppon) examine well how he may serve too the glory of God, with the
things that he has put him in trust withal, and make the gift which he has
received profitable, Math. 25. b. 20.
assuring him self that the use thereof is common too all men, and that although
God have committed it too his custody, and will have him too be the keeper of
it: yet must he not hold it as a treasure, locked up in a hutch: but impart it
abroad to such as want it, and have need of it. Herwithal also let us keep
us from envying of those whom it is Gods will to honor after that fashion,
that there be no spytefulnesse in us too say, Why, and is it meet that such a
one should be preferred before me? For in so doing we spyte God. And
therefore let every of us know his own state and degree, and not stand in
contention with our God, assuring our selves that the things which he has
ordained in his Churhe, are done by vnreuocable judgment. Wherefore let us
abhor these madbraynes, that would take away the order which we see too be
grounded upon the authority of the son of God. There are, that think the
preaching of the Gospel too be a needelesse thing, and that it serves as it
were but for little children, and that they them selves have the holy Ghost
(at commandment,) too reuele things too them from heaven every minute of an
hour. But it is certain that the Devil blyndeth them in that ouerweening,
and men know that he had won the goal, if the mean of our salvation were
abolished and taken away. For like as S. Paul says, that the preaching of
the Gospel must serve too make the Church perfect, 1. Cor. 1. c. 21.
that we may be brought too the kingdom of heaven: so on the contrary part,
when there is no more any doctrine or Shepherd, the devil must needs so
ouermayster us, as we shall be scattered asunder, and nothing shall remain but
ruin and destruction. Seeing then that this order is not of men, let us learn
too submit our selves unto it, and let all of us both great and small without
geynsaying, suffer God too guide us (...) that mean, seeing it has pleased
him too appoint it. Also we see how Gods children are called the children of
the Church. And S. Paul shows that our Lord Jesus will reign over us, Romans
10. b. 8.
with condition that his word be always in men's mouths. He says not, that
the Angels shall come to reuele unto us the things that God will have us too
know: but he says, that we must understand Gods will by their means which
have the charge and office too tell it us. For like as in the time of the Law,
it was said, Mal. 2. b. 7.
that the Priests were Gods Angels, and that men ought too inquyre at their
mouth: so now also God will not have us too flitter in the air after our own
fancies, but too go too the fountain which is open for us when we list too
drink. If a man would go seek the head and welspring of a fountain (I mean
as it is hidden in the earth) and would hold scorn too drink until he had
found it: would not men take him for stark mad and beside him self? Yis that
would they. But behold, God has provided for our infirmytie, in that he will
not have us too make to long wyndlasses too be taught his word faithfully. For
he makes the welspring too come home too us, which was hidden and far of
from us, I say, he makes it to come home too us as it were by Cundites, so as
we need do no more but open our mouths too receive it. Like as when there
are fair Cundites that run with continewall water abundantly, men will come
too draw at them for their needs: so was it our Lords will that his word
should be set forth unto us, by his ordeyning of men too be the
instruments of his holy spirit. Then seeing it is so, let us learn too hold
us too it: and if we will be taught of God, let us receive the doctrine that
is preached to us by the mouths of men. This say I, is the thing that we have
too remember upon this text, too the intent we be not so foolish as too say,
Why has not God given me such grace or gift? Why is it his will too use such
mean? Let us content our selves with this, namely, that his ordinance ought
too suffize us, and that if we will needs fall too reasoning of the matter,
we shall ever be put too shame, because there is is no wisdom but only his
good will. Also let us mark that which is said immediately in this text: namely
that it is Gods will that there should be order of ministry or Service. As if
it were said, God could well bring us too perfection by him self, without any
other mean or help: Howbeeit for as much as he will be served by men, and he
applies them too such use, as he makes them ministers, so as me^ perceive
that the praise of our salvation is always dew to him, and that all goodness
comes of him: it behooves men to submit themselves thereto. But here it might
be thought strange why Saint Paul in sted of speaking of the gifts of the
holy Ghost, brings us unto Offices. For he began with this matter, namely
that our Lord Jesus Christ gave gifts according too the measure which he
knows to be fit for us, and that in diverse manners, by means whereof he
fills all things. Now to confirm this he says, that there are Apostles,
Shepherdes, Teachers and Evangelists. It should seem that S. Paul does not
well continue ^he process of the matter that he treated of. But here we have
too note, (as we see also more largely in the first too the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 12. a. 4. and. 13. a. 2.
that for as much as our Lord Jesus has stablished the order that we have
spoken of alredye, and contineweth the same still in his Church, so as it is
his will that there should be Shepherdes, Prophets, and Thechers: he does
also furnish them out of hand with the things that are requisite for the
executing of their office. For he deals not after the manner of men. We for
our part may chooze one man to be in office of Magistrate, and another too be
a Preacher: but in the mean while we cannot give them that which is requysite
for them. For we cannot make a new man of him that is advanced too honor:
but he must abide still the same that he was for all us. Also when it comes
too the election, every man gives his voice. Uery well, he that is chozen
shall be officer: but yet in the mean while, he shall continue still the same
he was before. In like case is it with Shepherdes. We may well chooze a man,
and he shall perchance prove a beast. For we cannot cause him too be
qualified as he ought too be. But when men are of Gods own choozing, so as he
bears the whole sway: then are the gifts joined inseperably with their
charge. Math. 4. c. 18.
When our Lord Jesus choze his Apostles, he choze silly fisherme^, and such as
were unlearned, and yet did he serve his turn with them for the publishing his
of Gospel: howbeeit not too teach as yet, but too go abroad as his herawltes,
too give warning that the King was come. But when he intended too send them
forth too their office for adoo, he sent them the holy Ghost, Acts. ^. a. 4.
showing thereby (as is said in many other textes,) that all things requisite
for the welfare of the Church, must needs come of his free gift, because it is
well kn^wen that all things proceed of him, too the end that all praise should
be given unto him. Then is it no marvel that S. Paul speaking here of the
diversity of gifts, and of the measure that it has pleased God too deal too
every man, does send us purposely too the offices. As if he should say, It is
not without cause that God distributeth not his gifts in alyke too all. For he
will not have all men Shepherdes, or Prophets, or Teachers, or Apostles, or
Evangelists: but he calls whom he thinks good, and therein tries our
humility, and therefore if we be willing too be subject too him, let us not
stick to take al authority in good worth, which is grounded in him, and upon
his ordinance. Now it is so, God lets many men alone in priute state, and in
the mean while choozeth whom he thinks good too preach his word. Therefore
men must hold them there.

Furthermore let us mark, that if men proceed too their elections with the
fear of God, and seek too obey him: surely he also will show by effect, that
they whom he has called too teach, and to whom the charge of ruling the
flock is committed, shall not be destitute of his power, but that he will
furnish them with all things requisite, as experie^nce shows well enough, and
it is witnessed unto us, that if we meet toogither in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Math. 18. c. 20.
(so it be truly and unfeignedly) he will be in the mids of us. Thus ye se^
what we have too bear in mind. Yet notwithstanding we see that the papacy
has so contryued men and framed them too their own Lure, as they be utterly
gone away from the order of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from the manner of
governing the Church, which was known of the Apostles.

Let us look back agein to the thing that Saint Paul treats of here. His
meaning is too bring us too the unity before mentioned. Therefore he will have
us too be of one accord, too link toogither like brethren, and too shoot all
at one mark, as having but one head which knitteth us all toogither, so as
there be another envy, nor ill will, nor sects, nor aught else that may deuyde
us. Now too bring us heruntoo, he says, that there is (but) one God, and one
Lord, too whom all Souereintie is given, 1. Tim. 2. b. 5.
and that there is but one Baptime, and one Faith, and that we be called al
too one inheritance. After the saying of this, he adds that Jesus Christ
(for the better ratifying of that unity) would that one man alone should teach
the rest, and that the company should give ear too him, and therwithall that
all of us as well he that speaks, as they that hear him, should have one
selfsame faith. For as much then as all of us cannot be Apostles, Teachers, and
Prophets: he has chozen some of us too be in that state and office, to the
end we might be brought too the said unity, and Jesus Christ be aknowledged
for our head, and all of us be gathered toogither under him. Lo how S. Paul
speaks of it.

But now if there had bin any cheeftie or supremacy, so as it had bin Gods
mind too have assigned a seat in this world, the Bishop whereof should have
had superiority over all the Church, and his Commission have reached so
far, that his souereintie must have taken place every where: surely Saint
Paul would not have forgotten it, or else if he had, it had bin a very foul
fault. Spoke he by the holy Ghost, and yet left he out the principal and most
convenient point of his matter? (No:) and therefore if there were no more but
this only text, surely it were enough too confound the shamelessness of the
Papists, when they say, there must needs be an vnderhead in this wrold, and
that because Jesus Christ is gone out of this world, therefore he must needs
have a Uicar. But it is certain that Saint Paul meant too show the thing
which we have seen in other texts: which is, that Saint Peter's Apostleship
extended not unto us. For he was appointed peculyarly too the Jews, Gala. ^.
b. 8.
as is declared in the second too the Galathians. But howsoever the case stand,
we see here the continewall order, which we must keep, and wheruntoo we
must hold us, if we mind too be subject too our Lord Jesus Christ. And that is
not to have a Pope: but that every Church have his Shepherds and Teathers,
according too their need, acording too the number of the people, and according
as the place requires: that when we be so knit intoo one body of a Church,
we may have a lawful government, which it is impossible for us too forbear,
by reason of our rawenesse and the weakness of our faith, in respect whereof it
stands us on hand too have the remedy which our Lord Jesus Christ has given
us, that men may hold themselves too his saying and authority. That is it in
effect which we have too mark upon this streyne.

Agein, Saint Paul proceeds afterward too show us the inestimable benefyte
which we have by such order, and the fruit that we reap of it. For (as I
have touched before) men are so high minded, that every one would be a Lord.
Therefore there is nothing better than too know that God woorketh our welfare
by ordeyning this order of government, namely that there should be Shepherds
to teach us. For it is as a fyghting against our own salvation, when we play
the stubborn fools, and will not like of the thing that God has ordained for
our souerein welfare. Truly if there were no more but this, namely that God
has so willed. Woe worth him that dares check against the maiestite of his
maker. Yet notwithstanding the world sees our naugtinesse: and although we
grant it too be good reason that we should obey God, yet can we not find in
our hearts too do^ it willingly and with a free heart, except we see immediately
before our eyes, that it is for our profit too do so, and that Gods intent was
not alonly too humble us under him, but also too advance us therwithall, by
willing this order too be kept. And so ye see whereat Saint Paul amed here.
For it is not enough for us too reverence the thing that God commands, or
too tremble at it, too the end too do it half perforce, and half of good will:
but we must go too it with an earnest desire. And how may that be done? By
knowing that it is for our profit. Now since we know it is so, and specially
that it stands upon our salvation* We ought well too apply all our wits
unto it: Or else our unthankfulness will be the less tolerable, when we
fall too thrusting away of the thing that God affereth us, not so much for any
respect of himself, as for our profit. That then is the thing which Saint Paul
intended, in saying, that the preaching of the Gospel and the appoynting of
men expressly too that purpose, Phil. 2. b. 14.
is too link us toogither, that there might be no dissension among us.

And on the contrary part Saint Paul declares also, that all fantastical
persons which reject common order, and would be so spiritual, as if they were
ravished above the Clouds: are separated from the body of the Church, and
therwithall renounce God, by reason whereof they ought to be even abhorred, and
shumed as deadly plages, because they set dissension in the Church. For be
we never so desirous of unity, yet shall all that we can do be in vain,
if we hold us not too the thing that Saint Paul speaks here, that is too
say, that our Lord Jesus intended to knit the knot fast and sure in his own
body. And therefore if any man say, he will withdraw himself from the obedience
of the Church: it is all one as if he would cut asunder the senewes of a
body. I pretend peradventure too love some body, and yet notwithstanding cut
asunder the senewes of it euerywhere, so as the whole body being disioynted
and dismembered, falls in a swond, and finally rotteth quite away. Even so
stands the case with us. For we should link toogither, and God has provided
very well for it. As how? By giving us Prophets, Teachers, Shepherds, and
Evangelists. Now if we reject them, what else is too be said, but that we
be minded too break asunder all the unity which our Lord had appointed too
be among us? To be short, Saint Paul shows here, that all such as do not
submit themselves too the doctrine of the Gospel, and yield reverence too the
minister thereof, are deadly enemies of Gods people, and seekers of their own
confusion, and therefore that men ought too shun them as woolues, because they
be utterly intolerable, inasmuch as they procure the overthrow of the
Church, despyze God in the things that were well ruled, and forsake the
perfection of all good things.

Too be short, Saint Paul adds immediately after, that it is the edifying
(or building up of the body of Christ. And this serves also to make those yet
more abhorred, which will not yield themselves to this spiritual government
that our Lord Jesus has allowed of. For the body of our Lord Jesus ought too
be precious unto us. In deed it had bin enough if he had said, the Church.
But by using this honorable title, Saint Paul shows us, that it is too
beynous treason, for us too seek too rend the body of our Lord Jesus Christ
in pieces. Now it is so, that it cannot be builded up, that is too say, it
cannot be brought to perfection, nor continue in good plyght, but by mean of
the preaching of Gods word. So then if we be willing that God should be
honored and served, and that our Lord should quietly have his royal seat among
us, to reign in the mids of us: if we be willing to be his people, and to live
under his protection: if we covet too be builded up in the him, and to be
joined unto him, and to continue in him unto the end: to be short, if we desire
our salvation: we must learn to be humble schoollers in receiving the doctrine
of the Gospel, and in herkening to the shepherds that are sent us, as if Jesus
Christ spoke too us himself in his own person, assuring our selves that he will
allow of the obedience and submission of our faith, when we harken to the
mortal men unto who^ he gives that charge. Therefore let us show the desire
which we have that God should be honored, and also the desire and care which
we have of our own salvation, and of the common welfare and edefying of the
Church: which thing will then come too pass, when all of us both great and
small do give our consentes, that Jesus Christ shall have his instruments
whereby too speak unto us, and draw us unto him. Which order if we observe,
he will so bliss us thereby, as we shall have cause too glorify him, for that
we shall see how it has always bin his will too procure the salvation of our
souls, and that he is ever at hand with us, and will so woork, as we shall not
want any thing that is for our behoof or profit.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him to make us so to feel them, as we may be cast down
in our selves, and seek nothing else but to be set up agein by him, and that
our Lord Jesus may have such pre-eminence over us, as we may honor him as he
deserves, that we being under him in his keeping, may be so guyded by his
holy spi^i^, as his word may profit more and more in us, and show forth his
strength, and he so bear with our infirmities, as he may never cease too take
us for his own, so long as we live in his world, until we be all gathered
up toogither intoo his kingdom. That it may please him too grant his grace,
not only too us, but also too all. etc.

The.xxvi. Sermon which is the sixth upon the fourth Chapter.
11. And the same has given, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Shehperds and Teachers.

12. For the reparation of the Saints, too the woork of administration, and for
the building up of Christ's body,

13. Until we come all into the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the
son of God, in the perfect man, unto the measure of the full age of Christ.

14. That we may no more be babes, wavering and carried too and fro with
every vvynd of doctrine, by the vvylinesse of men, and through their crafty
conueyances too deceive us.


We have seen this morning, how God having respect of our frayltie, has
voutsafed too use this mean too draw us too him: that is, that we should be
taught familiarly by mortal men like our selves, and therein he shows also
that he had an eye too the thing that might be fittest for his servants. For
in saying that he will always send a Prophet in Israel from among the people,
Deuteronomy. 18. d. 18. and John. 1. g. 45.
he meant too show that we needed not too seek far for him, but that he
would find a mean too be familiarly conversant among us Therefore when the
Gospel is preached among us, Gods applying of himself after that manner too our
slenderness, is as much as if he came down too us himself. So little then
ought we too disdeyne the order that he has set among us, that our
unthankfulness shall be the more heinous, if we consider not how greatly he
loves us, in that he deals with us after our own small capacity. For
inasmuch as we have not so excellent ability as the Angels: therefore does he
give us such means as he knows too be necessary for us. Moreover Saint
Paul adds now, that this must not serve us for a little time only, but that
we must continue in it all the time of our life. For had he not added yet
further, the thing that we see: a man might say, that we ought in deed to
conform our selves to the rule that God gives us, howbeit that must be but
for a while, as if a man should send little children to schole, but that is not
to spend their whole life there. And so it would have seemed, that the thing
which has bin spoken heertofore, served but for a time, and that when we have
bin trained in them a year or twain, that ought too suffyze us, and every man
should be a Clerk well enough learned, so as he might forbear all instruction
afterward. But Saint Paul tells us, that so long as we be in this world,
we must still profit in Gods school, and have our ears beaten daily with his
word, that we may on the one side be brydled, and on the other side be
strengthened and set foreward more and more. For put the case we were of so
good ability and capacity, as too learn all that is for our behoof, within
two or three years space: yet are we so fickle headed, that every of us
would by and by be starting out of the way, if we were not hild back.
Therefore Gods voutsafyng too have his word preached unto us even too our
dying day, serves too make our faith (...) and steadfast.

But there is yet a greater necessity. Which is, that such as think
themselves forewardest, if they sift themselves thoroughly, shall find
themselves yet far of from the mark that they run at. Phil. 3. c. 12.
And therefore it stands us upon, too be strengthened daily more and more,
and to have the light of our faith increaced, after the manner of the day, which
we see to grow still bryghter and bryghter unto high noone. So must we profit
still more and more, till the daysonne of ryghtuousenesse appear unto us.
True it is that men are so stout hearted as a number of them will not believe
it: but that is because they be contented with their assishnesse. For ye
shall see a great sort so proud and presumptuous, because they have studied
three or four latin words, that to their own seeming they pass all the
greatest doctors in the world, And surely they also which do but begin too
study some science, bear themselves in hand that they be already come too the
perfection of it, and yet have they scarsely entered into it. In like case is
it with handy crafts, in so much that there is none so bold as blind bayard:
he sticks less to do al things, than the man that has greatly profited. So
is it also with these lyghtheaded Christians: get they once some saying of the
scripture at their tunges end, and behold, they be (too their ow^ seeming) as
half Angels, and they never pass of profiting any more. But they that apply
their whole indeuer to learn still in Gods school, do find themselves behynd
hand at a ten or twenty years end. Howsoever the world go, let us mark well
how the Apostle says here, that God will not have us trained in the Gospel
for a two or three years only, but he will have us go through with it, so
that if we lived a hundred years and upward in this world, yet must we be
scholars still, and all our wisdom is too know that we be not yet come so
near too our perfection, but that we had need too go foreward still. And
heeruppon we must every of us for his own part stir up and spur forth our
selves: and therwithall God must be so gracious too us, as to be always ready
to continue his teaching of us still without ^eassing, so as we may never be
weerye. And when we have one day learned some lesson that may d^o us good, let
us assure our selves that the same is not so well printed in our hearts as
needs, nor yet so well known of us as were reuqisite. And Agein, that when we
have learned one point, yea two or three, we want yet much more, and ther^ is
not a man so well qualified, which has not need too be exhorted still. Too
be short, let us assure our selves in any wise, that Gods ordeyning of this
government in his Church, that the Gospel should be preached, is too the
intent, that as long as we be in this earthly pilgrimage, we should resort
continually too the school where God teaches us: 1. Cor. 1^. d. 12.
for we walk by belief (says Saint Paul) and not by eysyght. Wherein he
shows that we be not yet of capacity to behold Gods glory, 1. John. ^. a. ^.
(according also as S. John says in his first Epistle,) another shall be until
we be all wholly transfigured and made like unto God: and then shall we see
him (says he) as he is. As now as (S. Paul says in another place) we see
but in part, 1. Cor. 1^. c. 9.
and we know but in part, verily because we walk but in belief. Now whence
springs faith? Romans 1^. b. 17.
How is it nurrished and increaced. By the word of God. When we have
preaching, and are diligent too be edifyed by it: that is the first point
whereby, and whereat our faith begins: and that is the mean whereby it
continues and increaceth till it be thoroughly perfected, as we shall see.
And for the same cause does S. John call both old men and young men, and such
as are in the flower of their age, too the intent they should all submit
themselves too the obedience of the Gospel. Ye old men, 1. John. 2. b. 12.
13. 14.
come hear him that was before all time, says he (speaking of our Lord Jesus
Christ) he is appeered. And you young man and little children, learn too know
that ye have a father in heaven. And you stronger sort, know ye wherein your
strength lies. Too be short, S. Paul shows us here, that Gods children
must be so humble, as to submit themselves too instruction and teaching from
day too day and from year to year, and consider that they be not yet come
whyther they would and should.

And too the same purpose does he add, Until we be knit all toogither in
the unity of faith. Forasmuch as we might quyte start away, and no bridle
could hold us back, if necessity once constreyned us, (as I have showed you
already this morning: therefore S. Paul tells us, that we be not yet come
too the point, which these fantastical persons that are puffed up with their
vain ouerweening, (do think themselves too be come unto,) as though they
wanted nothing more: S. Paul says, we be not there yet. True it is, that we
ought too indeuer too be all one (as I have showed already:) for without
concord there can be another Church nor religion among us, another is God
honored and served: nevertheless we do but go ^^^ward still unto this
concord as Math. 5. d. 25.
we do too all other virtues. And so long as we live in this world, we
always go still further and further, according whervntoo this life is not in
vain named a race or way, 1. Tim. 4. b. 7.
appointed us of God. After that manner then does he speak unto us of the
unity of faith: not that the Christians ought too varye one from another, and
to maynteyne contrary opinions while they be in the trade of profiting: but S.
Paul shows, that their faith cannot be all one, until it be well settled.
Now there will always be imperfections and infirmities, there will always
be clouds of ignorance. And therefore we must keep on too the mark that is
set us down here.

Furthermore, we must mark well what S. Paul adds, concerning the knowing
of the son of God. For therein he shows us the sum of our faith: which
is, not too wander too and fro, but too know what Jesus Christ is, what at his
power is, and what benefits he brings us. That is the true perfectness of
faith. Therefore I said, that it is a notable point. For we see how the
wretched world has bin misseledde and beguyled heretoofore, and still is in
the popedom, where they which have some deuoutnesse, torment themselves
greatly, and take pains too inquyre of this and that, always full of
hartbytings, always full of questionings, and yet are still of that sort, whom
S. Paul reports too be ever learning, ^. Tim. 3. b. 7.
and never a whit the wyzer. S. Paul speaks there of these Hypocrites which
despyze the simplicity of the Gospel, and turn away from Jesus Christ, too
follow^ their own foolish inventions. They will have their speculations on
either side, and they will take pain enough: but yet shall they never be the
wyzer. Coloss. 2. a. 3.
For inasmuch as all the treasures of wisdom and understanding are laid up in
Jesus Christ, we must ame at him: in him only shall we find the whole
substance of our salvation. When we once know that Jesus Christ is given us
of God his father, 1. Cor. 6. b. 11.
too reconcyle us by his death and passion: when we once know^ that it is he
only in whom we must seek our ryghtuousnesse, when we once know that we
be washed from all spots and vnclenenesse by his blud, that he has made
satisfaction for all our dettes wherein we were indetted, that he by his holy
spirit has sanctified us and dedicated us too the ^eruice of God, 1. John. 2.
^. ^.
and that he is our advocate too make us find favor in all our prayers and
supplications: I say, when w^e once know this: we may despyze all the things
which the other sort think themselves too know, and which they have imagined
without any certeintie. For that cause therefore does S. Paul add here
expressly the knowing of the son of God, too the end to defyne the better what
the word Faith imports. For it runs roundly enough in men's mouths: and
every man will say he believes: but in the mean while, if these men which
vaunt themselves with full mouth too be as pillars of the Church, and as good
catholics as may be, (as the world sees well enough,) be demanded what
faith is: they stop short of it. They will say perchance, it is too believe in
God: (yea:) but the Turks and Papists will say so too: and yet for all that
(...) will condemn the Turks, because they know not what belief is. As much
is too be said of Papists. And wherein differ we from them, we (I say) that
call our selves Christians? In knowing that God has sent us Jesus Christ too
lead us up higher, so as we be sure that because he is our father, he will
not lay our sins too our charge, but receives us intoo his favor through
his own free goodness, accepting us for ryghtuous, when we condemn our
selves by true repentance, and seek all our welfare in Jesus Christ,
acknowledging that there is nothing in us but utter cursednesse. Ye see then
that our Lord Jesus Christ is the very mark or white whereat we ame. If a man
should shoot in a long bow, or in a Cross bow, or in a Gunne, and have no
mark or white before him, but should discharge at adventure, now this way, now
that way: what a shooting were that? Even so stands the case with all them that
ame not at our Lord Jesus Christ. For they do but roue, and entangle them
selves in many a pecke of trubbles: and we should be ever in danger to be
misledde and de^eiued by men, if we did not know Jesus Christ, and settle our
whole contentation in him, assuring our selves that he is the whole sum of
our faith.

Now Saint Paul adds yet further, that the same is for the age of
perfection, and for our true accomplishment. Whereby he does us too wit (as I
have touched already) that so long as we live in this world, we must still
grow and go foreward, knowing that there are still many infirmities in us,
and that we be not yet come too our full greatness. Yet is it not therefore
too be said, that we be little children still, as he will add anon after:
but here he sets down as it were three degrees of age. First infanc^e and
chyldhod, secondly the years above twelve, before there be yet discretion and
skill to govern our selves, in which time we must still profit more and more.
And when a man is come too the age of forty years, then is he is his chief
state. For by that time he ought too have some trade both of body and mind,
whereon too stay and rest. Not that we must not profit still even at threescore
years: but I speak of the similitude that Saint Paul sets down here.
First therefore he says, that we must harken too the Gospel, till we be
come too full age. And when is that? At our death, says he. For here we
must not count our years after the manner of men. After a man is once past
fifty, too all seeming he decays both in his senses and in his wit, But
Saint Paul says, that we shall never be at our full growth, till we be
rid of this body. So then, the spiritual age of Christians is when they be
gone out of this world. But now let us see what manner of ones we be, since
we began too profit in the Gospel. We be like a child that is half a
man. He is past fifteen year old, or perhaps past twenty: and yet he
ceasseth not to learn still daily, for he has needde of it, and he is sure,
that although he have studied (a good while,) yet is he not come too the last
step, he has not gotten so settled and stayed a judgment as were requisite.
Howbeeit, it may well come too pass, that a child of twenty years shall have
all the sciences at his fingers ends, wherein he has bin trained and
instructed: but yet shall he be nevertheless light headed for all that,
another shall he have the skyll too apply them too his use, because he is not
yet ripe: for he is but like green Corn, or like as when a vyneyard makes a
fair show of a good vintage, but the grapes are not yet ripe. Even so is it
with that age. And for that cause Saint Paul says by a similitude, that as
long as Christians are alive, although they were threescore, yea four score,
or five score years old, yet must they be still like children, not too
children of wit, but too young striplings which are of age to profit, 1. Cor.
3. a. 1.
and do willingly submit and suffer themselves too be governed, because they
know well they be not yet of ripe discretion. Nevertheless Saint Paul
tells us, we must not be like little babes that have yet another wit nor
discretion, 1. Cor. 14. b. 20.
nor can scarsely yet discern between good and bad.

First and formest therefore we must bear this lesson well in mind, that when
we have seen and tried never so much in the world, and traueled from place
too place, and bin exercyzed in many affairs: though we think our selves to
be the politikest in the world, yet are we not so wise, that we need to
learn no more. And why? For here the case concerns Gods wisdom, which
passes all the wit of man, and we may be commended enough and too much of
the world, and yet we shall know things but in part, 1. Cor. 13. c. 19.
and therefore let us not deceive our selves. Therefore away with this fond
ouerweening, too think our selves wise enough, (I spoke even of them that are
able too teathe others) and let us continue scollers still. For although Jesus
Christ have appointed certain too be as leaders and guydes too show other men
the way: yet does it not follow, that they be so wise, that they must not be
learners as well as the rest. For he that speaks, must take instruction by it
himself, and a man shall never be meet too declare Gods will unto other men,
except he himself learn daily.

The thing then which we have too bear in mind, is, that we must be
thoroughly persuaded, that if we profit not our selves, we go like Seacrabbes.
For they that go not foreward in the doctrine of salvation, vaunt they never so
much of their being taught in Gods school, do undoubtedly go back. And
therefore let us beware in any wise that we fall not asleep, or stand still at
a stay, as though there were no more too be learned. And let us consider that
our life is lykened too a way, and thervppon learn too go foreward still, and
too gain always some ground, and too spur and etch forth our
slothfulness and slowenesse, so as it may from day too day appear, that we
have gotten some knowledge more than before: either by understanding better the
things which we thought too have bin thoroughly printed in our minds, or by
conceyuing some other point by other folks instruction, which was unknown too
us before. So then, let us increace the hoord of that treasure from day too day.
And if old folk be so much the carefuller too gather goods, as they draw
nearer too their grave, because they see themselves too be weak, and too have
need of succor, and are always afraid to be destitute of man's aid,
insomuch that that forecast of theirs, drives them to burning couet^usnesse:
ought not we on our side too be greatly ashamed, if we make not provision of
Gods word in our old age, seeing we perceive how there is much feebleness
and sin still in us? or if we labor not too be continually still inlyghtened
even till the daysonne of ryghtuousnesse (which is our Lord Jesus Christ) shine
upon us, Mala^h. 4. a. 2.
as at high noone, seeing we find our own ignorance by experience.

Ye see then that the mean too put this doctrine of Saint Paul's in ure, is
first too humble our selves in such wise, as no man take more upon him through
vain selfweening, than belongs unto him, but that we will keep on our way
aduyzedly, assuring our selves that we be not yet come too our ways end. And
that is the cause also why Saint Paul said, Phil. 3. c. 12.
that he looked not back to the things he had done alredye, but foreward
unto the things that remained. Saint Paul had made a great journey, and taken
much pain for the Gospels sake: he had bin taken up before into the third
heaven: 2. Cor. 12. b. 4.
and there he had heard and seen secret things, which it was not lawful for
him to speak of among men. Ye see then, that he was as a man that had bin
taught in the school of Angels: and as in respect of men, he had passed all
the other Apostles: and yet for all this, he says he streyneth himself
forewarde, and labors too atteyne too the mark whereat he amed. Now if Saint
Paul spoke so: what ought we too do, which are yet as it were but at our
Apcie? Then as concerning this full rypenesse of age, let us assure our selves
that we cannot forbear new and daily instruction, until we be quyte rid of
all the infirmities of our flesh. Until we be departed out of this world,
we must suffer our selves too be guyded and governed like teachable and meek
young folk, and we must beeleeue good counsel, assuring our selves that we
have need of it. Therefore Saint Paul attributes that (full rypenesse of age)
too our Lord Jesus Christ, as if he should say, that men beguyle themselves
through their own fond rashness, by beholding themselves in them selves. 1.
Cor. 1. d. 21.
For know we once what Jesus Christ is, we shall perceive full well, that there
are yet many imperfections in us. He is called the wisdom of God his father,
he is called his everlasting word, John. 1. a. 1.
he is called his image. And all this is too the end that we should learn of
him, and behold Gods glory in his person, which otherwise were invisible unto
us. But now, can we comprehend Gods infinite wisdom? Can we atteyne too the
understanding of Gods glory, 1. Cor. 11. b. 7.
so as we may have the full sight of it? Alas we be far short of it.
Coloss. 1. b. 15.
Therefore whenever we be tempted with foolish ouerweening, too think we
know more than we do: let us lift up our eyes too our Lord Jesus Christ, and
not presume in our selves, as many fantastical persons do. For when we (...)
know that our wisdom is in our Lord Jesus Christ, then shall we well
perceive that we be yet far from it.

Herewithall Saint Paul warns us also, that it is not in our own power or
cunning too believe faithfully, Iam. 1. c. 17.
but that we must be feign too have it given unto us. True it is that we
must do our indeuer, that our faith may be stablished: we must be diligent
in hearing Gods word, we must haunt Sermons, we must read, we must harken too
good exhortations, and too all good doctrine, whereby we may fare the better:
we must give good heed too those things. And yet notwithstanding we must not
presume any whit upon our own cunning, as though our wit were able of it self
too receive learning and instruction: but let us learn that our Lord Jesus
Christ must bring us too that by his holy spirit. So then let us be lowely,
that we may be the scholars of our God: and that lowelinesse imports a
ridding of our selves from all selfweening, and an abcing of our selves,
knowing that we have no more than is given us of God.

Also on the contrary part Saint Paul says, that we must not be as little
children wavering with every blast of doctrine, or being tossed and turmoyled
too and fro, as chafe with the vvynd: and too be short, that we must not
be beguyled by the vvylynesse of men. Here we see yet better the thing tha^
I touched heertoofoore: which is, that Saint Paul sets down as it were
three ages. The first is, as a Chyldhood. And which is that? It is before we
have any instruction at all, when we be yet as it were half beasts, without
discretion too discern Gods truth. And there be many such children in the
world. At what age? Even at three or fouer score years. For here Saint Paul
speaks by a liknesse or resembla^nce, and stands not upon the accounting of
days, moonethes, or years. His meaning then is, that such as are wavering and
floting like a boat that is tossed upon the water, are little children. It it
is true that the scripture does sundry times use the word (Child) in another
sense: as when Saint Peter exhorts us too be as newborn babes, 1. Pet. 2.
a. 2.
and too desire the milk of soundness, yea even with putting away of all
malice. Also our Lord Jesus exhorts us too be as babes, Mark. 9. ^. 36. and
Luke. ^. f. 47.
that is too say, vnpuffed up with presumption and pride, so as we mak^ no
reckening of our selves, ne be trubbled with the lusts that vex^ us, when we
begin too know what it is too live among men. Then after that manner it does
us good to be babes or little children. Agein in another place Saint Paul
says, ^. Cor. 14. d. 20.
that we should be babes i^ naughtiness: but yet he says, that we must not
be babes in understanding: and that is the thing which he rehearses agein in
this present text. Then condemns he such as are babes in understanding, that
is too say, which are so doutfull and wavering, that they be sure of nothing:
they know not what faith too be of, nor what God too woorship. Now I told you
that the world is too full of such babes, which harden themselves in their
brutishness and ignorance. And in good sooth, how many shall a man find
which are so thoroughly settled in Gods truth, as they cannot be made too
dance after another man's pype, as Saint Paul speaks of them here? For if
it be demanded what the Gospel is, some will answer, it must needs be a
good thing because God is the author of it: but in the mean while, too be
able too yield a reason of their faith, is no point of their skill, but they
harden themselves in their ignorance, yea and covet too be as little babes
still. Othersome can well enough skill too yield an account, in such wise as a
man would deem there were some good root of faith in them: and yet for all
that, if there come but one blast of wynd, ye shall see them in such
perplexity, that they wot not any more in what God they believe. For if there
rise up any heresies or stumbling blocks, the most part of those that spoke
woonders before, are so wyndshaken as too say, How now? There were never such
opinions heard of: and what means this? Which may a man hold for the best?
But in so doing they show well enough, (as I said before) that they never
streyned themselves, ne took any great pain too go forward, that they might
no more be so wavering.

Furthermore, besides this lykening of men unto babes, Saint Paul sets
down yet other similitudes, saying, that such folks are as reeds that are
shaken with every vvynd, or as a boat that floteth upon the waves of the
sea, or of some Lake. In deed this belongs not too little babes: but Saint
Paul's intent was also too show how wretched their state is, which are not
thoroughly grounded in the Gospel. For is there any greater wretchedness than
too be floting, and as it were wavering at every wind, and too have no
steadiness at all in the matters that concern our salvation? If we were
threatened every minute of an hour, where through we were so scared, that
we were in continual fearfulness and trembling: had we not leauer too be
dead out of hand, than too linger after that sort, and too dye a hundred times
aday? But now, we stand upon the everlasting salvation of our souls: and
wot not where too become in that case? Shall there be no stedinesse in us? S.
Paul therefore meant too show us this thing, of purpose too redress the
slothfulness or rechlesnesse whervntoo we be too much given.

And too prick us foreward yet dubble: he says, that we must not be
subject too men's Cousinage. He uses here a word that is taken of dyce
playing. For we know that they which make a trade or occupacion of that
craft, must have store of siyghtes, for there is no faythfulnesse nor trust in
it. In deed it is said, that a man shall see the trial of ones wit and
disposition by play: but it is known also that all Dycers are deceyuers,
insomuch as there is not the simplest of them, but he would have the cunning
too beguyle those that play with him. In deed all are not so cunnyng as too
shred other men of their goods by their s^eyghtie conueyance: but yet for all
that, we see it is the general and universal property of that play, too be
guylefull. And it is not so in that game only, but welneere in all other.
Saint Paul has set down here but one kind, but experience shows how the
case stands, yea and even little children ought too bear it well in mind.
And whereas I call them little children, I mean not such as hang upon the
dug, but these little Cockchickens that are tied too swords, and are so pert
fellows, and ween themselves to be men, when they ought to have a rod yet
half a doozen years longer, and yet for all that do take snuff at it, if a
man keep them from being deceived. For if all games were set at liberty:
surely there would be store of Cousiners euerywhere. And a young heir should
no sooner come too a dozen years old, but he should have a new lyuerie on
his back (as they say:) for he should find Cousiners ynow, which would take
him by the hand, too pick his purse, and keep him good company till he were
quyte shred of all that he has. Now then although Saint Paul speak here of
the steadfastness of the faith of the Gospel: yet borrows he the comparisons
of the common life, and of the things that are seen day by day. His saying
then is, that unless we have a well settled faith, so as we be fully
purposed and determined too walk in Gods truth even to the end, and to stand
inuincibly in it: we be but little children that are subject too every man's
cousinage, and we shall always find Cousiners and deceivers, that will rob
us and spoil us, and we never perceive it, so as we shall wonder how we
become poor. In the same taking are we* and all comes too his point, too
show us that we have great need too be well fenced. For when we be out of
fear, every of us falls too reueling, we take no care, we keep no watch.
But if there be war, so as we be threatened: then (we think) it behoues
us too keep good watch, and we stand upon our guard. If we dout of any
afterclappes, then we bethink our selves, least we be taken napping. Saint
Paul therefore tells us here, that there will be nothing but cousining, and
that we shall fall into Satan's snares every minute of an hour, if we watch not
warely. And why? For among whom are we conversant? What a sort of Cousiners
are there in the world? There will ever be leaud company which shall seek
the overthrow of our faith: there will ever be scoffers, heathenish folk, and
other makebates, which would feign have all things go too ha^^cke, yea and
which will indeuer too shead their poisons and herestes abroad, too corrupt and
infect men withal. Too be short, the devil has a thousand ways too deceive
us, and men also are ready enough unto it, and there are maynteyners ynow which
will offer themselves, and desire no better living, as they say. For this cause
Saint Paul shows us, that if we labor not stoutly too profit in Gods
word, we shall surely be caught and carried away at every hand, and fleet
too and fro, and be led by the bill, and run about like little chilldren, so
as we shall have no discretion at all. Then if we be not well aduyzed, even
they that are the forewardest of us, shall stumble, and within a step or two
break our necks, notwithstanding that we seem too be well entered on our
way alr^^y^. And it is not here only that the scripture tells us, we must
not be as little babes in understanding. We see that the people of the Jews
also were^vpbrayded with it, insomuch that Esaias tells them, that they be but
as little children always at their Apcie, Esaias. 28. ^. 10.
and that they must always be rapped upon the pates, because they continue
still in their brutishness. When a man has cried out too them a hundr^^ and
hundred times A.B.C. by and by they forget it, and are (...) new too begin.
Thus complayneth he of them. And agein, too (...) them ashamed, How pro^^t you
(says he) specially in Gods doct^i^e? There ye make as though ye were
little children, and play the (...). In worldly affi^^es ye be crafty
yn^^gh: but in the doctrine of salvation ye understand nothing a^ all. Now
herein God shows, that he will punish such as take scorn too be taught in
his school. So then, let us labor too come too the myddle age, Ephe. 4. b. 13.
whereof S. Paul spoke not long ago. And although we cannot atteyne too
perfection so long as we be in this world: yet let us not be stark idiots
and altoogither unlearned, another let us be ever nouices: but let us show
that God has not lost his time, in being so gracious too us, as too beat our
ears with his word. That is the thing which we have too bear away.

Furthermore let us understand also, that it is long of none but our selves
that we be not well armed against all the wyles of the devil and the world,
namely by laboring too profit in the Gospel and in Gods word. For from thence
must we fetch armor and weapon too furnish our selves withal, when we be
weak. That is the way too withstand at the cosinages and falsehoods of Satan:
that is the mean for us to beat back all his assaults: that is to wit, by
having the said word, which will serve us for Sword, Target, and Headpeece*
Ephe. ^. c. 14.
as we shall see in the syrt Chapter. Too be short, we shall be well armed too
withstand all bruntes.

Therefore if we be fickle headed, and thereupon it please (...) too punish
our unthankfulness, according too his threatnyng by Moses in the thirteen of
Deuteronomie, where he says, Deuteronomy. 13. a. 3.
that if he stir up false Prophets, and the people give ear too them, it is
a token that they loved him not, and that they which continue in his fear,
will abide firm and steadfast: I say, if we be so light and fickle minded,
let us arm our selves with these exhortations: and (as says Saint Paul) if
heresies spring up, let us understand, 1. Cor. 11. d. 19.
that it is for the trial of such as be rightly minded. And therefore let us
mark well, that it is long of nothing but of our own rechlesnesse, that we
be not always steadfast in Gods word, and that our faith does not always
get the upper hand of all temptations (as says Saint John in his first
Epistle. This ought too provoke us too take pains, 1. John. 5. a. 4.
not only too get ordinary food to sustain our souls withal: but also too
withstand Satan and all his champions, and too beat back all assaults that
shall be made upon us.

And forasmuch as our Lord matcheth his Sacraments with his word: let us make
our profit of them altoogither. And whereas we are too receive the holy Supper
the next Sunday, let us understand, that it is our spiritual armor, wherewith
it beh^ueth us too be fenced against Satan, and is added for a further
strengthening of us after we have bin instructed in Gods word. Wherefore ^et us
not through our unkindness and vanity, suffer the means too serve for
nothing, which God has given us, and which he knows too be fit for us: but
let us follow this counsel of Saint Paul's. And on the one side let us
consider that we be weak, and that we have need too be relieved, and that
Gods coming after that fashyon unto us, is too draw us unto him, that we
might yield him thanks for the loving kyndnesse which he uses. And for our
own part let us indeuer too put foreward our selves the more, by matching the
word with the Sacraments, and the Sacraments with the word, so as we may
be provoked thereby too resort too our God, that he may so further us in the
way of salvation, as it may appear in the end, that we have not walked in
vain, nor bin disappoynted of our expectation.

Now let us foll down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as we may utterly
mis^yke of them, and be always provoked too true repentance, and not only
be sorry that we have offended, but also resist all the wicked lusts of our
flesh, which hinder our true obedience in ruling our life according too his
holy word, and that forasmuch as the right way too atteyne thertoo, is too
profit in his word, it may please him too grant that we may never be
destitute of that benefyte, and that when we have it in our hands, we may
use it well, and labor too profit in it: and he work in such wise in us by
his holy spirit, as it may not be a sound that vanishes away in the air, but
a root that grows fast in us, to yield fruit in our life, even too the end,
that we way be so grounded in him, as his love and fear^ may grow more and
more in us, until he have gathered us together intoo his heritage. That it
may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people
and Nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxvii. Sermon, which is the seventh upon the fourth Chapter.
15. But too the end that follovving truth with Charity, we might grovve in
all things in him that is the head, too wit, Christ,

16. By whom the whole body being knit together, and joined by every joint
throughout, with furniture according too the operation of each part in
measure, takes the full growth of a body, too the buylding up of it self in
love.


We have seen heeretoofore, that we must keep the order which God has set
among us, that we may profit in Gods school all the time of life. For in
as much as God has not ordeyued any superfluous thing: we must conclude, that
we shall never atteyne too so perfect learning while we live in this world,
but that we shall have need too go further still, and (which is more) we
shall never be at our ways end, till we be come too the end of our life.
For as much then as we know that we have yet but a peer of the thing which
we must have, and that our faith will always be weak: let us strive so much
the more too be strengthened, and too draw near unto God. And then shall we
not be like little children, and such as waver and flote too and fro with
every wind, and have no stedinesse in their faith. For if we be diligent to
profit in Gods word, surely we shall be armed and fenced to withstand all the
wyles of Satan, and of the wicked men that would beguyle us. For although God
bring us not to perfection o^t of hand, but hold us still in some feebleness:
yet shall we never be destitute of good remedy, if we receive the things
that he offers us, and be not rechlesse in applying the^ to our behoof. The
mean to bring which thing to pass is showed us here: namely that we follow
the truth, and love one another. As if S. Paul should say, that the knowledge
of God, and ^he love of our neighbors are two things that ought not too be
sep^rated asunder.

And he puts truth foremest, purposely, because our linking toogither would
not boot us at all, unless Jesus Christ were the bond of our concord, and
that God allows it, because it is grounded upon his word, Saint Paul then
meant here too put a difference betwixt us, and the heathen and unbelievers.
For all men will grant well enough, that there can be nothing but havoc
among men, when they be like too Dogs and Cattes: and it has bin known for
a grounded principle in all ages, in all Countries, and among all people,
insomuch that even the heathen folk, and such as knew not what true religion
means, have simply commended and esteemed the benefyte of concord and
agreement toogither.

But yet they builded without foundation. And therefore Saint Paul begins
at Gods truth: As if he should say, we must not only link in one among our
selves: but God must also go before us, and we must obey him, so as we must
be gathered toogither under him, and he sit over us, and we must lever chooze
too be at defyance with the whole world, than too slip away from him. Thus ye
see that the thing which we have too mark upon this text, is that God will
not have us too be knit toogither without knowing how or why: but he will have
us too agree too woorship and serve him, and too put our whole trust in his
infinite goodness, so as Jesus Christ be our head, and we all members of his
body through the power of faith. And agein, that when we once know how we
have a father in heaven which has adopted us too be his children, and that
Jesus Christ has voutsafed too take our flesh and substance upon him, too the
intent that we should be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: the same
should move us too love one another, too be careful each for others salvation,
and too help one another according too the ability that God gives us.
According wheruntoo it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 133. ^. 1.
that the freendship of brothers is a leeuesome thing. And afterward the
Prophet brings us too the ointment that was powered upon the Priests: as if he
should say, that men having no more but even their moother wit, may perceive
that there is not a more leeuesome thing in the world, than too live in peace
and amity. Howbeit therewithal he declares the order of it, after the same
manner that it is showed us here by S. Paul, and ^ayth, that the said
brotherhood must be con^crated and dedicated to the name of God. For the
annoynting of Aaron and his successors, was in such sort, as the ointment did
sheade down upon the whole body, and upon the garment of them. Now therefore
let us mark, that if we intend too link toogither well, we must draw unto
God, and our linking must be allowed of him. Otherwise, we may well have
fellowship toogither, but it shall be but a cursed fellowship, and the end of it
can never be but utter confuzion. Wherefore, that we may rule our life well,
let the end that we begin at, be too cleave unto the truth. Right necessary
is this warning for us now adays. For the Papists accuse us, that we have
trubbled the world, and that the debates that are now adays, do spring of our
fault: inasmuch as heretoofore all was dead, every man said, Amen, too them,
and there was no disputing. In deed there was no great travel spent in
seeking God or the salvation of men. Now then, too cast the Devil out of the
possession that he had gotten, it behooved us too use great vehemency,
according as it is said, that he will never give over his place, except he be
enforced. Therefore it stood us on hand (as ye would say) too thunder and
lighten, too waken the world, that was so fallen asleep, and after a sort
bewitched. For inasmuch as the unbelievers are extremely stubborn in stryuing
against God, and cannot abide that the truth should take place, but uphold
their lies with diuelishe wilfulness: that is the very cause why there is so
much trubble and war in the world now adays, I mean for Religion. Now the
Papists would lay the blame in our necks: but let us see who is in the
fault. For we desire that every man should do homage unto God, and that both
great and small should submit themselves too his word, and that there should
be one true unity of faith, so the simplicity of the Gospel go before it
and guide it. These are the things that we seek: and the Papists find fault
with it.

Yet notwithstanding, there is none other thing too be found in our doctrine,
but that we would feign that there should be a melody between men and
Angels too woorship the true God, and too follow his w^ord, which is our true
rule, to the end there should be no corruption in his seruis. On the contrary
part, the Papists would maynteyne all their abominations and errors, and
cannot endure that Jesus Christ should have his pre-eminence. For they have
bereft him of all his offices, and made as it it were a booty of them. They
have an infinite warrein of He sayncts and She sayncts, too whom they give
the title of their Aduocats: saying, that by their merits they obtein favor at
Gods hand for such as pray unto them. Moreover in all the rest of their
doctrine, there is nothing but it is perverted, yea and falsified. And besides
these errors and superstitions, the Papists are also so spytefull, as too bend
themselves even against God, and to spit out their madness, yea and to indeue^
too wype away the rememberance of Jesus Christ by fire and sword. What should
we do in this case? There is no compounding with them, but by renouncing of
Gods truth. But we know what order is taught us here by the holy Ghost. For
Saint Paul could well have said io one word, Agree, my friends. But he saw
well he should have spoken but one half, and that his doctrine also should
have bin misconstrewed: and therefore he says, Let us be knit toogither in the
truth, and let us rather give over all the friendship of the world, and
procure the anger of all unbelievers, and of all such as rebel against God,
than swar^e one whit from it. But if we seek too be at good agreement in the
truth, and none of bs be wedded too himself, but rather every of us procure
the welfare and salvation of his neighbors: that is the concord which ought to
be among us.

The thing then which we have in effect too remember upon this streyne, is,
that on the one side we must beware of confederating with Gods enemies, ^om.
12. d. 18.
that we stryke not sail (as they say) too please them. For although it
behoue us too seek too have peace and unity with all men, as near as we
can: yet is Gods truth always excepted, and we must make more account of
that, than of all the world. And in deed they that will needs gartify
creatures, and in the mean season turn away from Gods truth (as much as they
can:) shall be always unhappy. Wherefore let us evermore abide steadfastly by
our God, and hold us under his yoke, and not shrink away in any wise, but
rather defye the whole world, yea though there were no man too hold with us.
That is one point.

Agein, if the world may be won too obedience, and we be able too do so
much as too draw one or two too consent in one faith with us: then must we
put our indeuer and labor theruntoo. For we must shun these two extremities,
namely of offending God, and of turning away from his pure word, too purchase
men's favor: and also of being so high minded and full of stateliness, as too
trust every man to himself, and to let others alone, and too pass for no man
but himself: for these are two evil extremities which we must beware of. But
let us learn too join these two things as inseparable: namely that we yield
God true obedience through faith, by holding our selves to the pure simplicity
of his word: and agein, that therwithall we despyze not our neighbors, but
indeuer to win them, that they may submit themselves quietly (unto God), and
by that means al^ of us both great and small may speak as it were with one
mouth, through the holy Ghost reigning in our hearts, and all of us have the
knowledge that has bin spoken of, namely that God is so the author of our
salvation, that he has also showed himself a father toward us, in adopting
us, and in voutsafing to have us to be al of his household: Which cannot be,
except we live all in good concord, because he is the God of peace. And
although we should be driven too fight against the whole world: yet let us
be of good comfort, because the Angels of heaven are our companions in
cleaving unto God. Should we then in these days separate our selves from an
infinite multitude of men, which presume upon their riches, their greatness,
their pomp, their credit, yea and their wisdom? (Yea: and let us esteem every
whit of it but as trashe, and for our own part, although they call us
Schismatikes, count us but as the ofscowrings of the world: let us hold us
contented, in that we know that the Angels of heaven, the holy Patriarks, the
Hrophets, the Apostles, and the Martirs agree with us: and too be short, that
all Gods chozen people from Abell too his present day, do bear us sufficient
company. And so may we despyze all that shall be laid too our reproach, when
we have Gods truth and the mark whereby we know our selves too be his
children. For inasmuch as God cannot deny himself, he will continue always
with his Church, whereof we be a parcel, if she stick unto his word. Let
that therefore be one point.

But in the mean while also let us not forget to seek peace to the v^termost
of our power, according to the text that I alleged out of the Romans.
Therefore let us not wilfully separate our selves from the world, Romans 1^. d. 18.
but let us have (as it were) our arms strected out too take home all such as
yield themselves willingly too the obedience of God, that we may have one
faith toogither: and let us indeuer too bring it too pass. And the very same
also is the cause why Saint Paul tells us here, that the faith and
obedience which w^ yield unto God, serves not too puff up our hearts with
pride, so as we should reject other men, and every of us love himself, and
shift for himself: ^ut too make us follow the example of our heavenly father,
who allureth them too him which were far of, and is ready too be^ reconcyled
too his enemies: which thing seeing he has showed us (...) our Lord Jesus
Christ, and given us so excellent a pledge of it: we also must have the same
doctrine of peace in our thoughts and in our hearts, and indeuer as much as is
possible, too bring them too the union of the Gospel, that are separated from
it as yet: so that if they which have bin as it were stark mad against God, do
yield themselves as lambs and sheep of the flock: we must be redye to
receive them. Let us then bend our selves too that, and not be given every man
too his own profit, but assure our selves that since God has knit us
toogither and bound us one too another: every of us ought too employ himself
too the vttermoste of his ability, and according too his own measure, too
draw his neighbors with him, so as we may be ryghtly one body, and Jesus
Christ reign over us.

And for the same cause also does he add, that we should grovve in all
things in him that is our head, that is too wit, in Jesus Christ. Now by this
word Grow, Saint Paul continues the matter that we have seen
heeretoofore, which is, that we must not stand so much in our own conceytes,
as too think our selves too be come alredye to the mark we go too. For (as
I told you) our life is a journey: and therefore we must go on still: for he
that lingereth by the way, does well show that he never wist whereat he amed.
Therefore although we must not be as little children, yet are we not yet
come to full age, another have we gotten yet such strength as were requisyte.
Wherefore let us grow, that is too say, let every of us look well too his own
infirmity, and when he sees his own weakness* let him theruppon take heart,
and thrust forth himself: let him preace unto God, and let all our minds be
continually bent that way. For it is not enough for us too have begun, nor
yet too have gone on ^ good way, unless it be printed in our hearts, that we
must profi^e still, even too our dying day. Otherwise it is certain that we
shall be but dazeled with our own pride, and that will make all Gods gif^es
too vanish away, which we had received before. Wherefore let us not imagine that
we have such power, or such understanding in all the things that are requisyte
for our salvation, as that we should not consider how it is not for naught
that the holy Ghost exhorts us here (...) grow. And here ye see also, how
lowelinesse ought always too ma^ch with faith: according too this saying,
Psalm. 19. b. 8.
that Gods word serves too instruct the small and lowelye ones. The greater
then that a man would make himself too be, surely the more does he shet the
door against himself, so as he can have no entrance intoo the school of God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore let us look well (...) our own
slenderness, that we may be so meek, as nothing may^ hinder us from hoping
continually more and more in our God. And the same ought also too quicken us,
and provoke us to serve him, and to confirm our selves continually the more in
his word. For what is the cause of so great sloth and coldness as is seen
in many men, but that they think themselves too be clerks great enough
already? And therein they deceive themselves, by reason that the devil has
dimmed their eyes through their own fond ouerweening. Seeing it is so: let us
continue little ones still, not in understanding, but in naughtiness (as has
bin said before:) and since we know that we had need too profit, let us
indeuer so too do. Howbeeit, let us also have an eye to the mean that is
showed us here, which is, too resort to him that is our head.

Tr^^ly Saint Paul adds theruntoo, all things: too show than v^^en a
Christen man has examined thoroughly what is in him: he shall find that if he
have any vertew, there shall be vices mingled with it, and that in all his
vertewes there is ever some blemish or mayme. Wherefore let all of us cast down
our heads, and let the excellentest men in the world understand, that God has
still reserved some piece of grace too himself, which he has not given too
them, too the intent we should not be puffed up with fond ouerweening, too
think our selves too be that which we be not.

But let us come too the head that is spoken of here. For Saint Paul tells
us, that our only shooteanker must be too know Jesus Christ (as has bin
declared before) how that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are laid up
in him. Coloss. 2. a. 3.
For else many would raundge far in Gods word: and that should be but too
be always learning, and never to know any thing, as it is said in another
text. But S. Paul tells us, 2. Tim. 3. b. 7.
that in Jesus Christ we shall find all that is requisyte for out salvation,
and that he also must have the pre-eminence, as the head appears above all
the rest of the b^dy. For it we grew in such wise, as the shoulders should get
up half a (...) the h^ad: what a growing were that? Were such a growing too be
well lyked? It were better that a member were stark dead, tha^ that it should
so disfigure the body. For so much then as the head ought too be uppermost,
Saint Paul tells us expressly, that it is not enough for us too grow, but
that we must always grow under our Lord Jesus Christ, so as he may stand
over us, and all of us both great and small submyt our selves unto him.

And we see by experience, that this was not spoken for nothing. For what a
number are there which carrye a great countenance and show of knowledge, and
yet do nothing but set all things in a broyle and uproar, through their vain
glory? There are a great sort which could find in their hearts too have our Lord
Jesus Christ buried, that they them selves might perke up, and have all the
world gaze upon them, and be had in estimation, and reioyst at. And many
wretches come so far, that they pass not what come of it, so they may keep
them selves in reputation. Ageyn, othersome myngle our Lord Jesus Christ with
so many superstitions, that he is utterly ouershadowe^ with them. We see what
is happened in Popery. For they verify their own proverb thoroughly, that the
son of God cannot be^ known from his Apostles. And why? Because they have
fleeced him, and robbed him of the honor that belongs too him, and made as
it were a booty of it, dealing too every man his share and portion of it. Thus
are the Papists well grown, howbeeit that is but in ignorance and
superstition, because Jesus Christ has not his pre-eminence among them, another
is he their shooteanker. Yea and even among us also ye shall see some so
desirous too get renoune among men, that Jesus Christ shall be as nothing with
them. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand too mind well this
lesson of Saint Paul's, that our growing must be in our Lord Jesus Christ,
John. 3. d. 30.
according to this saying of Saint John Baptist, I must diminish, and he
increace. Let us follow that example, namly that the excellency which is in
the Church should abide v^appayred, and yet in the mean^ while Jesus Christ be
the shooteanker of all men. For although the Stars have their bryghtnesse:
yet must the Sun shine above them, and men must know that it is he by whom
we have the true light in deed. And therefore let our Lord Jesus, who is the
dayso^e of rygh^^ousenesse, be so regarded, as nothing may impeach him, nor
bleare our eyes that we should not look^ at him, and our faith (...) leuelled
alonely at him. That then is the cause why Saint Paul adds expressly, that
Jesus Christ must be our head, and we grow in him, and resort unto him, and
set ou^ whole study and mind upon him.

Too express this the better, he adds, that it is he by whom the ^hole body
is knit and joined toogither by his joints, and that it is he which furnishes
it with substance and life, according too the measure and portion of every
member: and that when this is done, the^ the body is well proportioned: howbeit
that love must reign among us, or else there shall be nothing but confuzion:
insomuch that if there be greatness, it will be over huge, so as it shall
not be a natural body, but rather a monster. Now in saying that we receive
our growing of Jesus Christ, that it is he of whom the knitting of the body
proceeds, and that it is he also by whom we be maynteyned in life: he
shows us our unthankfulness, in that we yield him not the honor which he
deserves. For must it not needs be that we are tootoo leaud, when the son
of God gives us all things, and yet we will bereeue him the honor which he
requires, for showing himself so bountiful toward us? He desires not that
we should yield him any recompense, another can we, another is it needful: but
yet he will be glorified. Now then seeing we be so enriched by him, and we
notwithstanding do fall too robbing him of his honor, so as he is defrauded
and bereft of it: must it not needs be that we be worse than devilish?
Wherefore let us mark well whereat S. Paul amed: for he intended here too
reprove the world of too leaud an unthankfulness, for not yielding our Lord
Jesus Christ his dew honor, in so much as he is not exalted among us, another
do we think upon him, another do we place him in chief souereintie, that
all men might do him homage. And therwithall he shows also, that we be
almost out of our wits when we honor not Jesus Christ, ne exalt him as we
ought to do. For there is not that man which does not naturally ^ouet his
own profit. Now then, in forsaking of Jesus Christ, we seem to have conspyred
and sworn our own confuzion, that we might be bereft of all his grace, and be
as rotten members without strength. For he is as the head of a man's body, and
as the root of a ^ree: it is he from whom all our life and sustenance
proceeds. Now then if the hands, the feet, the belly, the stomach, the
legs, and all the rest of the members should conspire together to say, let us
forsake the hea^: What should ^hey win by it? Or if they should conspyre
toogither too put the head down, an^ to thrust it into the belly, that men
might not see it: what profit should the whole body have by it? Even so
stands the case with all such as would diminish the glory and majesty of
Gods son, and lessen his power, and not acknowledge to what end he was sent
of God his father, namely, that they should seek all their welfare, and all
the parts of their salvation in him: for it is as much as if they would put
down their head. But S. Paul tells us, that there must be no knitting in
the body, but that which comes of the head. For whence comes all? Behold,
the veins convey nourrishment every where through the whole body, and the
senewes hold the bones together, and give the^ moving: but yet must all these
things have their root in the head. So then, if we will needs despyze God in
diminishing the glory of his only son, surely all will turn to our
confuzion. Jesus Christ can well enough forbear us: but we must needs perish
wretchedly like rotten carions, if he give us not whatsoever belongs to our
life. Thus ye see what S. Paul meant too show us.

Hereunto he adds, that there is a certain measure in every member, and that
the furnishment thereof comes of the head, so as it sheadeth through the whole
body, howbeit (says he) that is in measure. When he says, it is in measure,
he does us to wit, that all the excellency which we can see here, is no
derogation to the perfectness that is in Jesus Christ. For there are two
reasons too be marked. The one is, that all that is in man is imperfect, and
therefore that we must resort to our Lord Jesus Christ, that he alonly may abide
vnimpeached, and not be mingled with other creatures. The other is, that the
measure and portion which is in every member, is not there as having his
peculiar seat there. For what could the hand do, if it were not continually
nurrished and maynteyned by the head? The bond that holds altogether must
needs be maynteyned from thence. Also the natural heat and moving must come
from thence, insomuch that the hand should wither every minute of an hour,
and rotte away, if the head wrought not continually. The like respect is
between Christ and his Church. For if we consider well what is in men: though
we admitted one too be like an Angel: yet has he but his measure still. And
why? To the intent that Jesus Christ should not be bereft of the honor that
belongs unto him. Seeing then that every of us has his portion (as has bin
showed before:) it is good reason also that every of us should stoop, and not
lift up our horns too take any thing upon us, which God reserueth to his only
son. That is one point.

Agein, let us understand, that the same measure comes of free gift, as has
bin showed already: and yet is it not without cause that S. Paul repeteth it
here agein. For we see the foolish presumptuousnes of men, how every man
would be a lord: and we would feign rod God of his right, to the end to be
advanced and esteemed our selves. Therefore to abate that loftiness, and to
clenze us of such vice, S. Paul puts us in mind once agein, 1. Cor. 4. b. 7.
that we have nothing which is not given us. And therefore we must resort too
this which he says in the first too the Corinthians: Who art thou? Haste thou
made thy self so excellent by thine own cunnyng? Have thou any thing which
thou can chalendge as thine own? No: it is God that has advanced thee so:
and therefore humble thy self. His meaning then is, that all the whole knitting
and all the whole furnishing comes of the head. For it is not enough for us
that we were once created and shaped, but it stands us on hand to have our
members still mainteyned in their plyght. That therefore is the cause why S.
Paul adds the word furniture, or sheading down, as if God should shead down
his inworking upon the head, and the head shead fo^rth the same inwoorking
throughout all the members. And that is it which S. Paul meant, in saying that
Jesus Christ is our spiritual head, who has received all fullness of grace,
according too the first chapter of S. John, where it is said, that it was given
him not for himself alone: but for us also which are his brethren. Seeing it is
so, let us understand that all the grace which we have received of God, is
creeped into us by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that we have the
full furnishing of it throughout also by him. True it is that the said strength
or inwoorking passes through every member, and in coming from the head, it
shall be in the shoulder, before it be in the arm, and afterward in the arm,
before it be in the hand: but yet for all that, shall the arm therefore glory
in it self, and give the hand no part with it? No: but his receiving is to
impart it unto the residew of the limbs, and all comes of the head. Agein,
shall not the hand on the one side, give of his power back agein too the arm
(on the other side? Yis:) for every member knows his own office, that is too
say, every member has naturally an inclination too serve all the rest of the
body, as though God had given them discretion and wisdom too say, thus it
must be. They be bound unto it, and know the need that each of them has of
others help.

True it is, that my hand cannot judge any thing, but yet has God put such an
indowment and disposition into it, that it desires nothing rather than too
employ it self to the service of all the rest of the body. Also the foot does
his dewtie without entreating or bydding, as though God had imprinted such a
discretion in them (as to consider) that all of them receive their power from
heaven, and that the things which they have received, must be fitted thervntoo.

Now if a man should demand, Is every man then alyke and equal in the
Church? Saint Paul, in speaking of portion and measure, means not that God
has distributed like portion too every member. For the leg is not the eye:
and yet ^euerthelesse, the leg, according too his quality, has that which it
needs. And for the same cause also Saint Paul says, that the members
should be so knit together, as they might make up one whole body through love,
and by that mean have every one wherewith too be contented. There are then
two things which we must mark: namely that Gods gifts are diverse, and that
some are much more excellent than other. For the Eye is an excellenter member
than the foot, and we see also how it is had in honor: and the mouth is more
than the leg. Mark it then for one point, that there is such diversity, that
our Lord exalts and honoreth whom he lists more than others. There are both
great and small in the Church, and all must not be teachers and Prophets. But
yet this diversity lets not, but that every member has his desire, and
that which is meet for it, so as the foot enuyeth not the hand, nor the hand
the foot, no more than any of them both enuyeth the eyes. Too what purpose
should it serve the hand too have sight? It were a thing which not only could
do it no good, but also should do it harm. If every member had al offices in
it self, surely the body should be confounded and come to naught. So then the
hand has his perfection in that which belongs unto him, I mean in his
degree: and likewise the foot. Howbeit S. Paul's meaning is, that it ought too
suffyze us, that the Church be edifyed in common* For if our neighbors be
enriched with Gods gifts: the same redoundeth partly unto us. And on the
other side, if we have received a larger measure of grace: we be the more
bound too imparte the same too such as have need of it. That therefore is the
thing which Saint Paul means too set down in this text, saying, that if the
knittyng be after that manner, the body shall be well builded and made up.

And here we see how he contineweth his matter, which is, that we must be so
linked toogither according too the doctri^e of the Gospel, as Jesus Christ may
reign over us, and we know that the heavenly father has given us him, with
condition that we should all link toogither under him, and maynteyne a
brotherly unity among us. But yet before all things, we must be subject too
him that has all souereine dominion, and consider that for as much as the
heavenly father has set him in that degree, we must all ame at him, and
continue in his obedience unto the end. And therwithall let us understand,
that that cannot be done, without love, that is too say, unless every of us
rid himself of the cursed affection of seeking too much our own profit. For in
deed it is easy too perceive, that that affection does so blind us, that it
makes us too despyze our neighbors. So much the more therefore does it behoue
every of us too indeuer too give over his own right, and too know that God
has not so distributed his gifts, that every man may be a world or a Church
of himself, but that for as much as every man has need of his neighbors, the
same is the very mean whereby he will hold us toogither. And that ought also
too provoke us so much the more too do what we can one for another. Although
then that there be but one fountain from whence we draw all spiritual
gifts, namely even our Lord Jesus Christ: yet notwithstanding, God makes the
fullness of the grace which he has put in Jesus Christ, too flow forth as it
were by chanelles, that we may receive every man his portion, as is expedient
for us. And so ye see in effect what we have too remember here.

Now were this doctrine well put in ure: surely all the trubbles that are now
adays in the world, would soon be appeased, and there would no more be so
many bickerings and disputings: but we should easly agree all toogither. For
Ambition or Uaynglorye is the moother of all heresies, for when men will needs
exalt themselves, they must needs thereby thrust down Christ if they could.
Agein, whence spring Superstitions, but of this, that men know not the
inestimable benefytes that are brought us by our Lord Jesus Christ, and are
daily offered unto us in him by the Gospel? This has made the world always
wanton and wandering after his own lusts: this has made men too forge so many
patrons and advocates: this has made men too advance their own deseruings:
this has made folk too deuyze so many satisfactions, so many means wherewith
too please God, and so many new services: namely for that they were not
contented with Jesus Christ, and all for want of knowing what manner a one he
is, and that when we once have him, he ought too suffyze us, and we too hold
our selves too him, because the father has so gloryfyed him, as we ought of
duty too do him homage, and too honor him as our souereyne King. For as much
then as we see the wretched unbelievers to be scattered here and there, by
reason that they turn away from Jesus Christ: we have so much the more need
to be warned to hold us simply to his obedience, and to know that all our
welfare comes of him, and (therefore) that we ought to return to him to yield
him his dew honor, and therwithall put our whole trust in him, and that too
the intent we may so do, we must consider that there is nothing but ^^lth in
us, and that we hold our spi^itual life of him, and that not for once and away,
but in such wise as he woorketh continewally in us, sttengthning and furthering
us even until he have brought bs to his perfection, that is to say, to the
perfection which we hope for by him. And for this cause was the holy Supper
left us, as a reme^berance that our Lord Jesus Christ is he in whom we must
wholly seek all things belonging to the life of our souls. For (there) we
profess, that he is our nurrishment, even to satisfye us to the full. And
therefore the cause why we come (thither) to eat and drink, is to put us in
mind that we haue^^ Jesus Christ, not the half of our life only, but the whole
of it: and that when we be fed with him, we must content our selves with him,
and not seek one drop nor myte (as they say) elsewhere. After this manner
then must we now come to the holy table: that is to wit, after the examining
of our own sins, when we once know that we be nothing: we must seek by
what means God calls us to him, and how we may keep our way thither, even
till we be perfectly knit unto him: namely (by knowing) that Jesus Christ is
given us, and that in him we have all that is behooffull and wanting in our
selves. And therefore let us so esteem our Lord Jesus Christ, as we may take
him for our very sustenance, and as our faith (as I have touched before) be not
haled away to roue here and there, and finally to vanish quyte away, but may
so rest upon him, as we may know that there is another righteousness, nor
holiness, nor merit, nor power, nor aught else in our selves, but that we
shall find all in him, and that we cannot be parttakers of him, but we must
also be parttakers of all the goods that he has received of God his father.
Seeing then that all the good things which God has put intoo our head, are
communicated unto us by his means: let us learn to humble our selves, and not
to clymb in such wise, as he should be defrauded of his honor, but confess
simply and without feyning, that look whatsoever is given us through his free
goodness, he mainteyneth and preserves it, and moreover increaceth and
stablisheth it in us more and more. Furthermore let us mark, that we cannot
possess the goods of our Lord Jesus Christ to take any profit by the^, except
we first enjoy him. And that is the cause why he gives himself unto us. And
thinks it not enough to give us some part and portion of his righteousness,
of his deserts by the sacrifyce of his death and passion, of the obedience
that he yielded unto God his father, and of all the gifts which he received
fully of God his father, (I say, he thinks it not enough to give us some part
and portion of them) in his Sacraments: but he says, I am yours, possess ye
me. Then is it not enough for us too go seek our wants at his hand, that he
may impart them to us: but (we must also consider,) first of all, how he
offers himself unto us, and says, Lo here my body which is delivered for
you, lo here my blud which shall be shed for the remission of your sins. And
this is done, too the end that we should know, that he dwells in us truly
by his holy spirit, and that we live by his own substance, and that it is not
said here without cause, that the knitting of the body comes of him, and
that he is the furniture thereof, and that forasmuch as we want the grace and
gifts that belong too our spiritual life, we must draw them out of that
fountain. And if we resort to him with perseverance in the faith of the
Gospel, we shall feel our selves more and more strengthened and stablished
in all grace, even till he have rid us of all our imperfections and
infirmities, too make us enjoy his heavenly glory with him.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as we may be sorry
for them: and therwithall too work so in us hereafter, as we may from day too
day be clenzed of all our imperfections and vices, more and more, and that our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the welspring of all pureness, may so shed forth
the grace of his holy spirit, as we may be made new creatures thereby, too
do our souerein king the honor that belongs too him. And so let us all say,
Almighty God heavenly father* etc.

The.xxviii. Sermon, which is the eight upon the fourth Chapter.
17. This I say therefore, and adjure (you) by the Lord, that hensfoorth ye
walk not as the (rest of the) Gentyles, (which) walk in vanity of their
mind,

18. Having their understanding ouercast with darkness, and being strangers
too the life of God, by reason of the ignorance that is in them, and through
the blyndnesse of their heart.

19. Who without remorse of conscience have given themselves over too
lewdness, too commit all vnclenenesse, even with inordinate greediness.


COnsidering how corrupt we be by nature, it is not enough for us too have
^he good showed unto us, unless the vy^^s that are rooted in us, be also
corrected: like as it would smally boot too sow (corn) in a ground that
were ouergrowen with nettles, shrewd weeds, rushes, and thorns. And therefore
notwithstanding that Saint Paul have heretofore showed the true rule of godly
life: yet he adds (as need is) that it stands every man on hand too
bethink himself, too change quyte and clean, and too become a new man,
because that until God have clenzed us both in mind and ha^^, and in all
parts of our soul, there will never be any thing but tilthinesse. So then,
the doctrine that we have herd heretoofore should not boot us, if that which
we hear now presently had not bin added. For we^ know that the Ephesians too
whom Saint Paul speaks, before they were converted too the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, had lived a certain time in ignorance, and bin given too all
naughtiness and leaud life, even too the uttermost. Yet notwithstanding, Saint
Paul sets it down here in general, that all they which have not bin
^aught in Gods school, are blind wretches, unable too discrene between good
and evil, yea and sta^ke beasts, insomuch that even with the very root that
comes with them from their moothers womb, every man hardens more and more,
till they fall intoo such excess, that they become as monsters, and appear no
more too be creatures fashyoned after the image of God. Ye see then that in
effect Saint Paul's intent is, that after he has declared Gods stablishing of
his government over us: Now too the end that our walking in this world should
be too go unto God, and too the heavenly life, wheruntoo he calls us: he
shows that we shall never obey him, nor bow our neck too receive his yoke,
until we have changed both our disposition and mind, and forsaken our
selves, by cause we be utterly corrupted.

And so there are two parts in the instruction that is given us. The one
shows us wheruntoo God calls us: and the other, that we must fight against
our own sinfulness, and utterly imprison our selves, that we may become
teachable too receive the doctrine that God sets out for us. Howbeeit for
as much as that is hard too do: Saint Paul thinks it not enough too give us
single warning: but also cyteth us, and after a sort sets him in seat of
Justice, before whom we must yield an account, too the intent too move them
and quicken them the more too whom he speaks. For it is no small thing to
make men to renounce themselves, considering how every man sootheth himself,
and believes that he is able to woork wonders. Although he be saped in
naughtiness, yet thinks he that he has some virtues in him. Yea and although
we have our faults proved too our faces, yet will we labor too cloak them
through hypocrisy, and too set some fair color and gloss upon them, or else
we will maynteyne them wilfully, and never yield our selves guilty, though our
shame lie open to the whole world. To be short, it is a very hard encounter,
when a man must as well lay down all the wisdom which he weened himself ^oo
have in governing himself after his own fancy, as also tame his affections,
that he may be subject unto God, and have nothing in him self that shall
strive against him. Romans 8. b. 7.
For our flesh is too too stout in that behalf: and we hear how it is said in
another text, that all a man's thoughts, and all that ever he can conceive, is
emnitie against God. Likewise also it is said in Genesis, Gene. 6. a. 5. and 8.
c. 21.
yea even at the time that the world had the greatest soundness that ever it
had, that whatsoever can come out of the warehouse of our own brain, is all
of it stark naughtiness and rebellion against God* So then, it was requisite
that great vehemency should be used in this behalf: and therefore also does
Saint Paul use it, saying that he not only teaches, but also cyteth them too
whom he speaks, too the end they may know that they be as it were in Gods
presence, and that it is not for them too fall asleep in their vain
selfflatteries, but that as the devil has many allurements too beguyle us,
so on the contrary part, Gods word must inlyghten us: and that although we
forslowe too consider our vices, and had lever too conceal them: yet we must
understand, that it is more for our profit to come too reason, and too examine
thoroughly what is in us. That is the cause why Saint Paul mynding too exhort
the Ephesians too change of life, sets down this adiuratio^ and kind of
witness bearing, as though he were present before Gods judgment seat. If
there be any couenanting between man and man, this solemnity and Ceremony
of swearing, will move them, and cause them to bethink themselves well what
they promis, at leastwyse if they be not quyte out of their wits. Howbeeit,
here is not some Notarie too take notyce of their oaths, and such other
customs as are among men, to ratify the things that they agree upon among
themselves: but here is Saint Paul, who stands in the behalf and person of
Jesus Christ, from whom he has authority, not only too require us, but also
too summon us too make our account, if we indeuer not too discharge our
dewtie: yea and he tells us, tha^ it is not for us too let slip the things
that he says, nor too hear them with deaf ears, because God is present too
punish our rechlenesse in despyzing his word. Since it is so, let us learn too
leave flattering of our selves, as many do, whom we see too pretend
deafness: and whatsoever cou^tenances they make, they continue always the
same they were before. Wherefore let us mark well, that God thinking it not
enough too teach ^s, intends too take away all excuce, and ^elleth us, that
he will not suffer such contempt of his word, when we voutsafe not too give
ear, seeing he was so gracious as too speak unto us, too give us a
warrantyze of our salvation.

Now let us come too the effect of that which is contained here. Saint Paul
says, Be not as the rest of the Gentyles are. I have told you alredye that
they too whom he writes, were for a time quyte given too all naughtiness, and
without the fear of God. For even from their cradle they had bin brought up in
all manner of Idolatry, and yet they thought themselves well discharged, when
they had done some sacrifyze too their puppets. Like as at this day in the
popedom, they that play most murlimewes, are counted most holy: and they
think themselves out of Gods debt, so they have once done a sort of pelting
tryfles. For that cause does Saint Paul send the Ephesians too this
similitude, saying, that if they look upon the rest of the Gentyles, there
they may see in what plyght and taking they weere, before God had gathered them
intoo his Church. Prye upon your selves there, (says he): for there shall
you see your own images: before such time as God reached you his hand, and
drew you out of the dungeon of unbelief wherein you were plunged, you differed
nothing at all from them. Now then at leastwyse ye ought too consider the
grace that has bin granted you, that it may bring forth fruit in you

By the way let us mark, that in using this speech, the rest of the Gentyles,
Saint Paul comprehends here al mankind. For he speaks not of two or
three men only, nor of any one nation, nor of some country: but he says
generally, that all they which had not bin trained in the Gospel, were blind
wretches, as we see. Too be short, he shows what manner of ones we be,
until God have prevented us with his grace, too the intent we should not cast
this exhortation away, nor bear our selves on hand, that we be exempted from
all the things which we shall see hereafter. Therefore too the end we surmyze
not a privilege too withdraw our selves from the common array of men: Saint
Paul has here knit all Adams children toogither as it weere in one bundle.
For in all mankind there is nothing too be found but leawdnesse and
corruption. Here therefore are two points which we have too mark. The one is,
that here as it were in a looking glass, we should behold what our own
state is, so long as God gives us the bridle, and lets us follow our own
swindge. Mark that for one point: and I will lay it out more at large anon. The
other is, that when we see the enormities which are committed through the
whole world, and that men be so shameless in evil doing, or rather
altoogither bewitched, and some so besotted, as a man can by no means move
them to learn too fear God: when we see (I say) on the one side such
stubbornness in men, and on the other side so gross and beastly
senslesnesse: let us learn to spy our selves there, and too consider that God
did us a singular good turn, when it pleased him too touch us too the quick,
that his word might prevail in us. For we differ nothing at al from the
woorst and most disordere^ in the ^orld, nor from such as are in most horrible
confuzion. Ye see then what we should have bin if God had not pityed us. And
this ought too touch us well too the quick, that the grace which God has
granted us, be not darkened and quyte quenched in the end, so as we be
quyte and clean bereft of it. After this manner therefore ought we too apply
this text too our instruction, where Saint Paul sets other men before us,
which have not yet bin inlyghtened by the faith of the Gospel, but are let
alone: that by comparing our state with theirs, we may consider how merciful
God showed him self vn^oo us, in drawing us out of such a dungeon, too the
intent that we should be the diligenter in giving our selves unto him.

Hereupon he says, Walk no more hensforth as they did in Vanity of mind. By
this word Hensfoorth or Hereafter, he intends too shame such as trained in
the Gospel, if their life prove not that they have not misspent their labor.
For too what purpose are we called too the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
too separate our selves from the stumbling blocks of the world? Therefore we
must not excuze our selves by our bringing up in evil custom, nor by any
examples that might allure us too lewdness, nor yet by that there is nothing
but frowardness round about us: for seeing that God has adopted us too be
his children, he will have us to live thereafter. And therefore let us mark,
that faith imports such a reforming of our selves, as our life be clean
changed. And for the same cause is i^ said, ^. Cor. 5. c. 17.
that whosoever will be counted too be in Jesus Christ, must become a new
creature. For we may prate of the Gospel enough and too much, and we may be
maruelously fine headed: but that shall be naught worth, until the said
change appear in us, that is too say, until we lead a new life.

Besides this, we have too mark here, that after Saint Paul has spoken of
the vanity of mind, he adds, Blyndnesse of mind, or Darkness of
understanding: and lastly he says, Blyndnesse or Stubbornness of heart. This
blazing of men after this sort, serves well too put them quyte out of conceyt.
For when the Philosophers spoke of the excellency and worthiness that is in
man's nature, they did always set down Reason as an ouerruler: Next her they
did s^t down discretion, between good and evil, when men debate in
themselves, and make a serching and a turmoyling (for things). After that
manner did they make as it were a Court bar, too the end too make man judge
of good and evil. It should seem then that Saint Paul here abaceth men too
much, when he says, that Reason has nothing in it but vanity, untruth, and
deceytfulnesse: and agein, that all that ever men can conceive, is but a maze
of vain fancies, and that they do but overthrow them selves more and more,
as if a blind wretch should wander abroad in the dark. Yet notwithstanding,
the holy Ghost is the only competent judge too give sentence of the things that
are in us, least we might think our selves too have won the goal by
flattering of our selves, according as he told us before, that men have their
eyes so blyndfolded with the fond opinion which they have conceived of their
own worthiness, that they cannot be ashamed and confess their own
lewdness. That was the cause why the Philosophers did always magnify the
nature of man, and yet notwithstanding experience shows the clean contrary:
for the vanity that is in them is apparrant. But they wyted that upon men's
negligence and rechlesnesse, so that if men would aply all the senses of nature
thoroughly, too know what is good, they should be as little Angels. They
imagined so: but that was for want of boul^yng them too the bottom. For they
never wist what God is: and that made them too discharge themselves so lightly
toowardes him: insomuch that even they which disputed most cunningly of Gods
majesty, and had a higher understanding than the common sort, and (too be
short) were esteemed the wyzest men in the world: could notwithstanding never
come near the truth of God: and whenever his seruis came in question, they
were so graueled, that they turned all things vpsyde down. And so the wisdom
of the world will not ^uffer us too come too the heavenly light: for it is a
special gift of God, and not too be found in our selves. Ye see then that
even the greatest men of skyll deceived themselves: and that is the cause that
men fall asleep in this fond opinion whereto they were to much inclyned before.
Yea and we see that this foolish or rather devilish ouerweening has gotten
place even among the Jews, insomuch that they have always bin of opinion, (as
men are now adays in the popedom) that they have freewill. True it is that
the Papists will grant more than the heathen folk, namely that we be
corrupted by original sin, howbeeit their meaning is, that notwithstanding the
infirmitye which is in man, yet there abides some remnant of goodness in him,
insomuch that we half an understanding still, and also (...) will that is
able to train us unto good, though it be but weak of it self. Too be
short, such as will needs judge according too their natural understanding,
say, that men are as sound and uncorrupted, as Angels. The Papists being
convicted by so many records of the Scripture, will grant well enough, that
we be fal^e from our original, and that there are many vices in us: but yet
is that no let (say they) but that we be still half clean, and are able to do
good of our own power, when we be once humbled before God. To be short, they
make such a partnership between God and men, that they say in deed, that we
have need too be inlyghtned from above, too atteyne too faith: but yet that
we have some light in our selves, and God makes up that which wants. Agein,
they will say, that lust does so reign in us, as it is right hard for us too
submit our selves too God, but yet that we must labor too do it, and are
able too do it, so that God aid us and reach us his hand. This is the
Concurrence (as they term it) (that is too say, the matching or marrowing
toogither) of Gods grace, and of the goodness that remains in man, though
we be corrupted. But (as I said) let us rather harken too that which God
himself, even he which only is the competent Judge has spoken of it by
vnrepealable sentence, which is, that all they which follow common reason, and
the things that man has of him self, are blind wret^hes. And what shall then
become of Reason? For although men think that it serves too give them light,
and too show them the way: yet is it certain that it does but always tumble
them intoo the pit: and whereas they ween themselves too be well aduyzed, they
shall be stark beasts. And the cause why this is told us continewally, is too do
us too understand, that God must be feign too reform us, not by half, but all
whole throughout.

And here a man might ask a question: if men (I meene those whom God has let
alone) were without understanding and discretion in that behalf, whether might
one see examples of it or no? It is very certain that they be not like
horses, nor yet like dogs: but yet let us mark, that all the understanding
and discretion which is in us, and all the judgment which it is possible for us
too have, serves too none other end, than too make us inexcusable. Therefore
we must understand, that although we have some discretion between good and
evil, before God have taught us by his word, and inlyghtened us (...) his
holy spirit: yet the same ^erueth but too beree^e us of excuce, that we might
not make a buckler of ignorance, as we be w^^nt too do. For although every
man have not had the written Law, yet must he bear the sentence of damnation
about him in his heart, (as says S Paul in the second too the Romans) and
God must drive him too perceive it aforehand, by making him to feel
har^^ytings whether he will or no, so as he shall say, I am guilty in this
thing and in that. Thus remains there some understanding in men: howbeit not
too lead them in the way of salvation, but only too make them so much the more
guilty before God. For as touching our affections, it might be said, that there
are many which live honestly and without blame, though they never tasted of the
Gospel. Yeamary, but in the mean while their hearts are fraughted with malice
and st^bbornnesse, and no dout but that all such as have not bin reformed by
Gods spirit, shall still feed a sea of wicked, froward, and malicious lusts
within them. And therefore let us not stay upon the outward show, 1. Sam. 16.
b. 7. and Psalm. 7. c. 10. and. 44. d. 22. and Iere. 17. b. 10. and 1. John. 5.
d. 20.
but let us mark how it is not for naught that God chalengeth the searching of
men's hearts as his peculiar office: and therefore that must be reserved unto
him. Also let us call too mind how Saint John in his Epistle says, that we see
not all the sins that are in us, but that God who sees far more clearly,
is the Judge thereof. Howsoever the case stand, when men have done the best
they can, yet can they not rid their hands of condemnation, when they come
before the heavenly Judge, (specially) seeing that the stars are not clear in
his sight, no nor even the Angels, in so much that if he listed to examine the^
with rigor, they should not be able too come too the perfection that is in
him. So then let us note, that until God have visited us, and is come unto
us, and has subdewed us unto him: we shall always continue ignorant and
blind wretches, there shall be nothing but va^^tie in all our understanding, in
our hearts there shall be nothing but pride and presumption, and our lusts
shall be so far out of square, that they shall strive against God, and we
shall fight against his Justice, and against all right. And surely we see what
has followed of it, when men would needs govern them selves by t^eir own
wit. For what fashions of seruyng God have been brought ^ntoo the world, and
how wicked? Wanted there any great cunnyng, or any great skyll? No: for we
see that God has (...) out this gracious gifts in such wise, as man's wit
has showed it self right excellent in all manner (...) sciences and
knowledges, saving in the chief: that is too wit, of coming unto God. In this
all have failed, they have all wandered away, and there was nothing but
fasehoode and deceyt in their case. And the further they indeuered too thrust
themselves foreward, so much the deeper did they plundge them selves intoo the
mire. Wherefore let us note, that although the light shine (as it is said in
the first chapter of saint John:) yet notwithstanding we being darkness,
conceive it not. Saint John shows, that even from the beginning God separated
men from beasts, imprintyng his image in them, and gyuyng them discretion too
discern between good and evil. The life of man then serves not only too
eat and drink, but also too consider that we have a better life, and that
is, too have some order and common policy here beneath, and too understand
that there is a God which rules all.

Lo here the light that was before Adams fall. And this light abides yet
still, but yet it shyneth in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not,
but rather quenches it quite and clean out. So then if we have any small
insight or ame, let us consider that it is but as a little spark, which passes
and vanishes away out of hand. But in the mean while, as concerning our own
nature, that we should be able too have regard of goodness, or too seek it,
follow it, and continue in it: it is utterly impossible. And why? For our
understanding is stark blind. Psalm. 94. b. 11.
To be short, there is nothing but vanity in us, according too this saying,
that God perused the thoughts of men, and saw there was nothing but vanity
and leazing in them.

Now too express this yet better, Saint Paul says, that they had their
understanding darkened, and were strangers too the life of God: wherein he
cutteth of the occasion of all excuses that men can make. For they will replye
continually against God, and though they be condemned, yet will they always
have the last word, (saying:) what can I do with it if there be nothing but
vanity in me, seeing that God created me so? why made he me not otherwise?
But Saint Paul tells us here, that we have our understanding ouercast with
our own darkness. And why? Because the light is quenched by the corruption
that is come upon us in Adam. To be short, S. Paul shows us here, that we
must keep our mouths shet, when the scripture bewrays that we be both
ignorant, blind, and brutish. We must not think to further our case by
alleging that god ought to have made us otherwise: for the evil proceeds of
Adams fall, because not only he was bereft of the good that he had receyu^d,
but all we also were impouerished in him. And like as he that for feyteth his
goods, must beg and his children to, so must we also also in our penury and
poverty consider still at this day, the misfortune that is come upon us
through the fault and offense of our first father. Thus ye see how Saint Paul
has here disappoynted all starting holes, that men are wont too set before
them, too show themselves too be ryghtuous and innocent before God. For
whence comes the vanity of our mind in that we be both blind and ignorant?
Even of our being in darkness, and by darkening of the light that God had put
intoo us in our first creation. And forasmuch as this is a hard matter too
brucke, S. Paul brings us too the life of God: and that is too laugh too
scorn all the tryflyng imaginations that men have contryued too maynteyne
their own Freewill, Reason, and Discretion. For (as I have said already) the
books of the Philosophers are full of such stuff. In the Popedom there is
bickering still at this day for Freewill, as though all were mard, if man had
not some good selfmouing and ability too prepare himself too receyre grace,
and were made fellow with God, and could make the grace effectual which is
offered him. By which reckening men shall not only be hayle fellow with God
(if they may be believed) but of better ability than he, so as he shall but
add some little portion too them. But S. Paul says, that we may well be
alive in our opinion: but as in respect of God, we shall not fail too be as
dead carkesses, or rather even as rotten and stinking carions. Then let not men
take upon them through their foolish ouerweening to have reason, wisdom, and
freewyll: but if they would feign know their own state, let them lift up
their eyes and consider that their living must be the life of God, and not the
life which every man fancyeth here too himself. S Paul in the seventh too
the Romans, confesses that he thought himself alive for a time, namely,
before he had bin converted too the pure doctrine, because he was full of
hypocrisy, and possessed with such pride, that he thought himself too be as a
little Angel. And (...). Because Gods law had not yet sifted him thoroughly.
Romans 7. b. 9.
But when I once entered intoo my self (says he) and knew what it was too
lust: then did Gods Law wound me too death, and I perceived that the life
which I had lived before, was but death, and that I had made my self too
believe woonders, taking my self too be that which I was not, as fools do,
which believe that they be Kings and Princes, when in the mean while lyce
eat them up, or else they starve for hunger and cold. So then, Saint Paul
confesses that before he was converted, he was alive too his own seemyng, and
he tryumphed at it: but when Christ had once humbled him, and made him feel
what Gods judgment was, then he gave over that life, and saw well that it was
but a death.

Likewise he says now, that although we be alive in the opinion of the
world, so as men clap their hands at us, and magnyfye our vertewes, and that
we our selves also are besotted with the same opinion: it is nothing at all,
but we must go unto God. Now we shall find that God has a special life
which he reserueth and keeps as laid up in secret for his children. For
albeeit that he make his daysonne too shine both upon good and bad, and show
himself lyberall toward all without exception. Yet does he not scatter
abrod the things that serve for his chozen, according too this saying of this
Psalm, Psalm. 3^. f. 20. 21
Lord how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up in store for them that
fear thee? It is as a treasure that thou have hoorded up for them. So then
whereas Saint Paul speaks here of Gods life: he shows that in living
according too our nature, we have not our life of him. Whence then? Is it not
God that has created us? Is it not he of whom we have our being and moving:
as it is said in the seventeenth of the Acts. Then is our common life of God,
in as much as he is our maker: but in as much as he is the Savior of the chozen,
and in as much as he is the father of his children whom he has adopted: this
life which is common both too good and bad, is not named Gods life, but man's
life: God lets it alone in his plyght. And which then is Gods life? It is,
when upon his choozing of us, he shows us the way of life and salvation, and
renews us by his holy spirit, so as Jesus Christ dwells in us by faith,
(as we have seen before) and utters his power in us, causing our old man to
be crucified with him, yea and even buried too, that we may be rayzed agein,
even too be separated from all uncleanness of the world, that we may not
resemble the unbelievers, who are wholly prisoners under the tyranny of Satan,
and are driven and haled by him, and give over themselves too all evil. That
is in effect the cause why S. Paul has spoken too us here of Gods life.

And now, that we may the beteer be wakened and receive this exhortation
unfeignedly: let us not deceive our selves any more with the opinions that every
of us may conceive in our own head, nor yet with the judgment of men, which
oftymes do praise and commend the thing that is nothing worth. Uerilye we
know how our Lord Jesus Christ says in Saint Luke, Luke. 16. d. 15.
that the thing which is high and excellent before men, is utterly loathsome
before God. Too the intent therefore that we may no more be deceived by them,
let us understand, that until God have made us new creatures, and begotten us
agein by his holy spirit, we be blind in our understanding, we have nothing
in us but vanity, and we be utterly ignorant, yea and stark beasts. That
is in effect the thing that we have too bear in mind. Wherefore as often as we
fall too our accustomed byase, and follow our own fancy, let us learn too
cite our selves before God, and too wey well what is meant by the life that he
reserueth as peculiar too himself. Not that it serves for none other but
himself, but because he bestows it upon none but his own children. For
thereby it is that he shows himself to have chozen us, as we have seen in
the first chapter.

Now heerupon he sets down immediately the hardness of their heart: not a
single hardness, after the manner as we take hardness: for the (greek word
betokens a thickenednesse (or muddinesse) as when a piece of wine that was
very well fined, is so trubbled, as it becomes all Lees, and grows thick
(and muddie like a puddle,) so as there is no more clear licour in it. Even so
Saint Paul says that the heart is thickened, when it is so blinded and
hardened by that mean, as it cannot yield too the obeying of God, and that
then there is no cleerenesse in it, but all is trubbled like a puddle. And this
word Heart, does in the holy Scripture betoken now and then, all the lusts,
lykings, and will of man: and sometimes also his understanding. But for as much
as here Saint Paul has put a difference between a man's understanding, and
his mind, and his Heart: we may well think that he meant too add the will,
together with all the scannings and debatings which we make (in our selves)
about the judging of good and evil: and finally the whole understanding which
we have, and the reason that reigns in us. Saint Paul therefore meant in
effect too show, that man is so corrupted in all parts of him through the
sin of Adam, as there is another wit nor will, but it tends wholly unto
evil, and is utterly saped in it. And therefore like as erst he condemned the
beastliness that is in us: so now also he shows that we^ be as blocks, and
cannot be quiet too follow our God whither soever he calls us, but that we
be stubborn, and have stiff necks which cannot bow, as Moses also
vpbraydeth those that rebelled against God, (telling them) that they had a
neck of iron or brass. And even such are we too of nature. And for that
cause is it said in Ezechiell, Ezech. 36. f. 26.
that God will change the hearts of them whom he will have saved, so that
whereas they were stonye before, he will make them fleshye. This similitude
shows well, what is in us till God have wrought an alteration in us. For we
have nothing but hardness: which is as much as if the holy Ghost should say,
that we be Gods enemies, and refuzers of al truth, until God have softened
us, and corrected the crabbednesse and stubbornness, wherethrough w^e cast up
our rage in such wyze against God. Too be short, all our lusts are as men of
war marching in battle, to let God that he should not reign and execute his
power and superiority, which he ought to have over us. Lo what our nature is.
Now let us go brag of our own freewill, and of our reason: as we see these
wretched Papists do, who are ever harping still upon that stryng. But let us
learn too humble our selves with a good will, and (as I said before) let us
consider that Saint Paul blames men's nature, showing that all of us from the
greatest too the least, are plundged even too the bottom of hell, until God
pluck us back agein. And therwithall let us consider all the enormities that
are done through the whole world, and conclude, that we our selves should do
as much, if God showed us not his mercy, and let the same stir us up too
bridle our selves, least we ouershoote our selves at some time: and seeing it
has pleased God too draw us unto him, let us not turn back agein too
meddle with the leawdnesse of the unbelievers. And no wonder though they
stumble, and tumble and reele too and fro, for they have no light to direct
them by. But our Lord shyneth upon vs^ by his word, and gives us eyes by his
holy spirt: and therefore let us eschew too be like them, as S. Paul exhorts
us here.

Heereuntoo he adds the top of al mischeef: which is, that men go astray
after their own kind, continue in going outward from worse too worse, and
foade themselves with flattery, whereby they cast their consciences into such a
sleep, as they feel no more any remorse or grief: and that is the high way
too make them utterly past recovery. Now first of all, let us learn here too
prevent such vengeance of God, which ought too make us quake. And when we
hear that such as abide still in their own nature, and ouershoote themselves
so far as too be without scruple of conscience, and too become as brute
beasts, void of discretion, too be moved either with life or death, or with
any manner of feeling of their own soul health: let us a Gods name walk in
fear and awe, and bewail our sins every hour early and late, that we be
not hardened after that fashion. For we see how they that grow beastly after
that sort, do gather such a hard hartednes, as a man cannot bow them, after
they have once gotten such a boldness in giving themselves unto evil. Thus
as touching the first point, let us be right well assured, that God reuengeth
himself after a terrible manner, against all such as foade themselves in their
vices, and take inordinate leave too do what they list, so that in the end
they become brutish, even as Asses and Dogs.

And now for the second point, if God use such rigor toward those which were
never yet trained too the Gospel: what will he do to us, when he shall have
showed us the way of salvation a long time, and yet we continue still like
those that never tasted of good instruction? Do we not think that the
punishment shall be more horrible and dreadful upon us? Like as when S. Paul
declares in the first too the Romans, that God gave men over intoo
disordinate and shameful lusts, so as they were utterly past all shame: he
speaks expressly of the heathen and unbelievers, who had none other knowledge
of God than by the skies and the earth, and the creatures: they had none other
help than that great book, whereby too glorify God, and yet forasmuch as they
did it not, therefore are they condemned after that manner. But now can we have
no such excuce as those silly souls had: we cannot say we be not able too
discern what is good, because we were blinded by Adams sin and there is
nothing but vanity in us: for God has given us his word, Psalm. 119. v. 105.
which is justly called a lamp too guide us by: we have the Gospel, where
our Lord Jesus Christ declares that he is our guide: and yet for all this, if
we will needs provoke God wilfully, by disaulling the doctrine of salvation,
whereas we should follow it, (of which sort there are many even at this day,
who seek too wallowe in all lewdness and disorder, and despyze God openly)
what shall become of us? Wherefore let us learn too walk in the fear of God:
and let us mark well, that Saint Paul has not without cause set down here
the top of all mischief, of purpose to show us thereby what wages God will
pay too all such as yield not to him in dew time and place, but rather take
liberty of all naughtiness, as though they were escaped out of his hands. Let
us then be afraid too ouershoote our selves so far: and then although we
have wandered far before, God can skill well enough too draw us to him. Let
us be afraid least God should execute the said vengeance upon us, Prou. 29.
b. 14.
as well as upon them, according too this saying of Solomon, that when the
wicked man is come too extremity, he despyzeth all: that is too say, he
regards another life nor death, but flingeth forth like a brute beast.

Therefore let us quake at such threatenings, for fear least God execute them
upon us, when we cannot abide too be rebuked for our vices. And contrariwyze
let us practyze the doctrine of Solomon, where he says, Prou. 28. b. 14.
happy is the man whose heart pricketh him and quickens him up night and day.
Let us learn then too be our own sollicitors, and too touch our selves for
our vices: and when we enter intoo them, let us be abashed at them, and cast
down and condemn our selves, until God have relieved us with his mercy.
After that manner must we put this doctrine of S. Paul's in ure, too the end,
that when God has once knit us too him by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and given us life: we may take good heed that that life be not defaced and
quenched in us through our own lewdness and unthankfulness. Agein, that
being minded too continue in this doctrine, may learn first of all too humble
our selves, (for it is certain that humility will cause us too resort unto
God:) and secondly, that our humility be matched with warenesse, so as we
be not rechlesse too flatter our selves, but that through the same warenesse
we streyne our selves too the uttermost too fight against all our vices and
lusts, tarying our Lords leyzure until he rid us quyte and clean of them:
and in the mean while let us always win somewhat of our selves, be it never
so little, so as it may continually appear, that our Lord Jesus Christ
woorketh in us, and makes his grace too prevail, by causing us too go
foreward in goodness: that we may (say I) be so dispozed as we may grow
more and more, until God have taken us ou^ of this world.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our sins, praying him too touch us so too the quick, as it may draw us
unto true repentance, too continue in it all the time of our life, that being
utterly beaten down and made nothing in our selves, we may learn too seek
all our welfare in him, and he theruppon lead us familiarly by the the hand of
our Lord Jesus Christ, so as we may go too seek it there, and go foreward
more and more in the professing of his Gospel, too the intent also too be
filled with his gracious gifts, which are the true fruits of that root. That
it may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all
people and Nations. etc.

The.xxix. Sermon, which is the nynth upon the fourth Chapter.
20. But you have not learned Christ so:

21. At leastwise if ye have heard him, and bin taught in him, even as the
truth is in Jesus:

22. That is too wit, that ye put off the old man after the former
conversation, which is corrupt after the lusts of error:

23. And be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind,

24. And put on the new man which is created after God in righteousness and
holiness of truth.


SAint Paul shows us by the example of the heathen men and unbelievers, how
wretched man's life is, when he suffers himself too be led by his own
affections and lusts. For we be so blinded by the sin of Adam, that we
discern not beetween good and evil, Howbeeeit that is not perceived at the
first blush: but if ye look into the whole course of man's life, ye shall
find, that they hold not any certain way, but that they wander too and fro, and
in the end become stark beasts, so as they have no heart greef nor scruple of
conscience at all. Now he shows what diversity there ought too be betwixt
the lyf^ of Christians that have bin ^ray^ed in the Gospel, and the life of
the ignorant and blyud wretches, which never wist what God or his will is. That
is the cause why he adds, that we ought too keep a far other trade, we
(I say) that are trained up in Jesus Christ. As if he said, that such as have
not the light of God, straye here and there, and no marvel though they do
so, for they be blind, and wander in darkness. But seeing that God has
inlyghtened us, and we have Jesus Christ the daysonne of ryghtuousenesse
shyning upon us: what a shame is it if we be mingled with those that have no
direction at all? Then is there no excuce for us, if we will allege the
heathen. For so little can their exawple serve too lessen our sin, that it
shall dubble our condemnation. And why? God sets them before our eyes as
looking glasses, wherein too behold what we our selves and what our nature is,
of all the while that we be ungoverned of the holy Ghost. On the contrary
part we have our Lord Jesus Christ too show us the way of life. And it is not
for naught that he has said, that he is the light of the world, John. 8. b.
12.
and that whosoever walks in him, cannot stray: John. 14. a. 6.
and agein, that he is also the way, wherein a man cannot go amiss. That then
is the cause in effect, why Saint Paul adds, that it is not so with us, for
we have learned Jesus Christ. And how? Ye have herd him, lays he. And his
setting down a those words, is of purpose too cut of all occasion of making
of shrouding sheet of ignorance. For men are loath too be counted fools,
except it be when they should come too accounting with God. But then they
would feign escape by saying, I am a silie idiot, I am not able too buzie my
self in so many matters, it is impossible for me too set my mind unto that.
Ye see then how we can well enough acknowledge our ignorance, when we be
called and cyted too make our reckening before God. Agein, another sort will
say, that the Gospel is too high and deep a thing for them. Saint Paul
answers unto all this in one word, saying, that we have heard Jesus Christ.
As if he should say, it is long of none but of our selves, that we have not
bin well and dewly instucted, seeing that the Gospel has bin preached unto
us. For why? There God shows him self, so far forth as is expedient for
us. Then is there sufficient learning in the Gospel, and it is not for us too
allege our own rawenesse, no more than our darkness: for God does the
dewtie of a good and faithful shcoolemayster. Too be short, if we continue
still in our beastliness, after we have heard the doctrine of the Gospel: we
must blame our selves for it: for surely it is not long of God, who knows
what is meet for us. And that is the cause also why Saint Paul protests, 2.
Cor. 4. a. 3.
that there is no veyle in his preaching, but that men might there see Jesus
Christ, if they were not blinded by Satan with unbelief, too goo away intoo
destruction. Howsoever the case stand, we could not fail on Gods behalf
too be guyded and governed as is meet for us, if we gave diligent ear too
the things that he shows us in the Gospel.

And he does yet so much the more aggrauate the lewdness of such as profit
not in Gods school, when he adds, that they have bin taught, not as though
it had bin shows them what Iesns Christ is, for once and away, and that they
had had but only some small taste of it: for then might it seem that their
ignorance were excusable. But seeing that our ears are continewally beaten
with it from day to day, and we have bin confirmed and furthered in the faith,
and yet we abide still in our beastliness: that is utterly vnexcuzable. For
he has showed heertoofore, that if all this boot us not, but that
notwithstanding men's stirring of us up early and late to come unto God, and
their offering of the food of life unto us too feed us withal, so as we
have bin confirmed in it from day too day, too the intent we should not want
any thing: we be still at our Apcie like young beginners, and know not what
the rule of good life is: we can blame none but our selves, another can we
say, that we be silie ignorant souls, or that God speaks unto us in too
dark a language, or that we have not bin trained up in the knowledge of the
truth. All this is dispatched by that which Saint Paul tells us here,
which is, that God has not ceased with the preaching of his truth unto us
once or twyce: but that he has ordained the Gospel too be preached
(continually,) that we might be confirmed in it all the time of our life: and
that the thing which we did not conceive or understand at the first, should
be repeted unto us, and laid forth more familiarly in a known tung, too the
end we might have the larger confirmation of it: and that if we profit not
for all his calling of us too him without ceassing, we see our unthankfulness
too apparent, in that we know not Jesus Christ after we have had our ears
beaten so long time with the Gospel. And this is spoken unto us: wherefore let
us learn too reckon the time well.

When such as have known Gods truth from their chyldhood, do come too man's
state, let them think thus with themselves: I ought too be a great teacher
(as the Aposte also shows in the Epistle too the Hebrews: Hebre. 5. d. 12.
) it is now a fifteen or twenty years ago since I came too age of
discretion: so as a number of men are still behynd me: and it is God himself
which calls me: for the preaching of the Gospel unto me is not by
chance, but thereby God shows the care that he has of my salvation, and the
love that he bears toward me. Seeing then that I have heard the Gospel so
long time without ceassing, or might have done, if the fault were not in my
self: must I not needs look for a terrible condemnation, when I continue
still in my beastliness? Agein, let such as have bin sometime in darkness,
and afterward are inlyghtened, think thus: It is now a year, five, ten, or
more ago since God opened mine eyes by his word, and drew me out of the
dungeon wherein I was, in which if he had left me still, I had bin a wretched
forlorn creature: and now that he has voutsafed too inlyghten me with the
knowledge of his truth, which is so precious a thing, should I be rechlesse in
the hearing and receiving thereof? Agein, on the other side, God pitying my
rudeness, applies himself as much as can be too my capacity, insomuch that
he does even lisp (as ye would say,) too show me his secrets after a
sweet and loving fashyon, as if one should feed a little babe, and chawe his
meat too him, too the end he should have no more too do, but too swallow it
down: and shall I notwithstanding continue a dullard still? Then let us mark
well all these things, and bear well in mind these words of S. Paul, where he
says, not only that we have heard of Jesus Christ, but also that we have
bin taught him, because that through Gods goodness the Gospel was not
preached unto us, for one day and no more: but has ringed a long time already
in our ears.

And we have too mark, that S. Paul speaking of the doctrine of the Gospel,
matcheth Jesus Christ with it, according as it has bin told us heretofore,
that the thing which God shows us in his word, is the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, as who is also the end and substance thereof. Therefore let us mark
it, Romans 10. a. 4.
to the intent we wander not when we would faynest profit in Gods word, but
may have always a certain mark too ame at. For we see a number that have
turned over the Scripture leaf by leaf, and are able too make great report of
it. But in the mean while they wot not what the effect or pith of it is: for
their amyng is not at our Lord Jesus Christ. So much the more behooves it us
too mark well all the textes wherein it is showed us, that when we once know
the benefytes that are brought unto us by the son of God, what power he
has, and what treasures he utters toward us: then we have the true
understanding of the Gospel. But without Jesus Christ we have nothing. And
verily we ought too be the more provoked theruntoo, by the example of those
which name themselves Christians, and yet notwithstanding wot not too what
Saint too vow themselves, as they say. As for example, see how the Papists
gad up and down without any certeintie, and are as Reeds that bend with every
wynd. And why? (Because) there is no steadfastness but in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and they be justly punished for not seeking of him. For although they
be never so stout in their own imaginations: yet must they be feign too
know in the end, that the things which they have builded and forged in their
own heads, are nothing. And therefore (as I have touched already) let us
understand that Jesus Christ is the shooteanker whereunto God the father calls
us, and that we must not be drawn from him for any thing, but apply all that
we have unto him. And that is the cause why S. Paul does in Gods name and
authority, exhort and warn those agein which have heard Jesus Christ, and bin
taught of him by the doctrine of his Gospel.

Furthermore he says, If ye have learned him well, according as the truth is
in our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is set down of purpose, because there are a
number of fickle headed folk and fantastical fellows, which make great
protestation with full mouth, that they be Christians, as though they had
devoured the whole Gospel: and yet have another wisdom nor discretion in
them. And would God that examples thereof were not so ryfe now adays in the
world. But if a man should demand every of them, whether they would not have
the Gospel: yis, what else, say they? That runs roundly with them without
any stop: for saying is good cheap. But let a man examine the most part of
them how they have profited, and he shall scarce find one among a hundred of
them, that knows in good earnest what belongs too Jesus Christ. Too say,
that men may lawfully eat flesh upon frydayes, and too mock at all the
superstitions of popery, and to say, that they be but gewgawes and tryfling
things. that they can do with ease. But in the mean while if a man ask them
what it is to be regenerated, what patience is, what newnes of life is, and
what it is to be fashioned agein after the image of god: there the most part of
the^ will show, that they never tasted of the truth of the Gospel, but did but
only guibble about the bark of it, and never came at the very substance of it.
And this is not now adays only, for S. Paul shows well, that eue^ in his
time many folks abused the name of Christ, and would needs be taken for great
Christians, and yet never wist what the son of God was. Wherefore let us mark
well what is said here. For it is as if S. Paul should find fault with himself:
not that the things which he had spoken needed any amendment, but too give the
sharper check or rebuke to such as did so falsify Christ's name, and wickedly
abuse his Gospel, by making it a cloak for their wickedness. S. Paul the^ making
a countenance as it were to bethink himself better, says, yea for sooth, but
I pray God ye have learned him. As if he should say, I speak indifferently to al
such as have heard the pure doctrine of God. Howbeit forasmuch as a great sort
will wrest and wring the things that are told the^, and take but only some patch
of matter, I wot not what: therefore have they not any good foundation to buyld
upon. To be short, they have no root of faith. And yet for all that, have they
once but fidled over, I wot not what: by and by they be great clearkes, to
their own seeming. And therefore look well to it (says he,) that ye make not a
vain protestation, least ye be co^uicted of falsehood before God and his
Angels: and that the name of Jesus Christ which ought to be holy too you, be
not taken in vain: and that whereas enery of you boasts himself to be a
Christian, yet notwithstanding ye know not to what end Jesus Christ was given
of God his father, nor how we be made parttakers of him, nor what our
redemption is, nor how we may enjoy all his benefytes. For if ye know not
these: it is certain that all this bragging of yours shall cost you right
dear, for that you have with full mouth protested your selves too be
Christians, and yet notwithstanding know not which be the qualities of your
Christendom, nor to what end to apply them. This in effect is the thing that
we have too remember upon that streyne.

Behold, Saint Paul tells us here, that if we have bin trained in the
Gospel, it beh^ueth us too differ from the ignorant and the unbelievers. For
Gods sholing of us out, and his setting of us in array alone by our selves after
that fashion, and his inlyghtening of us, is to the e^d we should no more be as
wanderers at randon, nor as silly blind wretches groping in the dark, but that
we should know the right way of salvation. And in especially, seeing we be
daily exhorted too come unto him, and he gives us means to further us more
and more in the faith: let us be very ware that we unhallow not so holy a
thing, as is the truth of the Gospel, and the pure doctrine of God. But we
vnhalowe it, if we know not too what end God has given it us, and that we
must bear it in mind. For I have told you already, that many fantastical
persons will pretend christianity well enough, but yet for all that, there is
no substance nor root in them. Therefore let us look well that we know
whertoo we be called, and that God be not disappoynted of his intent, when
he does the office of a schoolemayster toward us, but that we consider how
he shows us the way of life and salvation: and like as he is a good and
faithful teacher, so let us be like scholars unto him.

But let us come now too the truth whereof Saint Paul speaks, which is
(says he) that ye put of the old man, which is corrupted with earthly lusts,
even according too the conversation that ye have led heretoofore. He
expresses yet better that all they which vaunt themselves too be the
disciples of Jesus Christ, and yet notwithstanding lead a lawelesse life, and
do but give occasion of offense in the Church, are falsaries, as if a man
should bring forth a counterfeit deed. Wherefore let us mark that it is a cursed
treachery when we say we intend too be Christians, Titu^. 1. d. 16.
and profess it also with our mouth, and yet notwithstanding go from the thing
in our woorks which we protest in our words, as says Saint Paul in another
place. For he that takes leave too do all evil, and yet will be taken too
be of the number of Gods children: it is certain that he denies Jesus Christ
in his whole life, how much soever he confess him in words. Therefore let us
bethink our selves, and consider, that if we mean to be allowed of God, we
must learn too rid away our old man. And by that word the scripture means
all that we have of nature. For we know there are (as ye would say) two
welsprings of mankind, that is too wit, Adam, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now as
in respect of our first birth, we come all out of the welspring of Adam, and
are corrupted with sinfulness, so as there is nothing but frowardness and
cursednesse in our souls. It stands us then on hand too be renewed in Jesus
Christ, and too be made new creatures. And for that cause does the old Man
betoken all that we have by birthryght from our fathers. Now then, if a man
be let alone in his first state: surely he shall be but a blind wretch full of
rebelliousnesse and spyte against God. Too be short, he shall tend all wholly
unto evil, for we be altoogither saped in it. That is the thing that is
meant by the old man, least we should think that Saint Paul's intent was too
rebuke but only the vices that are apparent before men: like as when men will
rebuke one that has played the unthrift for a time, they will say he must cast
his old skin. But here Saint Paul passes yet further: which is, that our
likings are utterly untoward, that there is not one drop of goodness and
uprightness in us, that all our thoughts are wicked, and that all our desires
and affections are rebellious against God, and against his will and justice.

Furthermore, whereas he speaks of vnclothing or putting of: it is a
similitude ryfe enough, (whereby is meant) that we must give over all that is of
our own, and cast it quyte away, that we may be clothed agein with other
ornaments, as he will add anon after. And here we see, that there are two
parts in ruling our life, and in coming unto God. The one is the forsaking
of our selves, and the other is, that we be governed by Gods spirit. For
needs must all that is our own be laid down, before God take in hand the
guyding of us. And why? For our thoughts and Gods doctrine, our affections and
the commandments whereby God will have us too be ruled, are as fire and
water. Therefore all that is of our own nature, must be cut of, before God do
govern us. And that is the cause why we must begin at the forsaking of our
selves: which also is the very order that Saint Paul has followed in this
text. We must (says he) put of the old man.

And secondly we have too mark, that Jesus Christ was sent us too the end that
we should be repaired after the image of God. It is true that he has
reconcyled us to God his father by his death and passion, and that the sheading
of his blud washes us from all our filthynesse, and sets us free from
damnation, and endless death, and that his offering of himself has made full
satisfaction for us: insomuch that if we resort to Jesus Christ for remission
of our sins, God of his own free goodness accepts us for ryghtuous,
because he passes not what we be, but buryeth all our faults, and ceasseth
not to favor us as his children, notwithstanding that we be wretched
sinners. This benefyte receive we by Jesus Christ. But yet must we not
separate the second point from it: which is, John. 1. b. 16. and. Coloss. c.
19. and 2. b. 9.
that we must be sanctified by his holy spirit, according too this saying,
that he has received the fullness of all grace, too the end that all of us
should draw out of him. And Esaias Esaias. 11. a. 2.
declares that spirit of wisdom, the spirit of judgment, the spirit of
vpryghtnesse, and the spirit of the fear of God rested upon him. And was that
for any need that he himself had? No: but too the intent that we should
receive that which we want, according too the measure that it pleases him too
deal unto us, as we have seen heretoofore. And that is the cause why S.
Paul in the second too the Corinthians says, 2. Cor. 8. b. 9.
that he became poor too the intent too fill us with his riches. Then if we
desire too be received too mercy at Gods hand, by the death and passion of his
only son, and too have our sins vnimputed to us, because he has made
discharge and payment for them: let us learn also that he is given us too make
us holy, too the end we should be governed by his holy spirit. So then, if we
intend too begin too rule our life well: we must forsake our selves and fight
against our own nature. And agein, we must note also that there is no
Christianity in us, another can we any skill of the son of God, or of his
power, or of his office, until we know that we ought too be repaired by
him according too the image of God. Those are the two things which we ought
too mark well. True it is that this deserves well too be laid forth more at
large: Howbeeit too the intent that the whole may be knit toogither in one
link, let us note briefly, that we can never be allowed of God, nor never
do him any service that he may like of, unless we enter intoo the said
battle of offering force and violence unto all our thoughts and affections,
too subdew them as prisoners too the obeying of god, and too kill them quyte
and clean. So much concerning the first point.

Now too the end this doctrine might not seem more than needs: Saint Paul
puts the Ephesians in mind what they had bin. For we know that men are not
willing too be rebuked, that is too say, they be loath too abide it, and would
rather be spared: insomuch that when any warning is given them, they could
find in their heart too put it far from them. On the other side we be so
newfangled, that if a man tickle us not in the ear with some new thing, we
do as it were despyze and disdeyne it. As for an example, if a man speak too
us of walking in the fear of God: who knows not that, say we? Let him go
preach that too little children, will many a man say. And why? Because it
seems too them too be but lost time too speak of things that are so well
known too them. But does it therefore follow that they be familiar and in use
with them? (No:) for as for them that say, do not we know well enough that
God must be loved, honored, and served, that we must absteyne from Theft,
Extortion, Lying, Deceyt, Blasphemy, Whoredom, and all other such things: are
they not the greatest despyzers of God and of all right dealing? Yis: but let
us harken what Saint Paul tells us here. Go too (says he) I exhort you
too put of the old man. If ye say you have it not: aduyze your selves well,
and consider what you were at the time that God drew you too the knowledge of
his Gospel: that is too wit, that ye were as folk lost and utterly forlorn.
So then, assure your selves it is not for naught that I exhort you too rid
away the old man: for ye be not quyte stripped out of him as yet. It was as
a dubble garment about you before, and therefore ye must be feign too labor
the earnestlyer as now too lay away the residew that remains of it still.

Agein, on the other side, he tells them also, that it must not grieve them
too be exhorted, as though the things that are spoken of were sufficiently
known too them, (specially) seeing that experience shows, that they never
knew how too order their life. For too know that it behooves us too do this
or that, is not all that we have to do: but we must also show that our life
is well acquaynted with Gods doctrine. Then if it be perceived by our fruits
that we have such root in us, so as we can skill too frame our selves wholly
too Gods will: then may it be said, that we be well learned. But if our
former life bewray us too have bin as stray sheep, or rather as utterly peaked
away after our own lusts, and that there remains yet still a smatch of the
same, that we be not so well clenzed as were requisite: let us bow down our
ears and harken willingly too the thing which we see too be profitable, yea
and needful for us. And so Saint Paul spoke not alonly for the Ephesians, but
also for us all in common. Wherefore as often as it seems unto us that we
could well forbear the often putting of us in mind of one thing: let us
examine our life, and if we find not our selves yet thoroughly rid of the
diseases that we be told of: let us abide too be taught more and more,
assuring our selves that it is not enough for us too have the doctrine of God
swimming in our brain, but that it must be well settled in our hearts, so as
our life (as I said before) may answer for us, that we be learned in good
earnest.

And Saint Paul having spoken of the old man, says, that he is corrupted
according too the lusts of error and deceyt. In saying that it is corrupted,
he compares the agednesse of our souls with the agednesse as we see it in
our bodies. When a man comes too old age, he becomes weak in respect of
strength both of body and mind: he forgoeth all his lustiness and hangs his
wings. too be short, he is as good as half dead: for his age does so abate
his courage, that he must look still toward his grave, which wayteth for him.
And Saint Paul takes a resemblance hereof in the old agednesse of the soul.
Now I have told you alredie, that (too put away) the old agednesse of the soul
(or the old man,) is too forsake our own nature, because it is altoogither
cursed, and we bring nothing with us from our moothers womb, that is good and
clean. Therefore if we be given too our own imaginations, and follow our
own fleshly reason, and give the bridle too our affections: then is the soul
in his old agednesse. And Saint Paul says, that by that means it is
corruppted, that is too say, there is no life of God in it, as we have seen
heretoofore. Let us understand then that we be corrupt, so long as we continue
in our old man, that is too say, so long as we continue still in our own
state and nature. No doubt but we will think our selves too have lyuelinesse
enough: but that is but a madness, and all the maystries that we try shall be
but too break our necks, until we have forsaken and given over both our
thoughts and our lusts. And that is the cause why Saint Paul speaks
purposely of the desires and lusts of deceyt. For he shows that men are so
blinded, as they discern not how the devil deceyueth them by the intycementes
which he sets before them. For whosoever is not touched with true fear of
God, will let himself looce: and if a man say too him, unhappy creature, will thou undo thy self so? He will answer, No. For it seems not too him that he
serves the devil. And why? For they that are bewhitched with Satan's illuzions
after that sort, do so cleave unto him, that they beecome stark doltes and
dullardes. Too the end then that we learn too flatter our selves no more in
our own conceytes, nor too fall asleep theruppon: Saint Paul tells us that
our lusts are full of deceytes: as if he should say, when you take your se^ues
too be in good case, and ye have all your own wishing, and fortune (as ye
term her) smyleth upon you, so as ye prosper in all things every where, and
ye want nothing: behold, al your felicity is but falsehood. Too be short,
Saint Paul meant too warn us here, that we ought too suspect our selves in
all our desires. Therefore if a man intend too rule his life well: he must
first and formest mislyke of himself, and consider that all that ever he
imagines of his own conceyt, is but an illu^ion of Satan, wherewith he
deceyueth and beguyleth himself, and that as many as are of them, are but as
snares too entangle him on all sides. When we once know this, we shall have
profited greatly, not only for one day, but for all our life long. And for
as much as we see such a number of wretched souls cast away themselves upon
hope of some profit, which they have imagined of their own head: let us beware
that we hold not the same trade, that is too say, that we follow not our own
good intentes, as men term them. For we shall but throw our selves headlong
intoo destruction, if we follow the way that our own nature dryues us too.
And why? For all our own lusts and lykings are deceytfull. Then is there none
other shift, but too lay aside the reason which we ween our selves too have,
toogither with all the intycementes of Satan and the world, so as every whit of
it be cast away, and we well appointed, knowing that the sweetness of them
serves but too beguyle us the sooner, that we might not perceive the deadly
poison which is hid underneath. Thus in effect we have too bear in mind, how
S. Paul tells us, that until such ^yme as we have learned too deny our
selves, and too hold our selves as prisoners under Gods word, yea and too
rid our selves quyte and clean from the things that we have of our selves
and of our own nature: we wot not what Christi^nitie means, we know not
whertoo the Gospel tends, nor too what end it is preached. For it is not
enough too have put away the old man for once: but we must profit in it more
and more, according too the warning that is given us here. And in good scoth,
S. Paul had taught the Ephesians, and they had received his doctrine: and yet
nevertheless he exhorts them along time after, as we see. Hereby he shows
us, that it is for us too invre our selves to patience all our life long.
Although then that we have already struggled greatly too thrust all our
affections, all our lusts, and all our lykings under foot: yet shall we never
have so ouermaystred our selves, that we shall be thoroughly reformed. And
therefore it stands us on hand too give all our indeuer theruntoo, and too
labor for it all the time of our life. And so in few words ye see the
stoutnesse which we must have too forsake all our own lusts, and all our
wicked thoughts.

And heereuppon we must proceed too the second point, which is, that we must
be renewed. For it is not enough that men mislyke of themselves, and hate
their vices in shunning of them: but we must also frame our selves too Gods
will, according too this saying: Hate evil, Psalm. 34. c. 15.
and do good. So then, the things that S. Paul has spoken hithertoo, are as
a preparatyue too set our life in good order: like as when a man intends too
have a good crop in his feelde, he must first stubbe it, too rid away the
brambles, bushes, and evil weeds, and afterward plow it and harrowe it, and
then sow it, and so will fruit spring of his labor. Therefore if we purpose
too bear fruit unto God, and be desirous too order our life in such wise as
his name may be glorified by it: we must first cause our selves too be
stubbed, for we be full of naughty affections, which are as thorns and
thistles, and therefore must be cut away and plucked up by the root: and
afterward we must be tylled, so as the plow pass upon us: that is to say,
when our Lord makes us too feel his Justice, we must be so sorry that we
be so given too naughtiness, as it may be as a good tylth too us at Gods
hand. That is the thing which Saint Paul does hithertoo.

Now he sows the good seed, too the end that God may gather the good fruit
which he requires of us, that is too say, that he may be honored at our
hands, and that we may show that we do in very deed think our selves
beholden too him for all things. That is the cause why he speaks next of
being renewed in mind and understanding: that is too say, that we must be
reformed in all things throughout, and be so changed, as men may perceive
that we have not only forsaken our selves, but also that God reygneth in us
without geynstryuing, and possesses us both in our affections and in our
thoughts, according as he deserves right well that we should be given all
wholly unto him.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as it may make us
too be sorry for them, and too walk roundly away in the path wherein he has
set us: and that too bring the same too pass, we may consider too what end
our Lord Jesus is sent us, so as the things which he has done for us, may not
be lost and perish through our lewdness and carelessness, but that we
being renewed, may learn so too serve our God in holiness and ryghtuousnesse,
as we may well show how great account we make of the most noble and
excellent redemption which he performed, in that he spared not his only son
for our sakes. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father. etc.

The.xxx. Sermon, which is the tenth upon the fourth Chapter.
23. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind,

24. And put ye on the new man which is created after God in righteousness
and holiness of truth.

25. Wherefore put away lying, and speak truth every of you too his
neighbor: for we be members one of another.

26. Be ye angry, and sin not.


We have now too lay forth the second part of the well ordering of our life
set down here by Saint Paul: which is, that we must walk in newness of
life, because it behooves us too be reformed by Gods spirit. And too the
intent we may know that our changing must not be in part only, but in
whole. Saint Paul takes here the thing that seems most excellent and most
esteemed in man's nature: namely knowledge, understanding, wit, reason, and all
manner of ability of mind. Then if there be any wisdom in us, Saint Paul
says, it must be corrected. And why? True it is that our reason of it self
is always commendable: but we be so corrupted by Adams sin, ^. cor. ^. b. ^.
that we have not the skill to think so much as one good thought, which is not
crooked, and full of malice and rebellion against God. And although this be not
perceived openly: yet will there ever be some secret hypocrisy lurking, which
is enough and to much to condemn us before God. Ye see then that the thing
wheruntoo we must enforce our selves, if we purpose too please God, is that
being rid of all our own conceits and affections, we get us a new guide, that
is too wit, Gods spirit: according wh^^untoo he uses a like manner of sentence
in the twelfth too the Romans, Romans 12. a. 2.
in speaking of Christian life. It behooves us too be transformed, not only in
our affections which are sinful, as every man may judge: but even in the thing
which seems faultlesse, that is too wit, in the Reason that we have spoken
of. Too be short, we must be sacrifyzed, or else our life will be always
unholy and unclean. And this sacrifyzing is expounded by Saint Paul in the
text before alleged, to be the laying away and mortifying of all that we have
of our selves. Our true perfection then is that fyghting against all that is of
our own nature, we suffer our selves too be governed by Gods spirit, so as
it may be perceived that we be utterly changed. For it is not enough that
our life have some honesty too the worldward, so as it may be commended and
had in good reputation among men: but also ambition and all other vices that ly
lurking within us, must be clenzed away, and our Lord must have the guyding of
us.

And for that cause also doothe he add that we must be reformed according too
God, namely in true righteousness and holiness. Like as heertoofore he had
condemned the old man, which (as I have told you alredie) is all that ever we
bring from our moothers womb: so now he says, that we must be new
creatures. And for the same cause does he send us too the example of our Lord
Jesus Christ in the sixth too the Romans, saying, that we must be crucified
and dye with him, namely in respect of the old man, and also be fashyoned like
too his rising agein, too walk in newness of life. It is true that he uses
other words there: howeeit all comes too one, which is, that like as our
Lord Jesus is the second Adam, so must he be as a pattern too us, and we be
fashyoned after him and his image, that we may be like him. Now surely this
will not come too pass of our own nature: but yet is not this exhortation more
than needs, because that when the holy scripture brings us too our Lord
Jesus Christ, it means not that we should be as blocks of wood, but that
we should come and offer our selves too God that he may woork in us. And in
very deed, these two things agree v^ry well: that the power which is in us
should come of God: for it is he that moves us unto good, it is he that
brings us to it, it is he that gives us both the will and the ability to
perform the will, as we have seen in another text. Phil. 2. b. 13.
And yet God works so in us, that of his gracious favor the good works that
are done, are called ours. And in good sooth, when we be so led by him, we go.
And it is not too be woondered at, that Gods goodness stretches so far, as
too make the things ours which are his, and whereof he only deserves the
praise. For we call the bread that we eat our own, though we have it but
by title of gift. For although men take pain for it: yet could it not stand
them in any stead, but through Gods free blissing. Then look what is given us,
we call it our own. Even so S. Paul exhorts us too put on the new man,
not that we can do it of our selves, for Jesus Christ must be feign too
clothe us with his ryghtuousnesse, as well as make us parttakers of the gifts
of his holy spirit. And I pray you what is meant by putting on of the new man?
I have told you already, that it is the utter changing of us both in our
thoughts and in our desires, and (too be short) in all the parts of our
soul. Now is not such an alteration the special work of God, and the gift
of his holy spirit? Saint Paul therefore means not that we can do any
thing as of our own power: but yet that every of us ought too streyne himself
too follow whither soever he calls us. And therewithal he warns us that
all our life is very daungerful until we change, and that the newness
appear in us.

Now Saint Paul says, that the nevve man is created after God and his image.
And therein he confirms the matter which I go about too touch: that is too
wit, that although we streyne our selves too the uttermost that we can, yet
can we do nothing, unless we be prevented by Gods grace. Which of us can
be his own maker? We know that that honor must be reserved unto God
alone. But here the case stands upon a new creating. That therefore cannot
be in man's will, nor yet in his power. And Saint Paul also has dispatched
that doubt and scruple, in saying that the new man is created of God. As if he
should say, my friends, In deed ye ought not to abuse the grace that is offered
you by the Gospel: but yet for all that, assure your selves that when ye have
streyned your selves what ye can, too dedicate your selves too Gods service,
ye can do nothing furtherfoorth than he woorketh in you by his holy spirit.
According whereuntoo he says in another place, that we do work our own
salvation, Phil. 2. b. 12. 1^.
even as though we could do somewhat of our selves: but yet he adds, that it
must be in fear and trembling, that is too say, with putting away of all
presumption, knowing that it behooves us too depend upon another: and he
adds the reason, for it is God (says he) which gives both the will and the
ability too perform it, and all of his own free goodness. After that manner
then must we indeuer our selves. But yet must we not therefore conceive a
vain ouerweening in the mean while, as though we had some shift, and were
able on our own side too do never so little without Gods grace: Saint Paul
exhorts us rather too fear and warenesse. And why? For seeing we be as
weak as may be, and not only that, but also stark dead, and as good as
rotten caryons in all caces of our salvation, and have not so much as one good
thought of our own: seeing (I say) that we have all at Gods hand, 2. Cor. 3.
b. 5.
and that he must be feign too work it by the power of his holy spirit: let
us learn too walk in humility. And moreover, let us not cease too make his
grace auaylable, assuring our selves that his woorking by his power shall be
always in such wise, as the praise must ever redound too him alone, and no
drop of it remain over too our selves. Ye see then what we have too remember
upon this speech, where Saint Paul says, that the new man is created. Yea
verily, and therein he shows how we be fallen from our original, and from
the state whertoo we were advanced by Gods grace in the person of our
forefather Adam. As if he said, that Adams fall is unto us as a spiritual
death, whereby we be cut of and cast away from the number of Gods creatures.
And not without cause does God so often utter this dreadful saying, Cene. 6. b.
6.
that he repents him that ever he made man. For therein he detesteth the
corruption and sin that are in us. Not that God has any humane passions in
him: but too show us that he utterly mislyketh us, until his image be
renewed in us. Gene. 1. d. 31.
It is said, that God looked upon all that he had made, and all was exceeding
good and faultlesse. But when our father Adam was once fallen, and had made
himself a stranger to the fountain of life: by and by he was stripped stark
naked of all goodness. For being separated from God, what could he be but
utterly forlorn, and past hope of recovery? Shall we find either life, or
ryghtuousnesse, or holiness, or soundness, or vpryghtnesse out of God? No:
Ye see then that Adam was as it were cut of from the array of creatures: he was
not worthy too be reckened even among the Frogs and other vermin of the
earth. Brag we as much as we list, that is our nature: we bear a greater
curse of God, than is in all the Lyce and Fleas, and in all the woormes of the
earth. That is the cause why S. Paul shows us, that God cannot acknowledge
us for his children, until his image be repaired in us: which thing is done
by this new creation. John. 11. c. 25.
For like as Adam drew us all down, and plundged us with himself in the gulf
of death: so are we created new agein by God in the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And for that cause does he name himself the resurrection and life. For
we must ryze agein in him, if we will live in deed. Which thing cannot be,
except we have first bin dead, as was declared more at large this morning.
Therefore we ought too have this reason always with us, that we ween not
our selves too be rightuous, or too make our life allowable before God, but
be ever fully resolved and persuaded, that God will take nothing in good
worth at our hands, but that which he knows too be his own. For as I
said, without him, there is nothing but evil. For by that mean was his image
defaced in us by Adams sin: and therefore it stands us on hand too be made
new again in Jesus Christ.

Now he shows us how that may be done, saying in Ryghtuousnesse and
holiness. By the word Righteousness, he means soundness and
uprightness, so as we live with our neighbors without deceyt, and without
malice or harm doing, yielding too every man that which is his. Now when such
a soundness reigns in us, the^ shall we show by our deeds that we be
fashioned agein after Gods image in ryghtuousnesse. But it is not enough that
men have their right, except God also have his. For too what purpose is it for
us too be no thieves (toward men,) and yet to be traytrous toward God? or
to absteyne from stealing away our neighbors goods, and in the mean while to
rob God of his honor? Therefore must ryghtuousnesse be matched with holiness.
For the two tables of the law are inseparable. And under the word Holiness,
S. Paul comprehends all things that belong too the serving of God. The
newness of our life therefore, is this: namely too walk purely before God, too
eschew all corruption and uncleanness, too separate our selves from all the
defylementes of the world, and too offer our selves in sacrifyzce unto God:
and (on the other side) too walk soundly and uprightly with our neighbors.
The performance of these two things is all that is requisite to the perfection
of a Christian life. Now it is certain that Gods law has not taught us by
halues, what we have too do, but God has there showed us a right rule,
whereunto there may be nothing added, nor aught taken from it. For in those two
points is all our righteousness contained: namely that God be honored in all
fear and reverence at our hands, and that we serve one another without doing
any harm. Agein, forasmuch as men are inclyned pitiously too feyning, and do
ever think it enough to set some fair countenance upon the matter: therefore
does S. Paul add Truth. As if he said, that we may be taken for the holiest
folk in the world, and yet nevertheless be condemued before God, if we be not
clenzed from all hypocrisy, so as God may be our witness and judge, that we
be not dubble minded, nor have any bumbasting in us, but that we go on in
right meaning simplicity before him. So then, although our hands be clear
from theft, extortion, and all other things that are against charity, if we
have lusts lurking within us, surely we shall be still unclean before God. Not
without cause therefore does S. Paul add the word Truth, notwithstanding that
he had comprehended the whole perfection of our life, in the two former
points. For it is because we would always content God with some gay outward
show, according too the vanity and leazing wherewith we be fraught. Therefore
it behooved this too be added, that like as God is a spirit, so must we also
be faithful and true before him. For he abhors all dubblenesse of heart,
which the scripture terms Har^ and Heart. If we fall too making of
partitions, and keep some backshoppe behind: all that ever comes from us,
must needs be filthy and corrupt, as springing from an evil and infected
fountain. Then if we desire too have our hearts allowed of God, the fountain
must first be scoured, and truth must reign in us. Now we see in effect
wheretoo it behooves us too apply all our indeuer as long as we live here
beneath. For, too boast our selves too be Christians, and not too consider on
what condition Jesus Christ is our head, and has knit us unto him: is a
turnyng of all things vpsyde down, as has bin said this morning. Then look
what manner a ones we covet too be counted and esteemed among men: the same
must we be before God and his Angels.

Therefore we must fight against our own vices, until all that is of our
own nature be done away. Not that that can be done in one day: but that
we must go toward it continewally more and more. And further let us assure
our selves, that our Lord Jesus Christ is given us for a pattern and example:
and moreover, that it is his office, too reform us so by the spitit of God his
father, as we may walk in newness of life, and become Gods creatures, and as
all that ever we have drawn from the corruption of Adams sin, may be quyte
clenzed away. Therwithall let us consider also what is the pith of the things
that God allows, and which is the rule of good life: namely first too honor
and serve God, and afterward too walk (neyghbourly) one with another,
indeuering too do good too such as have need of us, and absteyning from
doing all manner of evil and harm. This doctrine were easy enough too
conceive, so we were not utterly perverted by our wicked affections. And
soothly, there is not that man which is not a great Doctor in preaching unto
other men: but yet as clear and apparently known as these things are, no man
can apply them too his own use. Yet shall there be no excuce for us, when we
shall be feign too come too account before the great judge. Wherefore let us
bear this doctrine well in mind, yea and let us give good heed too it, seeing
it is so ill put in ure through the whole world.

Among the Papists there is talking enough of Gods service, and of living
holily: but yet the world sees how those wretched souls stand buzzing about a
sort of pelting tryfles: and that for all their ^uerlaboring of themselves,
they be never the forewarder, but rather the further of from God. And what is
the cause of it? Even this: that every man of his own head deuizeth a rule too
his own liking: and in the mean while God speaking familiarly and without any
darkness, is not heard at all, but men do rather give themselves to the
things that cannot avail them. As for us although we have the light of the
Gospel, and can say that the superstitions of Papistrie are but trifles: yet
are we nevertheless far of from this doctrine. And if a man should sift our
lives, where is this true holiness? Where is this Ryghtuousnesse? For as for
the Gospel, most men take what they like of it, and tread Gods truth under
their feet as often as they li^t. Too be short, ye shall find that they which
brag most of their reformation now adays, are unholy and unclean people, yea
and (for the most part) even Dogs that bark against God, despyze his truth,
and rail at his word, unless it be when they let it s^ip, because they
think it another here nor there. That is the holiness of a number that would
be counted now adays great Christians and pillars of the Church, insomuch
that they would make themselves greater than God, if they could: yea and
although they be but woormes and woormes meat, yet cease they not too
blaspheme so far, and to cast forth their thunderboltes and madness, as too
say, that men shall speak as they will have them, or else they will conquer
God for it.

And as touching the said Righteousness, where shall a man find it? Every man
says, there is nothing but deceyt, nothing but craft, nothing but forswearing,
extortion, outrage, and violence. Every man complaynes of his neighbors, and
his neighbors of him. Howsoever the case stand, we see that Righteousness is
as good as banished out of the world. And therefore inasmuch as the name of
Jesus Christ and of his Gospel is so shamefully unhallowed by such as abuse it
falsely: we have so much the more need too remember what S. Paul says
here: namely that God will disclayme us, until we bear his mark, and be
created new agein in Jesus Christ. As how? Too be truthfull* (...) or (as I
have said already) though we were esteemed as Angels: yet shall our hypocrisy
be always lothely before God, if we be not clenzed of it, and indeuer with
a true and right meaning affection, too employ our selves too the serving of
God, and too the helping of our neighbors.

Now heeruppon he deuydeth this doctrine intoo several points, applying it too
particular exhortations. For first he says, that every man must leave lying,
and speak the truth to his neighbors, because we be members all of one
body. Not without cause does Saint Paul here lay forth things particularly,
which he had erst spoken generally. For we would always shift our hands of
the doctrine, that it might vanish away in the air, and not come at us. Not
that Gods speaking too us in general might not suffyze us, if we were
teachable as we ought be, too receive instruction at his hand: but because we
be so snarled in our vanities, that if God do but say generally that we must
be reformed according too his image, and utterly renounce (...) selves: it
touches us not at all, but we let it pass. Therefore is he feign too decyfer
it by parce^^meale, as if he should make an anatomy of our thoughts and
affections, and bring too light the vices which we would feign hoord up in
huthther muther. That is the thing which Saint Paul goes now about. He had
said, that it behooves us too be reformed after the image of God by our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the new man, and the head wheruntoo we must be like
fashyoned. Now if he had gone no further than so: that doctrine had bin
received without geynsaying, but in the mean while no man had fared the better
by it as by a lively instruction. But now will he speak of whoredom, of
Theft, of deceytfulnesse, of drunkenness, of hatred, of hartburning, and of
the subtle flyghts that pass between neighbor and neighbor. When things are
thus laid forth by particulars, men are the more wakened: and although every
man shrink back and invent excuces, and deuyze shifts: yet, will we, nyl we, we
must needs feel some hartbytings in us. That is the order which Saint Paul
keeps here. Wherefore let us make well, that it is not enough for us too have
bin taught our dewtie in one word, and as it were at a glaunce: but God had
need too warn us, and too show us flatly as well the vices whereto we be
subject and inclyned (of our own nature:) as also the vices whertoo the devil
draws us by his temptations and wyles. To be short, God must be feign to
guide our hands, our feet, our eyes, our ears, and our mouths: he must be
feign too make us see that we may ouershoote our selves in this sort and that
sort, too the end we may be well armed on all syds, that the devil find not
any gap open, nor be able too make any breach intoo us. That is it which we
have too bear in mind, too the intent we take not our selves too be so able
folks, as that the once hearing of a matter is enough for us. For we shall
wonder too see how the devil will nevertheless ouerreache us many ways. And
therefore let us be well ware that we give good ear too all the warnings that
are given us, because it is not any whit more than needs.

And forasmuch as Saint Paul had spoken of truth: he says, Put away lying,
and speak every man the truth. He sets the word Truth in another sense
here, than he did before. For in calling holiness and ryghtuousnesse
truthefull, he meant that there ought too be no glozing nor disguyzing, but a
right meaning simplicity, that when God looks as a witness intoo our hearts,
he may find no dubble dealing in us. After that manner was the word Truth taken
before. Now he speaks of the truth that ought too reign among us* when we
traffik or bargain one with another. Then must (...) be faithful and trusty
in all our business and doings, and we must use no wyles nor deceyt. And yet
that is not enough: but we must mark, that this truth whereof Saint Paul
speaks, is such a plain dealyng, as we lay open all that is in our heart, if
need require, and in any wise go not about too get other men's goods too us by
suttletie and craftiness, nor too profit our selves by another man's loss. And
on the contrary part, under this word Lying, he comprehends not only the lies
that are made in speech, as when a man says, that white is black, as for
example, if one should ask a man the price of a thing, he would sell that for
a crown, which is not worth a shilling. Saint Paul speaks not of the Lies
that are so gross and far out of square, that even little children are able
too condemn them: but by the name of Lying, he means all manner of
counterfetting and cousining, and too be short, all the policies and shifts
that men have, and wherein they glory. Look what the world terms wisdom or
policy: that does Saint Paul call flat Lying. And why? For a man is not
counted too be witty now adays, except the can filche and deceive, I mean
by bywayes and covert co^ueyances, which me^ shall not perceive. But this ge^re
is worse than the picking of a chest, and the breaking a sunder of the iron
work, too get away the money, or than the murdering of a man, when a thief
commes with a naked sword too cut a poor wayfarers throat. Therefore these
politic murderers, which will needs be counted honest men, may disguyze
themselves as much as they list by their hypocrisy: but yet are they called
(here) both deceyuers, and thieves and murderers. Not that they appear so
before men: but God who sees deeper than we do, will judge of their doings
as they be in deed. And what shall men gain by excuzing themselves?
(Nothing.) Then is we mark this geere well, we shall see, that in speaking of
Lies, S. Paul condemns the things that men make most account of, as
suttletie, and wittiness, and skill to behave a man's self in all company.
For (the world says) a man must hold with the hare, and hunt with the hound:
he must beware that he be not ouerraught: and he must always prevent rather
than be prevented. The fashion of the world then is, that every man stand so
upon his guard, as he have his nets ready too entrap other men, and to
entangle them a hundred times ere they be aware of it. But Saint Paul says,
we must use such a soundness and plain dealing, as we must speak truth
one too another. And he brings us back too that which he had (...) after,
too another purpose: namely, that we be all but one body.

Now then, let us come too our own members. If my one hand should play
legierdemayne, and convey all things too it self, too the hurt of the other: if
my foot should conspyre against my leg, or if my bellye could work some
pretty slyght against my stomach: what a thing were it? Now then, if we be
members of our Lord Jesus Christ, is it not a separating of our selves from his
body, when we use such fine shifts and pretty slyghtes, notwithstanding that
they be not condemnable before men? No doubt, but we will protest enough with
our mouths that we be Christians: but whatsoever we pretend, Jesus Christ
will not be misfashyoned after our fancy. Like as he is but one: so will he
have us to be all one in his body, yea even with this condition, that every of
us serve his neighbors: which cannot be done, except all counterfetting ^ee
first put away, as we see that the hand does yield it self simply too the
service of the rest of the body: and likewise the foot and every other member
does his dewtie. If any one be in danger, the rest will not sink aside,
but all employ themselves too succor it. (Among them*) there is no profer of
deceyt, but all cling toogither, according too the order of nature. Even so
ought we too prove our selves too be the members of Jesus Christ by like
plain dealing. Saint Paul then applies too this particular exhortation, the
thing that he had spoken in general: namely, that if we be clenzed from all
hypocrisy and fayning before God: we will show it in our whole life. For when
we have too do one with another, we will use no guyle, but walk plainly.
That is for one point. And thereof springs another: which is, that we must
not provoke or anger one another. For we see that if a man but move us a
little, by and by we be in in a chafe, and our passions are so excessive, as
there is another reason nor measure with us. And when men are so carried away,
they do so forget themselves, as nothing can wey with them, use what
persuasion ye can. And therefore Saint Paul says, that if we be not quiet
one with another, we cannot be knit intoo the body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and (besides that,) as much as lies in us, we deface Gods image in us, by
giving head so too our passions too chafe after that fashyon, and too be so
hot one against another. Now it should seem by all lykelyhod that he meant to
take this common saying as drawn out of the fourth Psalm: not that he
alleges the Psalm too report the natural sense of it: but too apply it too
his own purpose. For we may well take many textes of Scripture, and apply
them too diverse things, howbeeit without altering of any thing in them, and yet
notwithstanding they shall abide in their natural sense still. Even so, too
the end that S. Paul's saying might be the better received: he says, Be
angry, and sin not, as though it had bin a common saying, and so well known,
as it had bin taken almost for a proverb. Now, David uses a word which
signifies properly too chafe and storm: howbeeit that was in rebuking such as
persecuted him wrongfully, because they were hardened in their malice, and
forepossessed with so great and venomous rage against him, that they made no
conscience too oppress him. Forasmuch therefore as he saw such wilful
stubbornness in his enemies, he says unto them, Be ye angry, and ye
shall not sin. Whereby he does us too wit, that the cause why they were so
carried away with rage against him, was, that there was another fear of God, nor
honesty, nor conscience that could hold them back any more, but that they
were become as wyld beasts. And that is the cause why he says, Be angry:
that is too say, Enter a little intoo questioning and reasoning with your
selves: examine what ye be doing: and then will yeee not sin any more. If
every of you will go intoo his chamber, and bethink himself aduyzedly: ye
shall perceive, that hithertoo ye have bin driven by devilish rage. Now this
doctrine is right necessary for all men, because we see what headiness there
is in us, insomuch that we have no sooner conceived any toy in our head, but
that by and by without inquyring of Gods will, or without asking counsel at
his mouth, as the Prophet Esaias exhorts us too do: we take the thing that
we have conceived, Esaias. 30* a. 2.
for good, and will needs subdewe all men too our lyking. And therefore the
cause why we ouershoote our selves so much, is, that we enter not intoo
examination of the matter with our selves, that we might discern between the
good and the evil, even by yielding God his due authority, in giving ear
with all reverence and modesty, too the things that he shows us by his
word. Then have we need too be angry, that is too say, too be grieved
with our selves, and too complain of our selves, that we sooth not our selves
as we have bin wont too do. If we do so, we shall not sin: that is too
say, the great malapartnesse that is so deeply rooted in us, will soon be
abated: for we shall abhor too fight against God: and if our affections get
aforehande with us, God will set in foot against them, and say, how now? will
ye make war against me unawares?

Now heeruppon Saint Paul says, Be ye angry, and sin not. As if he should
say, my friends, what makes you too storm so one against another? For if
never so little a fault be committed against you, ye be streyte in a chafe,
and would rend up heaven and earth too be revenged of the offense, and yet in
the mean season ye have matter enough too be offended every one with
himself. Never go from your own persons too seek cause of anger: for how many
ways offend you God every day? Ye cease not too provoke him early and late.
And yet if one touch but the tip of your finger, ye are by and by in a
pelting chafe. And what is the cause thereof, but that (as it seems) ye have
conspyred with Satan too tormente your selves so? You bear your selves on hand
ye shall be well in quiet when ye have revenged the wrong that has bin
done unto you. But it is a cursed quietness, when men are so at rest, by
being revenged upon those that have offended them. The way then too assuage
all these wicked heates, is for every man too think with himself, that he
shall surely have enough wherefore too be grieved with himself, and too be
angry with himself, and too be revenged of himself. 2. Cor. 7. c. 10. 11.
According wheruntoo, Saint Paul in the second too the Corinthians, declaring
what true repentance is, alleges the sorinesse which we conceive upon the
knowing of our sins, saying that the said sorines brings with it a greef,
which suffers us not to be in quiet and rest, but makes us to fall to
stomaking against our selves, in consideration of the terriblenesse of Gods
wrath which we have provoked against us, and yet notwithstanding suffers us
not too cease too be still of good hope, by resting upon Gods goodness and
mercy. Therefore if one be once come too the point that they can be angry
with themselves, when they know they have sinned, and seek not too be
revenged of their enemies, but rather are ready too do them good, and do pray
for them: that is a good exercyze, and every man ought too spend himself in
that battle: for surely they be good and holy passions, when a man's anger
proceeds of a zeal too Godward, and of a love that he bears toward him.
And if we do so: that is too say, if every of us be grieved at his own
vices: certainly we shall never find leisure too be at emnity with other
folks, or too spyte our neighbors: but if we have a true zeal too Gods
honor: undoubtedly we will forget the offenses that are committed against us,
and not be so hasty as too say, I will maintain mine honor or honesty. For
we shall have another greater and woorthyer let too hold us back: that is too
wit, the revenging of the fault which we our selves have committed against
God, and whereby he has bin dishonored as much as in us lay, and the
forgetting of the offense that has bin committed against our selves. Thus ye
see in effect what we have too consider upon this, where Saint Paul shows
us, that men must turn their eyes away from the occasions which they may
conceive too be revenged of others. For if a fly do but come overthwart our
eyes, we be by and by in a spytefull choler, in so much as there needs no
more too make us fall out with every body that does any thing which mislyketh
us. So then let us learn to forsake our selves, and to think every of us
upon our own faults, that we may be so displeased with them, as it may rid
away our cholericknesse, wherethrough we fall too fyghting against God, and
make us too be angry at the great number of vices whertoo we be too much
given. That is the thing which we have too remember in the first place. And as
touching the second point, we will delay it until next the Sunday, at which
time it shall by Gods leave be discoursed at length.

Now let us fall down before the maiest^e of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our sins, praying him too make us perceive them more and more, and
therwithall too inlyghten us so by the doctrine of the Gospel, as we may
espy our own sins and shamefulnesse, and be ashamed of our selves, and
also behold the ryghtuousnesse which has bin showed us in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and tend thereuntoo with indeuer too be fashyoned thereafter, so as we
may come daily nearer and nearer theruntoo, until we cleave thoroughly unto
it: and that in the mean time he bear with our infirmities, granting us the
grace too amend them from day too day, in hope that he will show himself
merciful toowardes us, so we play the Judges against our own selves in
condemning all the vices which we perceive too be in us. That it may please
him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people and
Nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxxi. Sermon, which is the eleventh upon the fourth Chapter.
26 Be angry, and sin not: Let not the sun go down upon your anger,

27 Another give ye place too the devil.

28 Let him that stole, steal no more: but let him rather labor, woorking
with his hands in the thing that is good, that he may have too give unto him
that needs.


We saw the last So^day, that if every of us looked well too himself and too
his own vices, we shoud have enough wherewith to stay our chafing and choler,
from wreaking our wrath upon such as offend us. For we be so wayward of our
selves already, that a small thing will put us out of patience. And therefore the
fault that another man committes against us, be it never so little, will
always set us in a chafe. And why? Because we take too much leyzure too look
upon other men's faults, and in the mean while forget our own. The remedy
then which is set us down here to keep us from being so soon and so lyghly
offended at other men's faults, is, that every of us enter intoo himself, and
vex and chafe himself there, when he sees himself so wretched as all of us are.

Now after that Saint Paul has showed that it were much better and more for
our behoof too be be grieved at our own vices, than at every small occasion,
when men behave not themselves too our lyking: he adds theruntoo, Let not the
Sun go down upon your anger. We must not understand by this, that S. Paul
meant to acquit such as are soon angry, and soon appeazed: for it is a vice
worthy of blame. And although it be more excuzable than the feeding of a
displeazure which turns too rancour or hatred: yet notwithstanding we cannot
be so soon pacifyed, but that we shall have offended God alredye with our
choler. For we hear what is said even by the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Math. 5. d. 22.
namely that if we show any sign of displeazure at all, and it be as it were
but by grunting between the teeth we be already in danger of hell fire
before God. We shall not need too have given any blow, nor too have done any
open wrong whereby we might be brought before a Justice: if we have but only
offended so far as too have conceived any pritch, there is no excuce for us.
And therefore when Saint Paul forbids us too feed our anger, he does not
utterly iustifye them that are gentle and easy too be reconcyled, and will
soon forgive: for they be blame worthy alredie, as I said before. But he
proceeds here by degrees, as if he should say, my friends, if every of us
thought upon his own sins, it is certain that we should be moved too
mislyke of our selves, because we provoke Gods wrath against us: and he that
has a lively feeling of his own faults, will arm himself therewith against
himself. For we ought too have a zele too Godward, as though we were his
attourneyes, and that zele ought too procure us too condemn evil whersoeuer
we find it. But Anger is always at our elbowe, yea and it dwells in us, so
as we shall never be so perfect as were too be wisshed, so long as we be
in this world. (Yet notwithstanding) howsoever the case stand, let us beware
that we suffer not our selves too be possessed with inordinate passions. For
if we conceive any hartburning, and go too bed upon it: surely we shall be
poisoned by and by, and the mischeef will not be espyded so easly. It is all
one as if a man that felt him self alredye attached with infection of some
disease, should linger in his misery, and by all means possible eschew the
physician, and run as far back from him as he possibly could, if he
would offer too come too him: and afterward when he would have remedy, it is
too late, because the disease is settled, and has so ouergrowen him, that
physic cannot stand him in any stead. Even so is it with the man that is
angry, and contineweth in it without purging of the malice from his stomach:
certainly it is as if a man had some inward and vnespyed disease, which grows
so strong, as afterward it becomes incurable. That is the second degree which
Saint Paul has set down here. First he shows us how we may be
faultlesse before God, in respect of anger and choler: that is too wit, by
thinking every of us upon our own faults, too condemn them, and too be
^orie for them, and too feel such anguishe of mind for them, that we be as
men half in a (...). That is a holy Anger, and such a one as God allow^th of.
And yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as we be ouerweake, if we commit a fault,
at leastwyse let us not dubble it: and though we have offended God, let it not
make us too multiply choler against him, least the devil get possession of us,
and we cannot afterward abide too be brought back agein intoo the good way,
but our passions do so ouermayster us, as they make us too follow them
without end or measure. In any wise let us beware of that.

That also is the cause why he says, that we give place too the devil, when
the sun goes down upon our anger. It is true, that we have no sooner
tripped, but that devil has already had power over us: howbeeit he is brydled
in such wise, that if we bethink us of our faults, and amend them, God
suffers him not too hold us captive as prisoners. But when we be so far
ouerseene as to take pritch, and to like well of our own testiness, and
thereupon to conceive a number of fancies too rancle inward more and more: (I
say) if we be at that point: we have given Satan entrance, he has taken
possession of us, and afterward it is out of time for us too wish too return:
for the mischeef is rooted so deep, and grown so strong, that medicines can
not do any more good, as I have showed already. Now we see S. Paul's meaning.
And therefore let us put this doctrine in ure. The first point whereof is to
examine well the evil that is in us, that we may be angry with our selves, and
every of us be as a foe too himself, as driven by a zeal to Godward, to hate
and abhor our own vices. Let that be the first thing that we bestow our
study upon and then shall we have whereupon too occupy well our chafing and
choler, and we shall be no more so hasty to take pritch against such as have
done us some wrong, but we will rather bear with them that have fowly
offended us, because we shall have buzinesse enough too search out our own
imperfections. And (as I said before) we shall the easlyer bear with other
men's misdealings, when we perceive our selves blame worthy so many ways,
not toward mortal creatures only, but toward the living God. For what are
we that we should keep such a stir for every wrong that is done us, seeing
we crave forgiveness at Gods hand every day (as necessity also constreyneth
us) of the offenses which we have committed against his majesty, and
wherthrough we have broken his ryghtuousnes? The very mean therefore to appease
al wicked and excessive cholericknesse, is that every of us be grieved and
angry with him self, because he sees him self subject too so many infirmities,
or rather so many sins and vices.

And for the second point, if we chance too stumble and fall through
fraylty, that we be not so hild back by the fear of God, but that we be
faulty before him: let us beware that we do not harden and foade our selves
in our evil doing, but as soon as we feel any unmeasurable moving in us,
let us step before it, and indeuer too repress it: let us use violence in that
behalf too subdew our passions that carye us so away, making us too skirmish
so against God and our neighbors. Thus must we fight manfully too bridle all
our cholleriknesse. Or else if any excess have escaped us, let us come back
agein and bethink our selves better, and let us rid it away quickly, assuring
our selves it is as a disease that requires speedy remedy, or else it will
ouergrowe in such wyze, as all succor shall come out of season. Let us think
upon it.

Now if Saint Paul had said no more but thus: my friends, let not the Sun go
down upon your anger, for if rancour do once settle, it will not be easly
put away: it had bin much, and that warning ought too have suffyzed us. But the
threate which he sets down with it in that he says, Give not place too
the Devil, ought too make the hears stand up upon our heads. Some in deed
have expounded it too be spoken of the enemies of the faith, which seek
occasion of slaundering it: but it is easy too be seen by the words them
selves, how he intended too warn us of a thing which we ought too be more
afraid of, and which will scare us worse: that is too wit, that the devil
gets as it were the maystrie and dominion over us, when we feed any grudge
and hartburning against our brethren. Now then, which of us will not quake for
fear, when he hears of his subiecton unto Satan, as if he were in his bonds
like a prisoner? And yet for all that we take no heed of the things that are
told us here. For S. Paul has uttered Gods sentence, which is, that if we
pursue our anger and hartburning against such as have offended us, it is all
one as if we wilfully passed an obligation too Satan, too be hild as thralles
under his tyranny. So much the more therfyre does it stand us on hand too
bethink our selves aduyzedly, that if that vice cannot be througly amended at
the first brunt, we may at lestwyze be well ware that it do not so settle in
us, as that we cannot be set at one agein, or that we should pursue our
quarells, or that men should not be able too wey with us, until we have
taken some reuendgment. Let us take heed (I say) that we enter not intoo such
bondage of Satan. And even for that cause is it said, that when men do fret
and chafe after that fashion, of one devil there are made ^wayne. And why? For
God is already offended at my neighbor for doing me wrong, and if I also fall
to stomaking of the matter on my part, and will needs requyte him with the
like: the devil has won us both. I ought too pity the soul that is after a
sort stayed away alredye, and in the high way too perdition: I ought too seek
too be at one with him agein, and too salve the sore as much as is possible:
now if I also do let the reins looce, and cast my self intoo Satan's ^lauerie
through the cursed liberty that I take: then gets he the upper hand of both
parties. So then, let us bear this threatening well in mind, whereby the holy
Ghost meant too waken us thoroughly, (...) every of us might stand upon his
guard, too beware of taking pritch or stomach at things, least afterward we
conceive such hatred, as may so harden us, that there shall be no more means
too appeaze us.

Now hereuntoo S. Paul adds another warning (as I have declared already,)
wherein he rebukes the common vices that are contrary too the rule which our
Lord gives us, too the intent we should live as Gods children, knowing
wheretoo we be called. And now he speaks of the Deceytes, Robberies, and
Extorsions that are committed, when every man is too much wedded too himself,
and has no conscience of other men's harms. Let him then that stole (says
he) steal no more: but rather let him labor with his hands too do the
things that are good and profitable, and vvheriwth he may succor such as have
need. Now whereas S. Paul speaks here of theft, he means not such thieves
as men punish with whipping or with hanging: but all manner of slyghtes and
crafts that are used too get other men's goods by evil practyzes, as
extorsions, bryberies, and all other like things. Although then that such
things be faced out, or else that they which are most guilty of them, be not
accuzed before men, because they can skill how too cloak their misdooings: yet
does S. Paul call them all theftes and robberies. And why? For the Prophets
and Apostles spoke not the ordinary manner of speech that is used in Courts
of Justice on earth: but had an eye to the judgment seat of God. For the thing
that may be excuzed, yea and peradventure well justified before men, shall not
fail too be condemned there. For God sees much cleerer than mortal
creatures. Agein, favor or parcialitie may bear sway oftentimes in Law
matters: so as there shall be cloking, dissembling, and covering, and the Judges
shall like well enough too have a napkin tide before their eyes, that a man may
have some starting hole too escape out at. They may oftentimes like well enough
of such things: but it is not so with God. Wherefore let us mark well, that
the forbydding of us too steal, is not as the publishing of some statute law
that belongs too temperal policy: but we be called before the heavenly
judge, who discovers the things that are hidden from men, and condemns all
wicked covetousness, as theft, whereby we be moved too seek our own profit
too much with the hinderance of our neighbor. Too be short, under this word
theft or stealing, S. Paul comprehends all the wicked practizes, that are
used too deceive other men withal: and also all extorsions whereby men are
fleeced of their goods and bereft of their substance. Now then we see that
there are Thieves too be found of all degrees. For there is not that man which
is not buzie in gryping too himself, I mean of them which are not reformed by
Gods spirit. Although a merchant man be counted of good wealth, yet will he
have store of fetches and policies still, and they shall be as nets laid for
the simple sort and such as have no experience, which perceive them not. In
like case is it with Handicraftes men: for they have the skill too counterfeit
their works in such wise, as men shall be deceived by them. Agein, as
touching the price, there is no trusting too them, al is one too them, so they
may sell their wares, for they think that all is lawful for them. Likewise
do laborers and husbandmen. Too be short, there is no state of men wherein
there are not infinite faults, and extorsions too be seen, so as every man
would gain and make himself strongest. If ye look upon the rich, and upon
such as live of their Rentes, it is yet worse. For they flea off the skins
of the inferior people, and of such as are unable too resist them. And yet
before men (as I said,) all of them do iustifye themselves: howbeeit, that is
because they know not that God has sounded here his trumpet, too summon them
before him, ne consider what manner of perfection and pureness must be
brought unto him. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand too try,
not only all our outward deeds, but also all our our wicked affections,
whereby we be tempted too enrich our selves b^yond reason and (...).

And Saint Paul says purposely, that he which has stolen, should steal no
more: too show that there ought too appear such a change in our life, when
God has once brought us home too himself by his Gospel, as we may no more
resemble the wretched unbelievers which walk in darkness, but consider that
our Lords inlyghtening of us, is with condition, that we should become new
creatures. And herewithall we see the thing that I have touched already: namely
that S. Paul speaks not of the common theftes that are condemned and
punished before the world: for then should it follow, that all had bin thieves
which had bin converted too christianity. But (as I said before) he uses the
word Steal, purposely too make us too abhor all craftiness, malice,
suttlenesse, and catching of other men's goods the more. For if it had bin said
(but thus:) use no more craft too deceive men, another take ye leave too pull
the things to you, that are none of your own: he had not touched them so much
too the quick, which flatter themselves, and seek too have some covert to
cloak their vices withal. But when as he says, Steal no more: it is to the
end that we should think thus with our selves: Alas, albeeit that I would
feign excuze my self, and too my seeming it were not done amiss of me, and
men have bleared eyes: yet must I not rest upon that. For in the mean while
my faults shall not fail too be registered before God, and I must be feign
too yield an account of all things that have not bin done according too
incorrupt equity and right, and I must be taken for a thief before God,
notwithstanding that all the world have quit me.

But now let us see how well this doctrine is put in ure. A man shall find
that they which are converted too the Gospel, take most liberty too do
evil. It should seem that a number have learned nothing else by the Gospel,
but to buzie themselves about pretty slyghtes too entangle other men's goods.
For there are too be seen, which used greater simplicity in the time that
they were blind wretches, and knew nothing of God, and of the pure doctrine of
salvation, for they had at least wise some vpryghtnesse and plain dealing too
the worldward. But they have so profited backward in Gods school, as they be
far wylyer than they were before, in making their own advantage, and in
taking more liberty, and in bearing themselves on hand that all things are
lawful for them. And therwithall they be so shameless in facing and
bolstring out their dooinges, that they do but make a pot at it, and bear
themselves on hand that they have great wroong done them, when they be blamed
for the things that are apparently known too all men, and whereof even little
children may be judges. So much the more then are we too be condemned,
seeing that Paul tells us here, that although we enriched our selves by
Craft and Extorsion, and made no conscience too rake other men's goods too us,
before we had good teaching: yet at leastwyze we should be well aduyzed too
walk more vpryghtly with our neyghbors, now that we be inlyghtened by Gods
word. Ye see then that the thing we have to bear in mind upon this text, is,
that our Lord Jesus Christ's doctrine ought to rule us in such singleness, as
every of us may forbear his craftiness and suttleties.

Furthermore forasmuch as a number excuse themselves, saying, How shall I do
then? For I have no trade too live by, unless I may follow still mine own
manner of dealing: Saint Paul says, Let them labor. Let him that would make
it excuce, that he has not wherewith too find him self, except he may deceive
and defraud: let him (says Paul) give him self too laboring with his hands.
As if he said, that men's dispensing with them selves under color that they
should then fast, and endure many miseries and penuries, is a tryfling toy
before God: All those allegations are another here nor there before God, says
S. Paul. For if any be afraid that he shall want: let him not forbear too
labor. Mark that for one point. And here let us learn too leave these self
soothings, wherwithall a number of folks do bring themselves asleep, who
when they have said, what shall I do? Do bear themselves on hand that Gods
mouth is stopped, and that he dares no more come nygh them: and they will needs
be so privileged, that too their own seeming they be quyte and clear, if
they can allege for themselves, how then? Whereof shall I live? What shall I
do, if I follow not my woonted trade? It seems too us that God is shet out
of the gate, and that he has no more authority too condemn us, when we have
once alleged those things for our selves. But that is but folly, says S.
Paul. We should rather scratch up the earth with our nails, than offend God
by dooyng wrong too our neighbors. The thing then wheruntoo he sends us
back, is, that when a man is grown rich, and has lived a long time at his
ease by fil^hing and stealing: that is too say, by pretty fine slyghtes and
conueyances, that are against equity and right: let him not be ashamed too
abate his countenance, and too labor for the getting of his living. Albeeit
that he have erst done nothing but sit still, and gotten his living by deuyzing
mischief: yet let him not be ashamed too labor and to take pain for his
sustenance. Too be short, Saint Paul shows us here, that all unlawful
gaynes must be left by such as call themselves Christians, and will be taken
so too be. And this warning is as needful for us now adays, as ever it was
for any. For besides that, we must absteyne from all suttletie and deceyte,
when God once calls us too be his children, and will have us too maynteyne a
brotherhood among our selves: many of us also must give over our trades of
living. For what a number of means too live upon, are there in the popedom?
But when we come before God, let us always remember this definitive sentence
which I have set down: namely that we consider how the case concerns our not
answering before an earthly Judge, but before him which sees all things, and
before whom there is no cloking of any thing. Therefore let us think well upon
it, seeing there are so many means excuzable in popery, wherewith as good as a
fourth part of the world is maynteyned, and yet are all of them not only
vnauaylable, but also abominable before God. For first of all there be
Priests and Moonkes, and all the rabble (of Cloysterers.) Secondly there are
there hangers on which live of them, and are as it were their waged men, which
have some geyne by them, and do skum of some part of their fat by one mean
or other: under which Covert there lurketh a very long tail that is turned in
and out like a Maze. Agein, there are a great sort too be seen, which give
themselves all wholly too things that are nothing worth. True it is that in
this darkness of theirs men see not very well: insomuch that black (as ye
would say) is turned intoo white. But yet howsoever the case stand, there is no
placard for men in this behalf, but every man must have an eye too this, that
like as hithertoo I have filched and polled to get my living: and have
exercyced some wicked practice or other, which God, condemns by his word:
seeing I had defiled myself in eating the bread which came not too me lawfully
from the hand of God as it should do, according too my asking of my daily
bread of him, but by filching here and there: I must now hensfoorth change my
copy, and learn too labor in such wise, as I may truly say, that the things
which I have, do come too me of Gods blissyng* That is the thing which we
have too remember upon this lesson of Saint Paul's. And it behooves us to put
it so much the better in ure, considering that theeuerye is more ry^e now
adays in the world than ever it was, and yet notwithstanding a number of men
do flatter themselves still in that behalf, because the belly will needs have
the foredeele. When a man has whereon too live (say they) and all things
necessary besides: it is good reason that he should not exempt himself from
Gods word: but that we should starve for hunger, what order were in that?
what rigor were it? Forasmuch then as we be so inclyned too seek too be
provided for, by hook or by crook, without regarding what is lawful or
unlawful: let us think the better upon the things that S. Paul tells us
here.

And he proceeds yet one degree further in this change, which he inioyneth
unto all the faithful: which is, that he tells them they must not only
absteyne from defrauding of other men, and from polling them of their goods:
but also indeuer too succor such as have need. Although then that it seem
over rough unto us too absteyne from all evil, and that in sted of living at
our ease, as we have bin wont to do, and of having many commodities,) we
should be feign to scratch our living out of the earth with our nails (as
they say) and too labor with great pain and travel, yea and too fare very
hardly: if although (say I) that this seem right hard: yet must we go
further, that when we have wherewith to get our living without using of wicked
practizes, we must now and then spare somewhat of that which God gives us
through his blissing, too relieve the needy withal. Therefore let us not look
whertoo we be inclyned, but let us consider that of our own nature we be
so froward and wedded too our own profit, that every of us will needs be
always well stored, and that forasmuch as we have so little regard of them
that are members of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ as well as our selves, we
must take pains to enforce our selves to do them good: for that is a labor
that will bring us too another. We must (say I) enforce all our affections,
and theruppon employ our selves earnestly and unfeignedly, that we may be able
too protest that the bread which we eat, comes too us from Gods hand, and
that we be sustained by his goodness, as if it were by a father that
cantleth out every of his children their pittance. Then let us be at that
point. And moreover, let us not think it enough too absteyne from all
craftiness, and from wynding in of men by our fetches, and from catching of
other men's goods: but let us labor too do good with the little which we
have, and too succor such as have need.

Howbeeit Saint Paul adds here yet one circumstance more, which deserves
to be well noted: and that is, that he will have us to labor in the thing that
is good. And why adds he that? Let us consider what a number of trades,
Crafts, or occupations there are in the world, which serve for nothing but
corruption, and to toll in pence, as they say. Truly men are not aware of it.
And why? Because all men are contented, that such as have wherewith, should be
prodigal, too the intent that their money may fly abroad. Agein, such as (too
their own seeming) cannot get their living otherwise, are inuenting of new
deuyces every day, too angle the money out of fools purses, and of such as are
so given too lyghtnesse. Agein, they that have wherewith, will needs set out
themselves, and be brave too the worldward. And that is the cause why the
occupatons and trades which serve but for pomp and superfluity, and for I
wot not what nycenesse and allurements, and alonly too provoke folk too
lewdness, will needs make men believe that there is nothing amiss in them.
But Saint Paul has therefore set down a distinction here. For it is not
enough when a man can say, Oh, I take pain, I have mine occupation, or I have
such a trade: that is not enough: but he must see whether the same be good
and profitable for the commonwealth, and whether his neighbors may fare the
better by it. For ought not this too be the end whereto all trades, occupations,
and states do tend, and whertoo they ought too refer themselves: namely,
that every man look too employ him self in some thing whereby he may do good?
And for the same cause are we lykened too the members of a body. Now then, 1.
Cor. 12. b. 12.
as who should say, that the hand should employ it self too the delyghting of
some other member, which notwithstanding should receive harm by it. By that
means all the body should go too destruction. So the^, in as much as we must
always have before our eyes, that in what calling soever we live, God must go
before us, as if he called us too him, and we follow the way that he shows
us by his word: surely he will never allow of any trade or occupation, which
is not beehooffull and seruisable too the whole commonwealth, and redownding
also too the profit of all men. Therefore if a man use a trade or occupation
which is too no purpose but to breed offenses, or too be sotte men in their
delicate delyghts, and too mar them utterly, or else too set out pomp
excessyuely, as though men purposed even in despyte of nature, too make havoc
of the good things that God has given us: it is certain that all those
things are without the compass of godly vocations or callings, and that God
does utterly disallow them. Thou may well say, I have traveled in this or
that: yea but thou have served the devil. For like as the devil has his
Martyrs, so has he also his servants. We see how such as are given too
superstition, do martyr themselves without end or ceassing, and are (as ye
would say) stark mad upon them, and as good as out of their wits. And
oftentimes the scripture also uses the same comparisons, too show how the
devil casts men quite out of their bounds, when he once possesses them.
Ye see then that many men torment themselves without reason: yea, but yet are
they the devils martirs. Likewise there are a great number that shall have
taken much pain in some trade or occupation, too get their living: and yet if
a man look too what purpose it serves, he shall find it to be nothing but
infection and filthiness, and that it serves but to nurrish pride and
superfluity. To be short, it is an open provoking of God, and a wasting and
misspending of the things that God has given, with commandment to use them
soberly and stayedly. No marvel therefore though S. Paul have set down this
distinction. And therefore let every man look diligently to himself, and when
fathers are minded too set their children too any trade or occupation, let them
not look (as the common custom is) which may be most gaynefull: but let them
match these two things toogither, namely, when they have considered by what
trade their son may best get his living, and provide for himself and his
household, when he comes too be married: (therewith let him also look) that
he serve his neighbors turns, and that the use of his craft or mystery may
redounde too the common profit of all men. The thing then which fathers must
have respect unto in setting their children too trades and occupations, is not
too be forepossessed with regard how they may most gain, but how they may
always be hylde in order, that they swerve not one way nor other. For when
our lusts do^ so carry us away, that we can no sooner spy a little gain,
but we be by and by snatching at it: it is all one as if we shook hands
with Satan, yea and these things become as hayted hooks that he casts for
us.

And like as a hungry fish will soon be taken, and the food that she raught
at, costeth her full dear: so fares it with these intycementes of Satan. When
men have no further forecast, but thus, ho, such a man gained well by such a
trade, and great profit may be made of it: he steppeth too it at al adventure,
and never makes bones at it, too scan or consider whether it be right or
wrong: but (as I said before) is choked or ever he come too that consideration.
So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand too mark well what Saint
Paul says here: namely, that when men be desirous too get their living,
they must bethink themselves aduyzedly, and not bear with themselves in
dooyng of things, because they be customably done of others, and no fault
found with them among men: but consider that they have too do with God, and
that it is he before whom we must make our account.

Agein, let us have good eye too the thing that is told us here, that is too
say, too the succoring of the needy. For Saint Paul intended too warn us in
one word, that our Lord in setting poor folks before us, intends too try
what we be, namely, whether there be kyndnesse in us, or whether we be
cruel like wyld beasts, And it is a thing also that ought too move us too
compassion. And for the same cause, when the Scripture speaks of doing
alms, besides that it uses the word mercy, it says also, that our
bowels ought to be moved when we see our brethren in need. Ye see then that
the sight of our neighbors necessities, ought too provoke us too liberality,
and too relieve them. Let us not tarry till they cry out for hunger, nor till
we be enforced, nor till shame compel us: but let every of us think, has
this man need? Has God se^ him before me? Has he made me too know it? It
is enough. For it is even as much as if he summoned me, and sent me his
Receyuers or Rentgatherers, too take up his revenues. Like as they that have
Revenues and Rentes, send their men to demand them, and gather them up: so
our Lord requires of us, that we should pay him his tributes, that is too
say, the homage money that we owe him, in acknowledgment that the things which
we possess, come from him, and even of his mere free gift. He sends us
another Shreefes nor Serieantes, but the poor, and that ought too suffyze us,
for they be his true receyuers: and that is, too the end we should not be
looth to give them. The cause why their necessity is set before our eyes, is
too the end we should be touched with pity and compassion, and theruppon be
inclyned too do good. So then, let us mark that the sum of the things here
spoken, is, first that we should forsake all manner of trades too live by,
which are not agreeing too Gods word: assuring our selves that we shall
always be taken for thieves before him, if we use any wicked trades, and
that although we have good assurance that our calling is good and lawful: yet
must we use it in such wise, as there be not any ravening, craft, or deceyt
in it. Mark that for one point. Agein, let us understand, that there is no
excuce for us before God, insomuch that although we allege famine, poverty,
or necessity: all that will not serve too acquit us, but that we must set our
hand too labor, that we may earne our living lawfully, and forbear too
profit our selves by other men's loss. Finally, besides as it were the
bynding up of our hands from dooyng any man wrong, and from using any pretty
shifts and slyghtes too get other men's goods: let us have a regard too do
good. Yea and let us have a special care too succor such as want: howbeit so
as it be with the things that God has given us of our own. For those are
the offerings and sacrifices which we must make unto him, in acknowlegment of
his benefytes. And we know that Almesdeedes are called Sacrifyces. Therefore
when we do them, we must protest with an unfeigned and true meaning heart,
that we come too do homage too God for the things that we hold of him. And
if there be any theft in our hands, it is certain that our sacrifyzes shall
be unclean, and our almesdeedes shall be turned intoo lothsomnesse. Then let
every man beware that he do not pill and poll with the one hand, too give of
it anon after with the other: but let every of us have both our hands clean.
Another let us have a dubble heart, but labor with all uprightness to earne our
living in such wise, that if God send us any profit by it, we may take it as
his free gift. And in good sooth, Moses also forbyddeth us too father any
piece of our gain upon our own running, Deuteronomy. 8. d. 17.
or upon the labor of our hands: for God will have us to be beholden to him
for all. Therefore when we do any alms, let it be with this protestation,
not only with mouth, but also in heart and deed, namely, that according as our
Lord has showed himself liberal unto us, and bestowed upon us, and given
us over and above wherewith too serve our own need, we be willing too do
him homage with it: and let us show in deed, that we intend not too keep
too our selves the things that he has given us, but do put them too the use
whertoo he has ordained them, that is too say, too the releeuing of those that
have need of them.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us feel them better, so as we may be
sorry for them, and ask him forgiveness of them, and profit more and more in
his fear, that being withdrawn from our fleshly affections, we may continue
in his fear and love, too the intent too profit more and more in the keeping
of his holy commandments. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly
father. etc.

The.xxxii. Sermon, which is the twelfth upon the fourth Chapter.
29. Let no filthy speech proceed out of your mouths, but only such as is
good too edifye, as need shall require, that it may give grace too the hearers.

30. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, vvherby you be sealed for the day
of redemption.


SAint Paul corrects a vice here which is very dangerous, and yet
notwithstanding so common as can be among men, because they see not at the
first what harm it brings, and therefore do take leave the easlyer too do
it. For it will be said, that too hold pleasant talk, and in the mean while
too think no man no harm, is a thing that may be abidden: as who should say,
it were possible too poison our neighbors mind, and yet for all that, it
should be no harm. And hardly may men be persuaded that it is so,
notwithstanding that the holy Ghost have said it. I say that when there is any
light or leaud talk, or tending too give liberty unto evil: it is all one as
if talk were ministered too poison men's souls. Now then it behooves us so much
the more too mark what is told us here: for Saint Paul terms it filthy and
leaud talk, which cannot but infect. Men will deny it (as I said before:) but
experience shows sufficiently, 1. Cor. 1^. d. 33.
how it is not without cause said in another place, that evil words corrupt
good manners. Though we weere never so modest, chaste, clean minded, and
given too good: yet if we admit wanton talk, it perceth even too the bottom of
the heart, and we be atteynted with it before we perceive it, insomuch as it
marreth us utterly. And in very deed if a woman give ear too the messages
that are brought her, tending too seduce her: a man may well say she is a
harlot alredie, and the thing it self is manifest enough. Then is it certain
that all unchaste and leaud speeches, are baudie tricks: and although the
parties that are so given too casting forth of such leaud talk, do it not
always of that mind: yet of what intent so ever they do it, Satan is the
author of it. And (as I said before) if such unchaste and looce talk have full
scope, needs must we be poisoned out of hand, and the mischeef have his
course. And therefore not without cause does Saint Paul forewarne us, that no
Unclean speech, or (as I said before) no filthy speech proceed out of our
mouth. And on the contrary part he sets down, that we have sufficient
matter too talk of one with another: that is too wit, too edifye, that men may
fare somewhat the better by our communication. Accordingly as even the heathen
men can say, that it does one good too be in such a man's company. And why?
For he shall ever hear some good sentence, and he never goes from him without
carrying away of some good. And it is nature that month them to say so.
Therefore let us learn too abhor and shun such plaginesse, when a man shall
have his tung so looce too speak words that smell of the pump (as men say),
and one shall hold the one side, and another the other, and that in stead of
receiving good, a man shall feel himself too be stung by Satan. And in deed,
of a very truth when such words enter into our hearts ere we be aware of them,
they be stings that Satan gives us in secret and vnespyed. Seeing then that
they be so, can it be said, that such a man is worthy too be heard? Should
we not hate him rather as a deadly plague?

Ye see then that the thing which we have to mark in the first place, is that
our Lord has given us tungs too make one another privy of our minds, and that
is too the intent we should make them serve too the benefyte of our neighbors,
and therabouts ought we to employ them wholly. And the tung which is the mean
too utter our hearts and mynds one too another, ought too guide all the residew,
as having the superiority over them. Psalm. 16. c. 9. and 57. b. 9.
On the other side, not without cause is it termed by the name of glory, too
show wherabouts we ought too employ it, and too what use, namely too the
honoring of God. Therefore if we looked well upon the order of nature, it
ought to be sufficiently printed in our hearts, that our words should be
necessary, and too the furtherance of our neighbors welfare and profit. The
first point therefore which we have too bear in mind, is that our Lord will
have all the parts of us too serve too doing good, and specially our tung, so
as the drift of all our talk be too edify. As for example, one has need of
Counsel, another of warning; another of rebuking, and another too be put in
mind of some thing, or else to be taught, because he is utterly ignorant: and
agein, it extends too all things in this present life. True it is that the
principal thing which we have too look unto, is too teach the ignorant,
and too show them the way of salvation. Besyds that, if any man misbehaue him
self, so as he be negligent and slothful, he must be spurred foreward by
good exhortations: and if he be unruly, he must be shamed, (as much as lies
in us,) that it may bring him back tooo the seruis of God. Agein, a man must
comfort such as are in heaviness, and give counsel too such as are in
distress, too the intent they fall not intoo despair. Too be short, we must
indeuer too hold back the poor s^ules that should else go too destruction.
And of all others that is the principal benefyte. But yet if we see a poor
man that is like too be deceived, we must give him some warning of it. And
when we be once come too that point, it is certain that we shall give our
selves continually to the benefyte and behoof of our neighbors, yea even
infinite ways, as well in respect of the body as of the soul.

And let us see now whether we have not sufficient ground and matter too
work these things upon. We cannot go one step, but we see how one has
need too be spurred, another too be rebuked, the third too be comforted,
and another too be taught. If we hold our toungs at all this, and care another
for the bodies nor for the souls of them that are linked too us, and with whom
we ought too be united as the fingers of a hand: is it not an open dispyzing
of God, when we imbace the natural use of our tongue in such wise? And
therefore let us keep us from marring of the thing that we ought too set so
much store by, namely the mean which we have too glorify God, by making
confession of our faith, and by calling upon him, and also by serving our
neighbors turns after so many sorts, as I have showed alredye. And so the
first point which we have too mark in this streyne, is the lawful use
whereuntoo God has ordained our toungs, and how they ought too be applied
wholly thereuntoo.

Now if we ought too procure the furtherance of our neyghbo^rs salvation, and
also their temporal benefyte and welfare: what a thing is it if we seduce
them by our disorder, and utterly quench and put away all fear of God in
them? When we serve Satan by our looce talk, when we labor too deface all
honesty, when we move men too a beastly life: is not such defyling of our
toungs an utter perverting of the order of nature? Then let us learn so too
occupy our selves in good and necessary talk, as we eschew the defyling of
our selves with wicked communicatio^, which are as baudes tricks of Satan, too
corrupt such as were well dispozed too serve God. And so we see that look how
many looce speeches pass in the world, so many spiritual poysonings are
there (as I said before) too corrupt good manners. And although we cannot be
made to believe it: yet is it certain that it is proved sufficiently enough,
eue^ by experience. Howbeeit let us not be as fools that will not learn but
by great harm: but rather let us yield too that which is told us by the holy
Ghost.

And heereuppon we may gather, that it is not too be thought strange, though
the world be now adays given too all lewdness. For it seems too be no
evil at all too use jesting and scoffing talk, insomuch that men would make a
vertewe of it, and find no bones at all in it. Likewise we see a great number
of iesters and scoffers, whose drift is too put away all shame, that men might
let themselves at raundon, and become utterly shameless. We see this too much
in use, and therefore no marvel though we gather the fruits of that wicked
and cursed licentiousness, which is too much suffered. And hereby we see
also, what is too be thought of all wanton (and baudie songs, and of
louemakings. If a young maid use (as it is used too commonly) too sing foolish
songs of love: she will be made a whore, even before she know what
whooredome is. And so is she (imboldened and) inhardned too all
unshamefastness, and the devil gets possession of her before she know
what chastity means, and how horrible a thing it is to put forth hirself
too such lewdness, and too break her faith and troth which she shall have
plyghted, when she comes too marriage. Before a maid can be able too discern
all this: she shall be utterly mard aforehand, if she acquaynt hirself with
leaude songs. And it is wonder that this mischeef can not be redressed.
Whereby it appears, that Satan laboreth in that behalf, and streyneth himself
too the vttermust, knowing that he has us at a great advantage, if he may so
sow his cursed cockle, too corrupt our good manners. For surely if the devil
wrought not in it, we might more easly deal too dispatch and rid away all
those ribawdries and filthiness out of rememberance, which are as deadly
plagues, as I have said before. But it is impossible. For though there were
sorer punishment for it than there is: yet both wives and maids had lever go
too prizon, and too be taken for harlots, than too correct that vice, which is
the corrupter of the whole world, and too bridle their cursed toungs, which
serve for nothing but too infect all things with that filthiness. Yet
notwithstanding, we shall have the less excuce after such warning, and as for
them that stop their ears, and will needs harden their hearts against the holy
Ghost: they shall be driven too yield an account, not only for offending God so
many ways, but also for poisoning of folks souls after a sort, which is a
thing much more heinous and horrible, than if they had murdered their bodies.
They that do but poison beasts, shall be driven out of the world, and they
deserve it well. And what shall be done too them which not only slay the body
with their poisons, but also make assault upon the soul, and cease not too
corrupt all goodness and all fear of God, yea and all honesty (as I said
before) by their leaude talk.

Ye see then that the thing which we have too remember in this streyne, is
that in as much as God has appointed our toungs too such use as we have heard,
that is too wit, too the service of our neighbors, and too the benefyting of
them both in body and soul: we must employ them diligently thereuntoo. And
therefore let us above all things keep us from infecting of those that were
inclined too serve God, and from thrusting them out of the way by casting
forth such speeches before them as may cool their goodness, and provoke
(...) too evil, yea and make them more licentious and negligent. For evil
speech corrupts good manners many ways. There are some naughtipackes too be
seen, that are (...) ^corners of God. And if they be warned too have any
remorse of their doings: ^ush say they, God passes much for this. Agein,
othersome come not too such extremity, but yet will they lessen their faults,
so as they shall be but venial sins with them. Othersome do cloak all
things: and all others generally will say, Tush, we must not be so careful,
God will not have us too live so sadly, for what a thing were that? It should
not be lawful for us too laugh within a while. And their speaking after that
manner, is too bury all fear of God by little and little. Ye see then that
many sorts of such folk, yea many mo than needs, do show themselves too
much: and they be as many records, that leaude words are poisons too
murder men's souls withal. And therefore let us stand upon our guard in
that behalf. And first of all (as I said) let every man beware that he speak
chastely, and use none other than honest speech. And therewithal let us shun
all them as devils, which jest out the matter after that fashyon,
notwithstanding that for their mirthes sake they be welcome too us, and
sometimes also fare well of free cost, (O, say we,) He is a good fellow, he
will make all the company merrye. Now whereas men are desirous too have such
folk, too tickle their ears by casting forth their iestes and daliances, and
such other like things: let us learn too shet them out of our doors. For we
would not willingly hold up our throat too a dagger, when we saw it drawn:
another would go seek one too murder our bodies. And why then do we long
sore too have our souls murdered, which is much worse? Wherefore let us
eschew such folks as can do nothing but quench and put out the fear of God
in us, and make us shameless and hard hearted* and bereeue us of all honesty,
and shamefastness, for fear least God pay us the wages that we deserve, for
having acquayntance and familiarity with such people: and therefore let us do
our indeuer that such plagues may not reign among us. Be not deceived,
(says Saint Paul) speaking of such scoffers, 1. Cor. 15. d. 33.
which serve but too provoke our lusts, too bereeue us of all remorse of
conscience, too abate the fear of God in us, and too abuse us in such wyze, as
sin may delyght us. Beware (says he) that none of you be deceived by lying
words, because it has bin a common thing in all ages. And therefore let us
put Saint Paul's counsel in ure, and not only let every of us keep good
watch that he be not surpryzed: but also let us have a care too keep other
folks from being corrupted after that fashyon. That is the thing which we
have too remember here.

And we see what he says, namely that we be weak enough, yea and too
weak: yea and so saped in evil, as is horrible too see: and therefore when
we covet too record still some new lesson (of lewdness,) and are quickened
and spurred up by others, is it not as if a drunkard having well stuffed and
filled himself already, even till he be redye too burst, should seek still too
provoke his appetyte, that he might drink and lade in wine new agein? So
then, is not every man sufficiently given too evil of himself, though there
were no leaude songs nor unthrifty talk at all? But when the devil fyndeth
any gap open, and can draw us further too naughtiness by his flatteries, so
as he can harden us in it: I pray you do we not give him the upper hand of
us, so as we be wholly at his pleasure, that he may drive us and draw us
whither he lists?

Now hereuppon S. Paul adds* that we must not grieve the spirit of God,
wherewith we be marked and sealed against the day of our Redemption. Here is
yet one declaration more, which ought too touch us near. True it is, that the
things which have bin spoken, ought well of good desert too be thoroughly
minded. For what a thing is it for us too pervert the order of nature, by
applying our tunges too the clean contrary, which God has appointed to his
honor, and too the benefyte of our neighbors? And agein, too be guilty of
infecting all men with our filthiness, of perverting those that were given too
the serving of God, and of provoking those persons unto beastly
unshamefastness, that had some shame and honesty in them? Should not this
move us sufficiently, if we were not tootoo blockish? But S. Paul tells us
of a thing that ought too scare us yet much more. Grieve not Gods Spirit
(says he.) And why? For we be marked with it (says he) and it dwells in
us, and seals the hope of our salvation in our hearts, and it is also the
seed of life, which we have too warrant us our everlasting salvation. Now it
is certain that when we take such liberty both too do evil and too speak
evil: it is a fyghting against Gods spirit as much as in us lies, and a
choking of the light which he has kindled in us, and a taking of the bridle in
our teeth too do all naughtiness. And that cannot be done but too his
grief. This is the thing which S. Paul intended too say here.

Howbeeit let us mark first of all, that he speaks here after the common
manner of the holy scripture. For we know there are no passions in God. It is
the property of men too be sorry and grieved: God is unchangeable.
Notwithstanding, because we conceive not the highness which is in him, and
that his majesty is so infinite as we cannot come near it: therefore uses he
that similitude, even for our rudeness sake. Therefore when as it is said, that
God is prouokod too wrath, it is not for that there is any moodinesse in him:
but too make us hate the evil, because we fight agenist God in transgressing
his law, and that is all one as if we would provoke him too anger through our
spytefulnesse. The scripture then means not too make God subject too any
change, when it says, that he is angry or sorry: but it leads us too our
own doings, too the intent that our vices should displease us so much the
more, and that we should even abhor them. And here Saint Paul speaks not
only of Gods anger, but also says, that the holy Ghost is sorry or grieved.
And why? We be not Gods children (as he speaks of it in the Epistle too the
Romans,) Romans 8. b. ^.
except his holy Ghost dwell in us. For are we worthy by nature, too be
mustered in such array as too be fellows with the Angels? we (I say) which
are but rottenness, and moreover cursed in Adam, and children of wrath?
Howbeeit, God by his holy spirit calls us too this inestimable honor and
dignity of being his children, so as we may call upon him as our father, and
have familiar resort unto him. Romans 8. c. 15. and Gala. 4. a. 5.
That therefore is done by the holy Ghost: and for the same cause is he called
the spirit of adoption: For the inheritance of heaven belongs not too us, but
in respect that we be Gods children. We be not so of our selves and by
nature, as I told you: and therefore it follows that it comes of Gods
freebestowed goodness. Now he seals up all this in our hearts by his holy
Ghost: and that is the cause why it is said, that we have a mortal body.
The thing that is meant heerby, is not only our feet, hands, skin, bone, and
flesh: but that there is a lump of corruption in us by reason of the dwelling
of sin in us, which brings nothing but death. For have we lived any time?
we go away intoo dust and cindre, and there is not that man which sees not
himself alredye beeseeged with a hundred deaths, considering the diseases and
infirmities wheruntoo we be subject. Agein, age makes us to stoop, so as we
perceive a long while aforehand how we be summoned too come too our grave.
Seeing then that we perceive such a number of deaths all at once toogither in
our bodies, and a much great dungeon in our souls: how should we hope that
God would take us up intoo his kingdom? But Saint Paul says, that the spirit
is life. If there be but one grain or one spark of the spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ in us: let us assure our selves that we shall be parttakers of his
glory: for it is said, that he is raised agein from the dead, and has gotten
the upper hand of it by his holy spirit. After that manner are we quickened
with him, waiting till we be delivered from all the corruptible nature that
compasses us about. And now S. Paul says, that we be sealed by the holy
Ghost, 2. Cor. 1. d. 22.
as is said of it, in the first chapter heertoofore, and in other places
beside, as in the second to the Corinthians. And this similitude is very fit.
For although Gods promises ought to be of sufficient authority, and to have full
credit with us of themselves: yet notwithstanding, such is our misbeeleef, that
we cannot give credit too them, nor rest upon them, till they be confirmed,
and warranted unto us, so as we may say, behold, it is even God himself that
speaks. But what for that? On the one side we be forepossessed with distrust:
and on the other side we be always doubtful and misgiuing, and cannot rest
upon the things that are told us in Gods name. By reason whereof his promises
are always vnauaylable, until he print the^ in our hearts, which thing he
does by his holy Ghost. For as a piece of evidence is made authentical by
setting too of the seal: so God warranteth his promises of our salvation in
our hearts, by signing and sealing of them there with his holy spirit. That then
is the cause why it is so often said, that Gods spirit seals up the
inheritance of our salvation in our hearts. And for the same cause also is he
named the earnest penny, in another place. 2. Cor. 1. d. 22.
For when a bargain is made, although there be no present payment seen, yet
if an earnest penny be given, the bargayne is concluded, and the chapman
cannot say afterward, tush, I repent me of my bargayne, and I will^forsake it:
another can the other say, I find my self deceived and ouerseene, and therefore
I will rather keep my wares still: but each of them is bound, the one too make
the money, and the other too deliver his wares. Even so is it said, that Gods
spirit is the earnest penny of the life of our souls. And why? For (as I said)
God byndeth himself unto us in respect of our infirmity, whertoo we be too
much inclyned. In deed it is not for that he owes us any thing: but we have
so much the more cause too magnifye his goodness, in that he is so free hearted
as to bynd himself willingly unto us, whereas he owes us not any thing, and
vou^safeth too assure us of it, because he sees us so feeble and weak. Like
as when he swears: it is not for that he on his own part needs too add
any thing too his single word: for he himself is the truth, and the thing
that comes of him must not be doubted of. It might seem therefore that the
oath which he makes is superfluous, and that he does but abuse his own name.
(No:) but he does it because he sees us weak, and that we have need too
be hild up many ways, and specially because he sees us given too misbeliefe,
and therefore that he must be feign too remedy it. So then, whenever God
swears, therein he stoopeth unto us for pity of our wretchedness: and the
sealing and ratifying of his promyses in us by his holy spirit, is even because
it is impossible that we of our selves should believe him, and we could not
be sure of the things that he promises us, to call upon him, and too
overcome all the temptations of the world, unless he used that mean. And
therefore we have so much the more need too bear this text in mind, where S.
Paul says, that the holy Ghost seals in our hearts.

And hereupon we may gather a good lesson to humble us withal: namely, that
we shall never yield God the chief honor that he requires at our hands,
except he himself draw us too it, and give us grace too discharge it whithall.
The thing that he requires above all other, is, that his word have all
authority over us, and that we yield it such reverence, as he may no sooner
speak, but we shall by and by answer, Amen: that is too say, as there may be
a right (or full) accord betwixt them. That is the obedience of faith, which is
the cheef sacrifyze that God requires. But contrariwyse, on our part there is
nothing but replying against Gods word, we be full of lusts: and although
we seem not too make utter resistance against him, and too play the mad
bedlems as many do: yet are we given to a number of wicked imaginations, as
we see, insomuch that some are as it were frantike, specially when a man
speaks too them of God, for then will they have their mouth open too spew out
their blasphemies, and too enter into disputation and debate, showing
themselves utterly unwilling too receive any good doctrine. And othersome fall
not intoo such fury and outrage, but yet they let slip whatsoever is said too
them, and look what comes in at the one ear, goes out agein at the other.
Howsoever the case stand, another the one nor the other do give glory unto God
in receiving his word with such humility as they ought too do. Therefore let
us acknowledge our own naughtiness, and be sorry for it, seeing we provoke
Gods displeasure, in not yielding him the honor of thinking him too be
soothfast and true. In deed we will not say in open speech, that his word is
vain, we will not accuze him of leasing and deceyt: but yet does he protest
that we do him as much wrong as that commes too, if we credit not his
sayings? How long will this people slander me (says he,) and rob me of
mine honor? Number. 14. b. 11.
It is a complaynt which he makes there by Moses, and in many other places of
the scripture. And surely if Saint John's saying be true, John. 3. d. 33.
namely, that when we believe God, we set to our seals that he is true, that
is too say, we uphold him to be faithful: then contrariwyse, if we have not
that sure groundwoorke in our faith, and that Gods word win not so much at our
hands as too make us too betake our selves wholly unto it without any
gaynsaying: it is all one as if we counted God a liar, insomuch that although
we would hate and abhor too utter any such blasphemy, yet does he
complain that we have done him the like reproach, and not without cause. And
therefore we see what frowardness there is in our nature, until God remedy
it.

Furthermore whereas he says, that the holy Ghost seals his promises after
that fashyon in our hearts: let us understand that that is because he has
voutsafed too chooze us. We have seen already heertoofore how he calls us
too him, and inlyghteneth us with the truth of his Gospel, according too his
choozing of us before we were borne, yea and before the making of the world.
Therefore let us understand that Gods spirit is a special gift, which is not
bestowed upon all men indifferently, but is reserved as a treasure for his
children whom he has chozen. And for that cause we ought too bear well in
mind the foretouched title, that he is the spirit of adoption. Also the
unbelief which is throughout the whole world, Romans 8. c. 15.
gives an evident proof of our Gods goodness, in that it has pleazed him too
ingraue his word in our hearts. For it is certain that in all such as fight
against God, or which be as brute beasts, and so careless that his word
does no whit move them: we see what we be of nature, and what we should
be still, if our Lord for his mercies sake had not touched us with his holy
spirit. And so ye see what we have too bear in mind. Wherefore whenever the
doctrine of our salvation is talked of, let us beeware that we presume not any
thing upon our own wit and policy: but let us be small and lowely, that our
Lord may inlyghten us by his his holy spirit. And when we perceive that we
have received such grace already: let us not burye it, but let us give the
praise of it too him that deserves it. And on the contrary part, since we
feel many perplexities, douts, and unquietness, and that sometimes we be
tossed like a ship that is ready too topple over, and too be sunk in the bottom
of the the sea: since we perceive our selves too be so trubbled: let us
consider our own fraylty, that although we have bin trained up in Gods word,
yet will there be no steadfastness in our hearts, except God woork it there:
and theruppon let us run too the remedy, and pray God too keep the seed
that he has sown in us from choking, and the assuredness of our heritage
from ever wearing out: that although Satan streyne him self too the vttermoste,
too destroy that which God has put intoo us, yet it may be strengthened in us
from day to day, as is needful for us. And so ye see what we have to bear
in mind in this that Saint Paul says, that we be sealed and marked by Gods
spirit.

And now he warns us, that it is too heinous a crime too grieve him, yea and
to intolerable a treachery. I have told you already, that this similitude
intends not to impute any excessive passion to Gods spirit: but too put us
too shame, and too make the hear too stand up upon our heads. Behold (says
Saint Paul), Gods spirit has chozen his dwelling place in us, 1. Cor. 3. d.
17. and 6. d. 19. and 2. Cor. 6. d. 16.
(according as it is said in another place, that not only our souls, but also
our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost) and he is glad too be in us,
and too abide there, and too make it his continual home: now then if we fall
too spyting of him, as though we minded too chase him and banish him from us,
is it not too devilish a dealing? And yet notwithstanding, when we seek
allurements of unthriftiness, when we take leave too corrupt our selves by
leaud and loose talk, and when we labor too have other naughty means too
turn us away from the fear of God, and too bring our consciences asleep: it
is all one as if we indeuered of set purpose too chase away and too banish
Gods spirit from us, and too say, we will have no more acquayntance with him.
Must we not needs be most miserable and cursed creatures, when we ouershoote
our selves so far? That then is the thing that S. Paul had an eye unto.

Therefore whenever we be tempted unto evil, and the devil laboreth to
make us take pleasure in it, that all remorse of conscience may be put away:
let us call too mind the things that are spoken here, and say: How now? Thou
reioycest: And wherein? In the serving of Satan: and on the other side thou
let him go that is thy life, the earnestpenny of thy salvation, and the
foundation of the felicity which has bin purchaced so deerly for thee by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Let us think aduyzedly upon this. And moreover it is
certain, that every faithful man ought too feel the thing that is declared
here. For if our Lord have touched us, and given us the sealing that is spoken
of here: it will be a greef unto us when we be tempted unto ^uill. And so
the thing that holds us in awe, is the spirit which watches and wardeth too
withstand the enemy. And if we go above too kill this benefyte, that is too
say, this inwoorking that God gives us, it is al one as if we grieved the
holy Ghost. This then is a most certain experience, and such a one as shows
us that the thing which the holy Ghost has put intoo us, is utterly against
all evil, and that there must needs be a battle and strife betwixt them,
insomnch that none of Gods children can sin, but he shall by and by be stirred
up too fear, and too say in himself, Alas, where shall I become? In what
plyght have I brought my self? what shall I do? ^. Cor. 7. c. 10. 11.
And that is the sorrow that Saint Paul speaks of, which we must not shun.
But if we nevertheless go on still in evil: it is all one as if we took
pleasure in dryuing and chacing away of Gods spirit. The Prophet Esaias says,
we provoke Gods spirit too bitterness, Esaias. 63 c. 10.
when we refuze the good doctrine that he sets before us. But S. Paul
passes yet further here. For in deed it is a kind of provoking God too
wrath, when we yield not too his doctrine, which is a sure record of the care
which he has of our salvation, and of the love that he bears us. But we
must come too the considering of every of us by himself. God has voutsafed to
ingraue the belief of his Gospel in my heart, too the intent I should be sure
of my salvation. And how does he that: By voutsafing to chooze me for his
house, and too dwell in me by his holy spirit. Now then if I blot out this
grace: it is as much as if I meant to estraunge my self from God wilifully, And
therefore let us beware of such extemitie, and let us hold our selves in awe.

And therewithal let us mark also how Saint Paul adds for the last word,
that Gods sealing and marking of us after that manner by his holy Ghost, is
against the day of our redemption. Hereby he shows us, that if we will well
overcome Satan's allurementes, and the lusts of our flesh, and all the
temptations of the world: we must always mind the heavenly life that is
promised us, and wheruntoo we ought too travel. Now then, Gods spirit (says
S. Paul) is not given us too be withdrawn from us agein when we have once
felt his grace and power: but too the intent that the seal and print of him
should abide with us even unto the day of our redemption: that is too say,
till we be delivered from this transitory life, and from all the miseries
wherewith we be beseeged. Now therefore seeing that God has given us his holy
spirit, too guide and govern us both in life and death, and with intent that
we should never be depryued and destitute of him: Let us look well too it,
that he may always keep the possession that he has taken in us, and we also
enjoy that inestimable benefit of his continuing with us for ever, that he may
guide us, and hold us always up by strong hand, during all the course of our
life. The cause then why Saint Paul does purposely call us back too the last
day, is too make us live soberly, knowing that like as we have need too be
guided throughout by the power of Gods spirit, so if we be deprived of it,
and estraunged from him, and left destitute of his grace: it is too be feared,
that we shall fall intoo a reprobate mind.

As touching the day of our redemption, S. Paul by that word understood the
happiness which we hope for, and which is hidden from us as yet. It is true
that we were redeemed in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ: but we enjoy
not that benefyte as yet. We may well say, Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, that
is to say, he has delivered us, and set us free from the bondage and
subjection of death and sin wherein we were, by paying our ransom, and by
making our atonement. Ye see then, John. 19. c. 30.
that we be redeemed as in respect of the son of God: for he has performed
all that was requisite for our deliverance and salvation, as he him self
auoweth with his own mouth. But when we come too our selves, we find not
this redemption there. And for that cause, as well in this place, as in the
eight too the Romans, Saint Paul says, that the last day, wherein Jesus
Christ will appear, is the day of our salvation and deliverance. And why? We
see what a number of miseries beset us round about: yea we carye them with us,
and they be inclozed in our bodies and in our souls. It behooves us therefore
too seek a better state, than that which we see here. Rom* 8. c. 24.
And for the same cause is it said, that our salvation lies in hope, and that
we hope not for the thing that we see: but that God intends too feed our
hope. And whereas he shows not the things too our eyes which he promises, and
which it behooves us too wayt for at his hand: it is too the end that although
we be forlorn wretches in this world, yet we should not cease too rejoice
in him, knowing that we shall not be disappoynted in waiting for the heritage
which he has purchaced for us. And so ye see what is meant by the word
Redemption which is set down here. Wherefore let us learn too be so armed
and fenced with Gods spirit, too fight against all Satan's temptations, as he
may never find us unprovided, nor out of order. And that that may be done,
let us pray God so too ingraue his truth in us by the same spirit, as we may
get victory by it, and overcome all that is against our salvation, and that we
continuing in our vocation that God calls us too, may take courage and be
pacient until our Lord Jesus Christ (who is our life) do appear, that our
life and our full happiness may also be manifested in him at his coming.

And now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too take us too mercy, and not too
impute the great number of our sins unto us, whereby we be blame worthy
before him, but rather too bear with our infirmities, and too clenze us of
them from day too day, that we may grow and increace in all his gracious
gif^es, and put far from us all evil that may seduce us and thrust us out of
the way, and that by that mean we may draw nearer and nearer unto him,
until we be fully knit unto him at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
That it may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too
all people and Nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxxiii. Sermon, which is the thirteenth upon the fourth Chapter, and the
first upon the fifth Chapter.
31. Let all bitterness, and hastiness, and wrath, and roaring, and injury
be put from you, with all spytefulnesse.

32. And be ye gentle one too another, and kind hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God though Christ forgave you.

The fifth Chapter. 1. Be ye therefore folowers of God, as dear children.

2. And walk in love, even as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an
offering and sacrifice unto God, for a sent of good savor.


We know that all Gods children not only should be peaceable themselves, but
also procure peace too the uttermost of their power: and make atonement
whereas was disagreement and strife, forasmuch as it is the mark that our
Lord Jesus Christ has given us. Now if we ought too reconcyle those between
whom there was any secret grudge: much more ought we too absteyne from all
moving of dedate. For what authority or means shall we have too bring them
toogither which are grieved one at another, and too set them at brotherly
atonement, or too assuage their choler, when they be moved with some over
vehement passion: if we our selves be full of strife and trubble, and given
to crying, roaring and storming? So then, not without cause does Saint Paul
declare, that all bitterness, with testiness, and anger, and cursed
speaking, ought too be put away from the faithful, even with al
Spytfulnesse. For he sets down spytefulnesse here, as the root that
yields the fruits which he speaks of. And by that word he means such a
Churlishness as makes every man too be given too himself, and too draw
alone without regard of others. For it cannot be but that the man which loves
himself over much, must needs disdeyne his neighbors, and so shake them of,
as no gentleness can be gotten at his hand. Then if we intend too avoid
strife and quarelling, we must begin at this point of putting away
churlishness, and considering that God has linked us toogither, indeuer every
man too maynteyne peace and freendship, and regard those whom God has so
inhonored as too make them his children, or in leastwyze created after his own
image. That is for the first point.

Now out of this Spytefulnesse springs Bitterness, which is, when we be
wayward and easy too be moved, and there reigns such a scornfulnesse in us,
as we think all the world to be our underlings, and that other folks are
nothing in respect of us. When we be puffed up with such pride, it cannot be
but that we must needs be bitter, and by and by be out of patience at the
stirring of every straw, if it be too our mislyking, and take all things in
ill part, and seek occasions of unquietness. According as we see a great
number, which are not contented with chafing when any wrong is done too
themselves: but although the matter touch them not, do seem too be set as
spies too mark if there be any thing too check at. In deed if a man speak
but one word that mislykes them, they will not in any wise be quyeted, but are
still fynding fault with every thing. And howsoever the world go, they must
needs be meddling where they have nothing too do: for they be of so froward
a nature, that they will be quarelling for the furthest stranger in the
world. But if the matter concern themselves: though a man labor never so much
too please them, and too do the thing that may content them: yet will they
ever mislyke of somewhat: and if a man ask them the reason why, there is none
other too be found but their own cankerde stomach, because they have
conceived a rancour, and are puffed up with pride too esteem their own
selfwill with disdeyne of others. We see then that Saint Pa^le has showed us
here the true remedies too hold our selves in awe, that we may live
peaceably, and keep our selves from entering intoo quarrels and braules. A
Physician will not only bid a man beware of the fever or any other disease: but
he will also consider wheretoo he is inclined, and see what things may be
against him, and thereuppon say unto him, beware of such a thing, for surely
ye cannot but fall into such a sickness or such an inconvenience, if you take
not heed too your self. Now we would be heedie enough too keep the orders
that are prescribed us for the health of our bodies: but when it comes too the
soul, every of us is negligent: whereby we show that we make none account
of our salvation: and that is, because we consider not that on the one side the
devil laboreth too seduce us, and we on the other side are so frail, as we
never cease too give our selves too evil, except our Lord have armed and
fenced us with his word. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand,
too mark the order that is set down here: which is, that too live quietly
toogither, and too keep our selves from contention and strife: first, we must
not be blinded with excessive love of our selves, but rather indeuer too rid
away all pride, that we may make account of our neighbors, and live meekely
with them: for that will restreyne us from being so bitter and testie in taking
all things in ill part.

And hereupon S. Paul tells us, that when we be so purged within, both of
spytefulnesse and of bitterness: we must absteyne from Hastiness, and from
wrath, and from roaring. For here he sets down the suddein heats of choler
wherthrough men ouershoote themselves ere they be aware of it, and afterward
fall intoo rages that cannot be stayed. For this cause it behooves us too be
mortifyed, for then will it be easy too alay the heat yea and even too
quench it. But when we be so inflamed with wrath, all must needs be full of
thundering, and there wilbee no measure of our anger. Ye see then that the
thing in effect which we have too mark here, is that forasmuch as Gods
children ought too live in peace and concord: they must, too the vttermoste of
their power bridle all their passions, yea and consider what comes of wrath
and anger, namely that fire is kindled, open war preclaymed, many words
escape which a man would wish in agein, and finally thereof springs incurable
mischeef. Now then if we look well whertoo all our moodinesse leads us, or
rather earyeth us away: namely that the devil takes possession of us, and
holds us in the the stocks, and that we have another reason nor stay of our
selves when we be so far out of patience: certesse we would stand upon our
guard, and not give place to the devil, as has bin declared before. Howbeeit,
that we may avoid strife and debate, let us learn to clenze our hearts of
bitterness and testiness. And too bring that too pass, let us learn too
esteem well of those that are linked unto us, and unto whom also we be
bound. Thus ye see in effect how we ought too put this text in ure.

And forasmuch as it is a thing as hard to be kept as any, and a thing that
does greatly hinder us: therefore Saint Paul adds, that it behooves us too
be myld, gentle, and courteous one too another. Here he sets down the
contraries too the bitterness and spytefulnesse that he spoke of. And he
brings us back too this principle, that in as much as we be men, God has
created us after his own image, and that inasmuch as he has called us too the
belief of his Gospel, thereby he has marked us new agein, and there we behold
his image, which ought too move us too the Gentleness whereof he speaks.
Therefore let us mark well that we cannot despyze the least that is, without
dishonoring God. For (as I told you before) all men are made after his image.
Now were it tolerable that an earthly woorme should esteem it self so much,
and exalt it self so far as too set light by his maker? Let us make no excuce
in this behalf, for all that we can allege will stand us in no sted. And (as
I said) seeing that God has inhonored men so hyghly as too give them so
excellent a nature: it is good reason that we should yield honor and
reverence too his majesty, and not tread them under foot by whom he
represents him self unto us. Agein, if a man consider him self well, shall
he not see his own nature as it were in a glass, in all his neighbors?
(Yis:) For the greatest personages in the world, cannot say that they be made
of any otheer stuff, than the rest of Adams children are. Seeing it is so
then, what cause have we too be so proud as too disdeyne those that are like
us, and are alyed too us by such a kindred as cannot be worn out? Howbeit,
there is yet a more peculiar reason as in respect of the faithful. For in them
God has ingraued his image new agein, which was as good as defaced by Adams
sin. Then since it is so, let us learn too be gentle and courteous one too
another, and not too be so churlish, as no man may have access too us, nor
yet so strange and scornful, as too separate our selves from the common array
and company of other men. This is the thing that S. Paul meant by the
gentleness or courtesy that he spoke of.

Now hereuppon he adds, Mercifulness. Let us (says he) have compassion one
of another. And this compassion stretches very far, and is as it were the
welspring that moves us too gentleness. We will always grant that a myld
spirit is a singular virtue, and one without the which we cannot continue in
the world. And how may it be mainteyned among us? The only mean is this
compassion, that is too say, (the disposition of mind which causes us too
think) that when we see any despyzed person, yet is he our neighbor, that is
too say, our own flesh and bone. Yea, but yet is he dispyzed, another has he
any thing too be esteemed for. Yet notwithstanding, the myseryes that are in
him, may also fall upon me. Then if we consider that: surely our hearts will
yirne too see the man that is brought too so great an afterdeale in respect of
others: and whether he be weak of body, or have some infirmity of mind, it
will grieve us and touch us with pity too rue his case. And so there would be
no gentleness in us, if it were not for this compassion. Now then, put the
case there be a poor man that is sore diseased, or that droopeth and draggeth
his wings upon the ground: should he be hild scorn of for that? (No:) but
contrariwyse, if we were not utterly merciless like wyld beasts: Phil. 2. a.
1. and Coloss. 3. b. 12.
surely the very same ought to move our bowels (as the scripture teaches us:)
and too inclyne us unto pity, at leastwyse if we did our dewtie. Agein, if
there be any impediment of wit or mind: (as for example, some silly soul
has much adoo too understand one saying among a hundred, yea he is not able
too discern white from black:) if I have not compassion of him, what lets
me to do it, but mine own cruelty, which makes me too forget common
kyndnesse whereby God knitteh us all toogither? Ye see then, that if we have
any drop of pity, too keep us from rejecting them that are alyed unto us,
and also from disdeyning them in whom there is any cause of compassion and
mercy: we shall not fail too be gentle and courteous toward our
neighbors in all caces and at all times. To be short, like as the myseries
which God knows too be in us, do move him too be merciful toward us: so
the myseries that are in our neighbors, ought to be as spurs too prick us
and provoke us to be pitiful unto them. Yea and there is yet more: that even
their vices which inflame us too choler and anger, ought too minister occasion
unto us too pity our neighbors. I see some* man that has done me wrong:
not it is the devil that has driven him thereunto, and the wretched man does
but undo himself, for he provoke God against him. Now then, if there were no
more in me but the common nature wheruntoo God has knit us all: ought I not
too be sorry at the heart, when I see a soul that is beguyled by Satan's (...)
go too destruction? Yis verily. Therefore let none of the wrongs carry us away
which are done unto us, another let us be so far provoked, as not too pity
those that do amiss, namely, because they be blinded by Satan, and provoke
Gods wrath, and fight against their own salvation. Behold then, the very
remedy which we have too hold us unto and too keep, Phil. 2. a. 1. and ^
Colos. 3 b. 12.
is, that too be gentle, we must be pitiful and have compassion, as is
showed in the foresaid textes. For there is none of us but he would gladly be
borne withal: and without that, we could not tell how too live one day in the
world. The perfectest man that is has yet some infirmity, insomuch that if
men should deal altoogither rigorously with him, he should be disdeyned, yea
and as good as utterly disgraced and defaced. Nay further, where is that man
too be found which has not many infirmities in him, and would not feign be
greatly borne withal, (as need requires) and that men should not shake him
of, though he have some vices that deserve their withdrawing of themselves from
him? Now if we would so feign be borne withal our selves: ought not we
also too pity others? And soothly when we see a man has some blemishe, ought
we not too think, I am subject too the same? verily when I have sifted all
things thoroughly, I shall find other things in my self, that deserve more
justly too be condemned: and yet would I feign be borne withal, though I
were never so much convicted. Therefore like as we would that other men should
pardon us: so let us learn too pity other men, for they be no more Angels
than we be. That then is the thing which S. Paul meant too bring us too.

And thereuppon he concludes, that we should forgive one another. For if
compassion go not always before, surely we will not let a pinnes point go
without examination and rigorous sifting of it, and without unmeasurable
displeasure, as experience shows in very deed to much. Therefore a body
should not stir a straw, but we would be out of patience at it. And why?
Because there is no pity in us. But if we be touched with mercy, surely we
will easly forgive, and let many things slip and pass (unseen): and moreover
we will not be ^yghtly moved, but there will be a bridle too hold us back,
and we will not refuze too admit them always too freendship, which have so
offended. That therefore is the order which Saint Paul keeps too bring us
too charity, and too maynteyne us in it: for it is the whole sum of this
Lesson. Too be Gods children (say I), we must love one another, and be knit
toogither in good agreement, that peace may be maynteyned among us. And how is
that possible too be? For every man is too much medded too himself. Agein,
their minds are as far differing as may be. Their manners and conditions
also are differing. Too be short, we have infinite causes too put us away,
and too cut us of from all company. And surely if every man let himself looce,
Charity shall never take place, but be banished far from us. What is too
be done then? We must first rid away all scornfulnesse and pride (as is said
before) and afterward be clenzed from bitterness and frowardness, so as we
fall not too be cholerike and testie, but every man bridle himself and subdew
his own affections. But this cannot be done, except we be gentle and kind
hearted, namely because we be creatures fashyoned after the image of God, and
knit together with an inseparable bond. Yet would not all this suffize, until
we have learned too know our own infirmities, and that every of us be
angry with himself, because he sees that he has need too be quickened up,
and that there be many vices in himself of the same sort that are in his
neighbors: and that therefore we have need of this bond too hold us fast
together: which will then be done, when we be merciful and pitiful. Now
if common courtesy ought too move us too succor such as are in necessity: it
ought also too be of force too reconcyle us. Luke. 6. c. 36.
For when our Lord Jesus exhorts us too be merciful: it is not only too the
intent we should relieve the hungry and thirsty with meat and drink, or help
up a man agein that is fallen in decay, or that we should succor every man
according too our own ability, and the parties need: our Lord Jesus
intends not that alone. True it is that all things are comprehended therein:
but he will have us specially too show mercy, in forgiving the faults that
are committed, and not too be so extreme as too shake of those utterly which
are not altoogither too be commended, or in whom we spy many vices. In deed
we ought not too flatter one another: for true freendship will not bear that,
because it would be but a foading of us too our own destruction. If a man be
a friend too another, and suffer him to over come himself with meat and
drink, so as in the end he kills himself: is it too be said, that his
flattering of him after that manner, and his foading of all his foolish
appetytes, is freendship? (No:) So then, if we see a poor man at the point
too throw himself headlong intoo destruction, we do well show our selves too
be rather traitors than friends too him, if we indeuer not too pluck him
back.

The compassion therefore whereuntoo our Lord Jesus exhorts us, is not a
rocking of us asleep in our infirmities through flattery: but a holding of our
selves in measure, and a tempering of our rigor in such wise, as oil may
always be mingled with our vinegar, as they say. That is in effett the thing
whertoo Saint Paul meant too bring us. For although every man do his best too
be pitiful, so as he may show no over great rigor toward his neighbors:
yet is it as contrary too our nature as any thing can be. For (as I have said
alredye) this selfloue of ours does so blind us, that we make the least
scapes in the world, too be heinous sins and offenses unpardonable. By
means whereof if any man anger us, too our seeming his fault ought not in any
wise too be forgiven. So then, mercifulness shall never be found in men,
unless they fight it out too the uttermost, (against their own affections.)
As for single teaching, it will not boot in that behalf. We have this
(Churlishness) so deeply rooted in our hearts, that if we be told of our
dewtie, it does but half move us. For this cause Saint Paul sets Gods
example before us here, who has forgiven us in his only son. And immediately
thereunto he adds our Lord Jesus Christ, who spared not him self for our
redemption and salvation. The thing then that can break all hardness in us,
the thing that can mortifye all our excessive passions, the thing that can
reclayme all our cruelty, pull down all our pride and loftiness, and sweeten
all our bitterness, is to have an eye too Gods behauing of himself toward
us. John. 3. b. 16.
Now he has loved the world so well, that he has given his only son too
death for our sakes. If we compare our selves with God, what a distance is
there betwixt us? So then, the greatest wrongs that we can possibly imagine
(too be done unto us:) are nothing in comparison of the least fault that we
commit against God. For a man cannot deuyze to break Gods will never so little,
but the same is an incountering of his souerein dominion, a violating of his
majesty, and an overthrowing of his ryghtuousnesse: which are things too
precious (too be abuzed. What like thing is too be found in man? can it be
said, that if one have misuzed us, it ought too be esteemed as if a man had
infringed Gods ryghtuousnesse? Now then we have just cause too condemn our
selves, until we serve God as we ought too do. And who does that? We be
enemies too him aforehand, even from our moothers womb: and as we grow in
age, so grow we continually without ceassing in naughtiness, in all
sinfulness, and in all vnryghtuousnesse. And yet for all that, God has not
forborne too look mercifully upon us: insomuch that the more wretched we
were, the more has he uttered his infinite mercy, in sending us his only
son. Now if we consider this: ought not all pride too be laid down, all
bitterness assuaged, all rebelliousenesse tamed, all spytefulnesse rid out of
our hearts, and all untruth put away? Yis verily. What is the cause then that
we be so wayward, and that when heat has once carried us away, we cease
not even too spur foreward our selves, and that we do so easly enter intoo
contention and strife, that all the house where we be, must ring of us? What
is the cause hereof? Even our own unthankfulness, for that we think not
upon Gods incomprehensible goodness toward us, in that he has not spared
his only son, notwithstanding that we were his deadly enemies,
notwithstanding that we were at war with him, notwithstanding that we were
cursed already of nature, because of the corruption that is in us. But yet
notwithstanding all this (as I said before) it is impossible that we should
taste of Gods mercy, except we be touched with compassion, and have our
hearts rid clean of that cursed affection of reuendge. So then albeeit that
Saint Paul have exhorted us too things that are very hard, yea and utterly
repugnant too man's nature, and which cannot be brought too pass except God
woork in that behalf: yet notwithstanding the declaration that is showed us
here, ought too prevail so much with us, as too make us forget all wrongs.
For admit that another man have offended me: what then? Can I try my self
ryghtuo^s and giltlesse, when I shall come before God? Alas, there are so many
iniquities and transgressions in me, that I should be confounded a hundred
thousand times. Should one fault then which is committed against me, be
unpardonable: and shall a hundred, yea a whole Million which I have committed
against God, be nothing? What am I in comparison of that souerein Majesty: So
then, following this warning of S. Paul's, whenever we be moved too
impaciencie for any displeasure or wrong, so as we have any desire of revenge:
let us learn, let us learn I say, too gather our wits about us, and too
consider what we be. For first of all, if a man have committed any fault
against us, we our selves do the like or far worse. On the other side let
us consider how God has redeemed us, yea and specially by that most precious
pledge of the blud shed of his only son. And have we deserved that? Agein,
what cause has moved God too be so merciful toward us? Nothing else but
our wretchedness. Now seeing that he which is so good, and that he being not
of our nature has notwithstanding had compassion of our wretchedness wherein
we were plundged: what shall we do? Ought not we too have much more
compassion one of another, because we find the things in our selves which we
pardon in our neighbors? God can find no infirmities in himself: and how
then shall he be moved too forgive us? Truly even because he is the welspring
of all goodness and mercy. But when I see the thing that greeueth me in my
neighbor, if I examine well my self, I shall find the like there, or else much
more. Should not all these things persuade me too some compassion, if I forgot
not my self too much? The way then too make us easly forgive many faults, and
too bear with many vices that may mislyke us in our neighbors, is, too cast
our eyes upon the inestimable love which God has borne us in the person of
his son.

And heereuppon we may conclude, (as I said before) that if we were not too
unthankful, there would be another manner of myldnesse among us than there
is, and we would not so soon fall out for every wrong that is done us. For
ought we not too think early and late, and day and night upon the favor
that is granted us in our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the daysunne too inlyghten
us? Should we be so brutish, as not too consider that he makes his spiritual
light too shine upon us, of purpose too guide us too salvation? And how is
that done but by Gods mercy? Agein, when we behold the favor that God
shows us in maynteyning us in this present life: are we worthy too be be
found at his cost? No: but all comes too us through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore it would become us, both sleeping and waking, eating and drinking, in
rest and in labor, and in all things else, too consider always the mercy that
God uses toward us, and too bear it in mind, and too make it our
continewall exercyze. And specially must this grace come always before our
eyes, when we pray unto God. For what access may we have too talk
familiarly with him, and too discharge all our cares and greefes as it were
intoo his lap, yea and too call him our father: if we be not called too him
through his free bestowed goodness in our Lord Jesus Christ, and he forgive us
our transgressions? If we bethink us not of all these things, we be too
dulheadded and brutish. And hereby it appears full well, that we shall
always be disallowed in bragging our selves too be Gods children, and his
household folk, and faithful children, (if we be not willing and glad too
forgive:) we may well boast of it before men, yea and we may be had in
estimation through a fond opinion: but yet will God disgrade us. So then, if
we be loath too forgive, our unthankfulness bewrays it self therein, how
that we consider not the infinite goodness of our God as he shows it in our
Lord Jesus Christ. That is the thing in effect, whertoo S. Paul intends too
bring us.

Now he adds, that we must be followers of God, as well beloved
children. For a man might yet reply, it is true that Gods mercy ought too
ravish us all and too amaze us, and it is so wonderful a thing, that all our
affections ought too be fastened upon it. But what for that? Are we able too
be like unto God? No: for he is the fountain of all goodness, and we be
leaud and untoward: yea, God has the full perfection of all goodness in him,
and there is not so much as one drop of it in our nature. No marvel then
though we come nothing near him, ne have any resemblance or lykenes unto him.
Such reply (say I) might men have made, if S. Paul had not added this saying,
Be ye followers of God: that is too say, follow ye him, let him be your
example or pattern. For although God be the souerein goodness it self, and
that we have not any piece of us which tends not too evil: yet is it no
sufficient excuce for us, that we should therefore be utterly against him,
for that is a token that we belong nothing at all too him. Truly as in
respect that we be but only men, Adams sin has so alienated us from God:
that theroutof spring malice, spytefulnesse, pride, excessive passions, and
wicked desire of revenging: and it separateth us from God, in whom is the
fullness of all goodness. Such are we from our moothers womb through Adams
sin, as I said before. But yet for all that, must we not needs change our
kind, when it pleases God too reach us his hand, and too gather us too him,
and too knit the things agein in one, which were scattered asunder? (Yis.) And
that is the cause why S. Paul says, as Gods dear beloved children. Herein
he shows that we shall have our mouths shet, unless we answer God in
goodness, by bearing one with another, according also as our Lord Jesus
tells us in S. Matthew. Math. 5. g. 45.
Follow your heavenly father (says he,) which makes his son too shine both
upon good and bad. For too say that we be Gods children, too call upon him,
too pretend the name of Christians: and yet in the mean while too be
despyzers of God, and too make as though we would defye him, by showing that
we draw aloof from him: is it not utterly against kind? (Yis:) and therefore
let no man deceive himself, but let us consider that we be not only full of
hypocrisy, but also utterly past shame, when we fashion not our selves like
unto God, and yet will needs be hild and taken for his children. True it is,
that too be so fashyoned like unto God, and too resemble him so fully, as one
man comes near unto another, is impossible: but yet must we not be out of
heart for all that. And soothly we must call too mind how the scripture says,
that if we go on too Godward, although we be far of from the mark that
we ame at, yet does he accept that willingness of ours, when we keep our
way and indeuer continually too go on forward still.

Although we be slow and weak, and although we trip and stumble, yet God
imputes none of those faults unto us, when we be desirous too fashyon our
selves like too him. When we shoot at that mark, although we be far
short or wide of it, yet does God take it in good worth, as I said. And that
ought too give us courage? For if we should be driven too fashyon our selves
like unto God point by point in all respects: alas how could it be done?
For even the very Angels, notwithstanding that there be nothing but holiness
in them, and that Gods glory shine forth in them: are yet far short from
the perfection that is in God. And what are we then, which be so corrupted
and marred, which have such abundance of naughtiness, and which are so plucked
back and turned away, by so many vices and temptations which Satan trumpeth in
our way? yet have we this too rejoice of, that our Lord bears with us, and
accepts all our doings in good part, so we keep on toowardes him. That is
the manner of following him, which is commanded us here. True it is that we
must not in the mean while fall asleep, and say, as many do: I would feign
be like unto God, and then do but wring their mouth at it: but we must
consider every day and every hour, that we have ill profited in the true rule
of fashyoning our selves like unto God, and theruppon condemn our selves for
it, and think thus: I had some good will yisterday, how is it increaced since?
(nothing at all,) but rather to my seeming it is become colder. After that
manner must we quicke^ up our selves, and fight against the things that hinder
us, that we may indeuer too go still foreward, and too come nearer and nearer
too our mark from whence we be yet so far of. But howsoever we fare, yet
will not our Lord fail too esteem us always too be like him, and too be
true followers of him, if we willingly and without hipocrisy forgive them that
have offended against us, at leastwyse after his example, who has given us a
pardon that is far greater than all the pardons that can be gotten at our
hands, so as we bear with the vices and infirmities of our neighbors, as
we see that he has borne with us. For he might justly sink us down too the
bottom of hell: and yet he forbeareth not too adopt us for his children. Seeing
then that he loves us after such a sort, notwithstanding all the unworthiness
that is in us: It is good reason that we should resemble him in so doing. And
although we had no better prerogative than our natural birth: yet ought we
too know that God has not separated us asunder. Even the wretched Paynims had
some understanding hereof. For they said, that man's life is too tend unto God,
and too be fashyoned like unto his image, and that the same is also the full
perfection of all happiness. And agein, they added that we cannot resemble
God better in any thing, than in using gentleness one toward another, and in
doing good, and in being pitiful. So then let us consider, that in as much as
God has made us his well-beloved children, us (I say) which were his enemies,
and had nothing but filthiness in us, and were clogged with so many vices,
that we were worthy too be lothed of him, and yet he has not let too
love us, it is good reason that we should wink at many things that might
offend us, and hinder our loving of our neighbors, and our holding with them.

And now Saint Paul having spoken of God, adds also the example of our Lord
Jesus Christ. John. 3. b. 16.
The heavenly father loved the world so well, that he spared not his only
son, but delivered him to the death for us. And what did Jesus Christ? He
forgate himself, he regarded not his own person: 1. Cor. 2. b. 7.
he that was the Lord of all glory, submitted him self too all reproach: He
that was the life from the beginnig, made him self mortal: John. 1. a. 4.
He that was the power of God the father, made him self weak for love of us:
He that had all things in his hand, became poor, 2. Cor. 8 b. 9.
to inriche us: He by whom all things are blissed, became subject too cursing.
Seeing then that o^r Lord Jesus Christ abaced him self after that fashyon (as
Saint Paul also says (in another place) where he sets him forth as an
example for us) and in sted of his glory, Phil. 2. a. 7.
took upon him al shame, 2. Cor. 5 d. 21.
and in sted of his ryghtuousnesse became sin, Esaias. 53 a. 5. and 12.
(not that he offended or had any blemishe or spot in him, but as bearing the
punishment of our sumes, in which respect also the scripture terms him by the
name of sin: 1. Cor. 15 a. 3.
) and agein, in sted of life took death, and voutsafed too be cursed of God
in this world, that we might have blissednesse by his means: when we think
upon all this, ought not all pride, all presumption, al feercenesse, all
scornfulnesse, and all bitterness, too be laid away, considering the mean
whereby our Lord Jesus Christ has reconcyled us too God his father? So then,
let us think well upon all those things.

And furthermore, too pull us the more down, and too break the hard
hartednesse whertoo we be too much inclyned: Saint Paul says, that he
offered a sacrifyze of good savor unto God his father. As if he should say,
my friends, had you once well weyed the grace and favor that is purchaced you
by our Lord Jesus Christ, you would soon beat back all the wicked affections
which make you to stomach things, and ye would fight against them until ye
had overcome them. And therefore be kind hearted in bearing one with another:
and seeing it has pleased God too gather us as it were intoo one flock, and
that our Lord Jesus Christ does the dewtie of a shepherd too lead us
toogither, show your selves too be as a flock of sheep, and not as ravening
wooles. For so much then as our Lord Jesus disdeyneth us not in any thing,
insomuch that he has made an offering and sacrifyze of his own person unto
God his father, whereby he has wyped out all our sins: let it move us, and
ravish all our wyts to glorify God, and too do homage too our Lord Jesus
Christ, as often as we think upon it. And whereas he says, that the sacrifize
which was offered by Jesus Christ, was of sweet sent or savor: thereby he
shows, that there is nothing but stynche in us. Too what end has he
sanctified us? Too ryd away our infections and filthynesse, which made us
stynkyng and lothly before God: as when Sacrifizes were offered in the
material Temple, God said, they were of good savor unto him: howbeeit, that
was in respect of men, who could not come unto God by reason of their sins,
for that they be infected with them, and therefore God must needs have shunned
them. But all was fulfilled in our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the truth of the
shadows of the Law. Seeing it is so: let us understand, that whereas it (...)
said, that the sacrifyze which Jesus Christ offered, was of sweet savor
before God: it was too put away the rememberaunce of all our infections, too
the intent that when we appear before the face of our God, (as we must daily
in our prayers and supplications:) our sins may not be laid too our charge:
so that although we be disfigured like wretched lepers, so as there is
nothing but infection in us: yet the same may be no impediment, but that God
may embrace us as ryghtuous and innocent, too be companions with the Angels,
and fashyoned fully according too his image. And how may that be done? Even
because our Lord Jesus Christ will have all our spots wyped away, so as we may
come before him with our heads vpryght, being well assured that he will always
make us find the fruit of his mercy which he has once told us of.

Now let us kneel down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him to make us so to feel the^ more and
more, as it may draw us unto true repentance, and yet notwithstanding we not
dout but that he bears with us, too the end that we should ask him mercy
and forgiveness, assuring our selves that he will hear us if we keep the
way that he shows us by his word, and reform us more and more according too
his image, so as we may give a true proof, that as we call upon him for our
father: so we covet nothing else also but too be his true children. And so
let us all say, Anmyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The.xxxiiii. Sermon, which is the second upon the fifth Chapter.
3. And as for fornication, and all manner of uncleanness, or covetousness,
let them not once be named among you, as becomes Saints.

4. Another ribaudrie, nor foolish talk, nor jesting, which are not* convenient
things: but rather thanksgiving.

5. For, this ye know, that no vvhoremonger, or unclean person, or covetous
body, which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ
and of God.


FOrasmuch as we see our life is subject too many myseries, and as soon as we
have escaped one danger, another comes in the neck of it: we ought too take
the better heed too our selves. Then if a man have a care of his life: he
will bethink him how too fence himself both against cold and against heat,
and against all other inconveniences: and agein, he will take heed that no
mischaunce happen too his house by making fire in it, and as he goes abroad,
he is always thinking upon the adversities that are wont too befall men. But
we should begin at the other end: namely, that there are a hundred times mo
dangers within us, than we see without us. For the devil has many wyles too
wynd us in, and a number of vices do make war against us. Therefore it
stands us on hand too watch, or else when we have overcome one vice, it will
be easy for another too steal upon us, and too take us unawares. For he that
shall have absteyned from open force, shall be tempted too defraud his
neighbor by covert policy: and he that despyzeth the goods of this world,
shall have some other infirmity in him. For some be given too whoredom, some
too gluttony and superfluity, and othersome too gamyng and play. Too be
short, besides that every of us is dispozed (naturally) too wickedness and
sin: there is not that man which has not an infynite sort of enemies too
fight against. For (as I said) we be not only inclyned too some one evil by
nature: but too so great a number, that even they which are most virtuous,
shall find themselves surpryzed at all hands. And therefore it stands us so
much the more on hand to mark the exhortations that are contained here. Saint
Paul has told us of many vices already, and showed us the mean too encounter
them and too put them too flight. Now he adds whoredom on the one side,
covetousness on the other, and foolish talk that is full of vain
bibblebable. We would think it were enough for us too have bin warned in one
word, too walk godlily. But (as I have touched already) let us consider a
little, on which side the devil is wont too assault men. For when he has
once laid his battrie, if he cannot compass his purpose, he begins new
agein: and when he has given a skirmish on the right side, he commes agein too
the left, and one while before, and another while behind, and always he
fyndeth some gap open intoo us. That is one thing which we have too mark
upon the exhortations that are made here.

Now let us come too S. Paul's speaking of fornication and all uncleanness.
Forasmuch as it is a vice that all men do over easly bear withal in
themselves: therefore he warns us, that it is not enough for every one of us
too absteyne from actual whoredom: but we m^st also consider, that God in
commanding us too be chaste and undefiled, means that we should be well
fenced against all the intycementes whereby Satan might beguyle us. There are
then some kinds of whoredom or whorishnesse, which are not made account of
among men: but yet shall they not fail too be condemned before God. For this
cause S. Paul thought it not enough too tell us, that we must be chaste in
respeet of our bodies: but he adds, that all uncleanness or filthiness
ought too be far from us: and likewise he matcheth covetousness with it. It
is true that they be two far diverse vices for a whooremonger will commonly
be prodigal: and whereas he had bin well and thriftie before, he will forget
himself, so as he will wast away all. S. Paul's intent was not too make
articles of difference between vice and vice, another was it needful.
Therefore it was enough for him too show after how many sorts the devil might
beguile us, if we keep not good watch, and shet the gate against him, and also
prevent him, and descry the daungerswherin we be, to the end that practyze
what he can, he may always find us so guarded under the fear of God, as he may
have no entrance unto us.

Moreover he adds afterward, Filthiness or uncomeliness. For when men take
leave too be wanton, surely all rebaudrie will have full scope. (As for
example,) if wantonness and other foolish things be permitted, as dancing
and such other things, men will say at the first, that that may well be borne
withal, so there be no worse. But let men once bear and suffer dancing,
masking, mumries, and such other like dung: and out of dout the devil will
have a fling at them, and it cannot by any means be let, but that all will
be marde. That is the cause why Saint Paul in forbidding whoredom, adds
also all manner of ribaudrie or unhonesty: And by and by therewithal fond
talk. For a body would take it too be no great harm, if a man should jest
and dally with a maid or a wife, and prattle of a number of things. But (as I
said) they be all of them allurements of Satan: and if it be suffered, it
cannot be but the maid must be made a harlot, though she were the honestest
woman in the world. That in efffect is the thing which we have too bear in
mind.

And he thinks it not enough too say, that Gods children must absteyne fron
covetousness and whoredom, and from the things that come near unto them:
but too the intent we may abhor them all the more, he says, Let them not
be once named among you. It is not without cause that he says so, for (as I
have said already, and as shall be declared more fully hereafter) as touching
covetousness, it will be thought too be a vertew when a man woorketh and
scrapeth toogither on al sides: O that is a good thriftie fellow: men clap
their hands at him, men soothe him: and although they count him but as a
thief, and a robber, and a Cutthrote: yet notwithstanding so he have goods,
every body will think he does well too maynteine him self with such as be in
credit. Lo how men are flattered in their covetousness. And agein, as
concerning whoredom, we see that if Gods word cried not out upon that vice
continually without ceassing, it would be set at liberty, and every man would
dispense with him self, so as there would be no more honesty among men. Saint
Paul therefore perceiving it too be so hard a thing too keep men from them,
says, that not so much as the very names of them ought to be suffered to have
their course, but that they ought to be driven from among us. And in deed if
there be any plague in a town, every man will keep him self cloce in his
house, and be afraid too go abroad where any perrill is. Too be short, men
will be ware enough too keep them selves cloce, that the disease catch them
not. Yea and general commandment also shall be given too keep the streets
clean, that the air be not infected by them, and too take away the things
that may feed or increace the mischeef. But in the mean while, these deadly
plagues assail us: and yet notwithstanding every man holds on his way still,
and it should seem that we would feign be poisoned with them. Howbeeit this
warning ought not too be unprofitable for us, where Saint Paul forbids us
too name whordome. True it is that that word must needs be in use still: for
Saint Paul stands not upon that Ceremony. Exodus 20. b. 14.
And in deed God says expressly in his Law, Deuteronomy. 5. b. 18.
thou shall not commit aduoutrie. He thinks it not enough too forbid
whoredom: but too the intent we should abhor it the more, he shows us
what an enormitie the breaking of the faith between man and wife is. God then
names whoredom in that text, and so does Saint Paul name it here also: and
that is not to contrary one another: but to do us to understand, that we
should not talk of it in jest or sport, as men are wont too do: for that is
but a further inbrewing of men with that vice, so as they might not mislyke it
any more. We see that when there is talking of all ungodliness, and leave is
given too use looce speech, every man will give him self too it, so as custom
will go for law, and men will take whoredom too be lawf^ll. Finally we have
too mark that Saint Paul's intent was not too speak of the bare names of
Whoredom and Couetousesse: for if a man say too a whoremonger, What? Thou
playest the whoremaister: he will deny it, and say, I did but dally, and play
the wanton. As much will these naughtipacks do which give over them selves
unto it. But there is another whoremonger nor harlot, which abhors not the
name of whoredom. And why? For they see it is a filthy thing, and that it is
as much as if a man should set them upon a scaffold too be a shame too all
the world. Saint Paul therefore spoke not of the bare name of Whoredom. As
much is too be said of the name of Covetousness. What talk ye of
Covetousness? It sounds ilfauoredly, and no man will be acknowen that he is
atteynted with covetousness.

They will rather make such excuces as these: I have a charge of wife and
children, and why is it not lawful for me too seek sustenance for them?
Agein, should I not have a care for hereafter, that I may set them in some
good stay? Covetousness has such store of excuces, that it is colored and
vernished with them, and the term has such visors put upon it, that it is
taken welneere for a vertew. But Saint Paul meant not that men should only
forbear the bare names, which might make the vices themselves abhorred and
hated: but he would rather that whoredom should be named as a villainous
thing, and that men should understand that a whorehunter cutteth himself of
from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, banisheth himself from the kingdom of
heaven, and is cursed before God and his Angels. Those are things that must be
known. And agein, that a Covetous person is an Idolater and forsakes God,
that he is as a damned soul and a confounder of all right and equity, that he
is possessed of the devil, and a tormentour too himself. Those are the things
which it stands us on hand too know, and whereof we cannot speak too much.
But we know what the manner of them is, which are desirous too take all
liberty: for all their delyght is too sharpen their wits too tell merry
tales, (saying:) I remember me of such a thing and such a thing that was done
in my time. Yea and they will not stick to report what they have heard of
their graundfathers, before they themselves were borne intoo the world. And if
there were any ribaudrie or unthriftiness in their doings, that will they lay
open. And top what end? To the end that every body should be desirous too
inquire of such filthiness. Thus are snares laid too chatch us withal,
whenever the devil shall have won so much at our hands. Ye see then that
the things which Saint Paul meant, are the pleasant tales that are told too
make the men merry, too the intent not only that every man should delyght in
whoredom, and be no more ashamed too give themselves over too all lewdness:
but also take it as a lawful thing, so as there may be common speeches of it,
and it may be made a table talk at all feasts, and an ordinary
communication in the streets and every where else. Yea and we see that such as
have any journey or travel, I mean even the poor people, cannot solace
themselves in their labor without offending God, by intermingling always of
some fond tales. And too what end serve they? Even too harden men's hearts, that
they may think with themselves, Every man is at the same point: no marvel
though lecherye be made so heinous a matter: behold how such a man behaueth
himself, and such a one also. And when vices can once be made common, then too
their seeming the goal is won on their side. Now for that cause Saint Paul
says, that they must not once be named among us. And likewise does he say of
Covetousness. For every man takes it for a vertewe, if he can pill and poll
all his life long, and never leave raking of other men's goods too him by fraud
and extorsion. Yea and men have a delyght too follow them, and too say, O,
such a man of mine acquayntance could well skyll too use such a practyze and
such a trick. True it is that covetous folks will not speak so of them whom
they malice. For they will say, that villein? he does nothing else but catch
and scrape on all sides, there is no trust in him, he is cruel and churlish:
and too be short, every of them spyteth at his fellow. And so ye see how the
covetous sort do rail one upon another. But when a covetous person intends
too confirm himself in his naughtiness, and too harden himself in it, and too
cover his faults: he will say, It is meet that a man should be forecasting:
I knew such a one and such a one that came foreward by that mean: he was a
poor fellow, and had nothing: but he has behaved himself in such wise, that
he has hoorded up well. And how? Marry he had good policy, and if any man
fell intoo his hands, he left his hear behind him, if he left not skin and
all. Thus do covetous folks shroud themselves in spoiling men, under pretense
of good thriftinesse, as they term it, that is too say, under pilling and
polling, and such other like things. Therefore we see how needful this
exhortation of S. Paul's is, where he says, that all vices must be shet out
of the doors, and that if any man speak of them we must abhore him, and not
make a jesting matter of them among us, for fear least we be atteynted with
them.

And we must mark also that which he adds of al wantonness and folish (or
fond) talk. For (as I said before) it is certain that whoredom must needs
grow lawful among men, when they suffer such prouocations and occasions of
naughtiness: for it is all one as if a man would wilfully give over himself
too Satan. Therefore let us take heed too our selves, and drive the enemy
far from us, and let us be sure that where such lyghtnesse and lewdness
have full scope, by and by there must needs be a Brothelrie, or stews set
up, not in some one corner of a City or town, but over all, so as no place
shall be clean, as experience shows too much. But yet would not men be
willing too see it so. Every man complaynes now adays, that there is no more
chastity in the world. And is it any wonder? For the time has bin that there
was some honesty and soberness too be seen in married women: but now they
count it a vertew too be more than mannish, and too be brazenfaste and utterly
shameless. And why? will men say that a woman is chaste, if she be not well
tried? Ho, no, no. Come who will (says she:) if these roysters fall too
dallying with me, tush, I can tell well enough how too send them away, they
shall well find to whom they speak, for I wot how to answer them. Thus will a
harlot play the chaste wife, as though she were a mirror of all honesty: and
yet in the mean while she will stand at the barryers like a man of arms,
against all comers that will hold talk with her of lewdness and
ribauldrie. Now therefore let us mark well what S. Paul tells us here. For
women have bin suffered a long time too be so unmeasurable bold: and besides
wanton talk, there are also very garish attyres, that it is very hard too
discern whether they be men or women: they must have every day new deckings
and trimmings, and every day some new disguyzed fashyon or other. They make
the^ great cart wheels like Peacockes tails, that a man cannot pass within
three foot of them, but he shall feel as it were a wynd myll sail flasking
by him. Agein, they have their ribauldry songs myngled with it. Now what
chastity can there be where it is so driven away and banished by force, and
on the contrary part, the trumpets sound on all sides, that every body should
give over themselves too superfluity and garishnesse, and seek nothing else
but too plundge themselves over head and ears in it? So then, let us mark
well, that when there is such disorder both in iestures, and in countenances,
and in talk, and in dancing, and in all like fondness, and in all vanities
and loocenesse: it is all one as if man should cut trenches from a river too
convey the water too him. For whereas a river runs his ordinary course, if a
man cut the stream of, and draw it on the other side, must it not needs have
his course that way? Then if men fall too corrupting of the world after that
fashyon, (as in deed it is one of the cunning tricks that the devil has
used a long time:) must not all needs go too hauock, and be utterly past
recovery? Yis: and therefore let us mark well what is said unto us here. For
when we hear these iesters say, What a Gods name: men shall shortly be at
the point that they may not laugh and bee-merrie: dauncyng is forbidden: it
shall not be lawful for folk too talk toogither: a good fellow may not be
so bold as to come in company with a man's daughter, too talk unto her of love
matters: if a man do but speak too a wife, though it be but in sport, by and
by it shall be turned to a crime: and in the end what will come of it, when
there shall be such stowrenesse and sternnesse in the world? when men speak
after that manner, it is all one as if they proclaimed themselves too be the
Devils proctors and advocates, too infect and poison the whole world, that
there might be nothing but loocenesse, and that whoredom and ribaudrie might
reign in such liberty, as men might no more think it too be sin. That in
effect is the thing that we have to bear in mind.

Heerwithall Saint Paul says, that it becomes well the Saints: and that
is too show, that there ought to be no disputing nor replying: but that vices
should be condemned sharply. For wheruntoo does God call us? Too that point
must we come. Truly if any man say, men are frail, and alas if they might
not be so bold as too cast their eye aside too give a pleasant look, but they
should be condemned for it: I say if man's frayltie might be construed so,
truly that vice would either be utterly lessened, or else made half
excuzable. But let us come to our own state. God knows our infirmities: but
he will not have us to welter in them: for he has voutsafed to dedicate us too
his seruis. Now let us see if we can make these looce behauyours and all these
folies, which are but Satan's allurements (as I said before), too agree with the
word Holiness. What is meant by holiness? It is as much too say, as we must
be sholed out too offer our selves unto God, that he may enjoy us and weeld
us, so as we may be wholly his, and (too be short) be no more atteynted and
sullyed with the filthiness of the world. If Holiness import all this, and
that it must be in us or else we shall not be Gods children: it is not for us
too plead any more in defense of ribaudrie, that it might be taken but for a
light fault. Saint Paul therefore brings us back too the honor that God
does us: as if he should say, that if it seem over strange and hard unto
us too refreyne from the vanities wherein the world delyghteth so much, and
wherein men think even their life too consist, insomuch that the unbelievers
think not themselves too be alive, unless they may delyght themselves with
foolish and wanton dalliance, but that they do but linger and pyne away: when
we be provoked too the like things: we must consider what honor God has
done us in voutsafing too dedicate us too his obedience. For what are we by
nature? what is there in us? Even from our moothers womb we bring nothing but
disorder, we be cursed, we be saped in sin, and too be short, from top too
toe there is not any piece in us which is not given too evil: all our members
are instruments of sin: another eyes nor ears, another mouth, feet, nor hands
are exempted. Forasmuch then as we be full of all uncleanness through sin,
and yet for all that, God has now plucked us back from it: is it not reason
that we should be dedicated unto him, seeing he calls us too holiness? And
ought not this honorable title too restreyne us, from taking such unbridled
liberty as every of us could find in his heart too take in following his own
lusts? Too be short, Saint Paul meant too show us here, how we may fight
against our wicked lusts. For if we follow our own nature, surely though some
man be not inclyned too lechery, yet shall he have other vices: yea and we
have all vices in us, but that we be restreyned by Gods bridle: and yet does
every man beguyle him self on his own behalf. Now what is too be done? We
must not spare our selves, but rather fight against our selves. Let us not be
dismayed though the Devil be so subtle, and we so tender and so easy too be
soon shaken down: but let us consider how God calls us too the contrary.
And what is that? Too be holy in him. The thing therefore that Saint Paul meant
too say in the first place, is that he armeth us by setting before us the state
wheruntoo God has voutsafed too call us through his goodness, too the intent
that every man should gather strength, and not give any way too Satan: but that
although we be sore laid at, yet we should not yield him the victory,
because God has chozen us unto all clennesse. And after he has drawn us so
by gentleness, he does also set down an horrible manace, and which ought too
make the hears too stand up upon our heads: and thereby we see how God
indeuereth too win us too him by all means. When he says, You be Saints or
Holy ones: therein God uses sweetness and gentleness, as if he should say, my
children, bethink your selves, for I have not created you too live at
alauenture in this world, but I have therwithall adopted you, too the intent
too call you too the heavenly heritage. Now then, seeing I have redeemed you
with the blud of my son, and given you my spirit too dwell in you, too the
end you should be my temples, and I be woorshipped there: will you now go and
give your selves too all lewdness agein* and in sted of being my temples,
become styes for swyne, and suffer your affections too be as dirt and dung too
defyle you withal, and fall too wallowing agein in the mire, after ye have
bin washed and made clean? If ye will be my children, hold ye in the plyght
that I have set you. After this manner does God proceed with us, too draw us
too him, as though he did (as ye would say) half flatter us. And on the other
side, because he sees us cold, and that we abuze his patience, and are not
touched too the quick with his grace when he utters it, but follow still
our own lusts: he threateneth us like a father who perceiving his child too
be unruly, and not of so free disposition as too be won at the first:
(says thus unto him:) Wotest thou what? Though I have cockered thee and
suffered much at thy hand, yet must thou behave thy self otherwise, and play
the good child toward me, or else go too the devil. If thou will needs
continue still in thy naughtiness, get thee too the gallows: for I am not a
father that will suffer my self too be so mocked without redressing of it.
After this manner will a father indeuer too keep his child in his good favor
if it be possible: but if he see that it boot not, he falls too threatening
and chyding of him, and all too break that stubborn heart of his, if he can.
Even so deals God with us: and therein we see what care he has of our
welfare, as I said before.

Saint Paul therefore, after he has told us that we be Saints: adds,
that no covetous person, no lechour, nor no unclean man shall enter into the
kingdom of God, nor have any part of the heritage that is purchaced for us.
This threatening (as I said) ought too scare us all, or else we be too
blockishe. What a thing is it that we should be berefte of Gods kingdom? And
by the way we must mark well the words that he uses: for he says, that
we shall not possess the kingdom of God and of Christ. Not that they be two
diverse kingdoms: but too express the better how that inheritance belongs
unto us, namely not by birthryght, nor yet by our own purchase, but by free
gift. The kingdom of God then is the heavenly life, and al our whole
happiness. For out of God what can we have but all unhappiness? Therefore if
we be banished out of Gods kingdom, we must needs be plundged in all
misery. But it is expressly said, too be the kingdom of Christ: and why?
Because it was purchaced us by his blud, and also because we be now restored
agein too the state from whence we were fallen in our father Adam. Agein, we
know that the inheritance is given us in our Lord Jesus Christ, to the intent
that we being his members, and adopted of God by his means, should also be
parttakers of that which is peculiar too him. In the first too the Hebrews he
is called the heir of all things: and is that too shell us utterly out? No:
but because we cannot otherwise be taken for Gods children, but by being
incorporated intoo the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom all belongs.
Now then, if we should be rejected of God, if we should be cut of from all
the benefytes which have bin purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that this should come to pass through our own unthankfulness. Alas, should
we not be too too blockish? Yea, and for the better expressing thereof Saint
Paul uses the word Heritage or Inheritance. As if he should say, if ye were
heirs of Gods kingdom from your moothers womb, consider how great a greef it
ought too be unto you too be set beside it. But now understand you, that the
kingdom of God is communicated unto you by our Lord Jesus Christ, because he
has purchaced it for you, and made you his brethren and fellows. And
understand ye besides, that it is because God has adopted you freely: and yet
you have it not by birthryght, another can ye say that it is your own,
otherwyze than by free gift. Now then, seeing it is a state of inheritance:
will ye be so leaud as to looze such a benefit when it is offered you? Shall
God inuyte you so graciously too his glory, shall he offer you all the joy and
happynes of the kingdom of heaven, shall he match you with his own son, and
by that mean make you too possess all the good things that you can wish: and
shall all this be nothing worth to you, but that you will needs hold scorn
of it and refuze it? How can Satan so far ouermayster you? We see then how
Saint Paul meant too waken us here earnestly by all means, too the intent
that if we cannot be drawn wholly unto God by love, at leastwyze yet
threatening may do us some good, and move us too yield, that our desires may
by that mean be brydled, and our lusts not ouerflow so outrageously, but that
since God shows himself our Judge, we may at leastwyze refrain too resist
him: for that is all one as if we would openly run rushing against him.
Seeing that he with his own holy mouth has auowed us too be banished from
the kingdom of heaven: if we notwithstanding do make none account of the
things that he tells us: what a dealing is that?

Furthermore whereas Saint Paul says, that another whoremoongers, nor cuetous
men, nor unclean persons shall enter intoo the kingdom of God: he means not
that all such as have offended and done amiss, are rejected of God. For who
is he that can say, he is clear of all the vices that are reherced here? But
he means the whoremoongers, covetous persons, and looce livers that take
pleasure in their lusts, and are hardened in them, and are so settled in the
filthiness of them, as there is not any more fear of God in them too hold
them back. We hear what he says too the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. b. 8. 9.
10. 11.
where having made a greater beadroll of the same and other vices, and having
first uttered the like sentence, telling them that all such as are given too
those vices shall never come in the kingdom of God: he says, and such have
you bin. He shows that the faithful also had bin steyned with the like
corruptions. But ye be washed and made clean, (says he) ye be sanctified
by Gods holy spirit, and through the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he
should say, by nature ye were miserable, and folk given too all lewdness.
The willingness and desire that you have now too serve God, came not of your
selves, but of Gods drawing of you unto him, that whereas you were erst as wyld
beasts, he has brought you unto his obedience: whereas ye were foul and
unclean, he has washed you with the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ: and whereas
you were unholy, he has made you holy by his holy Ghost. And therefore fall not
too wallowing and plundging of your selves agein intoo uncleanness. Thus the
true meaning of those words is in effect, that the wicked and such as lead an
awlesse and lawless life, that is too say, such as fight not against their
lusts, but delyght in naughtiness, shall never come in the kingdom of God.
For first of all, if the faithful be not renewed at their birth by the spirit
of God: they be steyned with the sins wheruntoo mankind is subject, yea and
we see some that are wholly given unto them. And albeit that our Lord have
wrought in us by his holy spirit: it does not therefore follow that we be so
well reformed at the first day, as there is no more evil in us. For we must
be feign too keep continual battle through repentance, all our life long.
And repentance should take no place, if we felt not sin dwelling still
within us. Therefore it suffyzeth that it reign not in us, as S. Paul
exhorts us in the sixth too the Romans. There S. Paul tells them too whom
he speaks, that if they look upon their former life, they must needs be
ashamed, because they were so strayed away, that they had forgotten God and all
vertew and honesty. Ye cannot (says he) remember what ye were before ye
were converted too the belief of the Gospel, but ye must needs cast down
your eyes with great shame. And yet notwithstanding he tells them, that sin
must not now reign in our mortal bodies, although it dwell there still. In
deed it were too be wished that there were no sin dwelling in us, and that
we were all like the Angels of heaven. But Saint Paul knowing well that we
cannot atteyne too that so long as we dwell in this world, and until we have
put off our corruption, and be dispatched of this transitory life: wylleth us
yet at leastwize, that sin should not reign in us. So then, although we be
steyned with many vices, yet let us so fight against them, that they may not
become heinous crimes, as though we rebelled against God, but continue only
as infirmities, so as we beseech God too forgive us them quite and clean,
acknowledging that we have need too obtain mercy daily, accordingly as it is
not without cause that he teaches us too ask forgiveness of our sins. And
so ye see how that saying is too be understood.

Now furthermore S. Paul adds (as we have seen already to the Galathians)
that covetous folks are Idolaters. Gala. 5. d. 20.
Truly this matter were well worthy too be discoursed more at length, Colos.
3 ^. 5.
and there is nothing spoken of it which may not be spoken agein. Howbeeit
forasmuch as in handling the Epistle too the Galathians, I declared there why
S. Paul calls Covetous folks Idolaters: it shall suffyze too touch the
pith of the matter in few words. For as touching other vices, they do in
deed make us too forget God. What are the inordinate lusts of our flesh
euerychone of them, but Idols? for every man is haryed away after the things
that he desires, so as he sets all his heart and mind upon them, and
forgets God. Therefore it may well be said, that all wicked lusts are
Idols that impeache the majesty of God, and provoke us too strive against him,
yea and too shake of his yoke, and too betake our selves unto Satan.
Nevertheless, Covetousness is justly called Idolatry, because it is certain
that when a man does once give himself theruntoo, he ^etteth his whole
felicity therein. He is not like a Glu^ton, who has some remorse and shame of
his naughtiness: nor like a drunkard, a whoremoonger, or a blasphemer. For
there is yet some shamefastenesse in them. And why? Because they cannot so
blind men, but that they will speak shame of them for it. And although the
whole world clapped their hands at them, and knew no whit of their lewdness:
yet shall they themselves be enforced too have some hartbyting. Ye see then
that all such as offend God any other way whatsoever it be, shall yet be hild
in awe by some fear, and have some remnant of discretion left in them too say,
I do amiss, and how much so ever they soothe themselves, and fall a sleep,
yea and even utterly harden themselves: yet shall they be compelled too feel
some pricking within. But the covetous man does so rejoice in his doyngs, that
he thinks not himself faulty, another before God, nor before man: but (which
more is) gloryeth in his wickedness. For when he has fleeced one, and robbed
another of his goods, and deceived one, and snared or intrapped another:
theruppon when he casts up his account, he will say, Blissed be God that
has prospered me so well. Insomuch that ye shall hear the greatest Cousiners
in the world, say, thanked be God, I have made a good hand too day, I have sped
well this month, I have gone well foreward this year. And yet for all that,
if they enter intoo their own hearts and sift them thoroughly: they shall find
there that al was but theeuerie, extortion, craft, and deceyt. Howbeeit the
devil has so stopped their eyes, that they have no more discretion nor
conscience to say, this is evil done. For So Much then as covetous folk are at
that point, that they have no more fear of God too stay them and hold them
back: therefore are they termed Idolaters. But this is not all the mischief,
there is yet a worse point: which is, that they set all their felicity in
their riches, and do so forget themselves, as they think there can no harm
happen too them, wherthrough they be puffed up with such pride, that they
thrust God a hundred leagues of from them, as the proverb says.

And therefore it is not for naught that Saint Paul exhorts the rich men of
this world, 1. Tim. 6. d. 17.
not too trust too their goods, nor too exalt themselves for them. He says
that purposely, because they have so great opinion of their riches, that they
fear not God, but rather utterly forget him. Ye see then that the Covetous
folk abuze their riches, by setting their whole heart upon them, (which
notwithstanding is forbidden them, Psalm. 61. c. 11.
by the prophet in the Psalm) and by weltring in such wise in them, that too
their own seeming they have their Paradyse here already. And therefore this
cursed disposition and insaciable lust of Covetousness, 1. Tim. 6. b. 10.
which makes all men both drunken and blind, is justly named Idalatrie, and
likewise all the root of all evil, because the covetous man seeks always
his own auayles, and whether it be by hook or by crook, by murder or by
treason, by perjury or by poisoning, or by whatsoever mean else, all is one
too him, so he may compass his desire. Thence spring so many trubbles and
contentions, and so much bludshed through the world: that some are poisoned,
and othersome have their throts cut, there is none other cause but this
insatiable gripplenesse of covetousness. True it is that Ambition, and
whoredom, and such other like vices draw a sort of foul inconveniences after
them: but yet does not that discharge the covetous sort from being atteynted
with the same. So then let us mark well, that. S Paul speaking of
Covetousness, does justly say, that it does so subdew us too Satan, as it
makes us too forget God, and make us so brutish, as we stand no more in fear
of God, ne have any remorse of conscience, and so puff us up with pride, as
God seems to be nothing with us, but we yield the honor of the living God
unto our gold, silver, and riches. And that is so rank treason, that there is
good cause why we be made too abhor it here, as we see by that which the
holy Ghost speaks of it by the mouth of the Apostle.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us feel them with true repentance, that
being grieved and heartily sorry for them, we may so sorrow for our offending
of him, and for our straying from the way of salvation, as we may seek
nothing but too dedicate our selves wholly unto him, that he may daily cut of
whatsoever corruption is in us, and make us forsake the world, as the end
whertoo we were redeemed and clenzed by the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
in the mean while voutsafe too bear with our infirmities, and too rid us of
them continually more and more, until he have taken us out of this world, to
join us to himself in all ryghtuousnesse and holiness. That it may please him
too grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people and nations of
the earth. etc.

The.xxxv. Sermon, which is the third upon the fifth Chapter.
8. For ye were sometime darkness: but now are ye light in the Lord: walk
ye as children of the light:

9. (For the fruit of the spirit consists in all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth.)

10. Trying what is acceptable too the Lord.

11. And have not too do with the fruitless woorks of darkness, but rather
even rebuke them.


We know how hard a matter it is too reclayme men from evil custom, when
they be once inhardened unto it. For the mischief does easly take root in
us, because we be inclyned and almost wholly given too it of nature. But yet
we be not so soon changed, when we have continewed along time in doing
evil. For it happens unto us as unto sick folks, whose diseases having
once gathered strength, do so stick too their bones, as they can by no means
be purged away. Now a great number of folk (...) given to naughtiness, and
bear with themselves in many vices, before they be called of God, and touched
too the quick with repentance. Therefore we have need too practyze the
doctrine that Saint Paul teaches us here: that is too wit, too know that
when we have hild aloof from God, and strayed from the way of salvation, we
must not flatter our selves in it, nor make a buckler and excuce of it, because
it is become an ordinary thing with us. For we must not pardon our selves a
whit the more for all that, but rather consider that God has pityed us, and
that his drawing of us from the evil wherein we were, was too the end too
change us, and too make his power and grace the better known by our life, in
that it bears witness that we be no more the men that we were before.
That is the cause why Saint Paul says in this text, Ye were once darkness,
but now has God inlyghtened you. As if he should say, that we must not
respect either what others do, or what has befalne in our selves, too hope
too be justified, and acquit of our faults by that means. For when it has
once pleazed God too reach us his hand, and too show us such mercy as too
adopt us for his children, and to make us heirs of the heavenly life, in sted
that we were forlorn, cursed, and damned before: that grace ought too prevail
greatly in us, too make us become new creatures. And as for them among whom we
live, if God give them the bridle and let them alone as men forsaken: let us
understand, that it was his will too shole us out from so miserable taking. And
therefore let them be as looking glasses unto us, too behold what a
wretchedness it is for men to follow their own lusts. So little then ought
the offending and sinning of a multitude, too cover our faults: that we ought
rather too take warning by them to withdraw our selves, and too hold our
selves as it were fettered up under the fear and obedience of our God, seeing
he shows so special favor unto us, whereof the residew which abide still
ignorant and unbelieving, are depryued.

Howbeeit for the better understanding of the whole, let us mark first, that
Saint Paul has showed us here what the state of all men in general is,
until God have drawn them too him. And he tells us there is not any cause
at all why we should ^ooth our selves in our vertewes, insomuch that this only
speech of his, where he says, that we be darkness, (that is too say, that
there is another light, reason, nor any government in us, but rather that we
be become stark beasts) ^ught well too make us all too cast down our eyes and
too submit our selves with humility. In deed many shall have some show of
wisdom, and be commended of the world as well aduyzed men, and as able not
only too guide themselves in their whole life, but also too counsel (and
direct) others. Yet notwithstanding, God auoweth that in stead of having right
wisdom and reason, we be but brute beasts as in respect of him. Now like as
this saying warns us to sygh and groan before God: so also does it provoke us
too seek the remedy that is necessary for the well ruling of our life, that
is, too suffer God too be our master and teacher by his word, (as shall be
declared more at length anon) and also too pray him that his holy spirit may so
woork in us, and that we may not be led with such ouerweening, as too count
our selves wise in our own conceyt and fancy. And so ye see in effect what
we have too remember upon this streyne, where Saint Paul intytuleth men by a
reprochefull name, saying that they be darkness, and that there is nothing
but utter brutishness in them. And hereof I have treated already in the last
chapter, where Saint Paul showed, that men discern nothing, ne go but too
their destructions, until such time as they be reformed.

Now on the contrary part he says, Light in the Lord, too show that all the
wisdom which we have, comes of a supernatural grace, as they term it,
that is too say, we have it not by inheritance, another can we father it upon
our selves, but it is altogether of Gods woorking, and we must be linked too
our Lord Jesus Christ too be parttakers of such a benefyte. For it is not for
naught that the scripture says, Esaias. 11. a. 2.
that Gods spirit was given unto him too rest upon him with full perfection.
Therefore let us learn too distrust our selves, and to know that all that ever
we can bring of our own, will stand us in no stead, but to turn us from the
way of salvation, and that we have no wisdom, except it be given us of Gods
free goodness, too the intent too gather us unto him, and too make us members
of our Lord Jesus Christ his son, who is our true light, as we shall see
anon.

Too be short, it is all one as if S. Paul should say, that by nature we
be but only darkness in Adam, and that we be inlyghtened agein in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now (as I said before) it is too the intent we should seek none
excuce, by alleging that we cannot put off our old skin, nor utterly forsake
the things that are so printed in us: (for those shifts are but tryfling, and
they (...) pass in account before God:) but contrariwyse too the intent we
should learn, too examine well what we be, and what our state is, till God
have redressed it, and too consider what we have of our own, namely that we
bring nothing but cursednesse with us from our moothers womb: and therwithall
make the grace effectual which God has given us, that it be not (as ye
would say) choked through our unthankfulness and malice, but that we consider
well to what end our Lord* has reached us his hand, and showed himself so
pitiful toward us: namely that whereas we were plundged in darkness, it was
his will to bring us agein too light.

And we be called light in the Lord, not only because we have the word of
his Gospel, which is as a burning Cresset too guide us by: but also because
that he himself is as the spiritual Daysonne, and does therewithal
inlyghten us inwardly by Gods spirit. For we see by experience, that men fare
never a whit the better by having their ears beaten with the doctrine of
truth: for one may take pain too teach them, and yet it shall be but labor
lost. Therefore our Lord must be feign too make his son shine, that is too
say, like as he has commanded and ordained his word too be preached unto
us: so also must he give us eyes too enjoy the same light. For though the sun
shine never so bright in the sky, yet should we find another fruit nor profit
by it, unless we have eyes which are as instruments to receive the light that
commes from above. So must God be feign too give us spiritual eyesyght, to
conceive the things that are taught us by his word. Ye see then that the
mean how we become light in the Lord, is, that on the one side God shows us
the way of salvation by the preaching of his word unto us: and therwithall
gives us a new spirit, or mind, too the intent we should not abide in the
ignorance wherein all of us are by nature.

And Saint Paul utters his meaning yet better, when he adds that we
should walk as children of light. Now we see that here he not only
prayzeth and commends Gods grace, too stir us up too gloryfye him for it,
as we be bound too do: but also therewithal shows the use of it. As if he
should say, beware in any wise that ye thrust not Gods grace under foot, ne
make it vnauaylable unto you. For his calling of you too the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, was too the intent ye should be wholly changed, tod be
brought unto this light. For if we would have the sun but only too stand
ydly gazing upon it like folk out of their wits, what a thing were that?
We were better too have continual night. But the Sun must serve us to apply
our selves too the buzinesse which we have too do, and too labor in getting
of our living, every man according too his charge, office, and calling. Ye see
then that we should abuze the sun, which brings us so great benefyte, if
we should not every of us occupy our selves in the things that we know too
be our dewtie. Now Saint Paul applies this similitude too the spiritual
daysonne: that is too wit, too the doctrine of the Gospel, saying that it
shyneth, howbeeit not for us too give our selves too idle speculations, but too
the end we should set our hand too the plough, and every of us look wherewith
he can and ought too do service, and theruppon make the light auaylable that
is offered him.

Furthermore Saint Paul in one place calls us Light, and by and by he
adds, Children of light. Both of them come too one end. But yet is it not for
naught that he terms us Light. For it serves too express the better, that
Gods grace is not only offered us, but also imprinted in us, so as we be
after a sort new shaped by it. And it is not only here that he does it, Phil.
2. b. 15.
but also in the Epistle too the Philippians. Now we have too mark first of
all, that that title belongs properly too none but too our Lord Jesus Christ,
according as he himself says, I am the light of the world, he that walks in
me, ^ohn. ^. b. 12.
shall never stray. Ye see then that our Lord Jesus Christ is sufficient of
himself alone too give us light, and that if we keep our selves aloof from
him, we shall find nothing but darkness another in heaven, nor in earth, nor in
any creature else. For if we speak of Gods majesty, it is above all the
heavens: yea and the very Angels have no light but that which they borrowe of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And that is the cause why Saint John Baptist is excluded
from that honor, John. 1. a. 8.
when he says, that he was not the light, but that that dignity belongs
peculiarly to the son of God, who inlyghteneth all men that come intoo the
world. Agein, the Apostles, and all such as preach Gods truth are also termed
light in their degree, Math. 5. b. 14.
when as it is said, ye be the light of the world. Not that that belongs
properly unto them: but because God serves his own turn by them, when he
delivers them his word to guide others by, and to show them the way of
salvation. Now if he that bears the Candle too light other men, do reele and
stumble, and stray here and there, what a thing is it? Therefore in as much as
God has given us the charge too preach his word, we be warned too walk in
such wise as every man may be edifyed by our life. And yet in the mean while,
this is no derogation at all too the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ: for they
that are inlyghtened by him, must not thrust forth themselves to be fellow and
fellow like with him: but he alone must continewe the ly^ht still, and we
inlyghten one another, according too Saint Paul's saying in the text that I
alleged before, Phil. 2. b. 15.
where he says thus too all the faithful: You be as Lamps burning in this
world, even by having the word of God. The light then which the Scripture
allotteth, as well too the teachers, as too them that are taught, is, that all
of us must have Gods word, which must be as a candle set up aloft, and our
lives must so ruled thereby, as the vnbeeleeuers may be drawn too the faith
and reformed, or else confounded and put too shame, when they see that our
Lords calling of us too profit in his scoole is not in vain. And so ye see
in what sense S. Paul says, that we be light in the Lord, namely because
Gods word ought too be as a burning Lamp unto us, not only too guide our
selves by, but also too show the way too all such as otherwise should go
astray.

Hereunto he adds, that we be children of light, to do us to understand,
that our light comes from elsewhere than of our selves, and that we borrowe
it of him that is the light of the world, John. 8. b. 12.
as I have alleged before. According whereuntoo it is said, that God is the
father of light, and so also does the Scripture name him. Agein, our Lord
Jesus Christ is the true light, James. 1 ^. 17.
whereby God appeered unto us, and whereby it is his will too inlyghten us.
Therefore are we the children of light: that is too say, we be so
i^^yghtened, that Gods light is in us: namely because we be members of our
Lord Jesus Christ (as I said before) and communicate with him, and he guydeth
us by the light of his Gospel, and inlyghteneth us also by his holy spirit.
And forasmuch as our Lord woorketh in us by faith, he dreepeth it intoo us by
measure, as he himself thinks good, as we have seen in the fourth Chapter.
Howsoever the case stand, let us esteem Gods grace as it is worthy, and as it
deserves, and theruppon turn it too our own benefyte, that it be not
disappoynted through our rechlesnesse, but that we may walk, that is too
say, consider whertoo God has called us, and every of us employ and enforce
himself theruntoo.

Now hereuppon Saint Paul gives a warning, that the fruit of this light is,
Goodness, Ryghtuousnessr, and Truth. As if he should say, that he speaks not
here after the common fashyon of men* but intends too bring us unto God, and
too show us too what purpose it serves us to be Christians, and which is the
true use of the learning that we have by the Gospel, and also how the power
of the holy Ghost ought too show it self in us, that is too wit, in the well
ordering of our life. For by these three words, Goodness, Ryghtuousnesse, and
Holiness, he means that we should not do any body wrong, but indeuer too
live vpryghtly and faithfully with our neighbors, and also be kind hearted in
having compassion one of another, too bear patiently one with another, and too
succor one another as need shall require. True it is that there are other
things requisyte in a Christen man's life: but here Saint Paul comprehends
all under one kind. As if he should say, my friends, God is singularly gracious
unto us, in gathering us unto him, whereas we were strayed away intoo
destruction: and that whereas we were hild in thraldom under the tyranny of
the prince of the world, John. 12. e. 31. and 14. d. 30. and* 16. b. 11.
which is the devil: he has set us free, and made us members of his only
son our Lord Jesus Christ. Lo here an inestimable benefyte. And now must we
show too what end our Lord has used so great mercy toward us. That (says
he) must be known by our life, even by walking one with another in all
goodness: that is too say, that we be not cruel as dogs and Cattes, nor
given too guyle, craft, and malice, too deceive and wynd one about another, but
go on soundly and roundly in all things, and deal so vpryghtly as every of us
indeuer to yield his neighbor that which is his dew, so as no man be wedded to
his own profit to grieve others. When our life is once ordered after this
manner, then shall men percey^e that we bear fruit in the light, and that the
light also bears fruit in us, that is to say, that the light which God has
given us is not idle, but that like as God has inlyghtened us, so we apply
our selves too do the things that he commands and appoynteth. That is the
cause why Saint Paul speaks of the fruit of Ryghtuousnesse, according too my
former saying, where I told you that the sun gives not light to the world,
too the intent that every man should sit still with his arms folded one within
another, or too the intent we should be as the fowls that fly in the air:
but too serve our turn, by guyding us in all our doings. That is the fruit
and use of the Sun. Therefore the Gospel is not a frutelesse thing, the
woorking of it must show it self in our life, that is too wit, by being
ryghtuous, kind hearted, and faithful. Now under those words Saint Paul has
compryzed all things belonging too the two tables of the Law. For (as I told
you before) Charity serves not too make us forget what belongs too Gods seruis,
as though that were a thing of small weight: but it is the manner of the
scripture too send us back too our neighbors when it speaks of the serving
of God. For it is certain that if we love our neighbors as we ought too do,
and live with them according too Gods law, God shall always have his cheef
right. For until we be ruled under his awe, every of us will love himself
too much, and desire too draw too himself, and too glory in himself: and
too be short, there will be nothing in us but Pride, Uaynglory,
Covetousness, Cruelty, and al manner of Deceyt, until our Lord has brought
us under his yoke, and we bowed our selves unto his obeisance, too honor him
and serve him, and to bliss his holy name. And this shall be done when we
yield men their dewtie: for that is a true trial and record that we fear God.

And now too show us how we should live in the world, S. Paul sets down
these three things: namely Goodness, that is too say, kind hartednesse in
having pity and compassion upon such as are in distress, too relieve their
need, and too bear patiently with their infirmities. Thus much concerning the
word Goodness: Next that, is Ryghtuousnesse, which signifies upright
dealing, so as we take away no man's goods, nor go about too advantage our
selves by the hinderance of our neighbors, nor be given too pilling and
polling, but (too be short) be contented with whatsoever God gives us,
without raking of other men's goods or possessions unto us. Last of all is
added Truth, which is contrary too all crafty packing, and too all leaud
practyzes, whereby we labor too draw other men's goods too us. Then have we
once these three things, it is certain that Charity reigns fully and
perfectly in us. These are the things that we have too remember upon this
streyne. Will we then show that our trayning up in the Gospel has not bin
in vain, and that we have not forsaken the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ?
Let us live uprightly and euenly among men: and agein, let us be kind hearted
both in bearing one with another infirmities, and also in succoring them at
their need: and (finally) let us be faithful, that is too say, let us use no
craft nor suttletie, but let us be soothfast, and wherein so ever we have too
deal with others, let them not find us dubble.

The thing therefore in effect which we have too bear in mind, is that Gods
inlightening of us, is to the end we should no more plundge our selves in
darkness, but that when we have once taken light of him, we also should
indeuer too give light too wretched unbelievers; which wander and reele, and
stumble, and are like too break their necks, because they be as silly
beasts: and no marvel at all, for they have no light too guide themselves by.
True it is that that shall not excuze them, but that they shall always be
guilty before God: for their ignorance is matched with malice. But what shall
we on our side have too lay for our selves when we stray so away, seeing that
God has inlyghtened us by his word and holy spirit, and knit us too our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the daysunne of ryghtuousnesse, as I have declared alredie?

Now hereupon S. Paul tells us, that we must try and examine what things
please God. And this reaches further than that which he has said: for it
shows us which is the true rule, which if we follow, we cannot do amiss:
namely too frame our selves according too Gods will. Psalm. 11^. b. 10.
And truly we know that the fear of him is not without cause called the true
wisdom. For whereof comes it that men ouershoote themselves intoo all evil,
Prou. 1. a. 7. and 9. c. 10.
but because they forget God, and bury the rememberance of his name and
majesty? For they that have God in their minds, shall ever be restreyned as
it were with a bridle. Although their flesh tempt them too evil: yet will
they resist, and consider that as long as they live in this world, they must
spend their life in his service that gave it them. Then if our minds be upon
God, surely it will arm us and give us strength against all temptations. And
S. Paul says here, that we must examine well what things please him: wherein
he wakeneth up our rechlesnesse. For in the foresaid despyzing of God which I
spoke of, there are two things. The one is that men fall as^eepe in soothing
themselves, and think not that ever they shall come too account, and theruppon
do rest so soundly, as if it were in us to make good or evil. And afterward
they fall outrageously too flinging themselves at aladuenture against God.
Therefore it is not enough for us not too fight wilfully against God, nor too
play the wyld beasts, or the (mad) Bulls, which push every way with their
horns: that is not enough: but we must be watchful in inquyring thoroughly
what is lawful for us, that we may discern between the things that God
permits, and the things that he disalloweth. Too be short, the first thing
that Saint Paul shows us here, is, hat our life shall never be well
ordered, until it be wholly conformable too Gods will. Mark that for one
point.

Secondly (as I have told you) we must not think that God forgiueth our
carelessness, when we do (as it were) wilfully shet our eyes, and are
contented too go astray without taking any great heed: but that it behooves us
too stand upon our guard, and too seek diligently what God allows. Those are
the two points which we have too mark. As touching the first point, we see
how men have always taken leave in all ages too follow their own inventions,
as they term them. And soothly it has ever bin a common proverb, that the
intent judges men: and it is very true in part, but men have misexpounded it
and misconstrewed it. For under that presence, every man has imagined that he
should be cleared before God, and be taken for ryghtuous, so he had no intent
too offend. After that manner do the Hipocrites ween themselves to do well: and
when they have invented a sort of follies and superstitions, they bear
themselves on hand, that God ought too take all in good worth, because they
weened them to be good. But God deals not according to our imagination. We
see then, that men did foully beguyle themselves, in imagining that it was
enough for them too have a good intent or meaning, as they term it. And even
therefore is there nothing but hellish confuzion in popery, because they have
forsaken Gods word, and regarded not what he bade or forbade, but took leave
too do some this thing, and some that, as it came in every man's fancy, and al
under color that men are too be judged by their intent. True it is (as I said
before) that the intent judges men (in some respect.) For although we do the
most commendable work that can be deuyzed: yet shall we not fail too be
condemned at Gods hand, if it be not done too the right end. If our honest
dealing be but in outward appearance, too get report that we be the henestest
men in the world, and in the mean while all our vertuousnesse is but dung and
filth within: it is but a show of honesty. And why? Because our intent is
leaude and crooked. But yet for all this, (as I said before) we must not take
head too do whatsoever our own brain teaches us: Romans 12. a. 1. 2.
for our chief wisdom is to seek what Gods will is, according wheruntoo
Saint Paul says, it is our reasonable service which God commands us, and
wherein our obedience shall be well allowed. But if we will needs do all upon
our own head, God will reject it all: for that is not reasonable, it is but
trash and trumperie of Satan. Wherefore let us mark well what is told us
here* that is too wit, that we must not seek any other difference between
good and evil, than by weying it in Gods balance, and not in our own, too
say, It seems too me, and I think it too be good, and I will take some
taste of it. Let us beware (I say) of bringing such rashness with us, and let
us be as little children that are newlye weaned from the teate. Let us learn
of God, and suffer our selves too be guyded and governed wholly by him. Ye
see then that humility is the beginning too serve God well, when as we be
not puffed up and carried away with ouerweening, nor so rash as too say, I ween
so, I think so: (but contrariwyse, too think thus:) is this of God? has he
spoken it by this word? Although it seemed too be the best and excellentest
thing in the world: yet notwithstanding; I would not fail too refuze it, if it
be forbidden of God. And that is the cause why it is expressly said, Deuteronomy. 12.
a. 8.
thou shall not do the thing that seems good in thine own eyes. And for the
same cause are we forbidden too be wise in our own conceytes. Only let us
assure our selves, that too be taught of God, is the infallible wisdom. But
as soon as we step aside from that which he shows us, we be but wanderers
though we were the wyzest too outward show, and the best esteemed in the
world. Too be short, we see how all that ever men can bring of their own,
will stand them in no sted, but only too condemn them. And why? There is
nothing that can guide us but only Gods will: it is the only rule whereby we
may say, this is noughtwoorth, or this is good. Now seeing that the devil has
gone about too bereeue us of such a benefyte: it behooves us so much the more
too stand upon our guard, that is too say, too be heedfull, and too apply all
our wits thoroughly too the seeking out of Gods will. We be careful enough for
our temporal profit, for men never (lightly) take thing in hand without
forecasting well what may insew. O (say they) behold, I shall cast my self
intoo such a danger: agein, this will serve my turn that way, or else this
may hinder me, or hurt me. Now then we be heedfull enough in seeking the
things that belong too this flyghtfull life: but in the mean while we step
forth at aladuenture in serving God. And although we pretend great zele in
seeking the heavenly life: yet we show thereby that we make none account of it,
and that all that ever we do is but for fashyons sake, and as it were
taskwoorke. Therefore let us mark well that men shall not be so sore
condemned, when their rebelling against God is not wilfully and of set purpose,
as when they harden themselves in their frowardness. True it is that men shall
do some things without looking nearly too them: but yet must they look
whether God like of them or no. The thing wherein we must be wyzest and best
aduyzed, is not too make our own profit after the manner of the world, which
counts the wylyest folk wyzest, but too get us spiritual discretion, too
know what things God allows, and too follow the same.

Now heeruppon he adds also, that we must not have too do with the
fruitelesse woorks of darkness, but rather rebuke them. This is not added
without great reason. For although we be well dispozed too frame our life
according too Gods word: yet shall we be shouldered from it, if we learn
not too resist all temptations. Truly although we saw no vices about us too
withdraw our obedience from God: yet have we such store of vices alredie in
us, that we must needs have profited very well in Gods school, before we can
be disposed too submit our selves in true obedience, and to say, Lord reign
thou over us, and let thine only will be our rule. But yet let us put the
case, that we were come so far forth, as too feel no resistance nor
geynsaying in our selves, but that we could so subdew all our affections, that
they might after a sort be ruly: yet notwithstanding, the devil never
ceasseth too assail us on all syds, one while by light biekerings, another by
undermining, and another while by giving alarums and open assaults, so as he
will soon ouerwhelm us, except we be well fortifyed, and God have given us
invincible power to withstand all his policies. That is the cause why Saint
Paul adds, that we should not have too do with the unfruitful woorks of
darkness. As if he should say, my friends, I know well that the vneazinesse
of going unto God in this world, will be as a block too keep you back from
doing of your dewtie. And although ye know that God ought too have the
maystrie, and that we ought too be under his subjection: yet notwithstanding
when ye be conversant with the despyzers of God, and with unholy persons, it
is very hard for you too walk incorruptly. For look how many vices reign, so
many infections are there too atteynt you, and it is very hard for you too
escape vnperuerted, like as it cannot be but that we must feel some prickings
when we walk among thorns. Forasmuch the^ as there is such abundance of
corruptions through the whole world, as a man can scarsly remove one foot but
he shall stumble upon some evil or other: It stands us on hand too have
great strength too maynteyne us vnimpeached in the serving of God: or else we
must be utterly ^urned away fron his obedience. But what for that? There is no
excuce for us, says Saint Paul. It will not boot us too allege, Alas, what
shall I do, I that am a poor frail creature? If God had set me alone by my
self, I could serve him the better: but I am here among so many vices, that I
must needs do as other men do: for some pill, and some poll, some are
whoremongers, some are drunkards, and some swearers: and finally I see so much
wickedness, that it makes my heart too quake: and seeing I am hemmed in with
all these things, what can I do in such extremity? We will allege all this
geere (say I): but it is in vain. Wherefore let us learn too prepare our
selves in such wise too the serving of God, as we may stand obediently in
battle ray too resist all temptations. It is true that we shall have much
adoo too bring it too pass* but yet will God be strongest, so we pray him
too govern us with his holy spirit. And that government serves not only to
subdew us too his dominion: but also too give us victory against all the
things that Satan practizeth too overthrow us. Ye see then that if we call
upon God and put our selves to his guyding: it is certain that we shall have
enough too make us keep on our way, notwithstanding that this world be full of
wicked stoppes, too thrust us out of the way. The thing then which we have too
remember upon this streyne, is, that besyds the good mind which we must have
too submit our selves unto God, and besyds the lowliness too accept and
receive whatsoever God commands us, and too frame our whole life thereafter:
we must also be armed to fight against all the assaults that Satan makes
against us, and though we see the whole world set upon naughtiness, we must
not think that that may serve too diminish our fault before God, but consider
that it is his will too exercyze us after that fashyon. Yet notwithstanding if
we call upon him, and put our whole trust in the working of his holy spirit:
surely we shall obtain victory against all that ever Satan can trump in our
ways. And so ye see how we may overcome all things that hinder our serving
of God.

Finally, S. Paul following still the ^imilitude which he brought in before,
tells us that we must not have too do with the woorks of darkness. As if
he should say, that we must be separted from the unbelievers, and that when
we live at aladuenture, as though God had not wrought in us, and as though his
word had done us no good at al, it is as much as if we tra^pled Jesus Christ
under our feet, abolished the fruit of his death and passion, and defiled his
blud, which is the fountain of all holiness? Si^h it is so, let us look too
retire out of darkness, and not too have to do with it in any wise. And his
calling of them by the name of frutelesse woorks, is too show us, that when
we be so mingled with the unbelievers, worldlinges, and despyzers of God: we
shall receive but a poor reward, which shall yield us no fruit at all. What
gain we then by taking leave too do evil, under color that the most part
of the world is given too wickedness (nothing) for all of them must reap the
reward of everlasting death, for follow one another after that fashyon. Now
then let us look neerlyer too our selves: for when men pardon them selves so
lightly, that they seek nothing else but too keep themselves fast fettered
under the subjection their father Satan, and too cast themselves as it were
intoo the bottom of hell: Alas is it not a wretched liberty? Saint Paul
therefore tells us expressly, that we ought so little too intermeddle our
selves with the corruptions of the world, that we should rather indeuer too
amend those which take such liberty too do evil, that they utterly
overthrow themselves: and that both we and they ought too be so hild in
obedience to our God, as his word and holy spirit may serve us as an
invincible power too fight against all assaults, and that we may be so armed
and furnished therewith, as it may be unto us both a helmet, Ephe. 6. c. 14.
and a brestplate, and a harness, and a sword, as we shall see hereafter.
And let us beware too walk so in this world, as we may serve our God with true
constancy, and not be turned from him for any trubbles, impediments, lettes
or stoppes that can be laid in our way.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too touch us with such repentance, as we may be
sorry for them, and rid them away more and more, too the strengthening of us in
his fear, and in the keeping of his holy commandments: and the mean season
he bear with our infyrmities, until we be quyte and clean rid of them: and
make us too profit from day too day in the doctrine, that is too wit, in the
remission of our sins, until we come too the perfection of his
righteousness and glory. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father.

The.xxxvi. Sermon, which is the fourth upon the fifth Chapter.
11. Have not too do with the fruitless works of darkness, but rather
rebuke them.

12. For (as for) the things which they do in secret, it is a shame even too
name them.

13. But all things are laid open when they be rebuked by the light: for the
light is it that lays all things open.

14. Wherefore he says, awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ vvillinlyghten thee.


We have seen this morning, that although there be many things in the world
too turn us away from the serving of God: yet must we not therefore swerve as
though that might serve us for an excuce. For there have bin stumbling blocks
in the world at all times: but the remedy for them is this doctrine, that is
too wit, that Gods children must stand upon their guard, that they corrupt not
themselves by companying with the v^beleeuers, because God has sholed them
asunder. And it is not enough for us not too be drunkardes, whoremongers,
thieves, or murderers: but we must also shun all manner of evil wheresoever
it be. In deed we ought too begin always at our selves: Luke. 6. f. 41. 42.
for hipocrites will always spy a mote in their neighbors eye, and yet bear
a great stone in their own, without feeling it. But if we will be right and
sound Judges, let every man examine himself, and begin there in condemning
vices. Let us consider well whether we our selves be faulty or no, that we
may first and formest make our own indytement before God, by hating the evil
that is in our selves. Howbeeit we must also show therwithall, that we love
God better than the world, and not maynteyne our selves in favor and
freendship of the wicked, by foading them in their faults, and by flattering
them. And for that cause S. Paul adds, that we must rather even rebuke the
works which can bring nothing but utter cursednesse. And this serves, not
only too show the zeal which we have that God should be honored: but also
too withdraw silly souls that are in the way too destruction, and too bring
them back agein intoo the way of salvation. Lo here two causes which ought
too move us too reprove evil. The one is, that it must irke us too see God
offended, and men provoke his wrath by overthrowing the order that he has set.
Seeing then that God is by that mean despyzed, and his word trodden under
foot: it ought too grieve us, according too the Psalm, Psalm. 69. b. 8.
where it is said, that we ought too receive too our selves the reproaches that
are offered too God. Also we ought of dewtie too have a care of those that are
redeemed with the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ. If we see the souls go too
damnation which did cost God so dear, and make no reckening of it: it is a
scorning of the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ. And even for that cause also
does S. Paul tell us, that inasmuch as we be separated from evil, too the
intent we should not be companions of such as despyze God, nor in any wise be
like them: we must too the uttermost of our power show, that we hate them, to
the end that they being by that means ashamed of their lewdness, may be
touched with repentance. If we have once profited so far: it shall be a
great gain too have drawn back a wretched soul that was in the way too
destruction. And after the same manner speaks Saint James of it, exhorting us
too do it, saying: The thing that you shall gain by it, Iam. 5. d. 20.
is, that you shall save a soul from loozing. And although men be hardened in
their sins: yet is it too great purpose for us too show the zeal that we
have of honoring God, and that his word should not be so impeached, nor the
order broken which he has set, without declaring that the same displeazeth us.
For if a man will be known too be a good and faithful subject, he will not
suffer any man too speak evil of his Prince, without setting of himself
against him. (Likewise,) that child shall be taken for unkind and dishonest,
which hears his father wrougfully ^lamed and defaced, and maynteyneth not his
honor or honesty.

Now, is not God our souerein prince? Yis: and although we be but wretched
woormes of the earth, and vile caryons: yet does he the honor unto us too
adopt us for his children. Now then, if wicked and heathenish folk deface his
majesty, and darken his ryghtuousnesse, yea and indeuer too pluck his
dominion from him, and we dissemble at it: is it not too excessive and
intolerable a lewdness? Therefore let us mark well what is told us here. For
it stands us so much the more on hand too mark this text, because this vice
has reigned in the world in all ages: namely that according as every man is
more or less desirous too be flatttered, so does he the eas^yer bear with
other men, not after the manner which we have seen heertofore, which is that
we ought too have compassion of such as are weak, and too use patience
toward them: but clean contrariwyse, that is too wit, that we be contented
too feed the evil, and too enter continually into a willing confederacy
toogither: and too the intent that other men should not sift us too narrowly in
our vices, but let us alone too do what we list, we give every man leave too
take like liberty too him self. And that is the cause why all things are out
of order now adays in the world. Agein, we be loath too provoke any man's
displeazure against us, insomuch that we had lever betray God, and too betray
our neighbors both body and soul, than too use the liberty that Gods
spirit commands us. We see a wretched man play the naughtipacke: let him
follow his own swindge, (say we:) it maks no matter too us. And why? for we
will not discontent him. Agein, we see othersome pervert all order of Justice,
and infect the whole people and country. And we pass it over easly without
speaking against it. And why? O I will not bring my self in displeasure with a
man of authority. Let some other body lead the dance, and I will willingly
say, Amen too it. And if he were hanged on a Iebet a while, he had but his
desert. But no Godhamercie too me in the mean while. For why? I will not go
put myself in any hazard (for the matter.) Thus are vices passed over
nowadayes. But yet will not God give over his right for all that. For the said
sentence shall stand inviolable on his behalf, and according too the same shall
we be condemned as full of treason, that is too wit, we shall be hild for
companions of the wicked, if we play the blind and deaf (beasts) when we
should restreyne naughtiness by setting of our selves against it, and (as much
as in us lies) do suffer Gods honor too be so abaced, as all honesty is
overthrown, and we say nothing too it. Therefore ought we too be the more
attentyue too this warning too rebuke evil, and (as I said before) by showing
(too the uttermost of our power) that we mislyke of it, and also by being
diligent too let it, if it lie in our power too do it. If every man employed
him self after this sort, surely we should see another manner of soundness in
the world. For what is the cause that Gods name is so much blasphemed? It is
for that the blasphemies are cloked, and every man had lever too defyle him
self with other men's lewdness, than too purchase any disfavor or mislyking,
as they say. In like case is it with drunkenness, lechery, robbery, and all
extorsions and wanton doings that are committed. But had we the zele that is
commanded us here by Saint Paul: surely we should be much more corageous
and stout in rebuking such as do amiss. On the other side also we show our
selves too have no love nor kyndnesse among us, when we suffer good men too
be trampled under foot and misuzed, for we ought too reach them our hand.
Agein, men's s^ules go too destruction, and we remedy it not, though God have
done us the grace, too place us in his sted, in that office of saving the
things, that were in the way too be lost and damned.

Now S. Paul having spoken so, adds to confirm the same doctrine, and too
quicken up the slothfulness that is in us, that the cause why the vn^eleeuers
take liberty too do such evil, even as they be ashamed too speak of, is
for that they can hyde themselves (from men.) And why? For they have no fear
of God: and therefore they take themselves too be well hydden. When a these
perceyues no body near him, he rifleth cubboordes, he breaks open doors, he
filcheth, and he catches and caryeth away. Uery well, because he cannot yet
be convicted before a judge, he bears himself on hand, that he is escaped
quyte and clean. If a Robber or a murderer get intoo some blind nooke, he
thinks himself well hidden, and if he find a man astray, he pulles him too
him, and strippes him, and wounds him, yea and cutes his throat too, if he
cannot otherwise master him, and he thinks himself well escaped, because no
man sees him. In like case is it with all other deeds: for we be more ashamed
of men, than afraid of God. The scripture cries out, that all our thoughts must
come to account, and that not only our wicked deeds shall be punished, Psalm. 32.
a. ^.
but also even the things that we thought too have bin buried. For at the last
day the books shall be laid open, that is too say, nothing shall be forgotten,
except we have obtained this grace that is promised in the Psalm, namely that
God forgyueth our s^mes. And that is not done without repentance. But they
that are inhardened too all evil, do but make a monk of it: so they be not
put too shame for it before men, let God do what he will. For they be grown
so brutishe, that they cannot wake, too consider what it is too harden their
hearts against the souereine Majesty of God. Therefore when the unbelievers
and despyzers of God, get covert and lurking holes after that sort, there is so
vile lycentiousnesse among them, as a man would be ashamed too think what
they do and say.

But Saint Paul adds, that when they be rebuked, the mischeef is
discovered, and their liberty cut of, because it is a bridle too them. Not
only because they be blamed before men, but also because they feel themselves
too have too do with the heavenly Judge, and that it is a dreadful thing too
fall intoo his hands. Too be short, Saint Paul meant too show too what
purpoze rebuking may serve, when we use it ryghtly and with good zele of
charity. Now I have told you alredie, that we must not use any hypocrisy,
nor iustifye our selves by condemning other men. But when every of us has well
examined his own life, and hates the vices wheretoo we be subject, and
wherein we be wrapped: let us indeuer too bring our selves home unto God,
praying him too strengthen us so by the power of his holy spirit, as we may
strive too frame our selves according too his will and ryghtuousnesse. And that
done, let us not flatter such as do amiss, but let us tell them freely the
thing that may do them good. The profyt that will come thereof (says Saint
Paul) is that God shall not be so grievously offended as we see he is: and
moreover whereas men were past shame before, they may by that mean be brought
too some honesty, and whereas it seemed too them that they had leave too do
all manner of evil: they shall repent themselves, and draw others too
repentance with them. But much more ought this (that follows) too move us.
For too say, that we should line in this world, and enjoy the infinite
benefytes that God bestowed upon us, and in the mean while suffer his
authority too be defaced, even when it may seem that men would pluck him
out of his seat by blaspheming his holy name: when men shall provoke him too
anger, and we let all slip: must we not needs be arrant villeins and
traitors? If we were found at some man's cost, and one should rail upon him
in his own house, or practice too murder him, or rob him of his goods, or
defyle his wife, or intyce his child too naughtiness: and we in the mean
while should sit cramming of our selves, and eat of his bread and drink of
his wine, and (too be short) be fed and maynteyned at his charges, (and yet
let all alone, and say nothing too it:) should we not deserve too be stoned,
and too have all men too spit in our faces? Yis certeynly: for the vice of
unthankfulness shall always be condemned, even among men. Now if we be so
much bound unto a mortal man, as too maynteyne his honor and honesty, when
we be found of his free cost: what ought we too do for our God? Are we not
in his house as long as we live in this world? Have we so much as one drop
of water but only of his goodness and liberality? Behold, God has a fatherly
care of us: and yet notwithstanding we suffer his name too be blasphemed, his
majesty to be bereft and spoiled of al reverence, his word too be torn in
pieces, all order (that he has commanded) too be broken, the Church (which
is his wife) too be corrupted and misuzed, and his children too be intyced
too naughtiness: and in the mean while we play mum bowget. I would feign
know of you, whether such silence do not sufficiently show, that we be not
worthy too eat one bit of bread, nor too be counted in the number of earth
woormes, Lyce, Cimies, and other of the vylest and filthyest things of the
world? Therefore let us think well upon it, that we shall be found guilty of
the despyzing of Gods majesty, (as we see) because we rebuke not men's vices.
That is a cause why the wicked and heathenish sort wax the bolder, and think
the world to run on wheels on their side, and triumph in their despyzing of
God after that fashyon: it comes partly of our silence. And that is the thing
which S. Paul meant too show us here.

It follows moreover, that the wretched souls whom our Lord Jesus Christ
has bought so deerly, that he spared not himself to have saved them, do
perish, and are given intoo Satan's possession through our sufferance: and in
the mean while we make none account at all of it. Now then, do we not
therein bewray that we have not so much as one drop of charity in us? Yis:
and that is the cause why I said, that (in so doing) we be traitors too
God and too our neighbors. For when we have no better zeal toward Gods
name, nor better care of our neighbors welfare, does not the world see every
way that we be full of cruelty and unkindness? Of cruelty I mean toward
men, in that we suffer them too perish, even knowing it, and looking upon it:
and of unkindness toward God, because we yield him not such honor as he
deserves, when we have not the courage too show, that at leastwyse we
mislyke that men should so derogate Gods authortie, and the reverence which
they owe too him. Therefore whenever we be afraid too provoke men's
displeazure, or too purchase their ill will, let us think upon the thing that
is told us here: namely that we ought at leastwyse too fear the Lord, whose
we be, and that seeing we be fed at his cost, we must not abide too see
such lewdness committed against him, without showing (as much as is possible,
and too the uttermost of our power and ability) that we do utterly abhor
such things: I say, as far as we can: for some times our mouths shall be
so shet, as we shall be able too do no more but sigh and lament at such
utter disorder, when men become like devils that are let looce, in flinging out
intoo furiousness against God, and they that bear the sword seek nothing
but too make a confuzed medly, too the intent that all goodness may be
forgotten. For then (as I said) we have none other remedy, but too be sorry
for it, according as it is said of Loath, that it grieved his heart too be in
Sodom. 2. Pot. 1 b. 8.
Therefore let us not forbear, but let every of us provoke himself too grief
and sorrow, when we see things so out of order, and let us give record of it,
as far as it may do good.

Agein, if there be any hope for us to win those that are so unruly: let us
continually assay too draw them too repentance, yea, let us streyne our selves
too it. For many men allege this proverb too lightly, that a man must not
cast perles among swyne. And they bear them selves on hand, that men are
swyne, before they have tried what they be. Though they have bin of light
behavior, yea, or even looce and lawless, so as the devil has after a sort
carried them away: yet must we labor too win them agein, 1. Cor. 13. c. 7.
and have good hope of it, according too Saint Paul's saying, that Charity
hops well of all things. So then, until such time as men show themselves
utterly wilful in evil, and that their diseases appear too be utterly
incurable, let us indeuer too be good Physicians too them, by the aduyzements
that God shall put intoo our mouth. And so ye see what S. Paul intended, in
saying, that the unbelievers think themselves too be hidden, when they be
not perceived nor rebuked, and that when they be let go at rouers, they be as
it were in the dark, and theruppon conceive the more boldness too do
wickedly.

But we be partly the cause of it, and we cannot wash our hands of it: for
God sets us in his room in that behalf, and gives us his word, which
has authority too condemn evil, and yet notwithstanding all is suppressed
and thrust under foot. Mark that for one point. But on the contrary part,
when the wickeddest men in the world be rebuked, then perceive they their
shame, whereas before, they discerned not white from black. And why? For if a
man be in the dark, he sees nothing at all, but staggereth and stumbleth:
and though he be never so much berayed, yet he perceyueth it not. Therefore
when Gods word is set before men, and we show offenders their faults with
such liberty as is requisite: it is as much as if we showed them a glass,
(and said too them.) See what thou art, thou art as foul and filthy as may
be: art thou not ashamed too see thy self? go wash thy muzzle. So then,
warnings will always win thus much, howbeeit not alyke with all men: for (as I
said before) many are hardened, so as Satan possesses them, and God has given
them up too such a wilful stubborn mind, that they be past all shame.
Nevertheless whenever any faithful man does his dewtie, it will always
do good, and some profit will come of it, insomuch that they which were erst
as wood beasts, or as wyld bullockes, will return, and a man shall see some
honesty in them. Therefore let us win that point, if it be possible for us,
or at leastwyse let us streyne our selves too win it. And so ye see what we
have too gather upon those words of Saint Paul.

Now as touching the word Rebuke: it signifies properly too discover the
thing that was hyd. And he allotteth this office unto preaching, according
wheruntoo he taunteth the vaynglorie that reigned in the Church of Corinth, ^.
Cor. 14. ^. 2.
for their speaking with strange tungs too the intent too be commended, and
that men might say of him, This man is a great Clerk, this man can speak all
languages: and yet in the mean while there was no edifying at all. Likewise in
these days, in the popedom the Organes are pyping at one side, and there is
chaunting of four parts on the other side, and there is such store of
gewgawes, that the simyle people are ravished, but never a whit edifyed. But
Saint Paul says, that when we be come together in the name of God, we
must indeuer too fare the better by it. And how may that be? It is (s^yeth he)
when good men, and such as are already inured too fear and serve God, are
edifyed by his word. And not only that, but also if an unbeliever comes in,
which was erst a mocker, and never had any remorse of conscience, and hear
what is uttered in the name of God, (that is too wit, that we cannot escape
(Gods hand,) but must needs come before the judgment seat of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and how deerly Jesus Christ has paid for us, and what a
trayterousnesse it is for us too make the sacrifyze of his death and passion
vnauaylable:) I say, when an vnbeleeur hears all this, and that we be
exhorted too fear God, and stirred up too love him for the infinite grace
which he utters toward us: Although he were erst as a brute beast (says S.
Paul) yet shall he enter into himself and be rebuked. For he uses there the
same word which he uses here, the meaning whereof is, 1. Cor. 14. d. 24.
that whereas his conscience was as good as dead before, and he in manner brutish:
he was enforced too enter into examination of him self, and too be ashamed, so
as he could not but give glory unto God. Not that this befalls too all
indifferently: but we see that a number of folk which were gone astray, and
had forgotten God, and had no regard at all of their own soul health, shall be
so touched at one sermon, that they appear too be changed all their life
after. Now look what is done in common assembly: the same ought every man too
practyze by him self. For we be not here too the intent that every man should
profit him self only: but too the intent we should also teach one another
with mutual instruction. After that manner must we rebuke offenders, too the
end they may take no more liberty too mock God after that fashyon, nor to
shake of his yoke, and to wander into all naughtiness. And that is in effect
the thing that Saint Paul intended too show us here.

Now too confirm this doctrine the better, he adds yet one other reason: It
is the light (says he) that lays all things open. Heretoofore he told us,
Ephe. 5. c. 8.
that when we be once inlyghtened by Gods spirit and Gospel, we must be as
lamps too give light intoo the world. For we have the word of life, which
serves, not only too guide us, but also too draw them intoo the right way,
which have gone astray. Going forward herewithall, he says, that it is the
nature and property of light too discover. And therefore when we suffer
naughtiness to nestle and to grow still deeper and deeper in huththermuthther;
we show well that we be another light, nor children of the light, that is too
say, that we belong not awhit* another too God, nor too Jesus Christ. Too be
short, Saint Paul means that we cannot give any proof of our christianity
nor of our faith, but by hating and abhorring of evil, as much as is possible,
that it may not have his full course and sway. But now let us think upon our
selves agein. For (as I said) there is none of us all which is not faulty in
fearing men more than God, and in winking at others, to the end that they
should wink at us, and not be inquisityue of our doings. Lo how we betray
one another by our silence. But there is yet another vice that is worse and
further cut of dsquare: namely that besyos our dissembling, we do also help
too feed the evil. And so by that means whoredom has his full scope,
because every man and woman plays the baude. Whereas I say, every one, I mean,
that most men and women now adays do wink at al manner of lewdness and
misorder, and stop their ears at the things which they might well hear, and
every man seeks too conceal his fellows lewdness, men of men's, and women of
women's. They might remedy a great sort of enormities that are committed: but
they will rather go and ^eray their Gowns and Cotes with other folks dung and
filthiness, than discover their vices. Too be short, every body plays the
bawd in effect, by concealing his neighbors vice, too the end that the other
should do as much for him. In like case is it with all other sins. Yet
notwithstanding (as I said before) God has not spoken this in vain, but we
shall one day feel the execution of the sentence which he speaks here by
his Apostle, and then will it be too late too forethinke us of that which we
will not know now. But let such as fear God learn and remember how it is
said here, that Gods inlyghtening of us, is too the end that every of us
should examine himself, and not be as blind wretches, groping in the dark,
which stu^ble on the one side, and run against things on the other, but that
we should know the way of salvation: and moreover teach other men also, by
discovering the evil that lay hidden, too the end that such as have turned
their backs upon God, and were well appayd too have bin in darkness still,
may understand that they must be feign too come too the light, whatsoever come
of it. The very way therefore for us too show in deed and in good earnest,
that we belong too God, and are inlyghtened by his holy spirit and by his
word, is too discover things which should else as it were lie lurking a long
time, if we drew them not forth intoo the light. True it is that Charity
covers a multitude of sins (as says Solomon) and that it behooves us too
be pacient, Prou. 10. b. 12.
and too bear with many infirmities. For it is not meet that we should
diffame one another, 1. Pet. 4. b. 8.
as diverse do, who in stead of warning those whom they see too offend, fall
too sowing abroad of news, so as the streets and the market places are all
full of them, yea, and they do so inhaunce the matter, that of small scapes
they make deadly crimes.

Therefore when Saint Paul bids us discover men, it is not meant that we
should defame one another after that manner: but that the wretched man which
had his eyes blyndfolded by Satan, should be made too perceive his own
misery and naughtiness, that he might be ashamed of it: and that the woman
which had given over her self too all unchastity, might be made too recover
some honesty, and too return agein intoo the right way, by being put too
shame in having her faults and vices laid before her. The manner then of
discovering, is not too backebyte one another, or too taunt and upbraid one
another by this and that, and too play the hipocrytes, who will streyne at a
gnat, Math. 2^. c. 24.
and swallowe up and Ox or a Sheep at a morsel: that is too say, which will
make conscience in very small and light matters, and not see a number of great
enormities, which they suffer too pass hard by their nozes, without being any
whit offended at them. We must not do so: but when we see the mischeef fed
and increaced by our unfaithfulness, let us provide for it. and let every man
be compelled too think better upon himself and upon his vices, that he may
amend them. This in effect is the carefullnesse which Saint Paul inioyneth us
here: and it is the very mean to rid away the plagues that Satan would have
maynteyned still by silence and dissimulation. Therefore whenever we
perceive any impostume lying hid, let us beware that the matter settle not so
long within, till the disease become incurable: but let us purge it out of
hand, and let admonitions serve as it were for launcers, and letting of blud,
and for such other means and helps too take away the rotten matter that might
mar and infect the whole body. And so ye see in effect how we ought too
put this doctrine in ure.

Now heeruppon Saint Paul infers, that Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ, in
all the doctrine of the Gospel, speaks too them that are fallen aslepe in
their sins, and to such as are as good as dead, too the intent they should
wake and ryze up: and so shall we beee inlyghtened by him. Now we have here
too remember first of all, that Jesus Christ does then raise us from the
dead, when he calls us too the faith, and brings us intoo the hope of
salvation. And that is too the intent we should perceive our state the better.
For we see how men sooth and glorifye themselves. Although there be nothing
in them but utter confuzion: yet notwithstanding they will needs put out their
hor^es like Suayles too vaunt themselves, as it were in despyte of God and
nature. Now the Scripture says we be dead. We may well have some
resemblance of life, before we be converted too the faith of Jesus Christ:
Howbeit, that life is but death before God. And that is the cause why it is
said in Saint John, John. 5. c. 25.
The hour is come that all they which hear the voice of the son of man,
shall live though they be dead, and shall pass from death too life. Jesus
Christ speaks not there of the visible death, nor of the resurrection which we
hope for at the latter day. But he shows us how we have already a preparatyue
of the second rising agein, when God renews us, and gives us a spiritual
life. For we can do nothing but evil, as has bin declared heertoofore. And
Saint Paul also uses the same phraze of speech, namely that we be dead too
Godward. Following the same matter here, he shows us that the whole drift of
the Gospel is, that we should ryze from the dead. For as long as we be
strangers too God, who is the welspring of life: where are we but in such a
dungeon, as it had bin better for us never too have bin borne? But we must
wake: for one part of our death is this blockishnesse wherein we be, according
as I declared heeretoofore, that we be so corrupted before hand even from our
moothers womb, as we can find no savor in well doing, and that we be
stark blinded in our wicked lusts, and the devil dryueth us and thrusts us
foreward in such wyze, that as long as God gives us the bridle, we can do
nothing but grub down too the bottom of hell, too sink our selves the deeper
in it. Now be we once come too that point, there is no more sorinesse (as S.
Paul said before, Ephe. 4. ^. 19.
) there is nothing but such stubbornness, as God is nothing with us, another
have we any more feeling or perceyuerance of our sins. That is the cause why
he says here, that we must wake, because we be in a deadly sleep, until
God stir us up, and make us perceive what we be, that we may abhor our
sins and return unto him. So then, the entrance of life and salvation, is,
that God visits us with his grace, whereas we were as dead wretches, and had
nothing in us but utter corruption. Mark that for one point.

Secondly let us mark, that besides the naughtiness which is in us, there is
also so great a hardness and wilfulness, as God must be feign too wake us as
it were by force, that we may have some feeling of our vices too mislyke them.
True it is that this is done cheefely when God calls us, and pulls us out
of the confuzion wherein we were. But yet must every Christian continue therein
all the time of his life. For we shall never be so thoroughly awake, but that
we shall have need of Gods stirring up of us still: according as ye shall
see some folk so heavy asleep, that even when their clothes are on, and when
they be up upon their feet, they go reeling still, and be as it were half
in a slumber, v^tyll they stretch forth themselves and set their hands too
some buzinesse, and they be so heavy and dumpishe, that they still slumber
even waking. Even so is it with us: for although our Lord Jesus Christ have
done us the grace too draw us back from death, and too quicken us by his holy
spirit and by his word: yet shall we still feel our selves slothful and
sluggish, so as he must be feign too waken us still. And therefore we have
need too be exhorted every day, yea and too have our ears beaten early and
late, as though Jesus Christ cried out shrill and loud unto us, what do ye
ye wretched souls? Whereat look ye? Though we heard such warnings without
ceassing: yet should we not be so thoroughly awake as were needful. Now then
we see what S. Paul meant to declare in this streyne: namely that look what
we feel through Gods goodness in our selves, we should put the same in ure
toward our neighbors. Now, our Lord Jesus Christ has rayzed us from the
dead, and he wakeneth us daily from the dead sleep wherthrough we be so
drowzie: and that is too the end that we should afterward wake up others that
one asleep, and indeuer too draw those too life, which are as poor dead men.

Furthermore whereas he says, And Jesus Christ will inlyghten thee: It is not
meant that we can ryze up and awake of our own power, and that our Lord Jesus
Christ does afterward add his grace. He means nothing so. But the effect
of his intent is, that we shall be inlyghtened by Jesus Christ. And after what
manner? Not only as though we were but in some dark place (says S. Paul) and
had need of a Candle as in the night time: For though a man see not very
clear, yet if he have but some glimring of light, whether it be of moon, or
of stars, or of any thing else: he will have an ame too say, here is such a
door or gate, and here is such a path or way: And a man's eyes are not utterly
unprofitable when he goes by night, how dark so ever it be:) But our Lord
Jesus Christ inlyghteneth us after a much more woonderous manner. For we be
not only in the dark, but also stark blind. The remedy therefore which the
son of God brings us by teaching us the doctrine of the Gospel, is that
he gives us our sight agein. For our eyes are pikt out by the sin of our
first father A^am, who would ^eeds see too clear* Uaynglor iousnesse did so
carry him away, that he would needs discern between good and evil, more than
was lawful for him. But in sted of having greater light, he became brutish,
and we with him, insomuch that all of us continue blind. Now therefore we had
need too have our eyes restored us agein, and too have Gods spirit too serve
us in sted of eyes. Mark that for one point.

Agein, in this world there is nothing but dull darkness, yea and that so
thick, as we wot not how too step one pace without stumbling, or without
straying out of our way. Therefore it stands us on hand too be guyded, and
that our Lord Jesus Christ show us the way. This is it that Saint Paul
declares too us here, and how our Lord Jesus inlyghteneth us: namely, not
only that we be dimsyghted, and that he helps us, and supplyeth the want
that is in us: but also that we be stark blind, yea and dead, and finally
even in the pit of hell, like as when a Coarse is laid in the grave, men may
well bring Candels and Torches too it, but it sees never the more for all
that. So then our Lord Jesus imparteth his light unto us, not too make us see
more clearly than we did before: but to give us our whole ^ysyght new agein,
because we be stark blind. Now then seeing that Jesus Christ speaks after
this manner, and contineweth day by day in wakening us, and in making us too see
cleerer and cleeres: ought we not too follow his example, and too hold back
our neighbors as much as we can, when we see them straying too their
destruction? This is the pith of the things (...) showed us here.

Now seeing that our Lord Jesus sets, (...) forth for an example and
pattern: needs must we be too barbarous and savage, if we be not touched with
it. And how? The son of God has not only voutsafed too do his office in
inlyghtening us, and too show us the way of salvation, and to waken us from
the deadly sleep wherewith we were overwhelmed: but also, when he has
inlyghtened us, he will have us too serve as Lamps for others too follow,
that we may show them the way, so as he will have us (after a sort) too
execute the one half of his office. Seeing then that the son of God has
done us such honor: if we for all this, do thrust this light vuder foot,
and another do good too our selves nor too other men with it: is it not too
heinous a treachery? Agein, if we imagine our selves too be discharged of our
dewtie, when every of us does for his own part refreynes (...) dooyng evil,
and in the mean time let others go too destruction, (...) as we have another
care nor willingness to remedy the matter, when we see the Devil hale them
after him too everlasting death: must we not needs perceive therein that we
do God great wrong and injury, in holding his light choked after that
fashion, and in betraying our neighbors, by suppressing so the benefyte which
should serve too the everlasting salvation of their souls? Ye see then that
we shall be always blame worthy both before God and man, unless we
follow the thing that is showed us here by our Lord Jesus Christ, and bear
this doctrine always in our hearts too put it in ure: namely that they which
call themselves Christians, and will be so taken, must therwithall be as
trumpetters too waken such as are asleep, and as guydes too direct such as go
astray, and too bring them intoo the right way, which were wandered out before.
After that manner (say I) must we all deal, and continue in so dooyng, until
we be come too the happy meeting, when our Lord Jesus Christ shall call us
all too him, too put us in possession of the heritance which he has purchaced
for us.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us perceive them more and more, and in any
wise not too suffer us too fall asleep like wretched infidels, but that
forasmuch as it is his will that our life should be as one continual day,
wherein he gives us not the Sun too inlyghten us only for a time, so as
night should afterward come upon us, but guydeth and governs us himself
(...) night and day: we may take such profit thereby, as he suffer us not too
return too darkness agein, after he has so inlyghtened us, but keep us
still waking, too go through in the holy calling whereto he has called us, and
too follow the way which he shows us, so as we may call others too us, too
run all toogither unto him, as he calls us, until we be fully come
thither. That it may please him too grant this grace, not only too us, but
also to all people and Nations of the earth. etc.

The.xxxvii. Sermon, which is the fifth upon the fifth Chapter.
15. Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
vvyle:

16. Recovering the time: for the days are evil.

17. Wherefore be not vnvvyse, but understanding what is the will of the Lord.

18. And be not drunken with wine, vvherin is loocenesse.


THe care that we have of our tempor all profit, will suffyze too condemn us
before God, of the negligence that is seen in us, when we come too the well
ordering of our life. For we think too escape by this excuce, that we
thought not of it. But is it a tolerable fault, that when God calls us too
him, and sets the heavenly life (...) us, specially telling us how deerly it
was purchaced, and requires nothing but that we should yield him his right,
that is too say, that we should glorify him in true obedience: all this should
be nothing with us? Must it not needs be that we be too too gross headed,
too stand buzzing about a straw, as ye would say, and about a sort of
things that vanish away, and in the mean while too despyze the kingdom of
heaven after such a sort, as too make no account of Gods service, and too
esteem the salvation of ^ur souls as a thing of nothing? Yis: And therefore S.
Paul exhorts us now too be more waker, than we have bin wont: and first he
says, that in this ^ace we must stand upon our ga^d, and not imagine that God
must acquit us for out blo^kishnesse sake, when we be entangled in this
world, and by that means think not upon the kingdom of heaven. Take heed
(says he) that ye walk circumspectly. It is true that although we look
never so nearly too our selves, yet shall we not miss too be carried away by
our infirmities, and we commit many faults, not only through ignorance, but
also even wittingly, and oftentimes we be not strong enough too withstand
temptations so manfully as were requisite. Nevertheless if ye search narrowly
why men pardon themselves many offenses so easly, and why they bear themselves
on hand that God thinks not on them: ye shall find that it proceeds of
negligence. For if we considered that we walk in the presence of God and his
Angels: surely it would hold us in another manner of awe than we be. That
therefore is the cause why he does expressly require here a great care and
circumspectnesse in us, too the intent that no man should give himself over
unto evil for want of taking heed.

And too provoke us the more theruntoo, he adds, that we have need too
redeem the time, because the days are evil. Wherein he shows that we
cannot deuyze too abuze Gods grace so little, but it is a wilful lozing of
the time, which we cannot recover afterward. Now then, let us gather a breef
sum of the things that are contained here, and let us begin at this point,
that the days are evil, whereby Saint Paul does us too wit, that we shall
find many lettes too keep us from coming unto God. For we know we be
hemmed in with so many corruptions, that even they which are best minded, shall
stumble on the one side, be pulled back on the other, and diverse times stray
quyte away. Now we had need of a singular inwoorking, too fight in such wise
as we may get the upper hand of all the impedimentes that Satan castes before
us, to pluck us from our God, and to thrust us quyte and clean out of the way
of salvation. And therefore this has bin true in all ages, that forasmuch as
men are always froward of nature, and we be borne in sin: Satan holds us as
his prisoners. Agein, there is not that man among us, which draws not other
men too naughtiness. Moreover, we wot not scarsly how to open our eyes, but
we shall see some one thing or other, that may utterly overthrow us, and the
devil through his wylynesse applies all too his own woorking, that unless
we take good heed too his doings, he marreth us out of hand. But the more
that the world rages, and the more that iniquity ouerfloweth: the more ought
we too mark well this text, and the counsel that is given us here by the
holy Ghost. For surely now adays men are come too the full measure of all
enormite, and there is no part of the world where a man may find single and
sound dealing. In old time yet a man might have found some Nations, where the
folk were not so crafty and malicious, nor so excessive in pomp and all
kinds of pleazures, nor so far over the shoes in robbery, cruelty, and
extorsion. But now adays let a man go about euerywhere, and he shall find that
there is nothing but as a horrible water flud and confuzed turmoyle of all
wickedness. And therefore if Saint Paul have said, that the days were eui^l,
when there was a hundred times more soundness than there is now adays: we
ought too be the more vigilant in keeping good watch, according too the
increacing of the euilnesse of the time. If there be any fear of war, every
of us will abate his countenance, and consider that it is not for him too
hazard all at one chop, but that he must reserve some little sprincling for a
pinch, as well of vittelles as of other things. Also if we have any other
trubbles, every of us will be forecasting enough in that behalf.

Let us bethink our selves (will we say) for necessity will drive us too it.
But now we see well the euilnesse of the days, that is to say, that all is
against us, and although we were the diligentest and circumspectest in the
world, yet shall we not fail too be taken ^ardie with many things, and too
find our selves hindered when we should serve God: and yet notwithstanding,
all this passes and slippeth away, and we mind it not at all. Therefore let
us bethink our selves, and learn too redeem the time, that is too say, the
mo occasions there be too provoke us too naughtiness, and too pull us away
from God, the more let every of us enforce and streyne himself too do good.
For we be wont too take the corruptnesse of the time for a cloak too cover
our sloth and vnlustinesse withal, and so we bear our selves always on hand,
that it is lawful for us too play the unthrifts among vuthriftes, as the
proverb says. If a man tell us that we must live indifferently and
vpryghtly: how shall I do then, will every man say? A man cannot buy a
pennywoorth of apples without some deceyt: and how then may I deal in wares or
marchaundyze? Agein, if a man tell us that we must live soberly and ^tayedly,:
yea, (say we) but who does it? If a man speak too us of patience and
myldnesse, and such other things: Is it not apparent (say we) that every man
behaueth himself clean contrariwyze? Shall I be al alone in the world? Lo
how we make vice our buckler against God, and against all the warnings that
are given us, as who should say, that because it is common, therefore it ought
too serve us for an acquittance or discharge. But contrariwyse it is said
here, that we must take so much the more pain too redeem the time, and the
more that the devil laboreth to hinder us, and the more means and wyles that
he has too do it withal, the more must every of us employ himself manfully,
and waken up all his wits and understanding, praying God too strengthen us, and
too give power too risist him. Thus ye see that our redeeming of the time must
not be by making of temporal (and worldly) gain, for in that behalf we
need another counsel nor incoragement, every man is too much inclyned that way
of his own nature, and our lusts are so fyrye, as they will not suffer us too
be flothfull in that case. But since we see the devil goes about to trubble
us, that we should not spend our lives in the serving of God: let us redeem
the time in that respect. And after what manner? In that he speaks of
redeeming, (raunsoming, or buying agein) he presuppozeth that we must forgo and
looze the thing that we were desirous too have kept. For when we be too
redeem a thing that was gone out of our hands, or (too buy) a thing that we
need, or too (compound for) a thing that another man withholdeth from us: in
those caces we forgo some piece of our profit. If another man have laid hold
of a thing that were for my commodity: I must give him a piece of money too get
it out of his hand agein. Even so is it said, that we must redeem the time.
And after what manner? Not always with gold and silver: but by forsaking our
own lusts. It is true that some time gold and silver must be spent about it.
For if worldly riches turn us away, or pluck us back from following
whithersoeuer God calls us, we must redeem the time, that is too say, all
that ever we perceive too be noisome and offensive after that sort, must be
thrust under foot. Howbeeit there are many other means besides. For some are
so snarled in their ambiciousnesse, as this world has altogether ravished
them, and they take no taste of the everlasting life, for any thing that can be
preached unto them. Othersome be given too deceyuing, and others too
extorsion. According then as every man sees the Devil able too win of him, and
too make him to looze his time, by consuming it in wicked things: so let him
redeem it, that is too say, let him reform himself, and forsake both
himself and all the temptations wherewith he might be entangled. Ye see then,
that the thing which we have too mark upon this streyue, is, that
considering the corruptnesse which is now adays throughout the world, and the
great number of outrageous vices, and how all things are quite out of order,
and (too be short) that even the perfectest men are somewhat infected with the
vices, and disorders that are euerywhere: in stead of seeking vain excuce, by
alleging that we be weak, and unable to overcome the great number of
impediments that are offered us, we must redeem the time.

Now the only mean too do it, is too understand that Satan's thrusting of us
down after that sort, is no sufficient discharge for us before God: for if we
resort unto him, he will give us armor and weapon too hold out the battle
withal, until we have gotten the victory. But howsoever the case stand, let
it not grieve us too lay away the things that we lyked of, and too hold our
wicked affections as it were imprizoned, and then will it be easy for us too
follow the thing that Saint Paul says here, that is too wit, too be
watchful and heedfull that we walk aduyzedly, even as VVyzefolk, and not as
fools. We have seen already heretoofore, that if we profit in Gods school
as we ought too do, we shall have a sure rule, and cannot be deceived nor
seduced. For God knew what we have need of, and he has not forgotten too
show us any thing. And therefore Saint Paul presuppozeth that although we be
blind wretches, although we be overwhelmed with the darkness of this world,
although the devil have many suttleties and wyles to wynd about us: yet if
we be good scholars too Godward, and suffer our selves too be ruled by him
and his word: we shall have sufficient wisdom, and we shall not be able
too say, that we offended unawares: for God is forecasting enough too rule our
whole life, at leastwyse if we harken too all that he says, and yield our
selves easy and willing too be taught. If it be so: then may we surely be
wise, as Saint Paul requires.

And in deed he expounds him self by and by after in saying, that we must
not be vnwyze, but well aduyzed, and understanding what is the will of God. He
shows here what manner of wisdom he means. It is not as the world speaks
of it. For the world says, a man is very wise when he is suttleheaded to
deceive, and can skill to keep him self from his enemies, and maynteyn himself
by his shifting and policy. Or else, the wisdom of the world is also to lay
well aforehand for a man's own profit, whether it be by hook or by crook. For
there is no talk of the fear of God, there is no talk of equity, and much
less of single and plain dealing: because that he which will be wyze to the
worldward, must bear two faces in one hood, he must be malicious, he must be
full of lying. As for him that walks in truth, he shall be counted as a
do^terell, for he makes him self a ^ayt for every man too pray upon. He that
will not turn another too the right hand nor too the left, shall likewise be
called an idiot. Ye see then that the wisdom of the world cannot be without
lewdness and Psalm. (...) b. 10.
evil conscience. But S. Paul following the sayings of the scripture, namely
that the beginning of wisdom is the fear of God, Prou. 1. a. 7.and 9. c. 10.
and that the fear of God is the perfection of it also: tells us that when
we be skillful in Gods will, then are we wyze. His intent then is under
these words too condemn all the crafts, cautells, and suttleties that men
use, and wherein they welter themselves, and whereof they boast, and too show
that all such stuff is but lothsonmesse before God. What manner of wisdom
then shall there be in us? (enough) if we know what the will of God is. Yea,
but in the mean while how shall we behave our selves toward the world? God
will so bliss our simplicity, as we shall not fall intoo the s^ares of the
wicked. For we hear our Lord Jesus wills his disciples too be simple as
doves, Math. 1^. b. 16.
(which are silly birds, and soon scared away) and yet nevertheless too be
wyze as serpents. God therefore will not suffer us too be fleeced and eaten up
by the the wicked, though we live simply and plainly, and have none of all the
worldly shifts too resist them. Let us but only ^etake our selves to the
keeping of our God, and he will give us wisdom enough. Howbeeit the cheef
matter is not too have skill too maynteyne our selves in this world, and too
disappoynt men of doing us wrong and injury. We m^st begin higher: that is
too wit, at the ruling of our life in such wise as God may allow of it, and we
show our selves to know with what (...) he has set us in this world, and too
what end he has created and rede^med us, namely that we should come too the
inheritance of heaven. That is the way for us too be ryghtly wyze.

Agein, although this doctrine seem strange too such as are plundged in the
world, and utterly heathenish without knowing whertoo they be called: yet
notwithstanding if we look thoroughly intoo it, we shall see it is not
unjustly said, Psalm. (...). b. 10. and Prou. 1. a. 7. and 9. c. 10.
that there is no wisdom but the fear of God. For what do all they which
will needs auaunce themselves by their covetousness, ambition, and other trads
of theirs? It is certain that they do manifestly provoke Gods wrath against
themselves: and oftentimes they receive the reward which they deserve, for they
spin ha^tars, both for themselves and for their children: insomuch that whereas
they h^^ed too inriche themselves, or to maintain themselves in great (...),
and too leave an everlasting rememberance of themselves in their houses here:
God does so curse all their attempts, that the more they hoord up, and the
higher that they clyme, the more horrible is their fall and confuzion, so as
the goods which they had heaped up, are turned too their undoing, at leastwyse
too the worldward. But put the case that their prosperity hild always at one
stay: yet do we know that our happiness consists not in this transitory
life which is of no continuance, but is as a shadow that vanishes out of
hand. What shall we then think of the man, which being created after Gods
image, redeemed by the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, and adopted too be
companion with the Angels, does notwithstanding play the beast wilfully, by
forgetting what he himself is, yea and even the price of his salvation? If a
man which is created too inherit everlasting life, be contented with the
having of a three or four days pleasure here beneath, and never passes for
all the rest: must it not needs be that Satan has bewitched him, and bereft
him of all understanding and reason, and finally made him like a brute beast?
For if a man's son forsake his fathers house, and the sustenance that is
prepared for him there, and runnes^oging abroad too have a two or three days
pleasure, whether it be in whoredom or in any other laudnesse, and within a
while after becomes a beggar, and has not a morsel of bread too eat: will
not the world say, that such a child is starck blind, and worse than mad? Now
let us compare this too the heritage that is prepared for us in heaven, and was
purchaced so deerly for us: Let us see wherein it excels our wicked and
cursed lusts: Let us see whither those men do cast themselves which shrink
away from God, and what their end is like to be, when they be so gone away
from the welspring of life, and of all welfare and joy. So then, had we any
settled understanding, surely we would no more think it strange, that the true
wisdom of men is too live in the fear of God. For that is the thing wherein
all our welfare consists, as it is said in the Psalm. So much the more
therefore does it stand us on hand, too mark well this lesson, where S. Paul
tells us, Psalm. (...).
that we shall ever be as strangers from all welfare, so long as we seek
not too obey God.

Besyds the things before said, we have also too mark, that (as I said before)
there is not any other rule, than the framing of our life according too Gods
commandment. Would we then that God should allow of us, and like well of us?
Letvs us not rest upon our own intents, another let every of us be given too
much to stand in his o^ne conceyt, and too say, this seems good too me, it
must needs be so, for I like well of it. Let us beware of such over holdnesse,
and let us offer our selves too our God, assuring our selves that we cannot
do amiss in obeying him, inasmuch as it is our whole wisdom too inquyre of
his will. Now* can we say that our Lord has hidden any thing from us that was
for our behoof too know? No* for he protests that he will show us the way
of life, John. 14. a. 6.
so we be not s^ubborne, but bow down our heads with one accord too be
subject too his word. The same was protested long before of the Law, Deuteronomy. 30.
which notwithstanding was but dark in comparison of the Gospel: for there we
have the full and perfect sight. Now therefore let us not allege that we be
rude and gross, another the veryest idots in the world think too escape at
that starting hole, by saying, I am no divine, I never went too school. For
God has stooped in such wise, that all of us from the most too the least may
be taught familiarly by his word, so there be no replying nor geynsaying in
us, but that we suffer our selves to be guyded and governed by his will. Es^i.
4. c. 19.
And his will is manifest unto us, as he protests by his prophet Esaias. I
have not spoken unto you in secret (says he), I have not said in vain,
seek me, whosoever seeks me, I will be at hand with him, and show him
familiarly whatsoever is for his welfare. To be short, S. Paul presuppozeth
here (as he says too the Colossians, Coloss. ^. d. 28.
) that when the Gospel is preached unto us, there we shall find a
faultlesse wisdom, by means whereof we shall have a very certain way: and
therefore let us beware that we swerve not from it one way nor other.

It is true that all men shall not be so well inlyghtened as were requisite: but
whereupon is that to be wyted, but upon our own fault and negligence? And
agein, although many simple souls atteyne not too such knowledge, as might
lead them and direct them perfectly too the serving of God, according too
their hearts desire: yet notwithstanding, all they that submit themselves
humbly too Gods word, and receive it, and give themselves too it, and bear
such reverence toward it as they ought too do: shall surely have a good
loadstarre to lead them too the heritage of heaven, although they drag their
legs after them, and be not so well aduyzed as were too be wi^^ed. For this
cause Saint Paul rebukes al them of unthankfulness and stubbornness, too
whom the Gospel is preached, if they be not sure what Gods will is, for that
shows them as much as is for their (...). It is true that God will not make
us too s^ye above the clouds, nor feed our curiosity, as a number desire,
who would have speculations, and are fond too hear some new things, and would
(...) every day change of speech too tickle their ears withal. But God will
not follow our fancies so far. He will teach us the things that are
behooffull for the bri^ging of us unto him. And what would we more? That
therefore is the thing which we have too remember upon this saying of S.
Paul's.

Now then let no man think it strange that the wretched world is so run
astray, that every man peakes away alone by himself, and there is nothing but
confuzion euerywhere, as we see (for example) among the poor Papists, who
^^^tir themselves (...) of all measure, and yet fail so much of coming unto
God, that they go from him through their misaduyzed and brutish zele. And why?
For they pass not a whit for Gods will: but every man follows his own
fancy, and all of them excuce themselves under pretense of good intent. By
that mean has the world bin perverted, by that mean have all things bin put
out of order, and by that mean has all certeintie bin taken away: even
because that in sted of Gods will, which ought too be so apparent as every man
might ^ow down his neck too it, too receive the yoke that is laid upon him,
men have taken leave and liberty too do what they thought good of themselves.
Forasmuch then as Gods will has bin so despyzed, and men have bin so
di^elishly bold and ^uer weening, as too behave themselves after their (...)
^windge: it did put all things to confuzion, and the disorder of it is so great
yet still, that it ought to make us shudder too think upon it. So much the
more therefore does it stand us on hand, too hold our selves very soberly in
awe, by submitting our selves too God and his pure word, and not too wander
one way nor other, ^eeing that all our wisedeme con^^^eth therein. That is the
thing which w^e had too remember further, in Saint Paul's setting down of Gods
only will for the full rule of all things. But we cannot frame our selves
thereafter, unless we take our leave of all our ticklish lusts, and of all that
seems good in our own eyes, and suffer God to reign over us, and to have
such maystership among us, that we another add any thing too his pure word,
nor take any thing from it.

Saint Paul could well have said singly, that we must walk as folk well
aduyzed. But he adds also on the contrary part, that we should not be
fools and vnvvyze, to the end to show that it is but a mockery when men say,
I am let by other folks* I have not the means too follow my book, that I
might do good at it, or I am a poor simple soul, or a (...)* or a
handicrftes man. Therefore too cut of this geere, S. Paul tell^th, us that
although they which ween themselves too be wyzest, are but fools* yet
notwithstanding God will remedy such as suffer themselu^^ too be governed by
his word. Howbeeit let us mark (as I said before) that it is not for men too
advance themselves, or too be so proud as too think that they can govern
themselves as they ought too do: for the beginning of our wisdom is too be
fools in our selves, 1. Cor. 3. d. 18.
as has bin showed in the first too the Corinthians. But on the one side there
is presumptuousnesse, so that very few can humble themselves in such wise, as
not too be still plucked back and hindered by their own opinions: and (on the
other side) othersome are so rechlesse, that although they have their ears
daily beaten with Gods word, yet they continue dull still for all that can be
done. So much the more behooves it us too mark well the warning that is given
us here: which is, that too be well taught in Gods scoole, we must not bring
any whit of our own reason, another must we think our own deuyces good, but
we must be fools in our selves, that is too say, boyde of our own reason,
and we must give place and open way too Gods word, so as we accept without
any geynsaying whatsoever is uttered by his mouth.

Heereuppon Saint Paul comes back agein too certain particular and special
exhortations, as he had begone too do before, and first he says, that the
faithful ought too keep themselves well from being drunken with wine,
wherein there is disorder. As if he should say, that we must have such stay
of our selves in our eating and drinking, and so use the good things that God
has ordained for our sustenance, as too take measurable repast of them, and
not make our selves like brute beasts. Now, that we may profit our selves
well by this doctrine, we have too mark first of all, too what end our Lord
has appointed food and all other things that are for our sustenance. What
then is the lawful use of wine, of water, of bread, and of all other
vittelles? Uerily too feed our selves with them, according too the need of
our infirmity, and too sustain us so in life, as (...) do homage too him of
whom we hold our life, and by whom it is maynteyned, yielding him thanks for
his fatherly liberality: and secondly keep our selves occup^^d every man
according too his degree, and according too the ability that is given him.
Thus ye see that the lawful vs^ of mea^e and drink, is too sustain us: not
that we might be as blocks of timber, but that every of us might occupye
himself in (...) the things that God has ordained, too the behoof of his
neighbor, and too the earning of his own living honestly: and specially above
all things, acknowledge the benefytes that God of his infinite goodness
best^weth upon us, that he may be glorified in all things, as it is said in
another place. Now then we see that meat and drink ought too serve too lead
us to God. Colos. 3. c. 17.
For is it reason that when God shall have reached out his hand too power upon
us the benefytes that we receive of him, he should notwithstanding go
unknown, and we still cram our selves here at his cost, and yet forget him?
Were not that too leaud and detestable a beastliness? Therefore although meat
and drink be helps too our feebleness, yet ought we too refer all unto
God. In deed it seems at the first sight, that we be let and hindered
too do good, as well by eating and drinking, as also by sleeping. It is very
true: and thereby God shows what we be. But on the other side we must come
also too the recompense of it, that forasmuch as the time is after a sort lost
while we take our repaste, because we cannot apply our selves too the serving
of our neighbors (during that time:) our forslowing in that behalf may as it
were spur us too resort unto God, by considering what his goodness is
toward us, according to the proof that he sets before our eyes. Thus ye
see (as I said) that although our eating and drinking do hinder us too the
worldward: yet ought they on the other side too give us occasion too be more
cheerful in seeking God.

But now let us see what excess woorketh. If a man cram himself so full, that
he becomes vnweeldie, there is a change in his nature, and it is all one as
if he were at defyance with God and with nature, and with all order. For (as I
have said already) meat and drink are ordained too strengthen us, that we
may apply our selves to the things which God commands, and our vocation
requires. Now therefore, when a man is so pampered as he can no more, first he
has defiled the sustenance that God gave him* and secondly he changes
himself intoo a beast, and (as much as he can) defaceth the image of God.
Moreover God is forgotten. Is not this unkindness monstrous, as though a man
would mingle heaven and earth toogither? But this is not yet all: Saint Paul
adds here the vpshot of all enormitie when he says, that in drunkenness
and in all royot there is loocenesse, that is too say, men oue^shoote
themselves, putting away all shame, forgetting all honesty, and becoming wyld
beasts. We see that one of the properties of drunkenness is too drive men
either intoo whoredom, or intoo some other lewdness, and too cast them into
so sound a sleep, that they perceive nothing at all: let a man mock at them,
let him spit in their faces, they feel nothing of it. Agein, whatsoever commes
at their toungs end, out it goes, be it right or wrong, and they will as
soon blaspheme God, as speak vnius^ly of men: for there is no discretion at
all in them. Now when men are thus carried away, and whereas God had printed his
image in them, too make them reasonable creatures, and given them an excellent
state above all other living wyghtes: they fall too playing of the beasts
after that fashyon, and become like Asses and dogs: must it not needs be
understood, that drunkenness is one of the detestablest things that can be?
So then, Saint Paul meant too show us here in one word, that although there
were no true fear of God in us too restreyne us, nor we so well aduyzed and
discrete as too consider the true and lawful use of the venefytes that God
has granted us: yet we should refrain for shame of the world, forasmuch as
we see that a drunken man is as a confuzi^n too (...) all order, and there is
nothing too be seen in him but a lump of all lea^dnesse, insomuch that Gods
image is defaced, all reason quenched, and all things put out of order in him.
Therefore since we see that drunkenness is matched with such extremities: ought
we not too abhor it? And although S. Paul have given here but a short
glaunce at the enormicies that happen through drunkenness: yet we must
consider, that in the same he has also in general comprehended all the rest.
The thing then which we have too remember upon this streyne, is, that we
must be sober, and have a stay of our selves in our eating and drinking, and
that although there be abundance before us, yet we must be so discrete in
taking of our repaste, as our meats and drinks do not comber us* The very
heathen men saw that: and no (...)* for it is a knowledge that cannot be
wyped out, that we must eat and drink too li^e, and not live to eat and
drink: and agein, that we must take our ^^paste to strengthen us, and too make
us able too do our (...)* and no^ too make us unwieldy. For it is certain,
that bread and wy^e and meats are not ordained too cast men down: but
forasmuch as men should else decay for famine, Psalm. 104. b. 15.
our Lord renews them, and gives them their strength, according too this
saying of the Psalm, that wine gladdeth man's heart, and bread strengthens it.
And so ye see, what we have too remember in the first place.

And secondly let us consider, that when God suffers men to ouershoote
themselves into al lewdness, so as they be utterly without stay of
themselves, without honesty, without shame, and every man sees them to be as
brute beasts, and they themselves perceive nothing, but are as it were cast up
at randon to al shamefulnesse: it is a ryghtfull punishment laid upon them by
God for abuzing of his liberality, and for gl^tting of themselves without any
measure. Lo here the payment which this unhallowing of Gods benefyts
deserves, when we cannot use them according too his ordinance, and according
too the rule that he has set by his word, and imprinted in our hearts. For
though we had never heard one word, another of the Law nor of the Gospel:
yet are we sufficiently (...) even by beholding the order of nature, which the
very heathen men considered. And here we have too remember, that the mischeef
is dubbled when men step aside, and give over themselves (from evil too evil)
by degrees: and therefore much less ought it too serve too lessen their fault
as we see (a number would have it too do), who when they cannot deny but that
they have done amiss,, fall too this shift for their last refug^, saying, O,
ye may see, I was overtaken with the wine, my wits were intoxicate after I had
once drunk. Behold (I pray ye) how they that cannot start aside one way nor
other, would feign have their drunkenness too serve too acquit them before
God. But so little can that stand us in any stead, that contrariwyse we
shall be so much the more guilty. And in very deed, if Laws were well
ordained, a drunken man should have dubble punishment, when he had commit^ed
any offense through his vnsobernesse. And why so? For he was worthy of
punishment already for vnhalowing of the benfyts which God had dedicate^ to our
use, that they might move us too resort unto him. Whereas he gave them in
witness of his fa^herly goodness, the party ^^^zed them after that fashion,
and what a trayterousnesse is that? drunkards then deserve one punishment for
that. Agein, for as much as they be drawn too evil doing ^ far of, as
though they had confederated themselves with Satan: they ought too be punished
agein, for that they will needs excuze and cloak themselves. For although the
laws of men have not always that consideration, or that men observe not that
which ought too be observed: yet notwithstanding, they that give over
themselves after that sort, and let themselves looce intoo all lewdness
through their vnsobernesse, shall be driven too answer before God, for defyling
of the things which God had sanctified too his seruis, and wherein he had put a
mark of his goodness, too the intent too draw us unto him by the same. Then
if all be perverted in our eating and drinking: must we not yield an account
before God, for our abuzing o^ the benefyts that he had bestowed upon us,
contrary too his intent, as though we were minded too provoke him wilfully
too anger? Seeing then that drunkenness makes men so beastly, as too forget
themselves in such wise, that Gods image is defaced in them, and they become
like dogs and Swyne, and Asses: since we see our selves so disfigured (say I),
yea and (worthy) too be rejected of God as horrible monsters: and that we
do also lay open our own shame and dishonestie before men: ought not every of
us atleastwyse too bethink himself aduyzedly, and too bridle our lusts in such
sort when God gives us meat and drink, as we fall not intoo excess? Yis:
and so ^ee see in effect what we have too remember upon this streyne. And if
we cannot be so perfect as were ^equisyte, let us sygh for our faults, and in
any wise beware that we play not the beasts in eating and drinking, that God
may be so honored of us as he ought too be, not only by our doing of homage
too him for our life, but also by taking continual occasion by our meats too
be provoked too resort unto him. And let us understand, that he gives us
even now some taste of his love, too the end that in waiting for the full
inioyment thereof, we may learn too forsake the world, and serve him with the
willinger mind, knowing that he is not only our master, and has al
superiority and dominion over us, but also our father, and is desirous too win
us by his godnesse.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as we may truly
repent us of them, and always resort unto him too ask him forgiveness of
them in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he bear with us until he have
drawn us quyte and clean away from all the corruptions of the world and of
our flesh, and that we be so reformed as we may seek nothing, but by all
means too come too the perfect ryghtuousnesse wheruntoo he exhorts us. And
let us all say, Almyghtie God heavenly father.

The.xxxviii. Sermon, which is the sixth upon the fifth Chapter.
18* And be not drunken with wine, wherein is loocenesse: but be ye filled
with the Spirit.

19. Talking among you in Psalms, Praysinges, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody in your heart too the Lord.

20. Giving thanks alvvayes too our God and father* for all things in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ*

21. Being subject one too another in the fear of God.


We have seen this morning how God is offended when men abuze the benefytes
which he would have to be applied ^o such end as he shows by his word: and
therefore that all exce^^e and drunkenness ought too be shunned of the
faithful, because they know that God shows himself a father toowardes them,
by nurrishing them in this world: howbeeit not as when they shall be come too
the heavenly heritage, but by having at leastwyse some taste of his goodness:
for they be continualy confirmed in the hope which is given them by our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now if in sted of being drawn upward, men become so brutish, as
to looze all reason and ma^hood: it is an utter perverting of the order of
nature, it is as a defying of God for his own ben^fytes. But yet when
drunkenesse draws a long tail after it, and men flush forth into all
lea^dnesse, so as they be past all shame, and yet their shamefulnesse may make
folk too loath and abhor it: the mischefe is increaced so much the more. And
therefore too the intent too keep us in sobriety and orderly conversation:
Saint Paul says, we must keep our selves from being so overcome and
vanquished of wine.

And now on the contrary part he adds, that we must rather be filled with
the Spirit. For they that burst themselves so with eating and drinking, and
keep no measure, till they can no more, do well show that they have no
feeling of the kingdom of God, ne never tasted what the heavenly life is. This
remedy therefore is right convenient too correct all the excesses and
superfluities that reign among heathenish men, and such as never conceived any
incling of Gods grace and spiritual benefytes. Like as if a man that were
empty, should devour and swallow up al without chawing, it were rather an
ouerlaying of his stomach, than a taking of sustenance and repast: and
therefore if another man saw that vice in him, he would restreyne him: even so
is it with all such as have inordinate lusts: it is a token that they be too
empty. And whereof? Of faith, of the fear of God, and of the joy which is in
the holy Ghost: and that they know not a whit of Gods goodness and favor
toowardes them, nor of the grace which he shows us in our Lord Jesus Christ.
For had we once our bellyes full of such vittelles, surely we would not play
the Wolves in ravening, but we would keep mea^ure. That then is the cause why
Saint Paul says, that we must be filled with the holy Ghost. As if he
should say, that the despyzers of God, and such as have none other religion but
too live at ease here, and too have all their delyghtes and pleasures, are
excessiuely full, beyond all reason and measure. And that is a defyling of Gods
benefytes, and a despizing of the order of nature, as I said before. Now then if
ye be so sharp set too know what God is, and what it is too profit in his
word: come your ways to devour it, as they do which have eaten no meat a
two days before: be not afraid of eating too much of that food, for it will
never burst our souls. Therefore let us hardily cram our selves with the
gifts of Gods spirit, and with his Ghostly benefytes, whereby he feeds us in
the hope of the heavenly life: for in so doing we cannot do amiss: but we
cannot give head too our lusts, in taking food for the body, but there will
by and by follow some evil and offense. The matter which we have in effect
too remember upon this streyne, is, that all they which glut themselves after
that fashyon, and cannot satisfy themselves but by playing the beasts: show
well that they have not so much as one drop of faith, nor of the fear of God,
nor of religion in them* but that their bellye ouerruleth them, and that they
be so subject thereuntoo, as too their peculiar and principal Idol. Now
seeing it is so, let us learn to long after the food of our souls. And
forasmuch as it is liberally offered us from day too day, insomuch that it is
Gods whole desire that we should have all that suffyzeth for our salvation:
let us sharpen our appetytes too take such repast, and then shall we be sure
that (our other) meats shall not allure us too such gluttony, that we shall
become as insatiable gulfes, but we shall be contented with the having of that
which is meet for us, and sufficient for our necessity, at leastwyse too our
behoof.

Furthermore this similitude which Saint Paul uses, must not be thought
strange, when he says, that we must drink our fill of Gods spirit. Esai.
55. ^. 1.
For we know that the Prophet Esaias says, that Gods spirit is lykened too
Water, and too Milk, and too Wine, whereby we be inuyted too come unto God,
to take our repaste, and too have whatsoever is behooffull for us. Come on
(says he) and take at your pleasures both Milk, Wine, and Water, without
money, or monyes worth. Hereby therefore God declares unto us, that we shall
have abundance of all spiritual benefits, and sufficient too content us too
the full, if so be that we will but open our mouths (as it is said in the
Psalm) and not be so forepossessed of our own inordinate lusts, Psalm. ^1.
b. 11.
as we cannot find in our hearts too seek the principal. That is the further
meaning of the similitude that S. Paul uses here.

Now forasmuch as this doctrine is so ill put in ure euerywhere, we ought to
think the better of it. If a man consider how great emptiness there is in
them that profess Christianity: (he shall find that) they can scarsly say
three words too yield confession of their faith, for had they any in their
hearts, surely their mouths would utter it, according too this saying, Romans
10. b. 10.
that we believe with the heart unto ryghtuousnesse, and confess with the
mouth unto salvation. Howbeeit, if we be desirous too be filled: we need
not too be counseled too go seek the things that we need: we need but
only too receive the food that is proffered us and set before us. Yea, and this
serves well too upbraid us with our lewdness, in that we voutsafe not too
go unto God though he call us, nor too make account of that which he offers
us. We will not forget too eat and too drink for refresshing of our bodies:
and yet that will not content us another: for we could find in our hearts too
cobble up (as ye would say) the whole world. Yet notwithstanding even the
soberest are willing too have their ordinary repaste. The other sort do cram
in meat and drink a four or five times a day, and in the mean while the
wretched souls of them are hungry still. Therefore we must bear in mind
that the warning which Saint Paul gives us here, tells us, that too be
sober and well ruled, and too use measurably the benefits that God bestows
upon us: the soul must not be forgotten, but we must feed upon the
spiritual gifts, too lead us too the heavenly life, and too maynteyne us in
the hope thereof, until the full possession and fruition thereof be given us
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And hereuppon Saint Paul adds, that we should talk toogither in songs
and hymns, and also that the same should be done with the heart: because the
tongue would but vnhalowe Gods word, if the mind match not with the speech.
Now whereas he says, that we must talk toogither in hymns, praysings, and
songs: it is too correct all fond talk, wheruntoo we be too much given. For
we see that all of us have as it were itching ears: there is none of us which
is not well apayd too hear tryflyng bibblebabble: he that has received in on
the one side, is ready too deliver out on the other side: and so the day
passes away in things of nothing: or else our talk shall be wanton and looce,
meet too infect good manners, and God shall be offended with it. Ye see
then, that the thing whertoo men are too much inclyned, is, that too please one
another, they banish all talk that may edifye, and common of pelting tryfles
too move laughter, as they say. Now Saint Paul perceiving this vice to be over
common in the world, shows us here the remedy of it, that is too wit, that
we should talk one too another in songs and hymns, that is too say, that men
might hear the praises of God at our mouths. And he pursues still the
similitude that he had used heretoofore. For drunkards are not contented too
become beasts themselves: but they do also draw others. And riot has
always this inconvenience with it, that men incorage one another too drinking,
Esai. 2. d. 13. and 56. d. 12. and Wisd. 2. b. 6* and 1. Cor. 15. d. 32.
saying: come on, let us eat and drink, after the same manner that the Prophet
Esaias speaks of. Forasmuch then as Ryotters, after they have well stuffed
themselves, would that the same vice should raunge abroad euerywhere: Saint
Paul says on the contrary part, that when we have taken our repaste of the
gifts of Gods spirit, the same must not serve for our selves only, but also
too give refection and food too others that have need. The true feasting
therefore which we ought too make one too another too cheer our selves well,
is that he which has profited in Gods word, indeuer too deal some part and
portion of it too his neighbors, according too his own measure. Now he
vppeneth here Songs, Psalms, and Hymns, which differ nothing at all one from
another: and therefore I need not too buzie my self in setting forth any
curious distinction of them. For all comes too this end, that all our mirth
should ever tend too the glorifying of God. And surely we should take pleasure
enough in the mynding of Gods grace, if we were not withh^^d by our own
maliciousness.

And it is a wonder too see how desirous every man is, that God should show
him self liberal and loving toward him. We would feign enjoy his benefytes,
and yet in the mean while we put the rememberaunce of them under foot, and
labor (as much as in us is) even too bury them: and too our seeming, the time
is lost that is spent in acknowledging how many ways we be bound unto God:
and yet notwithstanding it is the thing wherein we ought too occupy ^ur
selves, it is the thing wherein our life ought too be cheef^yest employed. And
soothly if men were well aduyzed, there is no mirth comparable too this, nor
meet too be matched with it, namely with the acknowledging of how many ways
God has witnessed his goodness and love toward us. For (as I said) it
serves too further us in the hope of the heavenly life. And undoubtedly, none
of the things that we receive at Gods hand have any true sauerinesse, unless
we come too put our trust in him, and can call upon his name, and flee too him
for refuge, and yield him his dew and deserved prayze. And therefore let us
mark well what is said here, namely that when we talk one with another we
must always magnify Gods name. True it is, that we cannot atteyne too such
perfectness in this life, but that we must be feign too have much
communication of the needs wheruntoo we ^ee subject, and of the doings and
dealings which we have one with another, and of diverse things beside. But yet
for all that, the principal point must not therefore be let alone, and cast
behynd our backs: that is too wit, we must not foreslowe too acknowledge the
benefyts whereby we be bound unto God, and thereby be provoked too praise
him, so as every of us not only do his dewtie in secret, but also draw one
another too it by mutual example. That therefore is the pith of the things
which we have too remember in this strey^e.

Now by the way Saint Paul does us too understand, that we must sing unto
God in spirit, too the intent we imagine not too discharge our selves as a
number of hipocryts do, which magnifye God alonly with their tung, having
their hearts full of coldness still within. Here therefore he sets down
two things which ought not too be put asunder. The one is, that we should
sing unto God, and the other is, that we should talk with our neighbors. The
whole ground then of our matter is, that the benefyts which God has bestowed
upon us, should be commended, and that the rememberance of them should
provoke us too love him and serve him, and too give our selves wholly too him,
too seek him, and too know that too cleave unto him, is our full happiness.
That is the ground of the matter that S. Paul sets us down here. Now
first of all we must (says he) sing unto God: and that cannot be done
but with the heart. For we know that God accepts not any thing which is not
agreeable to his own nature. Then if we will so sing as he may allow of it, and
as he may accept our songs: we must goo too it with a hearty affection. For
if there be any counterfetting in our doings, so as we make a great show
before men, and in the mean while be nigardly in our hearts, and have no zele
at all, so as all is done but for fashyons sake: surely we vnhallowe Gods
name in so doing. And even for the same did he say by his Prophet Esaias, Esaias.
29. d. 13.
that such as came near him only with their lips, Math. 15. a. 8.
were far of from him in their hearts. Therefore let us mark Ma^k. 7. a. 6.
well how it is said here, that too sing Gods praises, the heart must go
before, and (as ye would say) make a thundering within. For it is the cheef
melody that can be, and therein we agree with the Angels of heaven. For if
the mouth speak alone, surely it is but flat mockery. And although men allow
of us for it: yet does God refuze our paying of him with such coin, that is
too say, with follies and things of nothing.

Notwithstanding, when we shall have bin zealous in the praising of God, and he
can well be our judge and witness, that we lay open our hearts before him:
then must we also do ^ur dewtie toward our neighbors, that every man may be
incoraged and tolled foreward by our example. And here we see first of all,
how little account is made of God now adays. For all the countenance that men
make of singing his praises, is but a howling and yelling. It is one of the
grossest abuses in papistrie, that they think that God ought too hold him self
well apayd, when they have barked at their parchment, as they say. But in so
doing the holy scripture is unhallowed, torn in pieces, yea and utterly
falsified. Howsoever the case stand, there is another aduyzednesse, wit, nor
understanding in their doings: for it is enough with them that the throat has
yelled it out aloud. Yea and even among us too, it is certain that such as
pretend to set forth Gods praises, do commonly seek nothing but too glorifye
themselves by it, and keep back the principal in making countenance too pay
God some piece of their arreerages. Agein, let us consider how cold and s^ender
this exercyze of talking one too another in songs, hymns, and praises of God,
is among us. For hardly can one word be wroong out of us that may edify.
Leaud talk can by no means be banished from us: all the world shall hear us
sing unchaste and ribauldly songs: and such things cannot be plucked out of
men's mynds. But then ought this matter too be rayzed out of the holy
scripture. Howsoever the case stand, if men pardon themselves, they shall
answer for it before God, according too the sentence that Saint Paul
pronounces here by the authorie of God, and by the power of his holy spirit.

And by the way let us mark, that his touching of three words here
together, which import all one thing, is not for naught. It is too show that
we shall have enough wherewith too interteyne one another, if we acknowledge
the s^ndrie benefytes that God has bestowed upon us, as becomes us. If
variety delyght men: let us consider how many ways God lays forth the
tre^sures of his goodness toowardes us. Look how many there be of them, so
many (...) are there, and if we had a hundreed melodyes too delyght us in all
the things that we occupye our selves about, it were nothing in comparison of
the inestimable diversity of benefits which we receive at Gods hand. Saint
Paul therefore has here cor^ected our unthankfulness, by adding these
diverse woo^d^s, too show that it must needs be that we be too dull, if we
be not moved when our Lord stirs us up so many ways, seeing we cannot set
our mind unto any thing, but his benefytes must needs come in our sight.

For the same cause also he adds, Yielding alvvayes thanks. As if he said,
that if we were well aduyzed, the continual repeting of Gods praises, and the
harping upon them should never grieve us nor weery us. And why? Seeing that
God continues his benefyting of us, is it not reason that there should be an
answerablenesse on our part, too hold out in doing him honor for his good
turns? Does any one day pass wherein we receive not at the least a hundred
good turns at Gods hand? Now is it meet that we should think, that when we
have thanked him a twyce or thryce for the great number of benefytes which we
receive of him al our life long, we have leyzure to occupy our selves otherwise
ever after? When as our Lord renueth and refreshes the rememberance of his
goodness: were it not meet that we should be moved by it? Therefore it
behooves us always too mark well this saying, whereby Saint Paul declares,
that we be tootoo unmindful of God, if we be not provoked too acknowledge
his benefytes from year too year, from mooneth too mooneth, from day too day,
and from hour too hour, and too yield him the sacrifyze that he requires of
us, which is, that we should protest our selves too be wholly at his will,
too be beholden too him for all good things, and that it is impossible for us
too perform the hundredth part of our dewtie, according as we hear how David
says, What recompense shall I yield unto the Lord for all the goood that he
has done me? Psalm. ^ 6. b. 12. 13.
Psalm. 40. a. 6.
I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon his name. And in the
fortith Psalm he says expressly, that the order which God keeps in
governing us, is so wonderful a thing, as it passes the hears of our heads
in number, insomuch that we must needs be amazed at it. And therefore seeing
we cannot come at the infinite goodness of God, though we indeuer too apply
all our wits thereuntoo: al leastwyse let us ame toowardes it. And like as
we see that God is never werie of showing himself liber all toward us, but
flows continually as a founteyne, yea even by so many streams as are able
too sati^fie us in all things: let us also show continually without ceassing,
how much we be bound (...) beholden to so good and kind hearted a father.

And he adds yet further, that we must thank God for all things. Whereby
he does us too wit, that men are too blockish, in that they consider not how
many ways God allureth and spurreth them, notwithstanding the slothfulness
that is in them. As if he should say, my friends, considering how much we be
bound unto God, both in respect of our bodies, and in respect of our souls,
can we comprehend it? No, it is not possible: for we have too small and
narrow a wit. And when we have after a sort comprehended Gods benefytes, yet
have we not tung too express nothing near how much we be bound unto him.
So then, of whom is it long that we be so cold, that as soon as we have
spoken but one word, we think it is enough, and that we be discharged till
another time, and return too it agein as slowely as may be? whereof comes
such slacknesse? Even of our shetting of our eyes. Although God show us by all
means, that it becomes us too be occupied in blissing his holy name: yet
will not we see it one whit. Agein, as touching the body, we bear our selves
on hand, that our goods come too us either by our own cunning, or by good
fortune, or by favor of the world: as for God he is always let alone: and as
for his goodness we think not on it. Now then, when we intend too do our
de^tie in yielding God his dew praise, which is the cheef sacrifyze that he
requires (as I said before:) let us have regard too cons^der better what we
be, Psalm. 116. b. 12. c* 17.
and what our state is, and how we be subject too so many necessities, as God
must be feign too succor us i^finite ways. And when we have considered our
wretchedness both in body and soul, and on the contrary part also
considered how God prouydeth for all, and suffers us not too have any penury
without rel^ef at his hand: surely we shall have wherewith too continue the
praising of his holy name without ceassing. And Saint Paul will have us, not
only too thank God for the benefits which we feel apparently: but also
although he afflict us, and handle us diverse times otherwise than we would:
yet will he have us too praise him still, after the example of Job, Job. 5. a.
1. ^. 21.
who (as we see) not only thanked God when he had his children at his table,
and they made merry in feasting one another: but also when he was bereft of his
issew, and left desolate in his house: when all his goods were taken away,
partly by robbers, and partly by lyghtening that fell from heaven: and when he
was so miserable, as it seemed that Lyce should eat him up, he ceased not too
say, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, blissed be the name of the
Lord. So then, Saint Paul shows us, that even in our sorrows, and when we
receive chastizements that are rough and bitter too us, yet let us not grudge
against God, but rather persevere in praising his name, Phil. 4. a. 6.
as he exhorts us in another place, (where he says) that in praying too him
we must always praise him. Although we have not the things that we crave,
1. The^^. 5. c. 18.
and that in our peticions we show our selves too want this and that, and are
pinched with grief and care: yet must thanksgiving be mingled still with our
prayers. There are a great number that pray unto God: but yet they do but
provoke Gods wrath, because they intermingle their grudgings and repynings,
g^ashing their teeth at him. They will in deed say, My God, help me. But
which is that God? If they could pluck him out of heaven, they would do it
with all their heart, too the end he might have no more power over them. Ye see
then that a number thinking too pray unto God, do but provoke him to wrath,
because their requests are full of pride, spytefulnesse, and defyance. And
therefore Saint Paul tells us too the Philippians, Phil. 2. a. 6.
that all our petitions and requests must be matched with thanksgiving, too
show that we do patiently abide too be governed by the hand of God.
Likewise in this text he says, that we must thank God for all things, not
only when we be in prosperity, and all things fall out as we would wish, so
as God gives us our hearts desire, and we live in delyght and pleasure: that
is not the only fit time and season too yield praise unto God: but although
he squoorge us, yet must we acknowledge that he procures our salvation (and
welfare) by that mean. Let us see then, if we have not cause to bliss God in
all our adversities? Yis: For first, whatsoever betyde us, he bears with us:
insomuch that if he should touch us but with one of his fingers in good
earnest: we should be overwhelmed at the first blow. Seeing then, that we
hold out, it is a token that he spares us: and have not we cause too thank
him for it? Agein, when he turns his chastizings too our benefyte, for that
he purges us by that means, too further us continually thereby too the
kingdom of heaven, and too lift us up because we be too much tied too the
world, too the end we should be gathered toogither, too come too the full
perfection that is prepared for us in heaven: when we see all this, have we
not cause too praise our God, notwithstanding that we be full of grief,
care, fear, and doubts? Yis certainly, but that our own unthankfulness
hinders it. So much the more behooves it us too mark well the thing that S.
Paul tells us here, namely that we have cause too praise God without end
or ceassing. And if our mouth be stopped sometimes with grief, so as we seem
too be barred from praising God, and we cannot apply our selves freely
theruntoo: let us understand that God never shows himself so rough and
rigorous toward us, but that he asswageth the bitterness which is in our
afflictions, too the intent too draw us unto him, and that we might thank
him, and glorify him for it. Forasmuch as we receive no grace but by the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ, who does also turn the corrections too our
welfare, which we should suffer as punishments for our sins: therefore it is
said, that we should yield thanks too our God and father, namely by our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now he sets down on the one side, God the father: and
afterward shows how God is our father in all respects: that is too wit, by
means of the mediator, through whom we be reconcyled unto him, and he has so
put away al our sins, that whatsoever things we can endure in this world, are
all furtherances of our salvation, Romans 8. c. 28.
as is said of them in the Epistle too the Romans. And here we have to mark
first of all, that without faith we cannot praise God as we ought to do,
insomuch that whatsoever praises we sing with our mouth, all is but feyning
and hypocrisy, except we be thoroughly persuaded that God is our father. And
mark here what is meant by faith. It is not as the Papists suppoze it, namely
too believe that there is a God in heaven, and in the mean while too know no
whit of his will: but Saint Paul tells us, we must be thoroughly resolved,
that God accepts us for his children, or else we shall never be able to
praise him with a pure and free affection. And how may that be done, but by
being grounded upon the free adoption, wherethrough he takes us too him for
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake? For is it by inheritance, or for any worthiness
of ours, that God is our father, and we his children? Alas no: ^phe. 1. a. 3.
but clean contrariwyse, we be called the children of wrath: and God must
needs disclayme us, because there is nothing but sin and wickedness in us.
Then ^ntill we come too our Lord Jesus Christ, it is certain that we cannot
be sure of Gods favor, nor that he will accept our ^eruice. And therefore
Saint Paul having said, that we must y^eld thanks unto God in and for all
things, because he is our father: does justly add, that that is done by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Then let us understand, that all they which are afraid of
Gods majesty, and cannot trust him, nor rest upon the promises of his favor,
too call upon him as their father: can never praise him. In deed they may
well use some Ceremonies, but all shall be but leazing. Therefore whenever
we will pray unto God, and yield him praise and thanks, faith must lead the
way. Mark that for one point.

Howbeeit, (as I said before) it is impossible for us too be grounded in any
certeintie of faith too take God for our father, until we know that we be
made one in our Lord Jesus Christ, and that forasmuch as we be members of his
body, we be also parttakers of the benefytes that he has purchaced, so as
his death and passion are our ryghtuousnesse, his holiness our clenzing from
all our own defylementes, and the sacrifyze which he has offered does set us
clear, and draw us out of the damnation wherein we were, and finally has set
us free from the bondage of sin, and purchaced us full ryghtuousnesse.
Forasmuch as we have all these things in our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore
ought we also too give thanks unto God by his means. And that is the cause
why the Papists cannot frame so much as one request, that God allows. Yea
and in very deed, they be as good as dumb. For though a man may hear Hymns
and Canticles ynow (as they term them) among them: yet cannot God be praised
at their hands. For although they wynd up all things with this saying, By our
Lord Jesus Christ: yet do they not believe that God is merciful too them,
another are they worthy of it, because they disclayme our Lord Jesus Christ,
and do so entangle him with patrons and advocates of their own forging, as a
man cannot discern him from others, insomuch that they coope him up in a
corner, or else set him behynd in the reerward, while in the mean time there
is hunting after the merits and intercessions of Saints, and that is their
trust, that is the moother of their devilish presump^ion, namely that they can
make amends (for their sins) and redeem themselves. But as for us, when as
it is told us that we must thank God in all things: it is too the end that
we should always abace our selves. And for that cause did I say, that faith
opens us the way as well too pray unto God, as also too give him thanks for
the benefits that we have received at his hand.

Now heerupon Saint Paul adds, that we must be subject one too another in
the fear of Christ, or in the fear of God, for any of both will fit the text
wellynough. In saying that we must be subject, he shows, that like as God
will have his children too exercyze themselves in his prayzes: so also he will
no^ have them too be unprofitable here beneathe, but too serve one another
turn. For inasmuch as we be not able too do God either good or harm:
therefore is he contented that we do but praise his name. For though we employ
all our ability: what is there in us wherewith too inriche God, or too
advantage him? For the gives us all things, and needs nothing him self.
Therefore is it an inestimable goodness, in that he quitteth us of all that we
can owe him, so we protest our selves too be so greatly beholden and bound
unto him, as we cannot discharge our selves of it. Then if we come with all
humility, and confess the bond wherein we stand bound unto God: it is the
payment that he requires of us, and (for his own part) he seeks no more. But
yet he will have us seruisable one too another, and not too seek our private
profit in such wise, as too forget that we be knit toogither in one mutual
bond of charity. That is the thing wheruntoo he intends to bring us now in
this text. Now a man might think it strange at the first blush, that he should
say, we ought too be subject one too another. For it seems not meet that
the father should be subject too his children, the husband too his wife, or
the magistrate too the people whom he governs, yea, or that even they also
which be equal in degree, should be subject one too another. But if we look
well upon all things, we shall find that Saint Paul has not without cause
put all Christians under this subjection. For why? The magistrates which are
advanced in authority and glory above other men, are bound nevertheless too
those whom they govern, for they be not ordained rulers for their own saks,
but for the common welthes sake. For Gods ordeyning of Principalities,
kingdoms, and States, was not to the end that some should have pre-eminence
above others: but for that it is for our behoof too have some bridle too hold
us in obedien^e under laws, and too have some power and authority over us,
and to stand in fear and awe of magistrates, because we cannot forbear such a
remedy. Seeing then that God has set magistrates in such state: it is certain
that they be therefore subject too those whom they ought too serve in reigning
over them. As much is too be said of fathers. It is true that the father ought
too be honored of his children. Yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as it is an
honorable title, it shall cost them right dear, if they govern not their
households discreetly. And in that government there is also subjection. Likewise
is it between the husband and the wife. For is it not a subjection that the
husband bears with the frayltie of his wife, and has the discretion too
forbear rigor toward her, holding her as his companion, and taking upon him
a part of her burden both in sickness and in health? Is not that a subjection?
yis. Not without cause then does Saint Paul pronounce here generally, that
all they which will prove themselves faithful, must be subject one to
another, namely every man in his state and degree. Let them that are hyghly
advanced consider well, that Gods aduauncing of them, is too the end they
should the willinglyer submit themselves too bear the pains and cares that
belong too their office: and let such as are inferiors understand, that they
ought much rather too humble themselves, and too bear the yoke that is laid
upon their neck. And let such as are equals and fellows, (unless they will
needs be as wood beasts, and are loath too maynteyn any c^urtisie among them)
consider nevertheless, that every man ought to bear with his neyghbors. And
is not this a subjection? We cannot live one with another without forbearing.
Now surely al forbearing imports bondage, Romans 13. b. 8.
therefore must we be served for necessities sake. According whereunto it is said
in another place that we must owe nothing but that which charity byndeth us
unto. And heerin we see what a stateliness it is, when any man shall say,
what owe I unto you? It is true that men may well upbraid one another, that
they owe them no dewtie: but they must step yet further. And that is the cause
why Saint Paul sets down the fear of our Lord Jesus Christ, or of God. As
if he should say, If we were here without a God, and that every man would get
alone by him self: we might well hold scorn one of another, and say, I pass
not for thee. Trewly, yet were it a great and intolerable folly too say, I
pass not for thee. For the richest man that can be deuyzed, does
notwithstanding stand in need of a hundred folks helps, yea of all men's help.
Then is it a great over stateliness too thrust away our neighbors after that
fashyon, under color that they can another boot us nor hurt us. And it is
apparent that we be too blind in so doing. But put the case we might say, I
pass not for thee, I owe thee nothing: yet must we come too God, who is our
head. For when he did put us intoo this world, he linked us together, and would
have us too serve one another in charity* and we know there is none other
bond of perfection but charity: and charity brings a bondnesse with it. So
then, although I owe a man nothing as in respect of him self: yet do I owe him
somewhat as in respect of God. And that is the thing whertoo Saint Paul
brings us back. As if he should say, Consider with your selves that ye were
not created and put intoo the world, but with condition that ye should serve
every man his neighbors. Otherwise, if ye shrink aside one from another: it
is like as if ye would cut asunder the sinews of the body, too the intent it
should fall in pieces, yea and that our Lord Jesus Christ who is our head,
might have no more too do with us. They then that will needs play the wyld
beasts, and cannot find in their hearts too stoop too any bondnesse too their
neighbors, must go live abroad in the wyld woods, for they be not worthy too
live among men. For we see how God has knit us toogither, and thereby
separated us from the brute beasts, and yet notwithstanding bound us one too
another. Now if we will needs shake off this yoke, is it not a plain
bewraying that we think not our selves beholden for any thing too our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that we be loath too be ruled by his hand, or too submit
our selves too the order wherunder he hat^ put us, and which he would have too
be kept without breaking? So then, forasmuch as every of us is so wedded too
himself, that we cannot submit our selves one too another: let us bear in
mind that which Saint Paul has set down for us here. For it is the very
sauce that will make us find taste in this doctrine, that is too wit, that if
we fear God, and can find in our hearts too submit our selves quietly too
his will, it must not grieve us, another must we think it irksome and
strange, that every of us should serve them whom he is bound too serve, and by
that mean so maynteyne his degree, as we may all link toogither under our
head Jesus Christ, and atteyne too the heavenly glory which he has purchaced
for us.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us so too feel them, as it may draw us
too true repentance, and make us too profit in it from day too day, and too
examine our myseries in such wyze, as we may be moved too call upon our God
for remedy, that he may clenze us and defend us from them, until he have
brought us too the perfection of ryghtuousnesse, which we ought too labor for,
and from which we be yet far of, and in the mean while he so bear with
us, as we may not cease too have the privilege of calling upon him as his
children, and also have wherefore too thank him through our Lord Jesus Christ,
because he has by his holy spirit sealed the adoption in our hearts, whereby he
holds us fast too him, and that we may so persevere in faith and hope, as we
may ever persist in acknowledging the manifold benefytes which he adds one
upon another, and learn too receive them so at his hand, as they may be made
holy unto us, both by faith and thanksgiving. That it may please him too
grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people and Nations of the
earth. etc.

The.xxxix. Sermon, which is the seventh upon the fifth Chapter.
22. Wives, be subject too your husbands, as too our Lord.

23. For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the
Church, and likewise is he the savior of the body.

24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ: so also let wives be
subject to their husbands in all things:

25. Ye husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.

26. Too sanctify it, clenzing it in the washing of water through the word.


We have seen heertoofore how every of us is subject too his neighbors, and
that we cannot otherwise live one with another, than by doing some duty as
of subjection. And forasmuch as that mislyketh us, because every of us coueteth
too be above his fellows, and we set so much store by that loftiness, that
it is hard for us too stoop: we have seen also that if we fear God, we
must not think it strange, that we should submit our selves too our
neighbors, for God created us with that condition. Ye see then in general,
that charity does so bynd us one too another, that we ought not too disedeyne
this man, nor too loath that man, or too count the third man unworthy to have
any service done unto him. For as in respect of God, we must either bow down
our neck, or else our stubbornness will turn too our decay. And now Saint
Paul passes further, and shows that there are certain degrees among men.
For although the foresaid rule do stand generally: that is too wit, that every
of us must indeuer too perform his duty: yet notwithstanding, there is also
a greater subjection particularly of the son too the father, of the wife too
her husband, and of underlings too their superiors, than there is
indifferently among al men. I have told you ere this, that there is a
brotherood even between the furthest strangers on the earth, because they be
all of one common nature, and every man must needs acknowledge himself
indetted too other. Howbeeit when God has knit folks together in a streyter
and holyer band: every man must look neerlyer to himself. For when a wife is
matched too her husband, she is given him for a help, and she is a part of
his body. Also there is a special subjection, so that although the husband
be superior in authority: yet is that no let but that he also is bound too
his wife: for she is his companion both too live and dye with him. Likewise is
it with children toward their fathers, and with fathers toward their
children, each one in his behalf and calling: as subjects toward their
princes and superiors, and servants toward their masters. Ye se then that
the thing which we have to treat of as now, is, that we must generally live in
charity one with another, indeuering too discharge the duty that God byndes
us too, according too our ability: and therewithal, not de^pyze the order that
God has set among us, but rather be provoked so much the more too do our
duty, knowing that if we refuze that condition, we make war against God.

And now let us come too marriage: which is not a thing ordained by men. We
know that God is the author of it, and that it is solemnized in his name, and
the Scripture says, it is a holy covenant, and therefore does it call it
divine. Now then, if a wife be stubborn and froward, and cannot find in her
heart too bear the yoke: although she do wrong too her husband, yet does
she more wrong too God. And why? For it is his will that that bond should be
inviolable: and behold, a mortal creature will needs break it, and pluck it
asunder. We see then that in so doing, she bends hirselfe against God. On
the other side, when the man will needs rule after his own lyking and fancy,
and despyze his wife, or vs^ her cruelly and tyrantly: he shows himself too
despyze God, and too defye him openly. For he ought too know too what end he
was created, what the state of wedlock is, and what law God has set in it.
The thing therefore which Saint Paul calls us unto, is that in all states
we should have regard of God. For so long as our eyes rest upon them with
whom we be conversant, surely we shall always find excuces ynow and too
many, to exempt our selves from all law. The husband may allege, I have a
spytfull and stubborn wife: or else she is proud, and coy* or has a wicked
head of her own: or else is talkatiue. Agein, another perhaps is a drunkard,
another an idle huzwyfe, and another of some other leaud disposition. To be
short, there is not that man which may not have some color, if he keep not
the faythfulnesse and honesty of marriage, as becomes him. The wife also for
her part shall not be unprovided. For now and then her husband may hap too be
testie and riottous, and too have small regard wheretoo God has called them.
Some are ill husbands and hunters of Tauernes (and ale houses:) or else play
the unthrifts in gaming and light behaueour. Some are whoremongers, some
gluttons, and some drunkardes. And so every woman might pretend some excuce
too exempt hirself from her dewtie. But when we come too God, we must be
feign too cast our heads in our bozom, for it will not boot us too stand
checking against him. Although the men misbehaue themselves on the one side,
and the women on the other* yet will not God have the marriage to be broken or
dissolved thereby, saving the divorce (I mean) which our Lord Jesus declares.
But the (other) vices that are in a husband must not impeache the wives
subjection and obedience unto him. Agein, though the wife be not found to be
as she ought too be, yet may not the husband shake her of, and rid his hands
of her, what shift soever he allege: but Gods ordinance must always stand
firm, and the bond which we have by his word, must be inviolable. This is
the thing that we have too remember upon that sentence.

The world sees how ill this lesson is put in ure: but we must consider, that
the root of the mischeef is, that in marriage few or none have an eye unto
God. In deed Gods name shall run roundly enough, and even the wickeddest
could find in their hearts that he should bliss them and make them to prosper:
but that in their marying they put themselves intoo his hand and guyding, and
call upon him unfeignedly: that is no point of their meaning. Some seek wealth
and gain, and othersome pleasure and voluptuousness. In like case is it with
the women. And no marvel though the end be out of all order, when the
beginning was so out of square. For God must needs be revenged on his part,
when he is so lightly esteemed and despyzed. Therefore let us learn too mark
well this lesson of Saint Paul's, that like as marriage was ordained of God: so
they that are too enter intoo it, must betake themselves wholly unto him, and
make him their refuge, knowing that it is he which byndeth the man and the wife
the one too the other, and which knitteth them toogither, and therefore that
either of them look too their own dewtie.

Whereas he says concerning wives, that they owe subjection too their
husbands: we have too mark, that this subjection is dubble. For man was
alredie the head of the woman even before the sin and fall of Eve and Adam. 3.
Tim. 2. d. 13.
And Saint Paul alleging the same reason, too show that it is not meet that
the wife should reign in equal degree with her husband, says, that the man
came not of the woman, but the woman of the man, and that she is but a piece
of his body. For God could have created Eve of the earth as well as he did
Adam, but he would not. Nay rather he matched the man and the woman toogither
with such condition, that the man knowing his wife too be as his own
substance and flesh, should be induced thereby too love her, (as we shall see
agein hereafter:) and that the wife knowing hir^elf too have none other being
but of the man, should bear her subjection patiently, and with a willing mind.
For if the hand being a member of the body, should refuze too stand in his
own place, and would needs settle itself upon the crown of the head: what
a thing were it: So then if we look back too the creation of man and woman:
the husband on his side o^ght too be induced too love and cherishe his wife
as him self: and the wife seeing she was taken out of the substance of the
man, ought too submit her self quietly unto him, as too her head.

But there is also another bond, Gene. ^. a. 6. and 1. Tim. ^* d. 14.
which dubbleth still the subjection of the wife: for we know that she was
beguyled. Women therefore must remember, that in being subject too their
husbands, they receive the hyre of Eues sin: and they must consider, that if
marriage had continued sound and vncorrupt, there had bin nothing but joy both
for man and wife. For know that things were blissed of God, and there was not
any thing which should not have turned too gladness and felicity. But now
although Gods blissings shine forth every where both above and beneathe: yet
are there always tokens of cursing imprinted in them, so as we cannot behold
another heaven nor earth, nor any other creature, but we may partly perceive
that God is become a stranger too us, because our father Adam fell from that
noble and excellent state, wheruntoo he was created before. This is too be
seen every where in all things, and specially in marriage. For women ought too
feel the fruit of their sins: and men feel enough of it for their part.
For surely if Eve and Adam had continued in the ryghtuousnesse that God had
given them, the whole state of this earthly life had bin as a Paradise, and
marriage had bin so beautifyed, that man and wife being matched toogither,
should have lived in such accord, as we see the Angels of heaven do, among
whom there is nothing but peace and brotherly love, and eue^ so had it bin
(with us.) Therefore as now when a man has a cursed and shreud wife, whom he
cannot weeld by any means: he must consider with him self, Lo here the fruits
of original sin, and of the corruption that is in my self. And the wife also on
her side must think, good reason it is that I should receive the payment that
comes of my disobedience toward God, for that I hild not my self in his awe.
Thus much concerning the word subjection, which is set down here.

Now Saint Paul in saying, As too the Lord, means not too make men equal
with God, or with our Lord Jesus Christ: for that were too great an ouersyght:
but he shows that the fear and reverence which a woman ought too bear unto
God, and the subjection which she owes too her husband, are two things that
cannot be put asunder: like as when he exhorted us erst too link toogither in
mutual subjection: Ephe. 5. d. 21.
he added this saying, in the fear of God. And why? For if we pretend too
honor God, and to obey him, and in the mean while reject and despyze our
neighbors, so as every of us is wedded too him self, and will needs be
exempted from all law and rule: it is too gross hypocrisy. Also if a wife
pretend never so great devotion, and seem too be thoroughly seasoned with the
fear of God, and in the mean while be a feend, so as there is nothing but
scolding and brauling, and wrangling, and such other things with her at home
in her own house: therein she shows her self not too have one spark of the
fear of God, forasmuch as she does so hold scorn of her husband who is her
head, and as it were Gods lieftenant in that behalf. Therefore let us mark that
Saint Paul has not set down this similitude too match husbands (who are
mortal creatures, yea and very woormes of the earth) in equal degree with
Jesus Christ: but too show breefly, that forasmuch as our Lord Jesus has
authority over marriage, men must have an eye unto him, and every person
submit himself patiently, because no man can refuze his part, without
despizing of him which will have wedlock maynteyned with mutual dewtie, so as
the man love his wife, and the wife be subject too her husband. That is the
pith of the matter which we have too remember upon this streyne.

Now then let wives look well too their duties, and understand that when they
contend with their husbands, it is all one as if they would reject God*
because he has not created them otherwise than with condition, and too the end
they should be subject too their husbands. True it is that they will be so
proud and stately, as to say, Should my husband have my head under his girdle?
Yea, but the wife that does so, shows that she is loath that God should have
any authority over her, and would feign put Gods Law under her foot.
Howbeeit, forasmuch as there is none other shift but women must needs stoop,
and understand that the ruin and confuzion of all mankind came in on their
side, and that through them we be all forlorn, and accu^sed, and banished
the kingdom of heaven: when women (say I) do understand that all this came of
Eve and of the womankynd, (as Saint Paul tells us in another place:) there is
none other way for them but too stoop, 1. Tim. (...)* d. 14.
and too bear patiently the subjection that God has laid upon them, which is
nothing else but a warning too them too keep themselves lowely and myld. But
if they lift up themselves against their husbands, and cannot find in their
hearts too be ruled by them: it is as it were a setting of their seals too
the sin of Adam and Eve, and too the disobedience by them committed, too
declare that they be not willing that God should heal that wound agein,
notwithstanding that it be deadly. Now, when they do so make war against
the grace of God: what can come of it but utter confuzion? But the wives that
are leaud headed, will not think of that: but yet is it registered before God,
and they must be feign too yield an account of it too their utter confuzion.
And therefore let us look that we keep this warning better, too the end that
every man may glorify God in his own house.

Also let the husbands think upon their duty. For although (to speak
properly) they be not subject to their wives, because their wives have no
authority over them: yet are they advanced too that honor of superiority
with certain conditions: namely that they should not be cruel toward their
wives, nor think all things granted and lawful which they lift, but that
their authority should rather be a companionship than a kingship. For
doubtless the husband in not his wives head, too oppress her, or too make
none account of her: but let him understand, that the authority which he has,
does bynd him so much the more too her. For seeing he is the head, he ought
too have discretion and skill how too guide his wife and his household. And what
is the way too bring that too pass, but too use gentleness and myldnesse, and
too bear discreetly with the frayltie which he knows too be in his wife, 1.
Pet. 3. b. 7.
according as Saint Peter exhorts us. Ye see then that husbands must so
require obedience at their wives hands, as they themselves must therwithall
do their own duty, and consider that they shall not be borne with before
God, if they give their wives cause too lift up themselves so against them.
For it is certain that if the husband deal discretly and vpryghtly, the wife
shall stoop too him, and our Lord will so dispoze her heart, as the house shall
be quietly guyded. But the first and chief point is, that God be called
upon. For though a man use all the means that can be, yet if he trust to his
own wit, he shall but loose his time. And why? Because God will laugh his
presumption too scorn. But if husbands consider that God holds folks
hearts in his hand, and boweth them as he lists, and thereuppon do pray him
too give them grace and power too win their wives, that they may agree with
them, and humble themselves too them: them shall they perceive that God
woorketh in that behalf. But most commonly it is to be seen, that men deal
roughly with their wives, and think too win them by playing the termagauntes,
so as they stick not too brooze their bodies, yea somtymes that the blud
follows. These are hangmen and tormentors that will so martyr their wives: asd
yet notwithstanding they will allege the superiority that God has given
them. That superioritye is not devilish, another serves it too make men like
brute beasts: but too maynteyne good order and government.

But the women on their side do for the most part inharden themselves: and
when rhey are too marry, they never think upon the things that God shows
and teaches them by his word: hardly shall a man find one among a hundred,
that prays unto God when she is upon the point of marriage. No boubt but
they hear it well enough said, that the husband must be the head: and (they
themselves will say,) very well: it is true, that if I have a husband, he must
be above me, for so is the fashyon of the world, and I must abide it. But in
the mean while there shall be such ouerweening, or rather devilish stoutnesse
in them, as they could find in their hearts too pluck God out of his seat,
and they would feign that this matter which we read now, were razed out (of
the Scripture,) too the intent they might not be subject too it. Yea and they
make a confederacy among themselves in that case, saying: tush, I warrant
thee, I will hold mine own, and if my husband play the Churl with me, he
shall well perceive that I pass not for it, and I will hold him at a bay so
long, that when he sees he does but looze his labor, he shall be feign to give
over his game, and too let me alone. After this manner (say I) do women begin
too enter intoo huswyfrye, so as a man shall scar^ly find one among a hundred,
which is not of that mind, and does not fully determine upon it.

Also the husband on his side thinks thus: Tush, let me alone, I will compass
her well enough. As who should say, he were God: who has told us that there is
another manner of discretion too be used in this behalf. For the way for men
too win their wives, is not too step too them with stoutnesse, and too play the
bedlems with them, or too use tyranny over them: none of that geere will boot:
and yet men think themselves so wise in their own conceyt, that they shall
scare their wives with a grim look. Too be short, they dispute of the matter,
and in the mean while rob God, as though he had reserved nothing to him self,
whereby to teach us to repair unto him, to pray him to meeken their hearts, and
to bow them to obedience and myldnesse.

Therefore it behooves us to remember the lesson so much the better, which is
showed us here. And for the same cause does Saint Paul apply the similitude
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well too the one side as too the other. For he
tells the women that it is for their benefyte too be so subject too their
Husbands. And why? Let us consider the spiritual state of the Church. How
miserable were our state if we were separated from our Lord Jesus Christ? For
we should be bereft of all hope of life, and of all Gods benefyts. And although
we inioyed many gifts in this world: yet should they turn all too our
displeasure, if we were not members of our Lord Jesus Christ. Too be short,
without the son of God, there is nothing but scattering here beneathe. For
he was sent too gather toogither all things that were scattered before, insomuch
that all our happiness, joy, and rest, is too have Jesus Christ reigning over
us and ruling us. Now then, there must be an answerablenesse hereunto in
marriage, and the women must understand, that forasmuch as wedlock is as an
image of the spiritual vnio^, which is between us and the son of God: it is
for their benefyte to be under their husbands, and to yield the^ obedience, and
that it shall be much more for their profit, than if they were at liberty too
govern themselves, and too do what they li^t, without brydling or
controlment. True it is that they cannot conceive it, but who shall be found
wyzer in the end? God, or Women? If they will needs reply, that it were better
for them too be in no subjection at all too their husbands, whereas God for all
that has ordained otherwise, yea even for their welfare, and has declared and
given sentence that it is so: ween they too get the upper hand in pleading so
against God? Ye see then that Jesus Christ is set down as the savior of the
body, too the end that wives should know, that God has preuyded better for
their necessities, than they be aware of. When they have well chawed their
cud, and debated what they can with themselves, and gathered all the reasons
that are possible too be had: yet is it certain that they know not so well
what is for their own profit, as God does, who has put them in subjection
too their husbands, yea even for their own welfare, too the intent they should
be maynteyned, which otherwise could not be.

Agein on the other side, Saint Paul alleges our Lord Jesus Christ too the
Husbands also, too the intent they should not abuse the authority that is
granted them, nor break the friendship which ought too be maynteyned in
wedlock, by being over churlish as they are wont too be. And the thing that
he sets them down in our Lord Jesus Christ, by demanding how he has loved
his Church: is first and formest that he has given him self for it, and that
he spared not himself when he took man's flesh upon him. In deed al power and
dominion were given unto him, so as all knees must needs bow before him, Phil.
2. b. 10.
(as Saint Paul him self says) and all of us both great and small must do
him homage: but yet notwithstanding, what has he done for his Church?
Listed he too reign in such sort as too exercyze tyranny over us? No: but
contrarily he humbled him self, and whereas he had souerein dominion over the
Angels of heaven, he became subject too the Law, Gala. 4. a. 4.
and was called a Servant, yea and he was utterly emptyed for our sakes. Now
when we see that God bears us so inestimable love in our Lord Jesus Christ,
Phil. 2. a. 7.
that he has put himself in the person of a husband, and voutsafed that we
should be as a wife unto him: I say, when we see that, should we now which
are but woormes of the earth and a thing of nothing, refuze too follow the
example of the son of God, who had no regard of his heavenly glory and
majesty, too the end too abace himself in such wise for our sakes? So then,
it is enough too meeken the hearts both of the one party and of the other, if
there be not too beastly lewdness, or rather stark diuelishnesse as well in
the husbands as in the wives. For considering that our Lord Jesus Christ did so
abace himself, for the love that he bare unto us which are but carions and
nothing worth: and also has told us that there is nothing better, than for
the wives too be subject too their husbands, and the husbands too bear with
their wives: if that move them not, it is a sign that they be too beastly
high minded, or rather that there is another wit nor reason in them. For were
there but one drop, surely the thing that Saint Paul tells us, ought too make
us amend all things, that might hinder the doing of our duties, as well on the
one side as on the other. And were this well regarded: doubtless men should
see much more quietness in their houses then they do: and man and wife should
not be as Cattes and Dogs in snatching and biting one at another. But the
very mischief is, that a man can see no fear of God among them. For ought not
men too call too mind both evening and morning, the grace that is showed unto
us by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ? And when all toogither had well
thought on it, and set their minds too it, the married men ought also too
think (particularly) with themselves, to what end has God showed himself so
loving, so kind, and so pitiful toward me? Seeing he has advanced me too
such dignity, it is good reason that I should fashion my self like unto him.
Now he will have me too behave my self toward my wife, as Jesus Christ has
behaved himself toward me. Is not this enough too break the hearts that
were as hard as stone, yea or as steel? Yis surely. Likewise if the women on
their side were myndfull of their redemption and salvation: then should their
hard hearts needs be softened, and they would not harden themsel^es any more
too such stubbornness, as they do, but they would submit themselves too the
yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they might be parttakers of the benefyte
which he has purchaced for them by his death and passion. We see then that
when the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is preached too us indifferently: most
men gain nothing by it, for they forsake it in all their life.

And by the way we have too mark further, that although husbands be
froward, and wives untoward too be ruled, yea and utterly incorrigible: yet is
that no release too them, that either of them both should not do their duty.
As for example: It may be, that if a husband had a gentle and tractable wife
(as I touched before,) he on his side could bear with her, and there should be
a marvelous good lyking and life betwixt them. But peradventure one man will
say, he has a drunkard or a glutton, another, that his wife is given too
garishnesse and over much bravery, so as all that she can rap and rend, is too
little too trim her and deck her withal: and another, that his wife is an
idle huzwyfe, and will do nothing. Well, these things may have some color
before men: yea and (as I said before) if the matter concerned but the parties
themselves: every of them might have their defense at hand, to cast of all
yoke. But the husband must think in that case, I have an ill dispozed woman,
or a sot, or one that has another manners nor good behaueour, nor any care at
all of her household: but how do I also behave my self, not only in these
worldly affairs, but also toward God? Now when the husband shall have
bethought himself well, and examined his own faults thoroughly: he will hold
his peace, and patiently bear with his wyfes faults, until God give her the
grace too amend them. And in the mean while, howsoever the world go, let him
not cease too play the good husband in applying himself too his wife, too win
her unto God. For he is not set in degree of superiority, but for the
benefyte and welfare of his yoke fellow. And forasmuch as it is an inviolable
law, the same reason also must persuade the women. Insomuch that if a woman
have a drunkard, or haunter of Tauernes and Tippling houses, or a Gamester, or
a Spendall, or an unthrift and a ryotter, or a Churl that is never in quiet
with her, so that, do what she can too obey him and to please him, she can
never have any peace or good will at his hand: let her consider, Alas, it is
Gods squoorge upon me, for I have not bin as I ought too be in obeying my
God, and in submitting my self to his will. For how have I applied my self
too serve and honor him? How have I quitte my self of the charge that he has
committed too me? Let the wife think upon those things, and then let her
conclude, that howsoever she fare, yet is it not for mortal creatures too
break the bond wherein God will have us bound: for that were a stryuing against
him. And therefore must I submit my self too him that is my head: and although
he be terrible, yet becomes it me too be subject too my God, who has my
husbands heart in his hand, and can alter it when he lists. And I must not
provoke him too win me with strokes of the Cudgel: for in so dooyng God would
be discontented both with him and me. So then the faults of the wife cannot
discharge the husband from keeping the law unbroken which God has ordained,
that is too wit, from living toogither both in one accord. Likewise the vices
of the husband, shall no^ excuze the wife from yielding subjection and
obedience in all things on Gods behalf, as is said of it here.

Now Saint Paul too confirm this exhortation the better, declares how our
Lord Jesus Christ is the Savior of the body: namely because he gave himself
for the Church, too Sanctify it, (or to make it holy.) In deed the whole
doctrine hereof cannot be dispatched as now. Yet notwi^hstanding we have too
mark (...), that here S. Paul shows more at large the thing that he had
(...) in one word before: which is, that both the husband and wife may bridle
their wicked affections, and that when they be tempted too go (...), or too
fall out one with another, the very mean too (...) all wicked passions, is too
have an eye too the pledge of the spiritual union between our Lord Jesus
Christ and us, whereof we will speak more fully hereafter. For here first of
all it is said, that we must consider that our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself
for us, wherein he begins at our redemption. And therefore we must mark
that word for an end as yet, tarying till after dinner for the dispatch of the
rest: for under that word it is showed us first, that our Lord Jesus Christ
was (after a sort) myndlesse of himself, and regarded not his own person,
when he went about our salvation. True it is that he was given us of God, John.
3. b. 16.
who (as it is said in the third of Saint John) did love the world so well,
that he spared not his only son, but gave him too the death for our sakes.
Yet notwithstanding, our Lord Jesus Christ also did give himself. John. 1^. d.
18.
No man takes my life from me (says he) but I lay it down. For it was
requisite that the sacrifyzce which he offered for the remission of our sins,
should be willing. Ye see then, that Jesus Christ gave himself too the
death: and if we de^aund the cause, surely it was first too fulfill the will
and everlasting dete^^ination of God his father. Nevertheless like as God the
father intended the salvation of mankind: so Jesus Christ showed how dear we
were too him, and how precious our souls are in his sight, since he voutsafed
too give himself after that fashyon. Now then, on the one side the husbands
must consider well here what they owe too their wives: that is too wit, that
they should be as ^eere too them as their own lives at the least. (And though
they do so,) yet shall they not come too the perfection of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but follow him a great way behind. And the wives also on their side,
must bear well in mind, that forasmuch as it is Gods ^ill that (...) wedlock
there should be as it were a figure of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ:
they be too far (...), if they submit not themselves where God calls them
too it. And by the way let us know also, that Saint Paul meant too magnify
Gods goodness toward us, and the love that Jesus Christ bears us, in
saying that h^ gave himself for us. And therefore let us acknowledge that it
came of the free mercy of God his father, and also that our Lord Jesus Christ
respected nothing but our miseries, when he showed himself so pitiful too
succor us. If we mind these things, on the one side we shall be moved too
our dewtie without geynsaying, and on the othersyde inflamed too glorify our
God, and acknowledge both with our mouths and also by our whole life, how much
we be beholden too him, seeing he has powered out the treasures of his mercy
upon us, in so much that he has not only discharged us of the condemnation
wherein we were, and drawn us out of death: but also has voutsafed too give us
his welbeeloued son for a pledge of his love, and Jesus Christ has taken
upon him the office too be the borrowe and ransom for us, too the end too
set us clear before God, that the devil also might not have any more against
us, notwithstanding that he be our adversary, and we be subject unto him,
till we be set free from that bondage by means of the said Redeemer.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him to make us so to know them, as we may ask him
forgiveness of them, and reform our selves more and more by amending them,
and so profit in the doctrine of salvation, as our life may always be
fashyoned after his law, according to the meazure of the grace which we have
received of him. And so let us all say, Almyghtye God heavenly father etc.

The.xl. Sermon, which is the eight upon the fifth Chapter.
25. Ye husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.

26. Too sanctify it, clenzing it in the washing of water through the word.

27. Too make it too himself a glorious Church, without spot or vvrincle, or
any thing el^e, but that it might be holy and unblameable.


We have seen this morning how large matter of glorifying the infinite
goodness of our God we have, if we consider by what means he has drawn
us from death, and taken us for his children, notwithstanding that we were
cursed before in Adam. And now Saint Paul sets forth how we be made
parttakers of the grace that is purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ:
namely by being wafshed and clenzed from our spots, too the end too be
dedicated too his service in all holiness. Also he adds the wasshing of
water, because Baptim is a visible figure and record unto us, according too
our rudeness and infirmity, too make us the better too perceive the grace of
our God, which passes all understanding of man. Now first of al there is the
word Sanctify, which imports that we should be separated from the world,
too be knit unto the son of God. And this doctrine is such, as we can
never know it enough. For (as I have said before) we must always compare the
state wherein God fyndeth us, with the state wheretoo he calls us: For from
our moothers womb we (...) nothing but utter wretchedness, we be cursed and
detestabl^^^fore God. Therefore he draws us out of the dungeon of death: from
thence does he gather us up too himself. And by the word Sanctify, S. Paul
means the change which ought as it were too ravish and too astonish us, as
often as we consider what we were, and what we should be still if God pitied
us not.

But let us come too the mean that I spoke of. He says, that our Lord Jesus
Christ has washed us. No dout but this is too be referred too his death and
passion. For how could we appear before God as it were with our countenances
vpryght, but that our sins are done away by the sacrifyze that was offered
too set us at one with God. Then until we be washed and scoured clean by
the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, we be fowler before God than any leapar:
we be full of all manner of filth and infection: and too be short, all that
we can bring shall but provoke Gods wrath, and the vertewes that men esteem
greatest, shall be but lothsomnesse. Therefore we must embrace the sacrifyce
whereby our Lord Jesus Christ has reconcyled us too God his father, and his
blud must flow down upon our souls, too clenze us from our filthiness and
spots. Nevertheless it is not without cause that Saint Paul sets us down
baptim here, not that we be made clean by that: another was it his meaning
too turn us aside from the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
forasmuch as we be dust and gross, and understand not the spiritual
benefyts so well as were requisyte: therefore Saint Paul conforming him self
too our rudeness and infirmity, has showed us here our wasshing by a visible
sign. That we may the better profit our selves by this manner of speech, let
us consider too what end baptim was ordained, and whertoo it serves. When our
Lord Jesus Christ commanded us too be baptized in his name, meant he too turn
away our faith from his bludshed? Meant he that baptim should take the room of
his death and passion, to perform the office of our salvation: No surely. For
Baptim is but on Incum and an appendant too the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ: and if it did not direct us thither, certeynely it were but a
tryfling Ceremony. As much is too be fayd of the Lords Supper. When we come
too (...) the bread and wine, which are the pledges of the body and blu^ of our
Lord Jesus Christ, although that in that supper we be truly fed with the
meat and drink, whereof mention is (...) in the sixth of Saint John (that is to
wit, that our Lord Jesus Christ makes us partakers of the truth of his own
substance, too the end that his life should be common unto us): yet
notwithstanding if the supper should be separated from the death and passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ, it were a thing of nothing. And in deed we see also
what the promis conteyneth. This is my body (says he) which is given for
you. True it is that is shows well what our ordinary food is: but
therwithall he sends us also too his death and passion. For had he not made
satisfaction for our sins, and shed his blud to wash away our spots: what
should it boot us now too have baptim and his supper ministered and given unto
us? We see then, that too use baptim well, and according too the institution
of the son of God, we must not set our m^nds upon the corruptible and
transitory element. For what is the water? If it stand but one day, it will
corru^pt: and how then can it clenze our souls for ever, and get us a
pureness that shall continue after death, though we our selves do turn too
rottenness? If this power cannot be in the water: we must of necessity
repair too the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in deed the
water also is a figure of his blud and of his holy spirit. Then let us mark
that our Lord Jesus did then wash us, when he shed his blud whereby he clenzed
us. That is the mean whereby we may resort unto God with full trust that we
shall be recey^ed as ryghtuous and perfect, because he lays not our sins too
our charge. Mark that for one point.

Now (as Saint Peter says in his first Epistle) we be was^hed with the blud
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the holy Ghost. We see then that we have the
substance and truth of our salvation in the person of the son of God. And
moreover we have too note also, that he communicates him self unto us, and
thereby puts us in possession and fruition of all his goods through the power
of the holy Ghost. And how happens it then that Saint Paul has made no
mention here, of the blud that clenzeth us, and of the woorking of the holy
Ghost? It seems that he has forgotten the cheef thing, and buzieth him self
about a thing that is very small. I have told you alredye that he meant not too
abridge any thing that belonged too the son of God, that we should not seek
the whole fulness of our salvation in him alone, and settle our faith alonly
upon him: another meant he too dispossess the holy Ghost of his office, but he
had respect of our infirmity. And that is the cause why he set down the sign
whereby the thing that (of it self) is too high and too far hidden from our
understanding, is set before our eyes. That is the pi^h of the thing which we
have too bear in mind.

Now of this declaration we may receive a very profitable lesson in general:
that is too wit, that the true and lawful use of Sacraments, is too lead us
directly too our Lord Jesus Christ, and that otherwise we make them but as
Idols. And (therefore) in popery Baptim is but as a Charm, because they think
there is no salvation but by the water. I let pass the things that they have
pu^ to it of their own deuyzing. For they have corrupted and mard the very
institution of Jesus Christ, by mingling baptim with the superstitions that are
known of. But let us put the case they used nothing else but the pure water:
yet is it devilish opinion that Baptim is able of it self to save us. For by
that means our Lord Jesus Christ is as good as thrust away, so as they make
none account of him. For they stand poring upon the visible sign, and are (as
ye would say) utterly doted upon it. In like case are they with all the rest
of their Ceremonies. So much the more therefore does it stand us on hand too
bear this lesson in mind, That too apply the Sacraments too a right use, and
too such use as God allows and ordeyneth: they must guide us too our Lord
Jesus Christ: Like as in Baptim, we see but the water: but thereby we must be
lifted up higher to the blud of the son of God, assuring our selves that it
is not the water that makes us clean, but that it is only a warrant of the
washing that was gotten for us, when our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified for
us. In the Supper we have bread and wine. Now to hold our selves to that which
is set before out eyes, were a withdrawing of our selves from Jesus Christ. Our
faith therefore must be lifted up, and conveyed too him in whom all the parts
of our salvation are inclozed. Forasmuch then as we have the whole perfection
and fullness of all good things in the only Son of God: it is thither that
we must look up and labor too atteyne, when the Sacraments are set before
us, for that is the very office of them: or else we pe^uert all, and it is (as
ye would say) an unhallowing of the thing that God has hallowed too our
benefyte, if our Lord Jesus Christ be separated from the visible signs.

We have also too note, that we communicate not with Jesus Christ, but by the
grace of the holy Ghost. Yet notwithstanding let us not hold scorn of the
helps that our Lord has ordained for us, because he knew them too be
requisite for our infirmities sake. Why be we not taught simply, that if we
run too our Lord Jesus Christ, in him we shall find our washing and
clenzing? It seems that that ought too suffyze us, and that the water of
Baptim is but a veil too keep us from coming unto Jesus Christ. Yea, but
let us see a little what our own ^udenesse is. If we had the minds of
Angels, we should no more need this outward Baptim, than the Angels do. But
forasmuch as we be earthly, and it is hard for us too atteyne unto God, and
the secrets of his heavenly kingdom: it is for our behoof too be helped
after that fashion. And it is a wonderful gracious goodness of God, that he
stoopeth so too our infirmity, and supplyeth it with mee^e and convenient
remedies. So little then does Baptim hinder us from coming too the son of
God, (so we be able too apply it too our behoof,) or keep our faith from
amyng at him: that without it we should be hild down still here, and waver
continually as floting in water. But when we see how water is cast upon the
chyldes head, there we ought too mind the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
too consider that like as water washes away the filth of the body, so the blud
of our Lord Jesus Christ is the very clenzing of our souls.

Now as touching the inwoorking of the holy Ghost, we know it is lykened too
water: and that is because he makes us parttakers of the benefytes that were
purchaced for us by our Lord Jesus Christ: and agein, because that by his grace
and woorking, we be renewed, and dye unto the world, and all our own
corruption is put away, to the intent we should come too the newness of life
which is gotten for us by the ^esurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. All this
must we behold in Baptim.

And likewise the Supper must serve us as a ladder too clymb up too our Lord
Jesus Christ, and too be thoroughly confirmed that he dwells in us, and that
we be made one with him, so as he quickens us as the branches of a tree,
which take their strength from the root, and as the body of man, which draws
his strength from the head. And so the thing that we have too mark upon this
streyne, is that the Sacraments do not turn us away from the trust which we
ought too put wholly in our Lord Jesus Christ, nor make us too start aside one
way or other, but that being persuaded by them that Jesus Christ suffizeth, we
find all our contentation and rest in him, too the end also that all the honor
which belongs too him, be yielded unto him. For it is not for us too
abridge him of that which his heavenly father has given him. Let that serve
for one point.

And that is also the cause why Saint Paul says, having clenzed it. Then
yields he the dignity of clenzing us too our Lord Jesus Christ. True it is,
that if he had not bin appointed too be the Mediator, he could not have done
it: for it is a work altoogither belonging too God: but forasmuch as he was
sent too that end, and had that office committed unto him, therefore are we
washed by him. And in deed it is not only in his humane nature that we be
washed by his blud: but we must also bear in mind how the Apostle in the
Epistle too the Hebrews, Heb. 9. ^. 14.
says, that he suffered in spirit. How in spirit? That is too say, his death
must not be considered of us, as if a man dyed: but we must understand that
he is in such wise the son of God manifested in the flesh, as he has uttered
his everlasting power. And that when he was so abaced, and emptyed, although
there appeered nothing but cursednesse in his death: yet ought we too
understand that he wrought in that behalf with a wonderful power, such as
surmounteth all our understanding, and all that we can conceive. Ye see then
that Saint Paul has very well confirmed the thing that I told you, that is
too wit, that all our faith is but a wavering and vanishing opinion, until it
be so grounded in our Lord Jesus Christ, as it rest wholly there, and another
swerve nor stagger one way nor other. For as soon as we go about too add one
thing or other too our Lord Jesus Christ: surely he shakes us of, as unworthy
too have any part or portion of his benefytes. Therefore we must leave him
that which is his own: that is too wit, that he only clenzeth us: according
also as it is of his mere grace, that we have all ryghtuousnesse before God.

And Saint Paul's speaking of Baptim (as I said before) is too the end that we
considering our own ability, should bend our selves too the confirming our
faith by these means which are behooffull for us. For he that rejects Baptim
as superfluous, does well bewray that he knows not him self. Insomuch that
when we have well examined what is in us, it is certain that even the
perfecte^t shall find themselves inclyned to unbelief, and to so many doutings,
as ye would marvel. They shall see themselves feeble and weak, and subject
too infinite temptations. So then, it must needs be that a man is too much
blinded in pride, when he thinks that baptim can (...) him in no sted.
Considering therefore what need we have (...) too God by certain degrees: let
us make account of baptim, and of the holy Supper, and let them always be
means too guide us (...) Jesus Christ.

Agein, it is not without cause that Saint Paul matcheth the word and the
washing of water toogither. For (as I have touched before,) too be so drawn
away by visible things, that in sted of (...) up aloft, we be hild down
below: is too common a vice, and so deeply rooted in us, as it is very hard
too be plucked up. God pitying man's weakness, has at all times (as ye would
say) (...) too them: not by changing his place, (for his being is infinite,
and his majesty fills both heaven and earth) but by making him self familiar
unto them, Ierem. 7. b. 11. and Math. 21. b. 12. and Ma^k. 11. c. 17. and
Luke. 19. g. 46. and 1. Chron. 6. g. 41. and Psalm. 132. b. 8. c. 14,
as if he were conversant with them. And for that cause did he term his temple
his house, his dwelling place, and his rest, and (said) that he dwelt between
the Cherubins: howeeit, that was not to harden the people in their
superstitions. Too what end then? He meant too draw them to him by little and
little, which were unable to come to him at the first dashe. For where are the
wings that we should stye above the clouds withal? But our faith must stye up
above the heavens. So then, God meant too releue men's infirmities, by
Ceremonies, Sacraments, and such other things. But the vice on the contrary
part has showed it self too much, that is too wit, that men have taken
occasion too hold themselves down, and too entangle themselves in Ceremonies:
and whereas they should have lifted them up, they have abuzed them, by turning
them too the clean contrary. And that is the cause also why the Prophets were
continually occupied in rebuking the Jews, for that they thought that God had
dwelt in the material temple. How now (says Esaias?) Has not the Lord made
all these things? Esaias. 6^. a. 1.
Has he not created both the stones and the wood? And will you shet him up
within them? Does he not fill all the Heavens? and the earth is not able too
conteyne him. And yet notwithstanding ye would lock him up in some Cabane of
your own buylding. Whereby he shows that it is too gross a folly for men too
snarle themselves after that sort in visible figures, Ceremonies, and
Sacraments, and too dwell upon them, whereas they should be led unto God.
Now forasmuch as this has reigned in all ages, Saint Paul too redress it,
says, that we have our washing warranted in Baptim, under the figure of
water. Yea, but yet must we have an eye too the word, says he. For if there
were no teaching, too show us that we find the things in our Lord Jesus
Christ, which are represented too us in Baptim, and that it is in his person
that we have the full performance and assuredness of them: certainly Baptim
would turn us away from God, and it were better too have none at all. For it
were an evil thing, if we should be withdrawn from the son of God, too
give our selves too the corruptible world. Therefore let us be well ware that
we separate not the Sacraments from the word at any time. And hereby we see
what Christianity there is in a number of folk. For all is well with them, if
they be Baptized, another consider they that the having of the sign without
the promise added too it, is but a deceyuable and unprofitable thing. Whereto
serves a seal when it is set but too a piece of Lether, or too bare
parchment, paper, or cloth? Surely it were too no purpose: for it ought too
confirm and ratifye some Evidence, whether it be of gift or otherwise. So is
it with the Sacraments, when they be not matched with the word. A man shall
see a seal there, howbeeit too no purpose, for he shall see no benefyte come
of it. And surely they that continue still doted in their ignorance, because
they were Baptized as soon as they came intoo the world: do show therein too
leaud an unthankfulness: for they falsifye Gods truth, as much as they can. If
a man should counterfeit a Seal, it were felony, though it were but in a case
of five shillings. But they that are so drowned in their ignorance, as they
cannot abide to be drawn out of it: are falsifyers and forgers in a thing
that is more worth than all the world. For here the case concerns the
ratifying of the things that have bin purchaced us by the death and passion of
the son of God, as has bin declared already.

Furthermore let us mark also, that Saint Paul speaks of the word that is
full of instruction and edifyeth our faith. For the pron^uncing of some words
is not enough: as if a man should say, I Baptize thee in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost: and think that the virtue and
power of Baptim were inclozed in those words: it were an abuse, and truly it
could not serve us but for a charm and inchauntment. But the word is the
promise whereby our Lord Jesus Christ has told us, that he is verily given us
too be our ryghtuousnesse, too the end that all our sins should be covered
and buried in his obedience, and all our spots washed away by his cleanness.
Therefore when we once have this promise, and know what things are brought
us by the only son of God, then is the water matched with the word. And we
ought so much the more too note this, ^. Tim. 4. ^. 5.
because we see how Saint Paul says in another place too Timothy, that not
even our meat and drink can be sanctified, but by the word. True it is that
bread, wine, water, and al other things are pure in respect of their creation
by God: howbeeit we cannot use them without turning them too uncleanness, and
without committing of felony against God, but by his word (says he) whereby
all things are made holy unto us. And how is that? By teaching us that God
shows himself too be our father, in having a care of us too maynteyne us
and feed us: and also by telling us that all these things are given us, too
the intent that by using his liberality, first we should be provoked too
serve and honor him, and too be ravished in love of him: and secondly be
confirmed in the hope of the heritage that is promised us. For seeing he makes
us feel his gooddesse aforehand in this world: it is certain that when we
come too the glory whereuntoo he calls us, we shall then have our fill of
the good things, whereof there is but some little taste showed us as yet. Ye
see then that all the be^efytes which we receive for the body, are made holy
by the word. And what shall be done then in things concerning the everlasting
salvation of our souls? Is it not much more reason that they should be
sanctified by the same word?

Now then, too be short, we see that the Papists are destitute of the power
of the Sacraments through their own misbeleef, because they have robbed our
Lord Jesus Christ of his power and vertew, and conuayed over his prerogative
unto corruption and dead things. And therefore God has so blinded them
through his ryghtfull vengeance, that they think themselves too have the
Sacraments still, but yet notwithstanding without the word. As for example, in
deed in Baptyzing they mumble enough, and they make their coniurations and
charms, and all in an unknown language, but yet is their speaking rather too
the devil, than too the Godfathers and Godmoothers that are there, too answer
for the teaching of the child, and for the common instruction of the whole
Church. Too be short, in Popish Baptim there is not the word, and therefore
(as much as in them lye^h) they have abolished Baptim. Yet notwithstanding, God
has not suffered the rememberance of his goodness too be utterly put away:
like as in the time of the law, although the priests were Ioolaters, and had
preached false doctrine, and had imbrewed the simple people with many errors
and fals^ opinions: yet notwithstanding, Circumcision was not changed in the
times of Ezechias and Ios^as, when things were redressed, and Gods service set
in his right state. And why? Because it had bin ordained of God, and it was not
lawful too have taken the sign of his covenant utterly away. But it behooved
them too forsake all the incomes that had bin put too by Sata^s policy. Even
so say I now, that in the Popedom there is not the word of God* as in respect
of those that pretend too minister the Sacraments: and yet that we stick not
too receive the thing that is witnessed unto us in Baptim, though we^ were
infected with much ^^^thinesse. But we must renounce the Cream that was
ministered unto us, and all the other wicked trash, and reteyne the pure
institution of our Lord Jesus Christ. And furthermore let us understand, that
our Baptim as we received it then had bin vnauaylable, nay rather it had bin a
cursed treachery, if we had gone no further than so. And why? For we had bin
perverted, and we had falsified the ordinance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In like case is it with the Supper. Of a truth there is no supper remaining
now adays in popery. For that which they call Gods Table, is a flat mockage
and reproach too the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, because it is
knit in inseperable bond with the mass, and we know that the mass is an
utter renouncing of the sacrifyze that was made by the son of God. But
howseuer the case stand, although they used some convenient resemblance too the
institution of our Lord Jesus Christ: yet for all that, they have not the
word. For they mumble between the teeth in their consecrating (as they term
it) of the spiritual Sacrament, which they have perverted. For how do they use
it? They prattle upon the bread, and blow upon it, too change it intoo the
body of Jesus Christ, at least too their seeming. Also they chatter over the
Chalice, and bear themselves on hand that all is changed there, and that they
have made such an alteration, as though they were able too create a new world.
For it is much more too make a piece of bread too become the son of God, than
too have created a whole world. But Satan has so bewitched the Papists, that
they beeleeue they do all that. And by what power? not of Gods word. Howbeeit
(as I said) the word that Saint Paul treats of here, is not a bare found,
but a teaching that edifyeth our faith, so as we receive the promis that is
made us there, and apply it too our ^se, too the end that in Baptim the water
may (...) as a warrant of our spiritual washyng. Also when we receyu^ the
bread and the wine in the supper, it is an infallible pledge unto us, that we
be nurrished with the very substance of the son of God, so as his flesh is
our meat, and his blud^^^ drink. Ye see then that the word is (...).

As touching the huge and confuzed heap of things that the papists have in
all their Ceremonies, and specially as touching their five Sacaments which they
have forged and (...) of their own heads: there is no (...) (of God) at all in
them. For what promis have they for their Anealing, as they term it? No doubt
but they (...) devise enough of it: (...) where shall a man find any whit of it
in the scripture? In the same plyght are all the rest. As for marriage, it shall
be treated of at another time, because S. Paul makes mention of it anon after.
Howsoever the world go, we (...) that the (...) have falsified the
Sacraments, and they can as now receive no profit by them: because they have
put the things asunder which God had knit together. So much the more therefore
does it stand (...) on hand to remember the thing that S. Paul tells us
here: that is to wit, that we be well washed in baptim, accordingly as (...)
says to S. Paul, Acts. 9. c. 18.
Wash away thy sins. And how? By Baptim. (...) even too show that the
washing of us with the water which we see, is not a vain or deceyuable
figure, but that Jesus Christ does in very deed accomplish the thing that is
showed before our faces. Therefore we must bear that well in mind: But yet is
the word req^isite therwithall, without the which, all that men can set forth
concerning Ceremonies, is but abuse and deceyt, though it be countenances with
the name of God an hundred thousand-tymes.

Furthermore Saint Paul adds, that our Lord Jesus Christ's washing and
clenzing of us, is too set us as excellent and singularly beautiful before his
own face. For the understanding hereof, let us note that we be washed, not
only through the forgiveness of our sins, when they come not too account
before God: but also when we be renewed by the holy Ghost too fight against
all the temptations of the world, and too mortifye the vices of our flesh, and
all the froward affections wheruntoo we be too much wedded. Ye see then that
it is a dubble grace which we receive of our Lord Jesus. That is too wit,
because he has satisfied for us and discharged us of our dettes: we come
before God as ryghtuous. For our sins are not laid too our charge, but we
be reconcyled freely, at leastwyse as in respect of our selves, howbeit that
it is by the ransom that Jesus Christ has offered. Yet notwithstanding, it
is not meant that God will have us let alone still in our uncleanness: but that
he (...) (also) too draw us too him by his holy spirit. Therefore it (...) of
necessity that the foresaid washing should be matched with regeneration. And
that is the cause why Saint Paul (...), that Jesus Christ has washed us, too
the end we should excel in beauty, yea and be unblameable also before him*
Now whereas he se^teth us forth too be Honorable or glorious, (for so does
the word which he uses import:) he has an eye back too the things which he
treated of before, concerning men and their wives. For now he goes foreward in
treating of the spiritual wedlock that is between the son of God and us,
whereof he will speak yet more a^ length hereafter. Therefore like as a man will
love his wife when she is too his lyking: So Saint Paul tells us in this
text, that the son of God will like well of us, if we wear the badges that
he gives us: that is too say, first if upon the knowledge of our own
wretchedness, we humble our selves too seek the pardon that he has
purchaced us, too the end that being quit at Gods hand, we may call upon him
with full trust. That is one point. Also that we be renewed by his power, so
as we follow not our worldly lusts, nor give liberty too our wicked
affections, but rather fight against our selves, and labor too put away more
and more the things that we have of our selves, that God may reign and live
in us, and we be governed by his holy spirit, so as our life may be nothing
else but a yielding of obedience too his holy will. Ye see then, what beauty
will make us acceptable too the son of God: namely, not (the beauty that is
adorned) with corruptible deckings: but (the beauty which comes) by being
clenzed of all our staynes through faith, and by being so sanctified by the
holy Ghost, as we may live continually as new creatures. That in effect is
the thing that we have too bear in mind. For where it is said, that Jesus
Christ is given us to be our redemption: Saint Paul declares therwithall how
it is done, namely, because (says he) he is given us too be our wisdom,
1. Cor. 1. d. 30.
ryghtuousnesse, and holiness. And why too be our wisdom? That all our
wits might rest upon him, and not wander from him one way nor other. Agein,
he is given us too be our ryghtuousnesse, too the intent there should not be
any spot or wrinckle in us, when we should appear before the face of our God,
but that the blud of Jesus Christ should be sufficient vncorruptnesse for us.
Also he is given us for our Sanctification or Holiness, too the intent that
we should be renewed by his holy spirit. And whosoever separateth these
things one from another, intends too rend Jesus Christ in pieces, as much as
lies in him. Now then, would we be parttakers of the spiritual washing,
whereof Saint Paul treats here? Let us look that we be holy, and that we
walk in pure conversation before God. Not that it can be done by our own
power or cunning: but all is attributed here to Jesus Christ, and Saint Paul
shows, that it is his office to make us so excellent. For it is certain, that
when men will needs come too it with presumptuousnesse, they may well enforce
themselves, ((...) yet they shall be never the nearer:) but as for us, we
must only suffer our Lord Jesus Christ too work in us by his holy spirit. And
by that means shall we be passing beautiful, that he may have delyght in us.

And for the same cause also does he say, that he may present unto himself a
beawtifull and glorious Church. In saying so, he declares that all the outward
show and gay glistering which we can have to the worldward, is but smoke: and
that we must have a pureness of heart. He could have said, Our Lord Jesus has
cleansed his Church, too the intent it should be pure and ryghtuous: but he
intended too express, that our purenenesse or cleanness, is not too please
the sight of the world, that we may be prayzed and commended here below, as
hipocrits are, whom men gape and gaze at a great way of, clapping their hands
at them, and esteeming them holyer than the Angels: but that it is much better
for a man not too be so precyze, but too walk plainly, and if there be
imperfections in him, too let them be known, and yet too hold on his full pace
still, having the fear of God unfeignedly in him all the while. Wherefore
following this instruction of Saint Paul's, let us learn too set our selves in
the presence of the son of God: and when it comes too the ordering of our
life, let us look at him, knowing that either we must be allowed there, or
else we gain nothing by being exalted and commended here beneathe: though
men have never so marvelous opinion of us, all (say I) shall be but mere vanity
and leazing, till we have ruled and framed our life in such wise, as if we
walked before the face of the son of God, howbeeit that in very deed nothing
can be hidden from him. This is it that we have too remember further.

Now when as Saint Paul says, too the end that the Church should be without
spot or w^in^le, and vnrebukable in holiness: he means not that this is
accomplshed and performed in us alredie, nor that it can be as long as we be
compassed ab^ut with this body: (...) it is as a prizon, and a bondage* and
we dragge our shackles after us continually while we be here beneathe: and
although we have profited well in the fear of God, yet must we be feign too
say always with Saint Paul, Romans 7. d. 23.
that we be hild in a miserable bondage, and cannot serve God but by halues,
as ye would say. Howbeeit, S. Paul meant also too show simply whertoo we be
called, too the intent w^e should hye us thitherward all the time of our life.
Now then what is the end of our Redemption? wherefore are we reconcyled too
God? Wherefore are we made clean by the blud of our Lord Jesus Christ? Wherefore
also are we sanctified and regenerated? It is too the intent we might in the
end be unblameable before God. And what in this world? There will ever be much
too be blamed and to be found fault with: but let us be contented that our
sins shall not be laid too our charge. And this is well worth the noting,
because there were a sort of malicious and leaud heads in old time, which
surmyzed an Angelical perfection in their brain, as though men might atteyne
too a full and perfect ryghtuousnesse in this world, and that was even an
abolishing of the covenant that God has made with us, wherein consists our
salvation. For therein are two inseparable points: that is too wit, the
forgiveness of sins, and the newbirth, as it is said in the seven and
thirtith of Ezechiell, in the thirteenth of Jeremy, and in effect every where.
These things then cannot be put asunder, namely that God does so receive and
adopt us, as we need still too have our sins forgiven us, till we be
rid quyte and clean of al earthly corruption: and agein, that we must go
foreward daily in newness of life. But there are yet still of those devils
incarnate, which would abolish the remission of sins, insomuch that they dare
slander us so far, as to say, that we hold men still to their Apcie, when we
make the^ believe that they must needs be sinners still* Nevertheless, it is
certain, that whosoever will be a Christian, must needs be a sinner. This is
strange at the first sight, but yet is it moved so as by the holy Ghost. 1.
John. 1. c. ^.
It is Saint John that speaks it, but the doctrine is Gods. If we say
(says he) that we have no sin, we make God a liar, and his truth is not in
us. Then if we imagine our selves too be so holy, that we have no more sin in
us: shall God be a liar for our fancies sake? Also, if we will be Christians,
ought we not too be Christ's disciples? And if we be desirous too learn in
his school, is not the manner of praying unto God his father, the principal
point which he teaches us? Math. 6. b. 1^.
And what does he show us there? For give us our offenses. We beseech God
daily too forgive us the great (...). Now if any man intend too raze out this
petition of craving forgiveness of our faults: the same forsakes the school
of Jesus Christ. Then let us understand, that in this world we cannot be
without spot or wri^kle, but we must be clenzed by little and little, and the
vices whertoo we be given, must be corrected by peecemeale, until we come
too the perfection that is spoken of in the first Chapter. Too be short, as
long as we be in this world, forasmuch as we have so many sins and vices
in us, let us be heedfull in praying unto God too show himself always
merciful toward us, and in bearing with us by forgiving our misdeedes. And
yet notwithstanding let us therwithall take heart too fight against all our
vices, and too yield our selves obedient too our God, and let us use force and
violence too subdew all our passions and lusts, until we have gotten the
upper hand of evil, though we cease not too commit it. Although sin dwell
in us, yet let it not reign in us. Thus ye see how we must day by day
continue this exercyze of presenting our selves before God with all humility,
in beseeching him too pardon our offenses: and yet notwithstanding profit more
and more in the renewment that is spoken of here, till we be wholly
fashyoned like too the ryghtuousnesse and glory of our God.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us feel them more and more, that we may
be sorry for them, and so streyne our selves too follow his service, as we
may show by our deeds, all our life long, that he has not redeemed us in
vain from the tyranny of Satan, and set us at liberty, even too serve him
with a free will, and too give our selves wholly too the glorifying of his holy
name. And therwithall (let us beseech him) also too grant us the grace, so
too taste the benefytes which he bestows upon us, as they may provoke us
more and more too glorify him, and that it may be our continual exercyze and
study too sing and preach his praises always, and too acknowledge how greatly
we be bound and i^detted unto him, that by that means our Lord Jesus may so
reign over us, as we may be linked too him in inseperable (...), until we
come too the ringdome that he has bought so deerly for us. That it may please
him to grant this grace not only to us, but also to all people. etc.

The.xli. Sermon, which is the nyenth upon the fifth Chapter.
28. Men ought so too love their wives as their own bodies. He that loves
his wife, loves himself.

29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but (rather) he nurrisheth and
cherishes it, as the Lord also does the Church.

30. For we be members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,


SEeing that the holy scripture exhorts us to be kind hearted, meek, and
patient one too another, and sets us down the example of God, who is
reconcyled too us in the person of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, and shows
us therewithal that Jesus Christ spared not himself, but showed the love that
he bare us, and the care that he had of our salvation, in that he gave himself
too so hard and bitter a death: it must needs be that our hearts are harder
than steel, if they be not meekened by it. And yet notwithstanding, all these
exhortations cannot suffyze us, by reason of our wylfulnesse and corruption.
God therefore, too put us too the greater shame, sends us back too the order
of nature: as if it were said, that although we had never heard any word of
Gods mouth, nor never had had any teaching by holy Scripture: yet ought every
of us too enter intoo himself, and too consider his own state, for that will
be enough too hold us convicted, without any other witness. And that could the
heathen men tell us full well: who having another belief in God, nor any
Religion, could notwithstanding well skill too say, that the wyld beasts make
not war one against another. For one Woolfe eats not another: the Bears
and Lions that live abroad in the wyld woods, have a certain thing that holds
them in order, so as they hurt not one another. And yet have they no discretion
as is among men: but they have as it were a natural ^^^ouing which drives
them too love one another, so as every of them lives (quietly) with his
fellow* Now then, must it not needs be that men are altoogither out of
square, and do despyze God and nature, seeing they live like Dogs and Cattes
(as they say,) and every man is as a Woolfe or a Fox too his neighbor, so as
there is nothing but craftiness and malice, or else utter cruelty? That is
the cause why God tells us that we be all of one flesh, and of one kind.
And Esaias uses the same reason, too persuade us too succor our neighbors, and
too have pity and compassion of them they stand in any need. Thou shall not
despyze thine own flesh (says he.) For the furthest stranger in the world
is never the more separated from us for all that, Esaias. 58, b* 7.
but both he and we spring both out of one fountain, and we ought too
acknowledge him too be our image. Therefore whosoever disdeyneth any man,
surely he foregetteth himself too much, and he knows not what he is, another
is worthy of the honorable degree wherein God has set him. And why? Because he
peruerteth all order. Now if this reason ought too take place in general: much
more ought men too be touched too the quick when it is told them what they
be, specially seeing they be linked toogither in a much streyter bond. As if
a man should say too a father, How now? If thou be so far out of love with
thy son, that thou art vnwylling too see him, and disdeynest too talk with
him, and he can find no means too come too atonement with thee: what a
cruelty is that? For he is thy flesh and thy blud. And how then can thou
be so blinded in thine excessive mood, as not too consider that God has
given him thee as though he had come out of thine own person? And too a son
it will be said likewise: How now? Is it meet that thou should be borne
intoo the world, and have room and place among Gods children, and in the mean
while forget thy father that begat thee, and by whose means God sent thee
intoo the world?

Now the holiest band that God has set among us, is the bond between man and
wife. That is the cause why Saint Paul says, that a man cannot love his wife,
but he must love him self: and contrariwyse, that if he despyze his wife or
hate her, it is all one as if he fall at odds with him self. And is that
possible? Heretoofore he had exhorted husbands too do their duetyes, by having
an eye too the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he had alleged, that the
son of God had given him self too the death too wash his Church: so that
although it was poor and miserable, and full of filth and uncleanness: (...)
suffered that which was needful for ou^ salvation, he left us moreover a
record of the grace which he has purchaced ^or us. Insomuch that in B^btim we
have a visible token, that the blu^ of our Lord Jesus Christ is our washing and
cle^zing. Can we think upon all these things, and not be moved too some
gentlnesse? Yea if we consider first of all that we ^ee but wr^tched woormes
of the earth, and (too be short) that there is nothing in us but utter misery,
so as we may well ^ee called vermin, and caryons full of all corruption and
lothsomnesse: and afterward compare our selves with the son of God: ought
there too be any such pride in us, as too esteem and commend our selves, and
too ^read others under our feet? Now if this be general too all men (as I
said:) what shall it be between man and wife? For the knot that God has knit
betwixt them is such, that the husband is (as ye would say (but half him self,
and may no more separate him self from his wife, tha^ the wife may separate
her self from her husband, but each of them must have regard too their own
state, as shall be declared in the end, and has bin partly declared alredie.
The husband is in deed the head, but the woman is the body. And whereas the
head has pre-eminence and souereintie over the body, it does not therefore
follow, that he should hold scorn of it, or be glad too have it shamed or
reproched: for does not the honor of the head extend too the whole body? But
now forasmuch as husbands are not sufficiently moved with the reason that is
taken of our Lord Jesus Christ: Saint Paul brings them back too their
original.

And for as much as the heathen folk and unbelievers were acquaynted with
marriage, and had given indgment of it: therefore we need no holy scripture
(says he) too teach us in this behalf, for the ignorant souls which had but
natural understanding, and walked as their moother wit directed them, knew that
the wife is a piece of the husband, and that there goes an inseparable bond
betwixt them, and that the one ought not too forsake the other, unless they
will tear themselves in pieces. Seeing that the blind wretches perceived this:
what a shame is it for such as are inlyghtened by Gods word, and have bin
taught familiarly as household folk, even as a father has his eye upon his
children: (too be ignoraut of it?) Seeing (say I) that God speaks so
familiarly too us, and as it weere month too mouth, so as he shows us his
will, and tells us our deutie: must it not needs be that we are worse than
the I^fidels, and much more grievously too be condemned than they, if we
continue hard har^^d, or stop our ears least we might receive the aduyce that
he gives us? Then let us mark well, that seeing Saint Paul has set us
forth our Lord Jesus Christ (for an example,) and told us that he is so given
us: it is good reason (considering how we be linked unto him) that we
should show our selves willing too follow him, and fashyon our selves like
unto him, by pitying such as are in distress, by bearing patiently with the
vices and infirmities of our neighbors, and by releeuing such as have need of
us, if we may conveniently, and have wherwithall. Let us think well upon that.

Agein, forasmuch as here is mention made of man and wife, let them that are
married, consider what damnation is prepared for them, if they be not moved and
touched too the quick by the things that are told them here: namely that on
the one side the heathen folk shall ryze up to give witness against them at
the latter day, and that (on the other side) the order of nature teaches them
what they have to do: so that if they live not in concord and freendship, as
is showed them here, they do (as it were) wilfully withstand God, yea and
utterly forget themselves, and become worse than brute beasts. And
furthermore let them know also, that forasmuch as marriage is a figure of the
holy union that is between the some of God and all the faithful: the same
ought also too hold them in the greater reverence: and although there happen
many contentions, yet ought they too subdew them, and too let them lie as dead,
and too consider that since our Lord Jesus sits over them, it is too show
that wedlock was blissed in such wise by God his father at the first, that he
himself also has ratifyed the same blissing by his death and passion, yea and
reconcyled us too God, in such wise as the husband may perceive as it were in a
(lively) picture, that he is all one with his wife, howbeeit in such wise under
the obedience of God, as both twain of them ought too serve him with one
accord, even until they be so far forth as they be come too him, too
cleave too him thoroughly in all perfection. Now although such warnings ought
too be of great force among us: yet are very few touched with them
according^y. And the world sees it. For let a man look intoo all housholdes
one after another: and where shall he find such freendship as may resemble
Jesus Christ and his Church? (Nowhere.) But the man and his wife are (rather)
ever iarring and disagreeing. And if there happen too be some fond (...), yet
is there no fear of God, and the least occasion in the world will be enough
too set them at odds, so as they shall forget all that is contained here: Or
(too say the truth) they never once think of it. The love that is betwixt them
is led and provoked by their lusts, and not grounded upon any knowledge that
they have of the discharging of their dewtie, that the husband considers how
he ought too bear with his wife, how he ought too guide her in the fear of
God, and how he ought too love her as a helper allotted unto him (for his
ease) that he might walk as he ought too do: Nor that the wife humbles her
self too her husband, or bends her wits too please him, because she
perceyueth that she is expressly given unto him, too be a furtherance and
not a hinderance unto him. There is no talk nor inckling of all this: but if
all be well considered, (I say) the common and most ordinary state is, that
in every house a man shall find diuelishnesse, cursyng, banning, blasphemy,
swearing, spytefulnesse, and harming. And although some w^man be a feend
toward her neighbors, as well as she is toward her husband: yet if her
husband had any wealth or goods by her, he must take her part without
discretion, and maynteyne her quarrel, be it good or bad. I say, a man may
see, that this perverseness reygneth welneere euerywhere.

Agein, every man complaynes of his wife, saying: I cannot live with her, it is
a mad beast, there is nothing in her but pride and peevishness, and there is
nothing in her but froward stubbornness. I cannot speak a word too her, but
she pays me agein with four for it. Now surely, such as men make their
wives, such have they of them. For were there no more but this that I spoke of,
namely that men do (as it were) in spyte of God maynteyne their wives
wrongful quarelles: ought not God too yield them their deserved hyre, and too
make it rebound back upon their own pates? Whatsoever I say, if a man mark
well every man's ordinary trade of life: he shall find that there may be a
sort of fond loves, and a forte of excessive affections, but as for well
ordered friendship, such as depends upon God, and is grounded on his word:
hardly shall he among a hundred houses find one, where the husband and the wife
are so well qualifyed. Yet notwithstanding we be vnexcuzable, if we profit
not in this doctrine. So then, every of us must fight against his unruly
affections: and if a man have not such a wife as he could wish, let him
understand, that God intends to try his patience by that means and let him
consider well, that he behaueth himself worse toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the husband, too whom all of us are married. And therefore let him not
be rigorous toward his wife, seeing that he himself deserves too be so
humbled. Too be short, let every man so mind this doctrine, that when the
husband has not all things in his wife that he desires, he may think thus
with himself: yet am I bound unto her, yea and I am not only bound unto my
wife, but also unto God, who is the master of marriage, and too our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is as a mirror and lively image of it unto us. Therefore am I
bound too do my duty toward her, and both too love her, and too bear with
her, although there be vices in her. Yet is it not meant, that the husband
should foster and feed his wives vices. For as we must warn and counsel one
another: so must there not be any such neerenesse or linking toogither, but
that if the husband see any thing amiss in his wife, he must at leastwyse tell
her of it, yea and rebuke her, and labor and indeuer too bring her intoo the
right way, as much as he can possibly.

But yet howsoever the world go, so long as we be married, this stands
continually, that we cannot change the order which our Lord has set, yea
even too be unviolable. Therefore we must not pass what the persons are:
insomuch that although a woman have too rough and sharp a husband, and such a
one as deals over hardly with her, yet must she always consider, that he is
her husband, and that when God matched them toogither, he allotted her that
portion, because she was worthy of it: and let her also enter intoo
examination of her sins, that she may pray God too take away that rod, and
too deal more gently with her. Then like as the wife must on her side continue
the bond of marriage, and submit her self, even without respecting what her
husband is: so when the husband has not a wife too his lyking, let him think
likewise, my wife does not her duty, I cannot live with her: but yet does
wedlock dure still. Who ordained it? God. Then if I forget my duty, and
revenge me of my wife, or fall too stoutnesse without regarding what belongs
too my charge: it is not against a mortal creature, that I shall bend my
self. When the husband ouershootes himself after that sort, surely he
fyghteth against God, and indeuereth too disanull the thing that is inviolable
by nature. So then let every of us put this doctrine better in ure on his own
behalf, and let not only married folks, but also all men in general
understand, that we cannot estraunge our selves one from another, and become
unkind, merciless, and impatient one toward another, but we must be as
witless creatures that have no reason nor regard from whence they come, or to
what end we live in this world. That is the effect of the things which we have
too bear in mind.

And if we rgarded well the Prophets reason, Esaias. 58. b. 7.
surely we should be more moved with this exhortation that is set here: No
man ever hat^d his own flesh, but nurrisheth and cherishes it. If every of
us gave himself too consider what care he has of his own person, how
tenderly he cherishes all the parts of his body even too the least toe of
his foot, how carefully he forecasteth that nothing may want him, and how
provident he is in all respects for it, so as if any member be ill at ease,
he indeuereth too remedy it, that he may maynteyne himself in health: I say,
if every of us bethought himself thoroughly after that fashyon: surely then
would it be a good teaching too us too do the like too our neighbors, that
is too say, too al men: and much more consequently, the fathers too their
children, and the children too their fathers, the husbands too their wives,
and the wives to their husbands, and so forth mutually according as it has
pleased our Lord too link us in nearer bond, as I have said before. And if any
body reply heereuntoo, ^ush, he, or he is not my self: (I answer,) then must
it needs follow that thou art no man. For (as I said before) Gods creating
and maynteyning of us, are with condition, that we should be all as one
mass. For though there be many fingers and many s^^ewes in a man's body: yet
is that no let but that they be all one thing, another is it any impeachment
why one member should not succor another as well as it self. For it is
unkindly that the body should fall too banding, and too dividing of it self
intoo factions: another is it possible that it should so. Then if every of us
be so wedded to his own profit, that in the mean while he disdeyne others
through pride, or else be cruel, so as if he see all the miseries in the
world, he has no compassion too relieve them, nor can find in his har^ to
bear with any thing, or to forgive it: is it not a sign that we have
forgotten our own nature?

Wherefore too the intent we may fare the better by this doctrine, let us wey
well these words of Saint Paul, that never any man hated his own flesh,
but that every man nurrisheth and cherishes it. Need we a schoolemayster too
teach us this? Needs God too send us his Angels from heaven, or need we
too take much pain too learn this art or cunning? (No:) we be but too much
given to it already by nature. Since it is so, every of us bears his own
evidence rolled in record against himself, and his own indytement ready
framed: there shall need no long examination before God. For the more careful
that men have bin for their own bodies, the more forecasting they have bin for
the mayntenance of it, and (to be short) the mo signs that they show of
loving themselves: the greeuouslyer shall they be condemned before God,
because they have not done the like toward them which are their own flesh,
yea though they were most unknown and of the furthest country in the world,
as I said before. And if this be general for all: what shall become of it,
when the son sets himself with all outrage and stubbornness against his
father, so as he has no meekness too suffer himself too be governed by him,
but even utterly shakes him of, for whom he ought to spend himself even too
the death? Also when the fathers on their side use nothing but bitterness
toowardes their children, or govern them in such wise, as they do but provoke
them to impacience: When the husbands deal so roughly with their wives, as it
may utterly discorage them, and cast them intoo sorrow, so as they shall let
themselves looce, and fall disorderedly too all manner of lewdness: When the
women likewise be stiffenecked, and cannot be brought to good order: I say,
when these disorders are among us: let us assure our selves there needs none
other record too condemn us, than the care that every of us has had of
himself, in that we have bin myndfull of our own welfare, and labored
(earnestly) for it, and in the mean while broken the bond that our Lord had
set among us, and every of us drawn alone by himself, and forgotten all duty
of loving kyndnesse, insomuch that we would (if we had could) have made every
of us a new world. Truly there is no man of that ability, that he can forbear
the help of his neighbors: and yet are we loath that our neighbors should
dwell with us, yea or that they should be counted in the number of men: there
is not that man which would not reign alone like a Lord. But this unkindness
and lewdness are sufficient too show that we be not worthy too enjoy the
benefytes which God deals too us in this transitory life. For since we be
too much wedded unto it, and mind it more carefully than we should do: we
be so guilty, as there is not that man which may open his mouth too reply or
too allege any excuce for himself.

And Saint Paul having told us what we ought too know, yea and too judge of
our own nature, returns agein too that which he had touched before, that is
too wit, that such as profess themselves too be members of the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, ought to be persuaded by his example, too live quietly,
freendly, and agreeingly with their wives. No man (says he) loves him self,
but he loves his wife (also.) Uerely God has ordained wedlock, in such wise,
as the wife must be as the body of her husband. Therefore if a man love him
self, his wife must be matched with him, or else it shall be a monstrous love.
It is a thing that men ought most too abhor, that the thing which is most
holy in man's life, should be utterly abaced. Seeing it is so, he that loves
him self, will love his wife. For we be of his flesh, we be of his bones.
Here he touches a thing that he spoke not of before. For when he did set
down the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, it was in alleging that he spared
not him self, but did shead his blud to wash us from our filthiness and
uncleanness. We then were defiled and stained before God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ found the means too bring us in his favor agein. And how? Even by his
own bludshed. But here he alleges another reason, too confirm the matter
yet better: which is, that we be bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh.
In so saying, he does us too understand, that when men do their duty, it is
too their own benefyte. For thereby they may taste the inestimable and infinite
grace of God, in that every man according too his degree, does in his marriage
represent the union that is between them selves and our Lord Jesus Christ.

The thing therefore which Saint Paul intends, is yet again to remove the
ha^dnesse of our hearts, by showing us that we cannot enjoy the grace that is
purchaced us by our Lord Jesus Christ, unless we live in freendshyp together,
according to the image thereof which we have in the love that he bare us in his
death and passion, which surmo^nteth all the love that we can have (one too
another.)

Howbeeit, before we go any further, let us see why and in what sense Saint
Paul says, that we be of the bones of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
flesh, and members of his body. For he is descended of Adams lineage, Romans 1. a.
3.
and is called the seed of David. And although he was conceived after a
woonderful manner in the womb of the Uirgin, yet took he man's flesh upon him,
and became very man. Howbeit he says, that he is the son of Man, too show
that he has taken a nature that is common too us, wherein he has made him
self familiar with us. Hebr. ^. b. 14.
And in deed (as says the Apostle in the Epistle too the Hebrews) he is not
ashamed too call us brothers.

But now let us come too that which is said here. It seems that Saint Paul
would make Jesus Christ as it were the root of mankind, so as we should
descend of him: for he calls us his offspring. But we have too mark, that
for as much as our Lord Jesus Christ was shaped of the seed of Abraham, too
perform the things that were promised, yea and that he could not be the
Mediator between God and us, except he had been of our nature: (for he could
not have amended our misdoinges wherthrough we were bound too endless
damnation, unless he had clothed him self with our body, and had also a
soul, too the end too present him self in the person of al men: and so it
behooved our Lord Jesus Christ too be our flesh in our body:) we may say that
he is of our bones and of our flesh. And why? He is descended of Adams race, as
I said before. But howsoever the case stand, he was conceived maruelously by the
holy Ghost. Howbeeit there is another respect. For yet for all this he
ceasseth not too be the second Adam, 1. Cor. 15. c. 21. 22.
as Saint Paul terms him, in making comparison between the grace
wherethrough we were set agein, and the deadly fall wherthrough we were all
forlorn. He says, that the first Adam did by his transgression make us
enemies too God, so as we have no access to him, but should be thrust back,
if we preaced to him, and that justly. For where sin reigns, there must
needs be as it were vnrecoucylable division. God being the fountain of all
ryghtuousnesse, cannot match with our iniquities and corruptions. Then is there
also a second Adam, which comes to remedy al, that is to wit, our Lord Jesus
Christ. And how is he the second Adam? For (as I told you before) it is not meant
that we should be so bold as too think too preace unto Jesus Christ, as
though we were linked too him of our own nature: but that is done in the
power of his holy spirit, and not in the substance of his body. Behold then,
Jesus Christ is become very man, and has taken upon him the selfsame humane
nature that ours is: but yet is it not of nature that we be his flesh and his
bones: (for we be not descended of him as touching our own substance) but it
is of his divine power. Then must we come too this point, that we be bone of
the bones of our Lord Jesus Christ, because we be restored in him, and have
in him as it were a new and second creation.

And Saint Paul (as we shall see hereafter) has an eye too the original of
Eve: for she was taken out of Adams substance, and shaped of one of his
ribs. Now then, are we restored by our Lord Jesus Christ? If we consider
our first birth whereby we be brought intoo this world too be mortal men:
we cannot say, such is our flesh, unless we be of the seed of them that
were before us: but whatsoever we be, in that seed we be accursed. It is
true that Adam was created after the image of God: but yet was that image
defaced by sin, so as we be not worthy too be counted among Gods works.
And the same horrible condemnation is pronounced with his own mouth, Gene. 6.
b. 6.
where he says, that it repents him that he had made man, as though he
disclaymed us all, because we do but infect the earth, and are not so worthy
too be mustered in the array of his creatures, as are the woormes, lyce, fleas,
dogflyes, and all other vermin of the world. That then is the benefyte which
we have by Adam: and as often as it is said, that we be of his seed and of his
flesh, it serves too show us, that there is nothing in us but a gulf of
cursednesse. Now hereuppon, if we come too our Lord Jesus Christ, we be
restored agein, ^. Cor. 5. ^. 17.
and (as the Scripture speaks of it,) we be made new creatures in him. Ye
see then, that it is by power of the spirit, and not by order of nature, nor by
any common fashyon, that we be of the bone and of the flesh of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the cause why we be members of his body, is that God his
father has ordained and stablished him as our head. Howbeeit (as I said before)
that is done by a secret power, which we comprehend not but by faith. Then do
both these things agree very well: namely, that Jesus Christ is of our bone and
of our flesh, in respect that he has taken our humane nature upon him, and
clothed himself with it, without the which we should have no alyance with him.
For if we cannot atteyne too the Angels: how shall we atteyne too him that is
the souerein head of them? But whereas he is come in such wyze unto us, that he
has voutsafed to be knit in the bond of brotherhood with us: that is done
specially when he woorketh so by the power of his holy spirit, that he is our
head, and we are gathered toogither in him, and have a heavenly state, and
whereas before we had nothing but of the earh, and consequently had nothing in
us but corruption, now we be lifted up on high, and are made the children of
God by the grace that is spoken of here, whereas erst we were heirs of his
wrath, which we hold from our father Adam when we follow his nature, because
we are all lost and perverted in him. Thus ye see in effect how the two
things are too be agreed, wherein there seemed too be some diversity. And in
deed if we have not that, what would become of us? How miserable would our
state be? I have showed alredye, that if any man look well what is in
himself: he shall find nothing there but matter too separate him from God. Now
then, until we be of the substance of our Lord Jesus Christ, God must needs
hate us and abhor us, and not know us too be of the number and company of
his creatures.

Now remains too see how it comes to pass that we be of the bones of
Jesus Christ, and of his flesh. For he is in heaven, and we are here beneath
on earth. Agein, when we be begotten, every of us is begotten after the order
of nature, he has his father and his mother too come of, and they be of the
same race that he is. How then are we of the bones of Jesus Christ? It is not
in respect of substance: for if we look upon our own flesh, another the
skin, nor the bones, nor the gristles that we have, do come of the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ: but it is in respect that the cursednesse which we
bring from our moothers womb, and is spread over all Adams lineage, is taken away
by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that therwithall he has so sheaded
forth the grace of his holy spirit upon us, that we be inlyghtened by it.
Therefore it is as a quality (as men term it) and not a substance. Every man
shall descend of such lineage, and God lets the common order run on still
which he appointed at the beginning, namely that men beget one another from
issew too issew: but in the mean while Jesus Christ renueth those whom God his
father has chozen, and such as are the members of his own body, and riddeth
them of the corruption which they had taken from Adam. And afterward he gives
them such a power, as every of them feels by faith that he is under the head
that is set over us, and that we be gathered all toogither in him, and his
life is given unto us, too the intent we should no more live too our selves,
2. Cor. 5. ^. 15.
nor too the world, but rather (...) he should live in us, as Saint Paul
says of him. Ye see then that Jesus Christ needs not too come down from
heaven, too make us members of his body, nor too diminish his own flesh too
make us too grow out of him, and too be shaped of him. For all is done by
the wonderful power of his holy spirit. We draw no^ any thing from the
flesh, nor from the body wherewith he once clothed himself: for that is in
heaven, too the intent that we should be fashyoned like unto the glory that
is now in him. But yet for all that he woorketh in such wise, as we have all
our strength continually of him. And like as trees draw both their flowers,
their leaves, and their fruits from their root: and like as the body of man
feels his strength too flow down from the head, so do we feel the vertew
and force of the conjunction that is between us and our Lord Jesus Christ, and
yet he continues still in his full state all the while. Another does that hinder
us too enjoy the inestimable benefit that S. Paul magnifyeth so much in this
text. And therwithal let us bear this point in mind, that it is much when we
be (inwardly) stird up to do every man his duty: for thereby we taste the
grace of God which concerns the salvation of our souls.

The matter that is in hand here, is that men should live freendly and
agreeingly with their wives. And when a husband considers the things that are
spoken here, he ought too be provoked, not only too discharge him self of
the bond wherein he is bound too God and his wife: but also too think thus
with him self: This is such a state that although it be corruptible, and
serve but for this transitory life, yet has God set it before us as a lively
image wherein I see that Jesus Christ is my head, and that I belong too him,
and that not only I am his, but also he is mine, so as his life belongs too
me, and (too be short) I am as if I were a member of his body. Seeing then
that men in doing their duty toward their wives, and wives also in obeying
their husbands, may behold how they be joined unto Christ, and that they do
the things that belong too the heritage of the kingdom of heaven: must it not
needs be that we be too unthankful, if we consider not how our Lord Jesus
Christ laboreth by all means too win us, and too make us walk under his yoke?
And moreover he not only allureth us by gentle and loving means, too the
intent we should take the better courage too serve him, and too do the things
that our calling and state require: but also draws us too him, and even in
this world, and in the transitory and earthly things, sets us forth the
everlasting salvation that is prepared for us in heaven, and which was bought
so deerly for us by the blud of his only son, to the intent that in the end
we should be parttakers of the effect and virtue that proceeds thereof.

And now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too voutsafe, so too reform our
hearts unto goodness, as we may seek nothing but too serve him, and too
yield our selves wholly too the obeying of his holy will, and that it may
please him therwithall so too bear with us in our feebleness, as we having
received pity and mercy at his hand, may in the end be able too stand up
before his face. And so let us all say, Almighty God heavenly father etc.

The.xlii. Sermon, which is the tenth upon the fifth Chapter.
31 For this cause shall a man leave father and moother, and be joined too his
wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.

32 This is a great secret. Yea, say I, in Christ and in the Church.

33 Therefore, do ye so, as every man may love his wife as himself, and let
the wife fear her husband.


GOd does so dispoze his works, as we have occasion too behold a
wonderful wisdom in all his doings, and too receive such instruction by
them, as may be too our benefyte: as (for example) in that which Saint Paul
alleges here, namely that the woman was drawn and taken out of the substance
of the man. For God could well have created Eve after the same manner that he
created Adam. But he (...), and commands woman too be sha^ed thereof. And
whertoo tends this, but that there should be such an union between man and
wife, as he might think, this is my flesh, this is my bone: and she, whence
has God given me life? whence has he shaped me? Even of a rib that he took
out of man. We see then that God did not without cause use such diversity in
creating man and woman. It was too the end it should be continually minded in
wedlock, so as the husband might know that he breaks the whole order of
nature, if he be not united in good agreement too his wife: and the wife
likewise, if she submit not h^^selfe quietly too her husband, acknowledging
him too be her head. But Saint Paul applies this further, to the union which
is between our Lord Jesus Christ and his Church. For (as was declared upon
Sunday) wedlock is as a figure of the knitting toogither which is between us
and the son of God. And therefore he cries out, saying, It is a high
mystery, that is too say, a secret which we ought too take very good heed of,
Yea (says he) in Jesus Christ and in his Church. There are then two things
too be noted here.

The one is, that we see how God even from the beginning, has knit man and
wife together in inseperable bond. The other is, that he intends too lead us
yet higher: that is too say, that forasmuch as there is nothing in our selves
but all manner of wretchedness, we should be knit too the son of God, who
is the fountain of all goodness, and from thence draw our spiritual life,
and have all our strength and power of him. Gene. 2. d. 24.
And forasmuch as S. Paul having alleged the said text out of Moses, adds,
that this mystery is great, in that the son of God has made us bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh: some have imagined it too be as a prophecy of
that which has bin said. But there is no reason nor color of reason, why they
should think so, and it is evident that the text should be mard, if it be not
taken simply as it lies: that is too wit, that God intended too warn man and
wife what their dewtie and charge is. Let that then serve for one point.

The Papists have foully ouersho^ themselves in this case, and bewrayed such
ignorance, as little children might well spit in their faces for it. Because
the word Sacrament was an ordinary word (in old time) too betoken Secrets,
mysteries, and all manner of high things that are worthy too be had in
admiration of us: therefore the said word Sacrament was (...) in here ((...))
It is a great Sacrament, says Saint Paul, that is to say, a great mystery
or secret. 1. Tim. 3. d. 16.
And heerof there is no doubt, no more than when he says, it is a great
Sacrament, that God was manifested in the flesh: It is a great Sacrament that
the Gospel was published through the whole world, Romans 16. d. 25.
and that the wretched Gentyles and vnbeeleuers were matched with the offspring
of Abraham. Ephe. 3. a. 3. b. 9.
So in this text, the infinite goodness of our God is a (Sacrament, Colost. 1.
d. 26.
that is too say, a) high thing, and well worthy to be looked at of us.
Hereuppon some folks have bin so very beasts as too say, Then is Wedlock or
Matrimony a Sacrament, as well as Baptim, or as the Lords supper. And because
they understood not the word: to their seeming there was somewhat to be found
here, like as in Baptim, the water betokens that we be washed by the blud of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and in the Supper, the bread and wine are warrants and
pledges of his body and of his blud. They were of opinion, that as much is
done in marriage. Now when we see that such doltishnesse has crept in through
the whole world, and that these great doctors had need too be set agein too
their Apcies, for so much as they knew not even the things that they ought too
have judged by their natural reason: therein we see that ther^ lies a great
vengeance of God upon such as have corrupted the true religion, and made
minglemangles in the word of God, after their own fancyes. And therwithall
we have too thank our God so much the more, for that he has drawn us out of
such dungeons. And seeing there was so horrible confuzion in such as are
reported themselves to be the Lamps and pillars of the Church, and were taken
so to be: since we see that God did dull them so utterly: we ought not too be
afraid too separate our selves from their company and si^agogue. And seeing he
has granted us the grace too be no more mingled with them: let us keep on
our course, and walk forth soberly. For there we have a warning too hold our
selves in awe, that we being Gods true scholars, we may distrust our selves,
and not go seek five feet in one sheep (as they say), but handle the holy
scriptures with such reverence, as God may guide us too the true understanding
of it by his holy spirit.

But now let us come too Saint Paul's intent. It is certain that he alleges
the record of Moses, Gene. 2. d. 23.
too show that the (...) bear with his wife, as with a portion of his own
bo^ie, and the one half of his own person: (...) them. The cause then why Eve
was shaped of one of Adams ribs, is, that God meant to stablish such a concord
between man and wife by that mean, as there should be no bond in the world
so streyt as that. For the child ought in deed too honor his father: for he
is his seed, and he is his blud: but yet is the bond of wedlock preferred
before it. And by whom? It comes not of men's lyking: but according as Adam
had spoken, and as God had pronounced the sentence, so is it an inviolable
order, that man should be knit unto his wife, yea and that in such wise, that
if he should needs forsake the one or the other, his father should not be so
near him as his wife.

Yet is not this as much too say, as that God meant too break that yoke, and
too give children leave too be stubborn against their fathers and moothers,
when they be once married. God changes not any whit of the things that he
has ordained. Therefore he that has a father or moother alive, ought too be
still subject too them, without ceassing of from doing his dewtie, according
as the scripture shows, and as nature also teaches every man too do. For
we have it engraven in us, and we cannot wype it out. Thus ye see that
married folks cease not too be always subject too their fathers and moothers.
But here the case stands upon the comparing of the one with the other: as
if he should say, If a young man should forsake his father, and have him in any
contempt or dis^eine, or be stubborn against him, or yield him no reverence:
would not the world say, he were a monster? Now if God have commanded in his
law, that stubborn and disobedient children should be stoned, Deuteronomy. 21. d.
21.
and that men should root such villainy out of the world: what a thing is it,
when a man shall forsake his wife, or the wife her husband? Surely it is an
outrageous crime. Then if it be intolerable that the child should ryze up
against his father: (No doubt but) the bond of wedlock is yi^ much holyer, and
more expressly commended too us of God. Seeing it is so: it stands every man
on hand, too look that he discharge his dewtie. For if a woman have a froward
head of her own, so as she must be brawling every minute of an hour, and
will not be subject to her husband: also if the husband be churlish and cruel,
so as he disdeyneth his wife: it is not a doing of wrong to a humane creature,
but to God, who is the author of marriage, and has ordained it with such
condition, as we hear of here. And so ye see what we have to remember upon the
first part of this text.

But this extends yet further: that is too wit, that every man should love
those that are alyed too him by means of God. As for example, a man having no
more but his wife, is bound notwithstanding too acknowledge that God has
united us all toogither. And when he created Eve the moother of all men out of
Adams side: it was too the end that the same should extend euerywhere, and that
we should know that he will have us to live in such concord, as none of us
should for all that separate our selves from other. No man then ought too be
so cruel as too say, Tush, she is not my wife. But we must consider, that
forasmuch as it is our Lords will that there should be a general concord
among all men, and that every man should think him self bound too his
neighbors: it is as though mankind were compounded of two sorts, so as there
were both malekynd and femalekynd. Then are we all bound one too another. True
it is that matrimony (as I said) is reserved by it self: but yet for all that,
men are bound toward women, too succor them, seeing that our Lord has showed
it by deed even in the first creation. And women also must behave themselves
soberly among men, although they be not their husbands.

Also there is further, that they shall be two in one flesh. Heerby our Lord
Jesus Christ shows us, that the man which is married ought too hold him self
contented with his own wife, and the woman likewise rest wholly upon her
husband, so as they let not their lusts raundge abroad, nor give themselves the
bridle to change any thing in the order which our Lord has set, and will have
too stand in force to the worlds end. Men have so passed their bounds in all
ages, that they have forgotten both kind and all kyndnesse. And they have not
only despyzed God and his word, but also forgotten with what condition they
were created, in the world: and they knew not even that which natural reason
could have showed them. And they had not come too that point, if they had not
bin doted in their lusts like wood beasts. And surely there is no such rage as
the reigning of inordinate lusts in our flesh, when they be not repressed by
the fear of God. Thereof it came that in many countries it was lawful for men
too have three or four wives a piece, as it is permitted still at this day
among the Turks. The Jews also, notwithstanding that they had the Law of
Moses, did put away their wives for every small occasion that came in their
heads. If a woman were not fair enough, or if she were not rich enough, by
and by she was divorced. True it is that our Lord had provided for it,
howbeeit but half. Math. 19. a. ^.
And in deed our Lord Jesus Christ declares, that God had a regard of the
hard hartednesse of that people, which was past amendment or taming. Therefore
when any of them listed too put away his wife, he was bound too give her a
Testimonial, that she was no harlot, but that she lyked him not: and he
choze rather too susteyn that shame, than to keep the faith of marriage. For in
putting away his wife after he had plyghted her his faith too live and dye with
her, he showed himself forsworn and unfaithful. Therefore it was a reproach
too them too put away their wives after that sort. But yet for all that,
divorces were common. And our Lord Jesus says, that in so dooyng the Jews
were backestyders from the law of God, and therefore he tells them, it was
not so from the beginning. They took that liberty on that it was said, that
he which found not himself well at ease with his wife, should give her leave
too depart. But our Lord Jesus tells them, It is true that God granted it
too your fathers: howbeeit that was because he was feign too deal with them as
with wyld beasts. So then, he granted them more than was lawful: but yet
know ye, that although he punished them not with rigor, yet is it not meant
that you should therefore take occasion at it too do yet worse. Therefore
have ye an eye always too the beginning, when God created Adam, and shaped
Eve out of his side: he said (at that time) that two should be one flesh.
He then that takes two wives, is worthy too be cut asunder, and he that
takes three, is worthy too be cut in three pieces: for it is all one as if he
would defye God and nature, seeing God has printed a mark in the person of
man and wife, too the intent that wedlock should be kept as it ought too be.
Wherefore if a man disanull the ordinance of God, deserves he not to be wyped
out quyte and clean? The thing then which we have yet still to bear in mind,
is, that a man must bridle all his senses, and not cast his eyes wandering
here and there, least his mind be carried away when he sees a wooman that
seems fayrer too him than his own. And let the wife also not look upon any
man but her husband, otherwise than with simplicity. And let them always
think, we be but two, yea and yet one flesh: I can not be a whole person,
except I be with my husband. And let the husband also on his side think, I am
but half a creature, when I am asunder from my wife, seeing that God (...) ye
see what we have too remember upon this saying, that (...) shall be one
flesh.

Now theruppon Saint Paul concludes, Therefore let the husband love his
wife, and let the wife honor or fear her husband. For the word that he
uses, signifies too fear: but it is taken here for the reverence and
subjection which the wife owes to her husband. And here we have too mark
the difference that is put between the dewtie of the husband, and the dewtie
of the wife. God commands not the husband too fear his wife, but he
commaunde^^ him to^ love her. There is yet more in the woman: that is wit, that
she must be subject. If a man demand, How then? Does the husband owe none
honor too his wife? It is not possible to love ryghtly and with a pure heart,
where there is no reverence: for a man will n^uer love him whom he despyzeth.
The world does in deed call it love, but (too speak properly) if I love a
wanton person or a iester, because he makes me some sport or pleases me,
that is no true love: but there must be a linking together, and an agreement
in good manners, so as a man have always good estimation and opinion of him
whom he loves. In like case is it between a man and his wife. For when I
think with my self, She is a portion of my self, she is the one half of
my person: is it possible that I should despyze her? The man then must honor
his wife, howbeeit not by subjection that he should not always abide in his
state as head, and have the governing of his wife. That is the cause why Saint
Paul requires nothing at the husbands hand, but that he should love his
wife. In another text too the Colossians he adds, Colo^^. ^. d. 19.
that they should not be bitter too them. For if there be love, surely he that
loves, will bear with many faults and infirmities of his friend. And if we
do it one too another: much more ought the husband too do it toward her whom
he knows too be given him of God, that he should love her as his own body:
1. Pet. ^. b. 7.
And therefore Saint Peter says expressly, that men must have discretion and
wisdom too help their wives infirmities, by bearing with their frayltie. If a
man take a toy in his head, that his wife is unconstant and light: or too be
short, if he despyze her under pretense that she is not a man: it is an ill
regarding of her. For though she be frail, he must consider that there is
the like in himself, and thereuppon bear with her, as he would be borne
withal himself. Thus ye see how this is too be defyned that Saint Paul
speaks of here. He means not that a man should be doted in fond love, as it
falls out oftentimes. And the last Sunday I alleged the examples of such as
pretend too be very hot in mayntenance of their wives quarelles (abroad,) and
yet are diuelles to them at home. So then, the love that Saint Paul speaks
of, is a right and good affection which the man bears too his wife, because
he knows that God has knit them together, as though he had put them
together with his own hand, and said, live you two together in peace and
concord.

Agein, as touching the wives, because they be loath too bear the yoke that
God has laid upon their shoulders: therefore in the other text Saint Paul
did put them in mind, that God is the author of wedlock, and that it is he
which has set down this condition, that the wife should be subject too her
husband, and suffer hirselfe too be ruled by him as by her head, and bear him
reverence. For a woman will always find matter enough in her husband too
despyze him. If he have any goodness, she will go about too deface it, that
she may have occasion too say, why should this man have pre-eminence over me?
For he is no more able too rule than I. And we know what ouerweening there is
in men and women. For every one thinks himself more able than his fellow.
The wives therefore would feyne govern and have the maystrie. For that cause
does Saint Paul tell them, that they must abide in the state that God has
put them in, (that is too wit, in subjection,) and that they must not stand
scannyng what is in their husbands, too examine whether they be worthy too
have authority and superiority or no: but that they must consider what God
has ordained, and obey the same without geynsaying or replying. They must not
inquyre, why is this, and why is that? too the intent too find some excuce too
exempt themselves from the obeying of God and of his commandments. Therefore
we must give ear to him, and every of us must without geynsaying receive the
things that he commands us. Thus ye see how the things are too be
understood, which are spoken here concerning the fear and subjection that
wives owe too their husbands. This doctrine is clear and familiar enough of it
self: but yet for all that, how is it practyzed in the world? Folk would
feign allege excuce of ignorance, too shift off the performance of their
dewtie, by saying, this is to high and to hard to be understood, when as it is
said, that men ought to love their wives* needs there any gloze too expound
what the holy Ghost meant? No: the thing is evident enough of it self, and
every man knows in himself that he understands it well enough. But if ye
look upon the love that men bear too their wives, scarsely shall ye find
one among a hundred, which could not find in his heart too give it over, and
which has not some wandering fancies in his head. The women also are so light
minded, that they could find in their hearts too be unmarried twenty times in
a year. And whereof comes that? Even of that they have not an eye unto God,
who is the author of Marriage? Truly though we had no scripture at all (as I
said:) yet would the brutishest man in the world reverence marriage. And why is
that, but ^ycause it was our Lords will too leave that record engraven in men's
hearts? His meaning then is too show, that since the most ignorant and grossest
sort understand that man and wife should join in good love every one in their
degree: men must bend that way. But now, we have teaching, and we have
exhortations added too spur us the further foreward, too the intent we
should not ^latter our selves in our vices: and yet what are we the better? It
is too be seen daily, that men storm at their wives, and wives check at
their husbands: it is an ordinary matter in every house, and ever among there
fly and flyng out cursings and bannings: too be short, there is nothing but
frowardness and dis^eyne. Now where these things are, it is impossible that
the man and wife should have any access too come unto God. For after what
manner ought our repayring unto God be, that we might receive mercy, and be
under his protection, and he have a care of us? It is by prayer.

Now Saint Peter says expressly, 1. Pet. ^. b. 7.
that when a man is ouersharp and rigorous too his wife, and the wife also on
her side is stubborn, so as he is not able too weeld her by any means, nor
she willing too submit her self as she ought too do: then are their prayers
broken of. As if he should say, wretched folk whereon think ye? Are ye not
very miserable, seeing the gate is shet against you that ye cannot call upon
God? Now then what will become of us, when we cannot betake our selves intoo
the hand of our God? It were better for us too be drowned a hundred thousand
times. Seeing then that God loves the quietness both of the men and of the
women, in commanding us too live in peace and concord, and moreover ^iddeth
them come unto him, saying: when the husband governs his wife quietly, and
the wife on her side does her dewtie too: then if ye call upon me, I will
hear you as it were out of (...) mouth: seeing (say I) that our Lord calls
us to him for our own benefyte and welfare, when he commands us too call
upon him with a pure heart: must it not needs be that we are possessed of the
devil, and have forgone al our wits, if we accept not so good and profitable
a conditon? Therefore let us mark well, that if the husband intend too discharge
his dewtie, and the wife likewise: both of them must have an eye unto God,
and hold their marriage of him, assuring themselves that they met not at al
adventure, but that the Lord cuppled them toogither, too the end that the
husband should be as a companion too his wife, and receive her as a part of
him self: and the wife yield the degree of honour^too her husband, as belongs
too him in respect of God, and submit her self too him as too her head. Thus
the best may too harken unto God, and too obey him in this case, is too take
him for the author of wedlock, too be ruled by him in all things. And let
not the husband trubble him self too much in looking upon the faults of his
wife, too say, what shall I do with this caryon? For we know that reproaches
are loathsome and heinous. Also let not the wife look at the things that are in
her husband, to say, he is a very devil, and cannot be won by any means:
but let her hold her to the condition that she is bound unto, and let her not
ask why, nor wherefore God has put her so in subjection, another let her make
her self glorious in setting up her bri^^^es against God, for putting her so in
subjection too her husb^nd.

But now let us come too the second point, and speak yet more of the high
mystery, which Saint Paul magnifyeth so much here. It is (says he) a great
mystery, yea between Christ and his Church. By these words it is easy too
discern, that Saint Paul meant not too call marriage or wedlock a Sacrament:
for he expounds him (...) afterward. And (as I told you) the only thing that
is treated here, is the expressing of Gods inestimable goodness, insomuch
that in sted of executing the office of a teacher, too show and declare how
we be knit too our Lord Jesus Christ, Saint Paul him self (...) is
astonished, and as a man ravished intoo woonderment, confe^sing that the
wan^eth fit and sufficient words to express well Gods grace, in vou^saf^ng too
knit and unite us too his only son. I have told you (...) already, how we ^ee
(...) of our Lord Jesus Christ's (...), and how we be his flesh. It is not
that we be taken out of his body, for we come of the lineage of Adam: but
because we live of his own substance, John. 6. f. 55.
according too this saying, that his flesh is our meat, and his blud our
drink, whereby he means that we live in him, howbeit spiritually. In deed
we have a common life both too talk and too walk with all men, which
proceeds not of the special grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. But yet the
moving which we have common with the brute beasts proceeds also of him,
according as it is said, that he was the life of all things. John. 1. b. 12.
Yea and Saint John passes yet further, saying, that the word, (that is to
say, our Lord Jesus Christ,) was too quicken men, in that God has given them
this special privilege of having some understanding and discretion. But when
the spiritual life which we have with the son of God is spoken of: that is
a thing above nature. For although we have not any worthiness or excellency
when we come out of our moothers womb: yet remains there always some print
and image of God. And yet for all that we be so cursed in our own nature,
and so miserable, that we be called even deceassed and dead. And that is the
cause why our Lord Jesus Christ says, John. 5. ^. 25.
that the hour is come, that the dead which are as rotten carkesses in the
grave, shall hear the voice of the son of God. And Saint Paul has said in
the second Chapter, that when we be reformed by our Lord Jesus Christ, then
we live, whereas erst we were dead in our sins and trangressions, because
we receive that from our father Adam as it were by inheritance. The manner
therefore that we be of Jesus Christ's flesh, and bone of his bone, is that
we be graffed intoo his body, accordingly as Saint Paul also uses the same
similitude of graffyng. Romans 6. a. 6.
Like as a sine that is set intoo a stock, takes his sustenance from the
same: so must we by being graffed intoo our Lord Jesus Christ. True it is,
that we do not yet bring forth good fruit of our selves: for his purpose
here is but too show that as a branch withers which is broken of from the
root and so let alone, but receives sap and nurrishment from the root, if it
be graffed intoo another: even so is it with us, that is too wit, that if we
continue such as we be by kind, then are we in death, because we be
separated from our Lord Jesus Christ? but if we be incorporated intoo him,
and it please him too communicate himself unto us, then do we feel in very
deed, that bread does not more nurrishe us when we eat it, nor wine
strengthen us better when we drink it, than we verily receive life and
strength by the body and blud of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now then, that this is a high mystery, every man is able to judge of
himself. When we have debated never so much, and scanned the matter in our
hearts, is there any of us that can comprehend how we be knit too our Lord
Jesus Christ, and how we be made all one with him, so as we can assure and
warrant our selves, that we shall by that mean be parttakers of Gods glory,
and that even at this day we live in our Lord Jesus Christ: According too this
saying of his, John. 14. c. 19.
be of good cheer, for as I live, so shall you also. Can this (say I) enter
intoo so small a room as our sensual reason is? No surely. And that is the
cause why a number of men cannot admit this point, that we be the flesh of
Jesus Christ, and bone of his bones, but content themselves with their own
imaginations, which is an abacing of Gods grace, which Saint Paul was not able
too express, but rather showed us that it ought too ravish our wits too
wonder at it. Many then may happen too have a rouing, and as it were a
heathenish imagination, that we be knit unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that is
too say, that we be saved by his grace. But the Scripture goes further: and
though there were no more but this saying, That it is a great mystery: yet let
us beware of limiting it after our own fancy, for it were al one as if we
would make Saint Paul a liar. All such as despyze this spiritual conjunction
which we have with our Lord Jesus Christ, would show that there is no such
secret nor wonderful power of God, nor aught else, as we hear spoken of
here. And the holy Ghost uses such speech, too humble us, and afterward ^oo
exalt us agein. Therefore we must on the one side confess that all the
wisdom and wit which we have, does fail us in that behalf: and afterward
ryze up agein, for that we hear our Lord Jesus Christ call us too him, and
tell us that we be so knit unto him, that he has not any thing of his own,
which he makes not common too us, and whereof he will not have us too be
parttakers. Therefore if we have any contrary motions in our selves, and it
come intoo our heads too say, how is it possible that our Lord Jesus Christ
who is in heaven, should nurrish us with his own substance, so as his body
should be our meat, and his blud our drink? I say, if we fall intoo such
fancies: we must repulse them all with that which is said here, namely that it
is a great Secret, and we must rebuke our own folly and rashness, in
intending too measure the thing that is infinite. Our Lord shows us, that
when he has knit us too his only son, he has done so high and profound a
work, as surmounteth all our capacity. Seeing it is so, let us always
conclude, that although we find it a strange matter: yet must we rest upon
the thing which is spoken by God himself, specially when he says, that he
will work after so high a fashyon, that we shall be utterly ravished at it.

Wherefore let us learn generally upon this text, that all the benefytes
which we receive by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, thereby too atteine
too the heavenly life, are and do proceed of the fayd fountain of Gods
incomprehensible wisdom, so as it is not for us too be so foolish and
presump^uous as too say, I will know what it is, and agein, I will see what
pleases me. Let us restreyne our selves from such presumption, for it will
make us unworthy of the mystery of faith, because it is a saying that
imports a great secret. The end (say I) whereat we must begin, if we mind
too fare the better by Jesus Christ, and too be parttakers of all his grace:
is too understand, that Gods woorking in our salvation is a great mystery or
secret, according too the text that I alleged heertoofore out of the Epistle
too Timothy. It is a great mystery (says Saint Paul) that God was
manifested in the flesh. 1. Tim. ^. d. 16.
For what a great distance is there between God and man? We be but worms and
rottenness, and Gods majesty is so high, as no man can say what it is, nor
conceive the hundredth part of it in thought, but we must be feign too be
ravished too wonder at it. Seeing then that God has so linked himself unto
us, that he is the true Emanuell (as he is named in Esaias, Esaias. 7. c. 14.
) and that the things which seem to be so far asunder, are knit together in
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ: Let us conclude theruppon, that there is
nothing but mysteries and secrets in all the grace which we receive of our
God, and specially in our incorporating or graffing intoo our Lord Jesus
Christ, who having taken our nature upon him, and clothed himself with our
flesh, will have us too be graffed into him as into our root, too be
quickened by his spirit, and too be parttakers of his life, so as he has
nothing peculiar too himself alone, but will have all to be common unto us.
Will we then receive our Lord Jesus Christ with all the benefytes which he
brings us, and will we by his means overcome all the temptations that can
cross us? We must taste thoroughly of the things that the holy Scripture
tells us and sets before us, and give such reverend credit unto the^, by
acknowledging that God woorketh in us by our Lord Jesus Christ, as the same may
content us, and make us too forsake all our own natural understanding.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our sins, praying him too voutsafe too pardon us in such wise, as we may
be rid of them, and he so govern us by his holy spirit, as we may indeuer to
live according to his holy will, and reform our whole life according to his
holy commandments, and he bear with all our infirmites, until he have
wholly reformed us, too bring us too the perfection whertoo we labor as now
too atteyne. And so let us all say, Almyghtie God etc.

The.xliii. Sermon, which is the first upon the sixth Chapter.
1. Children, obey your fathers and moothers in the Lord, for that is right.

2. Honor thy father and thy moother, (which is the first commandment in
promis,)

3. That thou may fare well, and be long lived upon earth.

4. Fathers provoke not your children too wrath, but nurrishe them up in the
nurture and warnings of the Lord.


OUr resorting unto Sermons, must be, not only too hear the things that we
knew not: but also too be stirred up too do our dewtie, and too be wakened
when we be s^othfull and drowzie, by good and holy warnings, and too be
r^buked, if there be any stubbornness and malice in us. And that is the thing
which Saint Paul tells us here, which every of us ought too have engraven
in our hearts. For it is a thing which all of us understand by our moother wit,
that children ought too be obedient and subject too their fathers and
moothers, and also that there ought too be such gentleness in those that have
children too govern, as too use them myldly, and not too give them cause of
frowardness, through their over great roughness. This (say I) is known well
enough of all men: but yet is not the warning that is given us here, more than
needs: For who is he that discharges himself of the things that are told us
here by Saint Paul? Fathers and Moothers do diverse times mar their
children with cockering them, and make them such Cocknyes, as they lead them
too utter undoing. Agein, somtymes they be in such cholers and heates with
them without measure or discretion, that they have no hold of themselves, nor
no indifferent dealing with them as there ought too be. As for children,
although it be sufficiently proved too them, that they ought too be obedient
and subject too their parents, does not the world see how they despyze them,
and as it were hold utter scorn of them? Another are there almost any, which
hold themselves in awe, and yield a right reverence too their fathers and
moothers, in respect that God has bound them too it, and that they ought too
do it. Therefore since we see here, that Saint Paul exhorts the faithful
too things that are so common: therein we may perceive the frowardness of our
own nature. For th^se are such things as we ought not too be put in mind of
them, but every of us ought too be inclyned of himself too do his dewtie
without warning. Gods spirit then rebukes us for being so fleshly, that
although we know a thing too be as ryghtfull as may be, yet we cannot give
our selves too it. Wherefore let us indeuer to fight against our own vices. For
it is not enough for us too have learned what we ought too do: but also,
forasmuch as there is much fyghting and stryuing in our selves against it:
after we once know Gods will, and what is ryghtuous and convenient, every of
us must enter intoo himself, and beware that he draw not clean back, but
that he imprison and bridle himself, and bear well in mind that it is not
enough for him too have bin instructed and taught, unless he do also thrust
forth himself by force, and subdue all his wicked affections, how hard so
ever it be too bring it too pass.

Now let us come too that which is said here. Ye Children (says Saint Paul)
obey your fathers and moothers. True it is that (as Paul alleges afterward)
God has in his law set down a more general term: that is too wit, Honor.
For God meant too do us too understand, that children ought too yield both
subjection and reverence too their fathers and moothers. For such a one might
yield obedience and subjection, as might nevertheless have a spytefull, a
proud, and a lofty heart, and despyze the party whom he serves. But when as
our Lord commands us too honor our fathers and moothers: therunder he
means too comprehend reverence, and moreover a performance of all dewtie:
that is too wit, that children should understand, that they be bound too serve
their fathers and moothers, and to be subject too them in all things too the
vttermoste of their power. Ye see then that generally God will have children,
not only too be obedient and subject too their parents, but also too yield
them reverence, and moreover too do their dewtie toward them, in succoring
them, and in doing them all the ease and comfort that they can, assuring
themselves that they be not their own, nor at their own liberty, but that
they owe all seruis unto them* by whose means they came intoo the world.

And Saint Paul says expressly, in the Lord: meaning that there is a dubble
bond too hold us in this subjection. For (first) there is the order of nature,
and agein, God tells us, that he has set us in this earthly life with
condition, that fathers and moothers should have superiority over their
children. The Heathen men shall not fail too be found guilty, though they had
not the law too direct them, nor were taught the doctrine which we hear now
by the mouth of Saint Paul. Insomuch that if a child were stubborn against
his father and mother among the heathen, he was as it were abhorred, and there
was another great nor small which could not judge of it: Another shall they
escape Gods hand, since they be condemned already in this world: for (as I said
before) it is a thing that is graven in the hearts of us all, and also as
manifest as may be. Howbeit, besyds that which we know naturally, God adds
his own will for a further and more ample confirmation, and tells us, that
he has so ordained and appointed it, and therefore that we must pass that
way. Then since we perceive that God holds us under awe of our fathers and
moothers: it is certain that we be so much the more vnexcuzable, if every of
us submit not him self with meekness and humility. And they that have
followed the order of nature among the heathen and poor blind souls, shall be
our judges. For who has stirrred them up theruntoo? They had not the helps
that we have: and yet they performed their dewtie. That then is the thing
which Saint Paul intended, in saying, that children ought to obey their
fathers and moothers in the Lord.

Now he adds, that that is right. As if he should say, no man shall gain any
thing by stryuing in this behalf. For we know that man's mind is so full
fraught with pride, as there is no man but he would be a lord. As for
subjection, it irketh men to yield too it, until our Lord have framed us too
it by his holy spirit. Wis. 1. b. 6.
And for that cause also is the spirit of God called the spirit of meekness
and gentleness. And why? Gala. 5. d. 22.
Because pride makes men like wyld beasts, and puffs them up like Toades, so
as they cannot humble themselves. Saint Paul therefore perceiving that this
vice is so rooted in our nature, and mynding too redress it, shows that it
is right, and that it becomes every man too employ him self theruntoo, and
that although there be any such sturdinesse in us, as will not suffer us too
be subject too our superiors, yet this ryghtfulnesse (...) Gods (that is too
say, the rule that he has set) must ouerwey it. For when he says, it is
right (or ryghtfull) he brings us back too Gods authority: as if he should
say, seeing God has said the word, there is no further scanning of the
matter, but men must stop their mouths, and seeing God has commanded it, men
must obey it, assuring themselves that his will is a sure and infallible rule,
from the which it is not lawful too swerve another too the right side nor too
the left. And it is a good warning. For we see that although men were willing
too do well, and had some good zeal toward it: yet will every of us be
wyze in his own conceyt, and when it comes too the guyding and governing of
our selves, we will needs bear sway above the word of God. Forasmuch then
as men are so fond and presumptuous, as too attribute somewhat continually too
their own wit: it stands us the more on hand too mark well what is said
here: that is too wit, that we must have the discretion and skill, too
perceive what God commands and allows, and likewise what he disalloweth.
Have we then a warrant of Gods will? We must be contented with it. And if he
once say, This pleases me: then is it ryghtfull, though we perceive not the
reason of it. Agein, if there be some hardness: yet let us not ask why,
another let us reply against God, when he condemns the thing that seems not
too be utterly evil in our eyes. Let us (say I) beware of such malapertnesse
and diuelishe rashness, and let us follow that which Saint Paul tells us
here, that is too wit, that all that ever God has uttered by his word, is
ryghtfull, and that we also must auow it too be so without geynsaying. For
the true proof of our faith and obedience, is that when we think that this
or that ought not to have bin commanded or forbidden: yet we accept it for
good and auaylable, because God has spoken it.

Now hereuppon Saint Paul alleges the commandment of the Law, Honor thy
father and thy moother. And agein he adds further, that it is the first
commandment of promis. As if he should say, that God intended too bring us by
all means too the subjection which we should yield too our fathers and
mothers. It ought too suffyze us that it is acceptable too God: but seeing he
allureth us moreover by gentleness, and will not fray us with authority and
force, but promyseth too prosper us, in serving our fathers and moothers: that
ought too make us too like the better of our subjection. Therefore Saint Paul
having showed us that we must be subject too our fathers and mothers, except
we will be rebels too God, and bend our horns against him, and turn all
right and order vpsyde down: adds, that we shall be tootoo hard hearted and
wilful stubborn, if after Gods commau^ding of us, this promis of his move us
not, whereby he intends too induce us so graciously, too do the thing that he
wills us. And surely if we be not moved, yea and even meekened by it: it
may well be said, that the devil reigns wholly in us, and that he
possesses our hearts. His saying then is, that it is a commandment which
has a special promis, and so has none other commandment of the law but
that. The promis is, that we shall live long upon the earth, yea and in
prosperity, because God will bliss us, if we honor those that were the
means whereby we came into the world.

And on the other side he shows what the dewtie of fathers and mothers is
toward their children: that is too wit, too entreat them gently. Not too
pardon them altoogither, or too lay the bridle in their necks, Coloss. 3. d.
2^.
and too let them do what they list: but too deal so myldly with them, as
they do not in any wise put them out of heart (as it is said in another place,)
but nurrish them in the fear of God. By this word Nurrish, Saint Paul
means that they should deal gently with them, and show themselves loving
toward them. Howbeeit, this word is also sauced (as ye would say) with
nurture and correction of God. Then is there on the one side Nurrishment, that
is too say, kyndnesse and gentleness: and on the other side, Chastyzement and
Discipline, that children may be hild in awe, and not be suffered too be
wanton and unruly, but so brought up in the fear of God, as they may know
that God has not left them awelesse and lawless, but that he has given them
overseers too rule their life. This is the effect of the thing that S. Paul
shows us here.

Now too the intent we may have the fuller and certeiner understanding of this
text, we must mark first of all, that (too speak properly) we have no
father but only God. True it is that now and then he is called the father of
our souls and of our spirits, Heb. 12. c. 9.
according as he is spoken of in the Epistle too the Hebrews. Howbeeit, even
as in respect of the flesh also, the honor and dignity of bearing the name of
father, Job. 13. b. 15.
belongs not too any mortal creature: for it is God that fashyoneth us, as
it is said in the book of Job. Is the seed of man (which is but corruption)
able to^ fashyon a body, wherein appears so excellent woorkmanship of God?
(No.) Then let us understand, that forasmuch as our bodies are all of them
records of Gods wonderful power: he only deserves too be hild and
accounted as our father. Yet for all that, they also that beget us, and by whom
we be brought intoo this world, are our fathers. By what title? Because God
has voutsafed too make them parttakers of the honor that belongs too
himself alone. And hereby we be put in mind, that in stryuing against our
fathers and mothers, we make war against God. For he has imprinted his mark
in them, and that title of theirs does us too wit, that God has set them as
it were in his place. Therefore we must hold it for an undoubted truth, that in
honoring our fathers and mothers, we yield God the service that he requires
of us, and which we owe him. And contrarywyse, if we despyze our fathers and
moothers, and hold scorn too do^ our duties toward them: God is expressly
offended in it, not only because we break the commandment of his law, but
also because we despyze his majesty, whereof our fathers and moothers do
bear a certain mark, as I have said before. And that is the cause why there is
so rigorous punnishment in the Law, against them that were disobedient too
their fathers and moothers, Leuit. 2^. b. 9.
that whosoever had despyzed his father or moother, or uttered any cursing
against them, or done them any harm, should be stoned too death. Therefore
when children be so far out of square, as too set light by their fathers
(...) moothers: God will have them dispatched out of the world: for they be
monsters, and an infection too defyle the whole earth. Also he will not have
any long examination, for such as lift up themselves against their fathers and
moothers: ^ent. 21. d. 18. 19. ^0. 21.
but if the father and moother have once given this witness, Behold, this our
son will not be amended: by and by thereuppon let him be stoned (says
he,) and let the world be rid of such an infection. Gods saying so, is too
show us, that it is tootoo outrageous and horrible a crime, when children
cannot find in their hearts too yield submission too their fathers and
moothers: for it is al one as if they were full bent too abolish the whole
order of nature. That therefore is the end that we must begin at, to profit our
selves well by this doctrine.

And the same also is the cause why Saint Paul says, that we ought too be
subject too our fathers and moothers in God: meaning thereby, that the thing
which the Paynims and unbelievers conceive darkely, ought to^ be much better
known unto us. For the Paynims wi^t not well, how too yield a reason why
children ought too yield this subjection and obedience too their fathers and
mothers, saving that it appeered that there is a certain equity and right
that required it, and that that was the reason. But as for too (...) too this
ground of the matter, that God is our father, and that he requires this
subjection at our hands: that could they not do. And why? For they knew not
whether there were a God that created and fashyoned them, or no. But we which
know that God who is our Creator, is also our father, and that too be so,
belongs unto him, and that he has reserved that honor and dignity too
himself: and agein, that he will have fathers and moothers too be also
parttakers of that privilege: we must of necessity conclude, that we ought
too obey our fathers and moothers, ye^ even in God, as though he received at
our hands the honor and service which we do to them that represent his
person and majesty here (as I said before,) which is despyzed in the
stubbornness and disobedience of children too their fathers and moothers.

Here agein I must put you in mind of a thing that I spoke of before: that is to
wit, that when Gods will is once known to us, we must bridle our selves short,
and not take leave to reply against God, and to ask why God lyketh this, or
dislyketh that: but admit his will as the souerein ryghtuousnesse and equity.
And where shall we find that will of his? In his word. For when S. Paul
intends to prove Gods will, he soreth not in the air above the clouds, but
brings and alleges the things that are contained in the Law. So then, too
rule our life aryght, let us apply our whole minds too seek out the things
that are pleasant and acceptable too God, as he shows them in his law, in
the Prophets, and in the Gospel. That is all our wisdom. And let us beware of
the over boldness which I said was devilish, which is, too be wise in our
own conceyts, and too say, How should this be? Why should that be? But let
us simply obey our God.

Furthermore here is also a promis. In deed a question might be moved here,
why Saint Paul says, it is the first commandment of Promis: seeing there is
a promis added likewise too the second commandment of the law. Exodus 2^. b.
6.
For there it is said, I am the Lord which do show mercy in a thousand
generations, too such as love me, and keep my commandments. Here is a much
larger promis than that whereof mention is made in this text. And how then does
Saint Paul say, that it is the first commandment with promis? The answer is
easy: For Gods promising of mercy too a thousand generations in the first
table, is not a restreint of it too that only commandment, but an extending
of it to the whole law: as if he should say, there is nothing better for you
tha^ to submit your selves to my will, for otherwise you be in a cursed plyght.
And for proof thereof, do not all things that you can hope for, come too you of
mine only free goodness? Now, for my part, I will not fail such as serve me,
and seek too honor me: but they shall find continually that I am a
merciful God. Heerin (as I said before) our Lords intent is too draw us too
the obeying of his commandments and ordinances with a willing mind. And so it
is no special promis proper too any one commandment alone. But the promis
that Saint Paul speaks of here, (where it is said) Honor thy father and
mother, that thou may live long upon the earth, is peculiar (too that
commaundment alone.) As if he should say, God is so gracious, that he will
cause them too prosper through his blissing and favor, which behave themselves
humbly and meekly, and yield dew reverence too their fathers and moothers. Not
without cause therefore does Saint Paul say, that it is the first commaundment
with promis, namely with such promis as is special, and has respect too none
other commandment than that.

Now let us come too the promis. God says, that such as obey so, shall live
long. Heeruppon we may gather, that this present life is not too be despyzed,
because it is a record of Gods fatherly goodness and love toward us. And in
good sooth it is no small thing, that God voutsafeth to create us, and to set
us in this world, not only to live here as brute beasts, but also too reign as
his children, and too have dominion over all other creatures. It is said, that
his goodness and mercy extend even too Asses, Psalm. 104. b. 11.
Oxen, and horses. And why? For when he makes the earth too bear hay for
Cattle: does he not therein show a wonderful goodness toward the poor
brute beasts, as I said before? But there is a far other reason in respect of
us. For how enjoy we all the goods and riches whereof the earth is full? God
has powered out his bountifulness in that the earth brings us forth such a
sort of sundry fruts. Yea we cannot look up too heauenward, high nor low,
but we may perceive a thousand (yea infinite) records of Gods goodness. Psalm.
104. c. 19.
Too what end shyneth the sun, but too give us light? And are not the Moon
and the Stars ordained to do us seruis? And yet are they as noble Creatures
as may be, insomuch that the heathen folk woorshipped them, thinking that
there was some Godhead inclozed in them. Agein, when we look downward, we
see what good things God has appointed for our use. And although he feed the
beasts, 1. Cor. 9. b. 9. 10.
yet in the end all redoundeth too us, according as Saint Paul speaks of
them, saying: has God a care of the beasts? That is to say, when as God
voutsafeth too succor the beasts in their need by his providence, he does it
for men's saks. Seeing the^ that God has harborowed us after such a sort to make
us possess so many good things, besyds his creating of us after his own image
and likeness: is it not an inestimable benefyte? So then, this present life is
not to be hild scorn of. But there is yet more: God has set us here as it
were in a journey, too come too a further matter: that is too wit, too the
everlasting rest, and too the heritage of heaven. Then if this present life
guide us thither, that is too say, too the glory which God has prepared for
us, and which was purchaced for us by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ: therbey we see that it is a great benefyte, and meet too be esteemed
at our hands. True it is, that there are so many myseries in our life, that it
were much better for us never too have bin borne, than too linger (continually)
as we do. Therefore if a man consider how wretched our life is in it self,
and too what a number of greefes, anguishes, peynes, and vexations it is
subject: surely he will say, it were better never too have come out of our
moothers womb, than to enter into such a sea of confuzion as we see upon
earth. Nevertheless when all comes to al, we shall find that Gods goodness
exceeds all the chastyzementes that he sends us for our sins. This life
should of it self be nothing but happiness and rest, if God made us us not to
reap the fruit of our sins and transgressions. Yet notwithstanding when as
God does now and then afflict us with some barrenness, or kill our vynes with
frost, or drown our Corn with wet, or parche it up with drought, and (too be
short) send us famine and derth: they be as a rod of God, too show us that in
sted of his former leberalitie, he is now become contrary to us. Likewise are
the plague, war, particular diseases and sicknesses, harms, reproaches, and
all other such things as work us grief or displeasure. They are all
chastyzements whereby God puts us in mind of our sins and faults, of
purpose too humble us that we might know what we be, and finally too make
us ready too forsake the world the more willingly. Howbeeit, when we have
gatherrd all the afflictions, trubbles, and greefes that we see, intoo one
heap: yet see we well (as I said before) that God makes us too feel the taste
and savor of his goodness, in that he gives us sustenance in this world. And
this present life is ever as a record of his love. For proof whereof, we should
quayle at every temptation, and at every vexation that might befall us in this
world, were it never so little, if God gave us not some cheering to mitigate
his rigor withal. For he does always show such event, as may cause us to
conceive that he myndeth not to handle us according to our deserts, but that
in his chastizing of us, he leaves always room for his mercy, Hab. 3. a. 1.
as he himself says in Habacucke. Not without cause then does God promis
prosperity in this life, to such as obey their fathers and mothers. True it
is, that Moses meant the land of Chanaan, because he spoke to the people of
Israel which were to be settled there. Therefore as in respect of that people
it was a particular lesson. Exodus 6. a. 4. b. 8*
Yet notwithstanding, not even we at this day can set our foot in any place,
but that we be after a sort harbrowghed there by God. Therefore we must all
of us hope for the blissing that was promised in old time too the Jews, of
bringing them intoo the land that was behyghted them for their inheritance.

A man might move other questions here. For we see some that are disobedient
too their fathers and mothers, which notwithstanding do live still, and
othersome which are of a good, gentle, and tractable nature, do dye: so as God
should seem too disanull the promis that he made in his law. The answer
heretoo is this. That God does them no wrong whom he calls out of this world
too take up to himself, another does he appayre their state. But too the
intent we may have an euidenter and easyer answer: let us mark that things
fall not always out alyke as in respect of temporal promyses. Psalm. 34. b. 10.
As for example: God promyseth too prosper all them that serve and love him in
singleness of heart. And how falls this out? We see a number of poor
believers, which are wretched too the worldward, and rejected and despyzed of
all men. And where is this promis of God? As I said, we must always have this
condition added, that God gives us whatsoever he knows too be expedient for
us. There are two sorts of Gods promises: and we must mark well that. Some
of Gods promises belong too the salvation of our souls, as his receiving of us
too mercy, his pardoning of our sins, his showing of us his will, his giving
of us power too withstand Satan, and his strengthening of us against al
temptations, by holding us up with strong hand, that we may never quayle: in
all these things we must firmly and sted^astly believe that God will perform
whatsoever he says, yea and far more than our understanding can see or
conceive. God then will surmount all our wit and capa^ity, in things concerning
the everlasting salvation of our souls.

But there are other promises to pass this world withal, for the easing of us
in our miseries. In those God will cantle us out our morsels, so as we shall
now and then have hunger and thrist with them. Yea and yet does not that
impeach but that he is faithful still. For (as I said) he knows what is
meet for us, and therefore we must not take his promises precyzely word for
word in those caces: that is too say, we must not take them according too the
bare letter or sound of them, too say, that God should do all that is said
there too the uttermost syllable: No: but we must always bear in mind, that
he knows what is for our behoof and benefit. Now then, if he take us soon
out of this world, it is because he knows it too be for our welfare and
salvation. And so ye see that God does not falsifye his promis, when he
takes those away in the flower of their age, which have obeyed their fathers
and moothers. Surely none does so discharge himself, but that he should
always be found faulty, if God listed too sift him with rigor: but yet shall
some have done their dewtie in such wise, as God lyketh well of the obedience
which they have yielded, and yet notwithstanding he fails not too take them
out of the world: for he sees that it should not be for their profit too
tarry there any longer. As for (other) reasons that are hid in him, and in his
secret wisdom, it behooves us too cast down our eyes at them, because we
cannot atteyne unto them. Howbeit let us understand, that if there were no
hope of a better life, those that are taken away so soon out of the world,
were too be greatly lamented. But seeing we know that this world is but a
pilgrimage, and this life but a iourneying to bring us too the rest of heaven:
we must not complain when God delivers us from the great number of miseries
wherewith we be beseeged here beneath, too take us up too a perfect
happiness which wayteth for us (above.) But howsoever the case stand, let us
bear in mind the thing that is said here: that is too wit, that when God
holds us long time in this world, it is as a pledge of his fatherly love
toward us. And therefore we ought too be the wa^er in reckening the days
that we live, while we be in this life. And for the same cause also does
Moses say in his Song, Psalm. (...). c. 12.
that it is great wisdom when men can skyll too count their days, and too
consider the shortness of their life, that they may hye them apace too heaven.

But we must also count our days too a diverse end, and for another respect,
which notwithstanding is not contrary, but both agree very well, and that is,
that when we be come too the age of discretion, so as we know that God has
created us too be glorified by us in this world: we must on the othersyde
consider how we have dishonored him, and think continually upon the time
past, remembering how we have spent it: and this must we do from day to day,
and from mooneth too mooneth. And when we come too the years end, let us
think thus with our selves: Behold, God has bound me too him a great sort of
ways: and how have I counted his benefytes that I have received of him all my
life long? Can my mind atteyne unto them? Alas no, nor too the hindredth part
of them. Therefore we must make a rehersall of all our years and days, that
we may be put in mind too love and honor God, when we see how greatly we
be bound unto him, for his maynteyning of us so long a time, and for his
pacientnesse toward us in bearing with us. For if we should make comparison
of the faults that we shall have committed: there is not so little a fault
which craves not that we should be confounded at his hand, and yet
notwithstanding he continues still his goodness toward us. Therefore let us
mark well this doctrine, that is too wit, that this present life byndeth us
too God, because he makes us too taste his fatherly goodness in voutsafing too
maynteyne us well, and in extending his bounteousnesse toward us, and in
being so gracious as too turn all his corrections too our benefyte and
behoof, and moreover shows us that he will have us too be inured in this
world too know him for our father, in that he gives us his word and
Sacraments, whereby he assures us that his setting of us here beneath for a
time, is too draw and too gather us in the end too himself. Therefore if we
consider whertoo we be called, and too what end we be created, namely, too
pass through this world and too be taken intoo the heritage of heaven: we
shall perceive that this present life is well worthy too be esteemed, if we
consider the benefytes that God imparteth too us here.

It is too be noted heerwithall, that we shall never have any prosperity nor
welfare in this world, except we be in Gods favor. Therefore in saying, that
thou may live long, and fare well: he shows that the having of long life is
not all, but that it stands us on hand too feel his blissing therewith. For
the wretched unbelievers which conceive not the thing that I intend too declare,
(that is too wit) that God powers out his riches upon us, too the intent we
should know him too be our father, and be confirmed more and more in
trusting too his goodness and love:) may well come too great years: but what
do they in this world? What is their life? It is certain that all that ever
they have, shall turn to their greater condemnation, and their riches wherein
they joy, toogither with their delyghts and pleasures, shall but provoke Gods
wrath, and all the goods that they inioye, shall serve but too the further
inchauncing of their wickedness, and too make them the more damnable. Then is
it but a wretched life, if we can perceive no ^oken of Gods goodness in it.

And moreover we must proceed further to the second point, which is, that such
as are so disobedient too God, and too their superiors, have no rest, but have
a woorme that gnaweth their consciences, and are always in unquietness. Too
be short, experience shows, that there is no welfare in this present life,
except we be blissed of God. This diversity is not too be seen always as
in respect of outward appearance: but yet do the faithful know well enough in
themselves, that God gives them all things that they want. And so God
promises not long life only, but also his blissing. As if he should say, you
shall not live, alonly too linger here beneath, or too get your selves
greeuouser damnation, or too repyne and too gnash your teethe, and too torment
your selves with afflictions, miseries, and trubbles: but too taste my
goodness. Although I exempt you not from the trubbles, comberances, and greefs
of this world: yet shall you always have some cheering, so as ye may feel
that I have not forgot you, but that I take you for my children, yea and that
all your sorrows and greefs shall turn too your benefyte and welfare. Whereas
the di^ell laboreth too keep you from coming too me, and too turn you away
from your perfect felicity: I will draw you too it by means of the
afflictions that you shall have in this world. The thing therefore which we
have too bear in mind, is, that too be filled with the benefyts which God
bestows upon us in this world, and too live at ease, is not all that we
have too desire: but too know that it is God that makes us too prosper, and
that as he gives us life, so will he maynteyne us in it, and provide us of all
things expedient and needful for the same. Wherefore let us have it well
printed in our hearts.

Now then if we be desirous too enjoy this promis of God: let every of us
look too the discharging of his own dewtie. In deed I cannot as now go
through with the things that are enjoined here to children, and to fathers and
mothers: and therefore I will reserve the^ to another time. Yet notwithstanding
for a short conclusion, let us understand that God allureth us too our dewtie,
by showing that he seeks nothing else but our welfare and benefyte, too the
intent that we should with a frank and free heart receive the yoke that he
lays upon our shoulders. And although it be an irksome thing too be subject
too those whom God has appointed too be superiors over us: yet when we have
first condemned our selves for it, let us nevertheless yield to that which he
says and utters, assuring our selves that he procures our welfare, and
would feign win us by gentleness, and not by rigor: and let that make us the
more obedient. And also generally, forasmuch as we see that all superiorities
are of God: let us understand that we cannot geynsay them, but we shall lift
up our selves against his majesty, and bend our horns against him: and that
contrariwyse if we bear subjection willingly, we may assure our selves, that
it is an acceptable sacrifyze unto him, and not doubt that our labor shall be
lost in serving him. Not that God will recompense us by his promises, as though
we had deserved aught at his hand: but he will do it of overplus. For as I have
declared alredie, we be bound too obey him in all things that he commands,
another must we think him beholden too us for it, nor think too bynd him too us
by any means, but that although we be bound too him, (as we be wholly his)
yet he of his ouerflowing goodness voutsafeth too bliss us, and too make us
feel his favor, when we have awfully and reverently followed the things that
he ordeyneth in his word. That then is the recompense which we ought too hope
for at Gods hand: howbeeit not as the Papists say, ho, God promises us, and
therefore we deserve. They bear themselves on hand that God is beholden unto
them, because he has bound himself willingly: yea, but that is of a free (and
undeserved) goodness. Howbeeit, we must not fall intoo such dotages, but
understand that God being no whit at all bound unto us, does notwithstanding
voutsafe too win us by gentleness, too the intent we should serve him with
the freer mind and cheerfuller courage. Thus does he call us too him by all
ways. And therefore so much the leauder are we, if we bow not our necks
willingly too give our selves wholly unto him, without seeking of any thing
but only too frame our selves too his good pleasure and will, which is our
chief rule, by renounceall our own affections.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too voutsafe too burye them, and too wash us from
them, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and too govern us in such wise by his
holy spirit, as we may be reformed too obey wholly his holy will, and too
follow his commandments, which he has given us for a rule, and that therein
we may show our selves too be his true children, likewise as he has voutsafed
too she^ himself our gentle and loving father. And so let us all say,
Almyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The.xliiii. Sermon, which is the second upon the sixth Chapter.
5. Servants, be obedient too such as are your masters as touching the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto
Christ,

6. Not with eye service, as men pleazers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from the heart,

7. Serving the Lord with good will, and not men:

8. Assuring your selves, that every man, be he bond or free, shall receive of
the Lord the good that he shall have done.

9. And you masters, do the like unto them, forbearing threats, assuring your
selves that the Lord both of them and of you is i^ heaven, and that in him
there is no respecting of the outward appearance of persons.


We have seen already, that besides the general rule which God has given
too all men, here are also several warnings, how every man should behave
himself in his degree and calling. And we have seen already what the husbands
ought too be toward their wives, and how the wives should behave themselves
toward their husbands: what gentleness parents ought too use toward
their children, and what subjection children ought too use toward their
parents. Now Saint Paul speaks of Masters and Servants, howbeeit, not of
such servants as we have now adays, for at that time there were no servants
that served a year or two for wages, but they were hild in bondage for life
and death, and were in the same taking that they be whom now adays we call
bondslaues. But we need not too stand any longer as now too have further
knowledge of them. Yet notwithstanding we have great cause too praise God for
taking away of such bondage from among men. For no doubt but it was too
excessive an authority which masters had in those days over their servants.
They hild them as brute beasts, and they had liberty too kill them for every
fault. And in deed they had prisons in their houses to keep them locked in
the stocks, they racked them, they rent them in pieces, and (too be short)
they used them horribly, yea and even beastly. Yet notwithstanding, because of
man's naughtiness, it was our Lords will that this state should be still
suffered. Moreover, we see that even they which are auowed too have lived in
the fear of God, and to have excelled in his Church, left not too keep
bondmen or slaves in their houses, howbeeit, they used another manner of
gentleness toward them, than the Infidels did, according as we shall see
here in Saint Paul's teaching.

Also there was a reason that constreyned masters sometimes too use the
greater rigor toward their slaves, because it was a common proverb among
them, that look how many slaves they had, so many enemies they had: and that
was by reason of their holding of them in awe by extreme force and violence, as
those are now adays upon the Sea, which are called Gallie slaves. And I have
already touched what and how excessive o^trages were done unto them. There was a
great number of those bondfolke, and rich men had as it were half armies of
them, insomuch that some had five thousand slaves in one house, and that was
the way too have ones throat cut five thousand times, if there had not bin good
heed taken too keep them fettered. And this came of sin, as one mischeef
tolleth on another, until things be come too utter confuzion. But if we
consider what the right or authority of masters was, we will always say, it
was a thing vttterly against all order of nature. For we be all fashyoned
after the image of God, and therefore that a reasonable creature in whom God
has printed his mark, should be put too such reproach, it was tootoo far
out of all square. But such are the fruits of the disobedience and sin of our
father Adam, that all things were turned topsiteruie. Also on the other part,
inasmuch as servants were in such subjection: it seems that if they could by
any means pluck their necks out of the collar, it ought too be lawful for
them, and it was an honest excuce so too do. But howsoever Servants fare,
Saint Paul commands them to obey their masters, and too be subject too
them. In deed he does also exhort the masters not too abuse the power that
was given them, nor too think that the thing which was granted them by the
Law of man, was so ryghtfull and vnparciall before God, as they could not be
blamed for it. Saint Paul then counsels masters too assuage the excess of
their superiority: but yet will he have their servants too submit themselves
too it, and too bear the yoke that was so hard and heavy. Now it might seem
that he did servants wrong therein, and that he should rather have cried out
against the common abuse, that such outrage might have bin laid down. But we
have two principles to remember to restreyne us from attempting of any change.

The one is, that forasmuch as it had bin Gods will too put maynkynd intoo
confuzion, and that all men both great and small should be put in mind that
Adam had perverted the order of nature. Therefore S. Paul counsels servants
to bear such subjection, assuring themselves that it comes of God, and
therefore that they must take it patiently. The other is, that the Gospel
serves not too change the common policies of the world, and too make Laws
that belong too the temporal state. It is true that Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates ought always too ask counsel at Gods mouth, and too frame
themselves unto his word: but yet for all that, our Lord has given them
liberty, too make such Laws as they shall perceive too be meet and
convenient for the government that is committed unto them, howbeeit they must
call upon God too give them the spirit of wisdom and discretion, and because
they be not of ability too rule of themselves, they must take advice and
counsel at Gods word. Yet notwithstanding, the doctrine of salvation, which
is called the kingdom of heaven, Math. 13. c. 24. d. 31.
and the things that belong too the brydling of us in this world, that men may
know how too behave themselves one toowardes another, are sundry things.
That therefore is the cause why Saint Paul left slauerye, bondage, or
seruiship as it was.

And he exhorts Servants to do their dewtie, in fear and trembling, that is
too say, with all lowelinesse and reverence: yea and he adds further, with
singleness of heart, which he matcheth against all the fine slyghts and shifts
wheruntoo the servants and slaves of that time were too much given, as is too
be seen in them that have written of them, and have set forth the manners and
trade of lif which was in course and use at those days. And let us mark first
of all, that S. Paul thinks it not enough for servants too seek the benefyte
and profit of their masters, and to be willing to obey them, and too be
foreward in executing whatsoever is commanded them: but he requires reverence
above all things, as I said before. Let Servants understand, that although they
should not be enforced, nor chastized with whipping when they do amiss, but
that they had gentle and meek masters: yet notwithstanding they ought too
bear patiently the state wherein they be, assuring themselves that God
allows of it, and that the superiority which their masters have over them,
how hard and grievous so ever it be, is nevertheless ordained and stablished
of God. And that is the cause why he sets down the word Singleness. For
we be over witty in seeking our own advantage, and there is none of us all
which is not a great doctor in matters concerning his own profit. Why should
such a one (say we) have this prerogative above me? What reason is there that
I should be bound too him in that* Take me the handicrafts men, that never
knew word of learning, and deal with them in daily matters, and in things that
may make with them, and they be so skillful in debating their case, that ye
would take them too be all men of law. Forasmuch then as men are so wyly in
seeking their own commodity and profit, too the hinderance of others: Saint
Paul does purposely set down singleness of heart, which serves too sift all
affections, and too overthrow all things that men can deuyze too hinder
themselves from doing of their duties.

Now he sets down purposely (these words:) As serving the Lord: and it is
the cheef foundation that we have too lean unto, when the case concerns
the doing of any dewtie toward men. For if we stick too creatures, we will
say, Came we not all out of the Ark of Noe? Why should he be better esteemed
than I? Is it meet that I should be put under his feet? what reason is that:
And all the rest of the words which we hear every day. For we have skill
enough too allege exemption, and so little do we think our selves bound unto
others, that we think all others bound unto us. The mark therefore that al me^
shoot at, is, that every man would be a Lord, and no man admit any subjection.
And so it would needs follow, that we should be as wyld beasts, or rather as
dogs and Catts (as men say), until we knew that God lyketh well of the
seruis that we do too creatures. If we be not thoroughly persuaded of that,
we may well make some fair countenances, and please men: but out mind shall
never be right and well dispozed, until we be come to the point that we
know, that our Lord accepts our seruis.

But there is yet one other cause that might hinder us, or rather cool us in
the discharge of our dewtie toward other men: and that is, men's
unthankfulness. For they whom we pleasure, do commonly (...) us no thank,
but rather think that we be made for none other purpose but too serve them.
When we see them requyte our seruis so evil, it spyteth us: and it were
enough too make us leave of altoogither. Now then it is needful for us too
come back too that which Saint Paul tells us: namly that God is above all
degrees, and that he having superiority over the world, will have every man
employ him self with all humbleness, and that all subiections which he has
ordained in the world, too remain firm and unviolable. This is the effect of
the thing that Saint Paul tells us here.

Now first of all we have too mark the general article which I come now to
touch: which is, that when we have superiors over us, we must not obey them as
enforced, Romans 13. a. 1.
but because God has ordained them, and there is no pre-eminence but of him,
as Saint Paul declares to the Romans. It is true that there he speaks
expressly of Princes and Magistrates: but yet for all that, it extends too
all authority, as too that which parents have over their children, husbands
over wives, and Masters over their servants. Therefore we must be fully
persuaded of this, that Gods intent is not that all men should be shuffled
toogither, (as it would come too pass, if there were no restreynt,) but that
some should rule and have authority too command others, and that they which
are under them, should obey. Then is it an vnreuocable sentence of God,
wheruntoo we must hold our selves and be contented. For if we protest our
selves too be willing too obey God, and in the mean while will needs remove
all order that he has set among us: all that we speak with our mouth is but
hypocrisy. Therefore we must give a proof of our humility too Godward, by
our willing and easy bearing of man's yoke which he has laid upon us as it
were his own hands. Let that be for one point.

Now (as I said) this comprehends all subjection, as well of people toward
Princes and Magistrates, of children toward their parents, and of wives
toward their husbands: as also of servants toward their masters. And
when we once have that, it will be easy for us too withstand all the
trubbles and incomberances that hinder us, and turn us away from our duties.
For what is the cause that we cannot submit our selves too Gods will? As I
said, all these disputings are vnauaylable and fond, when a man shall say, Why
am I bound too such a one? Why should he hold his foot upon my throat? Who
has given him more authority than me? But seeing God has told us that he
will have it so: it behooves us too hold our peace. Therefore if we be fully
persuaded of it, we shall be too froward if we show not by our deeds that
we be willing too please our God, and too fulfill his good will. For if a
master have a great multitude of folk in his house, he shall be of
sufficient authority too appoint whom he lists too have the ouersyght of it,
and they must be obeyed. A Prince has his officers, and they must command,
and others must harken too them, and simply obey them. And what is too be
done then, when our God who is the souerein Lord and father, and has the
right of pre-eminence and dominion over us, will have us too obey such as he
has appointed, without making any reply? For what can it boot too say the
contrary? Therefore (as I said) let us print this counsel of Saint Paul's
thoroughly in our hearts, That when we do our dewtie willingly and unfeignedly
toward those whom God has set in authority over us, we serve God himself.
And soothly, without that mind, all the vertewes that we can have in outward
show too the worldward, shall be but smoke, as ye shall see a number of men
that pretend maruelously well, insomuch that they who^ they serve, shall be
contented tootoo well with them. But although such dealing be allowed among
men: yet is it nothing worth before God. And why? For God will be honored at
our hands: He will have men too enjoy their right in such wise, as another he
be forgotten, nor they as it were defaced. Therefore if we will but only
obey men, and despyze the thing which God will have too be as an acceptable
sacrifyze too himself: what a dealing were that? Then let us tend always too
him, and dedicate our selves too him. And forasmuch as it is his will that we
should be vnderlyngs, let us bear that yoke willyngly, and with a free and
vnslauishe or vnconstreyned mind.

And for the same cause Saint Paul says expressly, Let not your service be
eye service, as though ye sought too pleaze men. And in very deed, they that
play their pageantes so fair (as they say) seek either recompense, or else
too be well interteyned and fed with the fattest, or else too have greater
wages, and afterward too have some extraordinarye gift or reward when occasion
serves. That is the thing that men hunt for, when they have not an eye unto
God. But Saint Paul tells us, that although they whom we serve be so
froward, as we cannot tell how too content them, and we have not any hope
that ever we shall get the value of a button at their hands: yet we must
nevertheless perform our duties toward God. And here we have too gather,
that in all things which God commands us, we must not only employ our
eyes, our feet, our hands, and our arms (as they say:) but we must begin
with the inwar^ affection. Therefore when as Saint Paul says, not with eye
service: he shows us, that if we desire that our Lord should allow our
serui^^s as good and lawful* our heart must go foremost, and guide all our
members, so as there be no counterfetting: accordingly as it is said, that he
regards faythfulnesse, that is too say, that we should deal soundly, Psalm.
101. b. 6.
plainly, and substancially. Thus are all gay shows quyte dashed. For (as I
said) there is grea^e pre^ence of vertew in many men, but God accounts it
every whit as nothing, and in deed it is but hipo^risie. Therefore if we will
begin too serve God well, let us learn too leave dubblenesse: and that we may
buyld substan^ially, let us always lay that foundation, accordingly also as
we see how he had lever too be loved than feared. True it is that we owe him
reverence, and that we ought too tremble at his majesty* but yet when he
shows us the cheef thing which he ^^quyreth, and which pleases him best, he
says, What is it, O Israel, that thou shall find in my Law, Deuteronomy. 10. c. 12.
but that thou love me, and stick too me? Seeing that our Lord requires
this willing affection, and that we should resort too him with a free and
frank heart: think we that he accepts aught at our hands, when we come
too him grudgingly and repyningly, and yet pretend too marvelous earnes^nes
toward men? Howsoever the world go, we will always have this back nooke in
us, that we would be exempted from the obeying of God. Therefore we must take
pleasure in his service, and it must be our joy and delyght, so as our bondage
must be more sweet and lee^some too us than all liberty, yea and than all the
Realms and Kingdoms of the world.

And Saint Paul says expressly, Masters as touching the flesh, because that
among other ^lyghtes of Satan wherewith he (...) too trubble the world in old
time, and also too make the doctrine of the Gospel hated: he did put this
heresy intoo a number of men's heads, that if we be once spiritual, we
must no more be subject too any worldly and transitory policy, another is
that the state of Gods children. And we also have seen in our time a sort of
seditious and mad headed people, which have indeuered too abolish all
principalities too take away taxes and impostes, and too make every man master
of himself, like myce in the chafe, as they say. And they grounded themselves
upon this foundation, that in as much as God has adopted us too be his
children, and the world is now renewed, too the intent we should be graffed
intoo the body of our Lord Jesus Christ: it is a thing against reason, and
contrary too all equytie, yea and even against the honor of God, that
unbelievers should reign over us, or that they which name themselves
faithful, should (...) souerintie over their brethren and neighbors. Lo how
the d^uell laboreth too drive it intoo men's heads, that the Gospel
^onfoundeth all order in the world, too the intent that men should hate it and
abhor it. Agein, too say that there is no man better than other, is a
pleasant speech, and very fit too intyce a great number of folk. S. Paul
therefore says purposely, that although masters (...) temporal authority,
and that their superiority does (...) the flesh, that is too say, this
present world, and this transitorye life: yet must they not be defrauded of
their right, another did our Lord Jesus Christ come too make a confuzed
equality here, so as it should not be known who is great, and who is
little, but too make every man too hold himself quyietly in his calling, Psalm.
131. ^. ^.
without looking lo^tyly, as it is said in the Psalm. The way too make us
humble and meek, is too have an eye every of us too his own calling, so as
the person that is advanced too authority and honor above others, be not
puffed up with pride and presumption for it, but rather abace himself before
God, assuring himself that he is dubble bound unto him, for exalting him
after that sort^ and the meaner sort maynteyne themselves in their meannesse,
without usurping that which belongs not too them. Likewise the way for
fathers too have such obedience of their children as is requisite, is too
treat them gently? that husbands also rule their wives with all concord and
freendlinesse: that Princes abuse not their subjects as wretched beasts: and
that (...) devour not their (...) too much: and therwithall, that such as are
the meanest sort too the worldward, consider that God has set them in that
state, as though he had appointed them their place there with his own hand.
Therefore let not the common sort advance them selves, but be contented with
their state.

That (say I) is the cause why Saint Paul sets down this saying expressly,
as touching the flesh. It was not too bring masters in contempt for reygning
over their slaves, but too prevent all objections that men might allege, when
they would seek privilege too exempt themselves from obedience too God, and
too all order that he has set. And therewith all he does us too understand
also, that the same subjection is no prejudice too the faithful, but that they
may continue still in full liberty, as in respect of their souls. For the
devil uses that color also. What (says he)? Seeing that our Lord Jesus
Christ has shed his blud too purchase us freedom, why should we not continue
in it? Yea, but Saint Paul answers theruntoo, (as he has done with more
large circumstance in the fifth Chapter of the first Epistle too the
Corinthians:) that the bondage which we yield too our superiors, is alonly as
touching the flesh, and that our souls and consciences cease not too be
always frank and free before God. And therefore it is a chyldish ob^ection, too
say, that seeing our Lord Jesus Christ has set us free, why should men make us
bond? He has not set us free as touching our bodies, for it is his will that
there should be principalities and Lordshippes still in the world: which
cannot be, but that some must be subject, and othersome have pre-eminence and
authority. For as much then as our Lord has so distinguished the two
gouernmentes of the body and of the soul, and that the one is spiritual, and
too be governed by his word, as in respect of our walking before him too
atteyne to the kingdom of heaven: but when it comes too the behauing of ou^
selves toward men, which are of our own body, then we must learn too frame
our selves too all good policy: let us assure our selves that yet for all
that, our state is no whit worse before God, than if we were Kings and
Princes, and all (...) ^rembled before us. Yea and the things which we do
hart^ly in serving of creatures, do turn so much the more to the exalting and
magnifying of God. For needs must he be a man of noble mind, which can stoop
so low as too obey willingly, (not regarding) how great, how skillful, nor how
rich so (...) change their state: for we see how Saint Paul has cut of all
occasion of such dealing. And therefore let us learn by that which is told us
here, that first and formest we must have God as it were fastened before our
eyes, and know that he has set us in this world too serve one another in such
sort, as we must notwithstanding live toogither in all humility, and not
disdeyne too do our dewtie even toward such as are not so sufficient as we
could wish, and as we take our selves too be. Be we once at that point, it
is certain that we will every of us submit our selves willingly according too
the state that God calls us too, and hold our selves in the place where he
has put us.

Now if Saint Paul would that the Slaves of his time should be so obedient too
their masters, there is less excuce in these days, for Servants that take
wages. Let us compare the one with the other. Those poor souls (as I told
you before) were handled so rigorously, that their masters might imprizon
them, put them in the stocks, rack them, dismember them, mayme them, yea and
kill them. It was a grievous case, and yet were they bound too it for life and
death. Exodus 21. ^. 1.
There was no limitation of term but only among the Jews, among whom God had
appointed a term. But the common and general law of all nations was, that
bond folks with their children should continue bond for ever, so as the father
had no more right too his own child, that a horse (as ye would say) or any
other beast had over the young ones that came of their seed. And was not such
a state as bad as a hundred deaths? Yis: for man does always covet liberty,
and too take his ease, and too eat his bread with quietness: and those
wretched slaves had not a bit of bread at their own appointment. As touching
their persons, they were worse than Captyues, as I said before. And yet for all
this, God wills and commands streytly, that they should bear this state
patiently, and perform their duties faithfully, and fall too it with a free
and cheerly heart. Now what is too be said of hired servants, which may warn
themselves away, and have their wages paid them when they have served out their
year, and are used and treated much more gently and liberally than those poor
slaves were? For they were feign too labor every one in his trade and craft,
they earned their bread, they drunk water many a time scarce their fill, and
they were shet up in Cabanes, where they were enforced too do their taskes.
Then if Servants now adaye^ can not stoop so low as too bear the state that
God has laid upon their backs: it is certain that they be tootoo
vnexcuzable. As much is to be said of subjects toward their Magistrates.
Therefore inasmuch as we see that our Lord spares us: we be so much the more
bound too the subjection which S. Paul speaks of here.

Furthermore we have too wey yet agein the words where he speaks of frank
and free hearted willingness. For it is impossible for us too find any taste or
savor in our state or calling, of what sort so ever it be, except we know
it be for our benefyte and welfare. For we can reap no great profit of the
serving of Creatures. We must therefore resort always too our God, and ame at
this mark, namely that seeing he has bin so good and gracious too us as too
set us in this world, and too maynteyne us here, and too show himself so
good a father toward us, that all that ever we have, does come of him: we
must show the reverence which we bear too his majesty, and labor too
please him in such wise, as we stick not too be subject too men, nor take it
in grief or in scorn. So shall our state be greatly sweetened, when we know
that God accepts it in good worth at our hands.

And that also is the cause why he sets these things as one against another:
not too show any contrariety, but rather too accord them toogither. For he
says, that we must serve God on the behalf of our masters, with all
willingness: and afterward sets down Gods will on the other side. Then is
it a very good melody which answers very well, that we should know how it
is Gods will, that servants should obey their masters. And this will of Gods
must dispatch all objections that might hinder us or stop us. When the devil
tempts us too think any thing strange that is commanded us, he intyceth us
too our destruction. Now then, let us take Gods will as our souereine welfare
and perfect happiness, assuring our selves, that howsoever we be handled at
his hand, yet he loves us still, and has an eye too that which is good for
us. Let that serve for one point. And if we have such persuasion well rooted
in our hearts, it is certain that this willingness which S. Paul speaks of
will follow with it, so as we shall find no lothnesse in our selves, too
grudge against it, as we see they do which are enforced to do things against
their wills: for they grunt at it, and although they dare not be aknowen of it,
yet their hearts are fell, and there is nothing but rancor in them. Therefore
Saint Paul sets down willingness, that is too say, that we should do
all things with a good will and freely. And so shall we make our state
lee^some and pleasant. For as for them that do nothing but by force and
constreynt: they cannot eschew the necessity of obeying, and yet in the mean
while they be tormenters too themselves, and work themselves more spyte then
they could receive by all the sorrows that they can allege. For when we be
handled roughly by our masters, superiors, and Magistrates: yet if we be
sure that God accepts our service, it asswageth all the greef that we can
conceive, so that when we have done our dewtie, we take our repaste with
praising of God, we take our rest as a relief that he gives us for our
infirmities, and besides this we will ever have an eye too the heavenly life,
and take courage at it too walk on, though we have never so many stoppes. Ye
see then that Gods children shall always make a hundred times better market,
when they do their dewtie in serving God freely: than they that go too it as
though nine men hild them, (as they say) and discharge it very coldly with
grudging and repyning.

Furthermore let us mark, that Saint Paul here brings us three times back
unto God and too our Lord Jesus Christ: and that is too rid us of this
imagination which we might conceive, that if other men misbehaue themselves
toward us, the bond is broken too us, and therefore that we may exempt our
selves from subjection if we can. As for example, if a servant have a master
that is too rigorous and froward, he thinks with himself, why? What do I?
And so, servants think themselves half quit, if their masters perform not
their duties toward them. But S. Paul declares expressly, that although
masters be so cruel as they do by no means spare such as are under their
hand: yet is not their superiority diminished thereby. True it is, that in
respect of themselves such masters are unworthy too have authority, as we
shall see hereafter. But yet for all that, he that is the inferior must hold
himself still under the yoke, because he sees that God has so ordained it.
That is the effect of the thing which we have too bear in mind.

And on the other side, Saint Paul forgets not servants, that he should not
procure them their right, and that which belongs too them. For he commands
masters too do the like too them, not as ma^e and matelyke (as they say) but
so as masters consider, that although though the civil laws lay the bridle
looce in their necks, yet does not God grant them leave too do what they
list, but speaks as well for the one as for the other: which thing we must
bear well in mind. Now for the masters he gives this rule, namely that they
must look well about them how they rule, because they have a common master in
heaven, Deuteronomy. 10. d. 17. and. Romans 2. b. 11.
who accepts no persons. As touching Servants, he says, my friends, though
ye have not such recompense in this world as ye would desire: let it suffyze
you that God accounts you not as slaves. It is true that ye be despyzed
too the worldwarde, but you have your inheritance in heaven, and our Lord
accepts your seruis, and ye shall have your reward paid you as well as if
ye were Kings and Princes. That is the thing which we have too remember
here. In deed the time will not serve for the whole discourse of it: but yet
we see, that first Saint Paul meant not too currye favor with the great and
rich sort, by maynteyning their right against their slaves: and also that he
laboreth on the other side, too bring those too lowelinesse and meekness,
which otherwise might have advanced themselves too much. And the same order
ought too be observed by such as have charge in the Church, and are ministers
of Gods word: namely that they spare another great nor small, but tell every man
his dewtie. For since there is no accepting of persons before God: his word
must be handled roundly, and we must not be dismayed at the highness and
authority of such as are in estimation among men. For seeing it is God that
speaks, his word must pull down all loftiness, according as Saint Paul
speaks in the second too the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 10. b. 5.
where he says, that commission is given too all Shepherds and ministers of
the Gospel, too pull down the pride of men, and too subdew their over
loftiness, when they will needs exalt themselves against our Lord Jesus
Christ, and step up against his doctrine, so as they will not submit themselves
too his yoke. The way then for ministers of Gods word too discharge their
office faithfully, is too exhort the meaner sort too do their dewtie, and the
poor and oppressed too bear their state patiently without replying, howsoever
they fare, and without grudging against men, because that in so doing they
should rebel against God.

But on the other side also he tells the great ones, that they must not be
as beasts that devour others, and eat them up, but that they must behave
themselves vpryghtly. And in deed even the heathen men themselves, when they
listed too speak according too natural equity, declared that even at that
time it became not the masters too abuze the authority which they had over
their servants: and these were their words, that bondmen and slaves ought to
be hild as Hyrelinges that were interteyned by the day. Since the Paymins spoke
so, without having any other understanding than their moother wit auorded them:
what excuce is there now adays for such as are trained up in Gods school,
where there is a brotherhood between both great and small, and where the
masters ought too become fellowlie with their servants, because they have all
one hope of the endless life? If they that have power above others, will needs
set their feet upon their throts by abu^ing the right of their authority:
what a thing is it? So then, so much the more ought both the one and the other
sort of us, too think how too walk in our own state and calling: so as the
inferior sort grudge not that our Lord suffers them too be abandoned too so
many wrongs too this worldward, and too be so mocked and scorned: but that
although they should endure a hundred times as much, yet they repyne not
against God, because it were but a kicking against the spur: And the greater
sort also do the like, that is too say, that they consider, that the nearer
God has drawn them too himself in giving them pre-eminence, the more will he
also have them too fashyon themselves too his image and likeness. And what
shall we find in God but goodness? according as we see that throughout all
the Scripture he is called the fountain of all lowelinesse, gentleness, and
mercy. And therefore let such as are in degree of honor think cheefely
theruppon. For it is certain, that if they discharge not their dewtie, they
shall pay full dearly for that they have bin so honorable in the world, and
yet abuzed the singular benefyte of God. And (as I said before) because both the
one and the other are hard too be brought too conformity: insomuch that they
which are oppressed, cannot refreyne grudging, but are provoked too break all
bonds: Let them be hild in awe by Gods word, and by earnest exhortations. And
let the great ones also be subdewed, that they forget not God as they are
wont too do. For they ouershoote themselves so far, as to think they be
no more mortal men. And it is certain, that if men bethink themselves well of
their own state, and view themselves in the persons of the meanest, it will
lead them too humility. So then, Gods word must have his course in this
case, too bridle as well the one as the other, that we may live in such sort
every man according too his calling, as God may be quietly obeyed, and we in
herkening too his voice, desire nothing but too perform our dewtie toward
him, and toward all creatures, until we be come too the everlasting
kingdom, where we shall be parttakers both of his glory, and of his
majesty, and of all the good things that are in him.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our sins, praying him to voutsafe to touch us with true and lively
repentance, that we may be so sorry for offending of him, as it may make us
too hate our vices, and too crave pardon of them at his hand, too the intent he
may govern us by his holy spirit, and make us too live according too his holy
commandments, and bear with our weakness, until he have rid us quyte and
clean of it. And so let us all say, Almyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The.xlv. Sermon, which is the third upon the sixth Chapter.
10. Moreover my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the mightiness of
his power.

11. Put on the complet harness of God, that ye may stand out against the
assaults of the devil.

12. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blud, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Lords of the world, (even) the
rulers of the darkness of this world, (and) against the spiritual
vvickednesses which are in the heavenly places.


We know that prospertie does so puff men up, as they bear themselves on
hand that they ought too be privileged, and their state exempted from the
common array: and too be short, that they ought too do what they list. On the
contrary part, the poorer sort which are despyzed and shaken of, think that
God has as good as forgotten them, and thereuppon they cannot conceive that he
has any care of them. Therefore it is expedient that such as are so drunken
with presumptuousnesse, as they take overmuch upon them under color that they
be in credit and authority, should have their corages abated, and hear it
told them, that they have a master in heaven, too punish them, though they
escape the hands of men. On the other side, it is requisyte that they should be
comforted which are redye to quayle, and should be tempted too fall intoo
despair. And Saint Paul showed them both here. For he tells the Servants
they need not be afraid but that God regards them, so they walk in his
fear, and that he has a care of them, and accepts their service, as well as
though they were in honorable state, and very great dignity too the worldward.
And unto the masters he says, they have a superior in heaven, before whom
they must yield their account, and that there their greatness and highness
will not go for payment. For all those things are nothing before God, because
all things that bear a great gloss and countenance too the world, do vanish
away when they come before the souerein judge. On the other side also here
follows that which is said in another text, 1. These. 5. c. 14.
namely that they which are faint hearted, must be comforted: for else they
might quayle, because it would seem too them, that God regards them not: I
speak of such as are despyzed too the worldward. Therefore it must be told
them, that God has not forgotten them, though it be his will too keep them
low for a^yme. It behooves every of us too apply this too his own use,
according too the state that God shall have set us in. For when we be
trubbled wrongfully, when men make none account of us, when men shake us of: if
we imagine that God has given us over too, we cannot call upon him. And on
the other side also, we cannot serve him with a free heart, because we think
it is but labor lost, and too no purpose. Therefore when we be assailed with
such temptation, let us call this lesson too rememberance, which is, that
though we be now afflicted in this world, and men laugh us too scorn, and
spit in our faces, and too be short, though we endure all the reproach that
can be: yet we fail not for all that, too be in the safe keeping of our
God, because he esteems us and sets store by us, and will in the end show
that he does so, insomuch that although we linger and pyne away, and he
withhold himself as it were hidden from us, and a man might deem (according
too natural understanding) that we be (as ye would say) razed out of his
rememberance: yet nevertheless, after he has hild us under for a while, and
tried our humility and obedience: we shall find, that our walking faithfully
and incorruptly in his fear, shall be admitted in our account in the end, and
that we have not labored for mooneshyne of the water, as they say. That is the
thing in effect which we must bear in mind, when the great personages of the
world exalt themselves in their pride, and are able to trample us under their
feet.

Howbeeit, let all such as have superiority over others, aduyze themselves
well, and consider that God has not given them the bridle without reserving
his own right too himself, but that both great and small must be feign too
appear before his judgment seat, and there there will be no accepting of
persons. Wherefore let such as are rich, let such as are in authority, let
such as have any advantage above their neighbors, remember well this saying,
that there is no accepting of persons before God: but that although that in
this world one man goes before, and another follows after: yet when the
Trumpet sounds, so as we must all come before the great Judge: then there
shall be no more any such difference. And for the same cause are even Kings and
Princes brought too that point, and too that consideration in the Psalm,
Psalr. (...). ^. 6.
where it is said, Ye be Gods, and ye be children of the highest: which is,
because God has ordained the^ to be as his leeutenants, and set them in high
degree. True it is that this must stand in force for a time: but yet shall ye
dye as men (says he) and as any one of the common people, and then shall ye
be driven too know that ye were but mortal men. For all these great and gay
shows shall then be laid awater. And of a truth, the setting down of the
word Person, ought too put us well in mind, that they be but temporal
things, and that we cannot bring any of them with us before God, as though
they were our own. True it is tha^ in our common speech we take the word
Person it another sense: for we call a man or a woman a person. But when the
Scripture speaks of it, it means all things that are without us, as riches,
states, offices, nobility, great birth, and all things that men possess in
this world, and whereof they may also be bereft. Therefore when it is said,
that there is no accepting of persons before God: it is as much too say, as he
will judge us simply as mortal men, and as brittle and frail creatures, and
that we cannot sheeld our selves with one thing or other, insomuch that the
richest cannot bring their treasures, lands, and possessions with them, to
advance themselves with them above others. They that have bin in any great
dignity, shall not say, how so? Every man trembled under me. Such geere shall
be nothing worth before God. All the greatness and all the authority of the
world will serve too no purpose, but every man shall be taken as a child of
Adam. So then, let such as have any occasion too exalt themselves, bear well
in mind, that all the things which have any gloriousness too the worldward,
and are esteemed and had in reputation, shall fade away like smoke, and be
consumed too nothing, when we come too be judged of our God. And therefore
let all men both great and small live in humbleness and trust. James. 1. b. 9.
And that is the c^^se why Saint James says, let him that is small, glory in
his highness. Why so? Because God has adopted us too his children, and
although we be but poor earthwoormes, and even men themselves account us as
filth and dung: yet has God voutsafed too print his mark in us, that we
might be known too be his children, and that he has given us leave to call
upon him as our father with full mouth. Therefore we have just cause too
glory, notwithstanding that we be of low degree. For we have a highness
whereby God exalts us above all the world. And on the contrary part, Saint
James says, that he which is great, must glory in his lowenesse. For whereas
the unbelievers are so bewitched with pride, that they despyze God, and (as I
said before) do bear themselves on hand, that they be exempted from all law,
and that their state is set alone by it self from all the rest of the world:
the believers must understand, that all the dignity and excellency in the
world, serves but for a time, and passes away, and that when we come before
God, we shall have another one thing nor other to clothe our selves withal.
Too be short, the things which the scripture calls Persons, are as apparels
and clothings. Let us take this similitude: If he that is richly apparelled,
think too escape from God, under color that he gazeth at his own gay feathers,
and that the world woondereth too behold him: he deceyueth himself very much.
For all those things must be laid aside when God calls us too judgment.
Agein, the poor folk that scarsely have wherewith too cover half their body,
yea and that but with a few rags and torn cloutes, must not think
themselves the less esteemed (of God) for all that. For there shall be no
more persons, that is too say, there shall be noth (...) riches nor poverty,
honor nor bacenesse: we must all appear as we be, that is too say, mortal
men, and children of Adam. That is it in effect which we have too gather upon
that lesson.

After Saint Paul has showed every man's dewtie particularly: now he returns
agein too general doctrine. For (as I said before) there is one rule common too
all men without exception, which is the same that is contained in Gods law,
namely that we should lead a holy life, giving our selves over unto his
seruis: and also love one another, living chastely and soberly, in all
myldnesse and honesty. This is common. But it is said afterward, that every
man must have an eye too his own calling, as, the husband has a special
dewtie toward his wife, and the wife toward her husband, as we have seen
hertoofore: for Saint Paul has laid forth all those things. Now he
attempereth his talk too all men, saying, Moreover my brethren, be strong in
the Lord. Wherein he shows that we cannot give our selves too the serving of
God without hardness, but must take peynes too prepare our selves thertoo.
True it is that if we were whole and sound, and that our nature were
uncorrupted, it would never dare us to live according too Gods commandment:
nay rather it would be our whole pleasure, accordingly as the faithful do
feel by experience, when God has touched them too the quick. And for that
cause also does our Lord Jesus Christ say, Math. (...). d. 30.
that his yoke is another hard nor rough, nor his burden heavy: as if he
should say, that he desires nothing but too guide us by all gentle and loving
means. But if we consider what we be: that is too say, how unable we are
too be firm and constat, and too hold out in the way which God shows us:
surely we shall well see how it is not without cause, that Saint Paul
exhorts us here too be strong. As if he should say, I have exhorted you
hithertoo too do your duties: but I know well that every of you shall find
such stubornnesse in him self, as he shall not be able too overcome his wicked
lusts but by fyghting manfully. And though you be weak, yet think not that
that ought to serve for excuce. When your passions on the one side are
stubborn and rebellious against God, and your selves on the other side are
frail: think not that that shall quit you before God: for ye shall be
condemned in your sins nevertheless. What is too be done then? Be ye
strong in the Lord (says he:) that is too say, whereas most men do welter in
their sins, and think themselves discharged by^^use their thoughts and
affections are so rebellious against the ryghtuousnesse of God: you knowing all
the same miseries must mislyke of your selves for them, and seek the remedy
of them. And what is that? Strengthen your selves: that is too say, we must
enforce our selves: As if he should say, It is a hard thing too walk aryght:
for we shall have as many impediments as may be. The devil will not cease too
seek all means possible too thrust us out of the way, and we shall have
store of oppressions and vexations, for he has slyghtes ynow and too many, and
besyds that, he assayleth us now after one manner, and now after another, and we
have not wherewith too resist him. Therefore it behooves us too get strength too
us.

Howbeit, he says, in the Lord, least men should imagine themselves able too
furnish out the matter with their own freewill, and with their own cunning.
Therefore, Be ye strong in the Lord (says he) yea and in the myghtinesse of
his power. When he does us too wit, that God will utter such power, as we
shall not need to doubt of victory against all that the devil can practyze,
so we be not rechlesse, ne fall asleep. Wherefore let us call upon God, that
he may help us and succor us at our need. So then, let these two things go
toogither with us: that is too wit, first wakefulnesse, and such care as the
faithful should have too strengthen themselves: and on the other side, hearty
desyrousnesse too call upon God. And this is a text well worthy too be
marked, as which conteyneth a great matter in few words. For first we see
that we must not be slothful if we covet too rule our life according too
Gods will, but forasmuch as every man bears with him self, and we desire
nothing but too shake of all care, and too cast the things at our backs (as
they say) which might trubble us: too the end we be not so nyce, we must
mark first of all, that if we will serve God, we must enforce our selves, and
that is as much to say as we must fight against the devil. For (as I said
before) he is not idle, another will he suffer any of us to do our dewtie with
such ease, as though we did but walk up and down in some foyre place: but he
will set thorns, and cast logs in our ways too stop us. Agein, he will give
such girds at us, as shall be enough too overthrow us a hundred times, before
we can step one pace, unless God aid us. Forasmuch therefore as we cannot
walk in the fear of God without fyghting: we ought too bear Saint Paul's
warning in mind. Furthermore he intends also too make us perceive our own
weakness. For we know that men do bear much with themselves, and seek
nothing but too welter in their pleasures. Also there are which presume upon
their own strength, and bear themselves on hand that they be able to work
wonders as though they were as stout as could be required. And this cursed
persuasion has deceived wretched me^ in all ages, and by that mean has
freewill trotted in every man's mouth. But S. Paul tells us here, that we
have need too be strenthened: which saying imports that we be weak by
nature.

And afterward he expresses him self yet better, in saying, that it is in the
Lord that we must be strong, and that he has all power in him, too give
thereof unto us, as much as needs. Then if we enterpryze any thing without
calling upon him, we shall be punished for our rashness and pride. Saint
Paul therefore shows us, that men cast themselves into decay by their
ouerweening, in imagining themselves too have that which they have not, which
conceyt turns them away from calling upon God, Now it might be said here,
that it is a superfluous exhortation too bid us be strong in the Lord: for no
man is able too uphold him self: that lies not in any bodies power too do.
(No:) but yet for all that, we feel by effect, that God woorketh in such wise
in us, that we do the same things that he does. But yet must that woorking
needs be amyable too us. If a man have lived holily, so as he may have bin as
a mirror of holiness and of all vertew: it may well be said, he has done
this or that. And in deed we be not as timber logs: and therefore we do
good. Yea, but yet must we understand that this (woorking) comes from
elsewhere than of our selves: and there lies the knot of the case. Then if it
be demanded, whether men can do good or no: yea, but not of themselves, nor
of their own selfmouing, or of their own kind, but (only) because they be
guyded by the holy Ghost. If it be demanded whethr men can do evil: yea,
they be given wholly too it, it is their common byasse. So then, men do evil
of themselves, and the root of it remains in them, and the blame of it is
ryghtly imputed unto them, and they must not fetch wyndlasses above nor
beneath too find tryflyng shifts. Whosoever has done evil, shall abide
always in his condemnation: but let us consider well that God woorketh in us
when we do good, and the praise thereof ought of right too be given too him.
Howbeeit, although there be nothing in us nor on our side when we serve God:
yet notwithstanding S. Paul exhorts us not in vain, in saying that we must
be strengthened in God. Phil. 2. ^. 12. 13.
For we must not be lazy, as he speaks of it in another place, where he
says, work your salvation in fear and trembling, for it is God that gives
both will and the ability too perform it, and all according too his good
pleasure freely and of his own mercy. This saying seems strange at the
first blush, when S. Paul wylleth us too work our salvation. For is that in
us? (No:) But he corrects that which might be conceived through presumption
and ouerweening, by saying that it must be done with trembling, and that we
must walk in fear: that is too say, we must distrust our selves, yea and be
utterly abashed, assuring our selves that we cannot stir one of our little
^^ngers, no nor think one good thought (as he says in another place: 2. Cor.
3. b* 5.
) except God give it us from above. And afterward (which confirms this matter
yet better) he adds for a conclusion, that God gives both the will and the
performance of the will. Then is it God that does all, and yet cease not we
too do also: yea, but that is by him, and of him, as I have declared already.
Too be short, the holy Scripture says, not that God does renew us, and that
when we be begotten agein by his holy spirit, we begin too have a good mind
and too be well inclyned: too the intent we should be slothful and idle,
but too the intent that God should be glorified, and we not imagine our selves
too be the woorkers of our own salvation, but yield him the honor of all the
good that he has put intoo us. Howsoever the world go, yet must we be
watchful, that is too say, we must keep good watch against the devil, and
indeuer too give our selves too goodness, so as every of us enforce our
selves, for we must imprizon our own wit, and wicked will too make them
obedient too God: but yet must all be acknowledged too be of him.

His adding of these words, of the mighty power of God, is too make us
overcome all distrust, for we see we be given too be out of heart, insomuch
that if we cannot compass the things as we would, which he commands us,
we conclude, that in the end we must needs quayle. But contrarywyse Saint
Paul says, that God will utter a mighty and victorious power, according as
it is said, that he which is on our side is stronger than all the world. Seeing
then that God takes our part, and vpholdeth us with his power: let us not
fear too be surpryzed by Satan and all that ever he can deuyze against us,
but that whatsoever distresses betyde us, 2. Cor. 12. c. 9.
in the end we shall overcome all, even by resting upon Gods invincible
power. And of a truth God perfecteth his power in our weakness: that is too
say, he woorketh not in such wise, but that in the mean (...) go limping, and
are plukt back, and stumble, and step man^^^^ pace awry, and now and then
start out of the way. Ye see then that our Lords assisting of us with his
holy spirit, is in such wise, as he holds us still in awe, too give us
occasi^n too humble our selves. Our weakness therefore is mingled with the
strength of Gods assistence, and that is too the end we should know what
need we have too call upon him, and too flee too him for refuge. For we be
redye enough of our selves too barken Gods glory. And therefore God is feign
too waken us, and too say unto us, wretched Creatures, should ye not be
forlorn a hundred thousand times, if I hild ye not by the hand* Now then, our
Lords leani^g of infirmities in us, is too draw us too him, and too subdew us
too meekness, that we may have matter too praise him for, in that he
suffers not our falls too be deadly: and agein, that we should seek him
every minute of an hour, knowing that if he helped us not up agein, and hild
us on our feet, we should perish without any mercy. That then is the cause
why that unto Paul's former saying, we must also join this sentence, that
God does in deed leave some weakness in us as long as we live in this world,
but yet ceasseth not too utter his invincible power in making us too get the
upper hand: and that we must dwell upon this concluzion, that when Satan has
wrought the uttermost that he can, yet must we march on nevertheless, and
keep our way too our iournyes end. And why* For it is not only said, that God
will humble us, and that he will have pitye upon us: but also that his power
shall show it self in succoring us, and that not with a single and common
operation, but with a mighty power, that is too say, with a power that shall
overcome all the lettes of the world.

Now then we see what diversity there is between the doctrine of the
Papists, and the doctrine that we follow, which is grounded upon the holy
Scripture. For these blind wretches say, they can work woonders by their
freewill. In deed they will give some little snippet unto God, saying, that
he supplyeth their wantes, because they be inclined too evil and too vice,
but that they be restreyned by him. God therefore is as a pretty fellow too
help them at a dead lift: but in the mean while it is their own freewill, and
their natural power that bears all the sway. But when they have made the
uttermost of their own strength: yet do men dwell always in doubt, and if
they happen to hold their own one hour, by and by they slumble, and can never
get up agein. But contrariwyse we hold opinion, that man must be utterly
beaten down (as we be taught by the holy Ghost,) so as we may not have one
drop of power resident in our selves, but be utterly emptied. Are we once at
that point? Our Lord shows us the remedy. If we repair too him, and
acknowledge our wantes, and be ready too beg, so as we have our mouths open,
and be not pu^t up with mind, but (rather) utterly emptye: then does our Lord
assure us, that he will not fail us, and we shall have whereof too presume,
howbeeit not after the manner of the Papists, who make their brags^ and
aferwarde come short (of their reckening,) and are put too utter shame. On our
part, when we have acknowledged that nothing we be, nor nothing can do, we
resort unto God, too glory against Satan, and against all the assaults that
he gives upon us, and against all the munitions of hell, and against all the
impedimentes and temptations in the world. Thus ye see how we ought too put
this lesson of Saint Paul's in ure.

After he has spoken so of the mighty power of God: now he adds, that we
must arm our selves with his complet Harness. As if he should say, that it
is long of none but our selves, that we be not well armed and weaponed too
overcome all Satan's assaults, and that our own negligence is the cause that
we be so often vanquished and foiled. And why? For God not only promises to
succor us by his power, and that in such measure, as we shall get the upper
hand: but also puts means intoo our hands, and armeth us: and yet
notwithstanding we hang up our armor upon the wall. And is it any marvel if
we be taken unawares, or be unable too resist at the pinch, when we hold
scorn too use the means that God offers us, and are so near our hand? Now
what is this armor? Saint Paul will show it in dew place, as now let it
suffize us too know his intent. Then whereas it is said, that we must be
armed with Gods complet harness: it is too rebuke and quicken up our
rechlesnesse, in letting the things alone which he offers us. In deed we
will like well if a man tell us that God is redye and foreward too succor us,
and that we need not too doubt of victory against all our enemies, so long as
he is on our side: we accept this geere willingly: but in the mean while we
be contented too sit still, and it is not for us too encounter our enemy, for
he is far too strong for us. But yet must we in this case encounter hand too
hand: and we would that Gods armours should lie still, and be prepared for us
without using of them. For this cause are we commanded too put them on, that
is too say, too apylye them too our use, since our sta^e is such, as we must
maynteyne battle, and it pleases God that we should be so armed, and that
the devil should not come upon us vnprouded.

And Saint Paul not only uses the word Armor or Harness: but also adds,
all the furniture, as if he should say, we must be armed from top too toe.
And that shall be set forth particularly yet better hereafter. Howbeeit his
meaning in this text, is that our unthankfulness is known so much the more,
in that God armeth us at all points, so as nothing is missing, except the
fault be in our selves. In deed we will not stick too put on some part of
the armor that God gives us: howbeeit, it is but as if one man should clap on
his Morion for a countenance, and take another Target, nor Corselet nor any
thing else: and another catch up his sword, and the third his halberd, and in
the mean while every of them want many other things that they should have
need of. So we perhaps apply some part of Gods armor too our use: that is
too say, we will not utterly reject or refuze all the grace that he offers
us. But there is none of us all that armeth himself as he should do: that is
too say, which is fenced with all the virtues that God gives him. For it is
certain, that both from the right hand and from the left, from above and from
beneathe, God ordeyneth means for us too fight withal, which are sufficient,
so we despyze them not, but upon knowledge of our want, receive the things
which he gives us so liberally.

And too the intent we should be the more provoked too arm our selves, and
too receive the helps that God gives us: S. Paul adds, That ye may
vvithstand all the assaults of the D^uell. Here he confirms the matter that
I spoke of before: that is too wit, that we cannot serve God at our own ease,
as though there were nothing too let us: as, a man may go too his work all
day long, and it shall go foreward quietly, because he is not distrubbled. But
it is not so in the obedience which the faithful should yield too their God.
And why? The devil ceasseth not too trubble them, and too work them a
thousand spytes and incomberances. Therefore if we desire too walk in the
fear of our God: we must be armed, that ^ee may be ready too battle, for
our enemy will never let us rest. And for that cause Saint Paul sets down
many assaults of Satan. As if he should say, Satan's assayling of us too bring
us too wickedness, is not for once or twyce and away: but he maynteyneth a
continual battle, and when he has given us o^e alarm on the one side, he
commes about agein on the other, insomuch that besides our own enforcing and
strengthening of our selves, we have need of armor too repulse our enemy, on
which side soever he assail us.

And agein he amplyfyeth it yet better, saying, that our fyghting is not only
against flesh and blud: but (also) against the powers, and principal^ties of
the air, against the Lords of the world, and against wicked Spirits, which
fight from heaven against us: Commonly when we have too do with an enemy that
is not greatly able too anoy us, so as we fear not that he can do us any
harm: we despyze him, and that is oftentimes a cause, that such as ye would
esteem too be the valeantest in the world do come short home. And why:
Because they despyzed their enemy. But Saint Paul tells us, we have to do
with other manner of wyghts than mortal men: and yet we fear them not. If a
man hate us, although he be not of any great ability: Yet have we a flea in
our ear (as they say) and we think it wisdom too prevent the things that our
enemy can practyze against us. But specially if our enemies be myghtie and
strong, and we unable too stand against them, and too repulse them: then are
we as much amazed as may be, and yet they be but mortal men as we be.
Howbeit S. Paul tells us, we have not to fight against mortal me^, but against
enemies that do far pass the^. And for that cause does he call them powers
and principalities, giving them authority as though they had the over hand of
us alredye. If we were too fight with an enemy that were over our head, it
would trubble us curstly. Now such are the devils: they have that advantage
of us: for they be named even Kings of this world: and besyds that, they have
a thousand wyles and policies. And therefore it is said, that they not only
assail us with force, but also lay so many stales and ambushes too intrappe
us, as we could not escape them, if we stood not upon our guard. Here it
stands us on hand too be thoroughly waked, though we were not only asleep,
but also as it were in a swound. Yet notwithstanding, this warning does little
boot us: for we see how cold we be in buskling our selves to the battle.
Saint Peter tells us the like, 1. Pet. 5. b. 8.
though he use not the same words. For in saying that the devil is as a roaring
Lion, going about and seeking some pray to devour, so as he will swallowe us
up ^ut of hand, if we be not waking: he shows us that it is not for us too
be rechlesse and out of fear, but rather too stick well too our talking. Not
that we should be afraid out of measure: for the intent of Saint Peter and
Saint Paul in setting forth the devils force, is not too discomfort us and
dismay us, that we should conclude (with our selves:) how shall we then do?
we be quyte past hope of recovery. No: but Saint Peter adds, withstand
him being strong in faith. And Saint Paul says also unto us: the devil is
strong and myghtie, but yet God surmounteth him: and if ye be armed with his
power, fear not but ye shall far overcome Satan and all his assaults, and
in the end get the upper hand of him. So then, the thing that we have too
bear in mind, is that as often as we perceive the lets that hinder our walking
where God calls us, and our holding out as were requisyte: we must
acknowledge our own infirmity, and condemn all the foolish ouerweening of
popery, as their freewil, their works of preparation, and all things which
they imagine themselves too bring unto God. Let all such stuff vanish away.
And when we have acknowledged that we can do nothing at all of our selves:
then let us on the other side consider who is our enemy, and be afraid: not
as men in a maze too sink in our own wretchedness: but that the same may the
better waken us, and drive us too seek succor at Gods hand by prayer and
supplication, and too embrace his promises with faith, which shall get the
upper hand of all the world. And therwithall let us not doubt but that God will
always have the upper hand of Satan and of all his practizes. For he has
promised too use an infinite power, whenever the case concerns the
succoring of us. Ye see then that we must walk in fear and warenesse. And
why? Because we be beseeged with many enemies, and yet are destitute of all
goodness, and given too al evil. Then stands it us on hand to distrust our
strength, and too mourn, and too be quickened up with fear, because of our
enemies, which might so devour us at the first chop with one grain of salt
(as men say) as we should be utterly undone. For not only once, but a
hundred thousand times should we be overwhelmed by the power of the Devil,
if our Lord vphild us not. But howsoever we fare, let us march on with our
heads upright, pr^suming upon the help that is promised us from above: and
we shall feel it in such wise, as we shall continue unvanquishable. And
although we always hang our wings, and endure hot skirmishes, (...) as
e^ewhyles we feel stinking hartgrypes, 2. Cor. 12. c. ^.
(as in deed God will perform his strength in our weakness:) yet howsoever
we fare, let us not doubt but all shall turn too our benefyte, and that even
our trubbles shall be a means too make us modest, and serve us for spurs
too prick us foreward too call upon God, and moreover move us too yield him
thanks and honor, when we see he has granted us the grace too overcome our
enemy, so as we shall every minute acknowledge the goodness that we have
received at his hand. Thus the way for us too order our life well, is, first
too know God, and afterward too understand that we be beholden too him for
all the goodness, and good things that we have, and therefore not be cold
and lazy, but inforc^ our selves every man too glorify him, in such wise as
we walk continually in his fear.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us perceive them better than we have
done, and that our so dooyng may cause us too resort too him, that we may not
only obtain forgiveness of our faults past, but also be so strengthened,
as we may order our whole life according too his holy commandments, even
according too the measure of grace that he shall have given us, until he have
taken us out of this world, and rid us of all the vices and spots wherewith we
be steyned as now. And so let us all say, Almyghtie God heavenly father. etc.

The.xlvi. Sermon, which is the fourth upon the sixth Chapter.
11. Put upon you the whole armor of God, that ye may vvithstand all the
assaults of the devil.

12. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blud, but against the
Principalities, against the Powers, against of Lords of this world, the
(governors) of the darkness of this world, (and) against the spiritual
vvickednesses that are in the heavenly places.

13. Wherefore take too you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able
too vvithstand in the evil day, and stand fast when ye have performed all
things.

14. Stand fast therefore, having your loins girt with truth, and being clothed
with the brestplate of Ryghtuousnesse:

15. Having your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace:

16. Taking above all things the sheeld of faith, whereby you may quench all the
fyrie darts of wickedness.

17. Also take too you the Helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God.


I Showed you this morning, why Saint Paul speaks here of the force and
crafts of Satan, that is too wit, to wake us, that we be not taken unawares,
as it happens oftentimes. Therefore it stands us on hand too know, with
what manner of enemy we have too do, that the same may stir us up too
resist him. True it is that at the first we might be abashed, by comparing
our own weakness with the practyzes and preparations of Satan, whereof mention
is made here. But the remedy thereof is set down therewithal, as I have
touched already, and as Saint Paul proceeds too show yet more at length.
Therefore he says first, that the encounter which we have too deal in, is
much more hard and daungerfull, than if all the men in the world did set
themselves against us. For the force of Satan is above them all. And that is
the cause why he says, that our fyghting is not against flesh and blud. By
these words he does us too understand, that we have not too stand against
mortal men only. It is true that men shall oftentimes bid us battle, yea
and they shall be Satan's underlings too torment us. But that is not the thing
that we must stick at. For the devil serves his turn by them too drive us too
despair, or too provoke us too reuengment, and too make us grudge against God.
Howsoever the case stand, the wicked do never trubble us, but they be egged
too it by another, that is too say, by Satan, who rules them, and is their
head, and sets them a work, too the ends aforesaid. Therefore if we
stick upon men, we forget the principal, after the manner of Dogs, who if
a man do cast a stone at them, fall too biting of the stone too wreake
themselves, and regard not the hand that threw it. Even so are we unpurveyed
of wit, when we think our stryuing is but only with men, and in the mean
while think not upon our invisible enemy. Wherefore let us bethink us well
of the thing that Saint Paul tells us here, namely that Satan is the cheef
enemy that we have, yea and that it is he whom we must withstand: and
although he use diverse means to vex us, and to turn us away from the fear
of God: yet must we always have our eye upon him, that we may beware of him.

Agein, a man might think it strange, that Saint Paul should say, that the
diuelles are the principalities of the air, the lordshippes and powers of
heaven, and the princes of the world: for a man would deem that he matcheth
them against God. Now although some Heretics in old time have abuzed this
place, intending too have made as it were two beginnings, so as God should be
let too maynteyne himself against Satan, and too defend those whom be has
taken intoo his protection: yet notwithstanding if we have an eye too Saint
Paul's intent, this question will be easly resolved. And why? For here is no
talk of any power that the devil should have as it were in despyte of God too
advance himself against him: for we must rather stand fully resolved of this
point, that the devil is the executer of Gods judgments, and cannot attempt
any thing more then is granted and permitted him. Job. 1. b. 6.
If there were no more but this text of the first chapter of Job, where the
devil appeered with the Angels (who are named there the children of God) to
get leave too do mischeef: it ought too satisfy us thoroughly. True it is that
he seeks nothing else but too pervert and confound all things. But yet for
all that, God holds him brydled, and executes what he thinks good by his
means, insomuch that when the diuelles have deuyzed what they ca^, yet can
they not attempt any thing without Gods leave, yea and except he have ordained
it, and given them express charge to do this or that. Yet notwithstanding, it
is not for naught that S. Paul names them the powers and principalities of
the air: for all this depends upon the things that he will speak anon
concerning the darkness of the world. But, that the diuelles should have
superiority over mankind, which is shaped after the image of God, were against
all reason: yea if we had continued in our soundness. Had we hild out in the
state wherein God created our father Adam, it is certain that the devil
should not have had any advantage over us. But forasmuch as we be now
overwhelmed with darkness, and become thralles of our own nature: therefore
the devil is named the Prince of the world. Wherefore let us mark well that
Saint Paul having so advanced the power of the devil, shows us from whence
all of it proceeds, and what is the welspring of it, too the intent we
should not think that the devil has the reins of the bridle looce on his
neck, so as he should be able too do what he lists, and God unable too
let him. Too the intent then that we should not imagine that Gods souerein
dominion is abated by any power of the diuelles: Saint Paul says, that their
power proceeds of this, that this world is in darkness. True it is that the
Sun shyneth upon us, and the Moon also: but yet for all that, we cease
not too be plunged in the dungeon of death, and too be blind wretches,
because we be banished from the light of life which is in God. Inasmuch then
as we be destitute of the knowledge of him that made and fashyoned all
things, and have our wits entangled in all naugh^inesse, and our reason is
utterly perverted: therefore does Satan reign over us. And so the question is
dissolved which might have bin demanded, namely how the diuelles are named the
princes of the air, and have such scope in this world which God has created.
That comes not of the original order of nature, (as I have declared alredye)
but of the corruption that is happened through the fall of man: Howsoever the
case stand, the devils have such power over us, as we could not tell how to
withstand them, unless God were both our sheeld and our wall, and served our
turn at al assayes, yea and fought for us at such time as we can do nothing
at all. I say, we must mark well that, and also beat down the foolish
presumption which is so rooted in our hearts, as it is right hard for us too
weed it out. For we see how men do always vaunt themselves, and would make
themselves as Idols. But how speaks the scripture of them? It calls them the
devils slaves. So long then as we have not Jesus Christ for our king, and his
seat is unset up among us by reason of Adams fall: the devil must needs be
our Prince, and have all authority over us, and we be subject unto him. Now
let men make as great bravery as they list, and chalendge this and that too
themselves: and yet notwithstanding, the thing that the holy Ghost has
spoken, must continue soothfast. For vnrepealable is the definitive sentence
that is given here, that is too wit, that the devil is our prince, and we his
subjects, hild down under his thraldom, until we be set free by our Lord
Jesus Christ, John. 8. c. 36.
according too this saying in the eight of Saint John, that it is he which
makes us free, too the end we should depart out of the cursed tyranny and
bondage of Satan. Now seeing we be as wretched folk overthrown, and the
devil is over our heads, and has gotten the upper hand of us alredye, if we
be not reskewed after a wonderful manner: there is good cause why we should
stoop, (as I declared alredye this morning) and distrust the strength that we
surmyze our selves too have of our own, for it is nothing else than
deceytfulnesse. Also there is wherewith too quicken up our carfulness, too
make us resort unto God, and too pray him that he forsake us not, ne suffer us
too be given up as a pray too our enemies. And finally, too make every man too
streyne himself, knowing that although we our selves do nothing: yet does
God woork in such wise by us, as he will not have us too be as blocks, but he
will have us exercyze our faith, and too be as men of war, too serve him in
battle, so as the stoppes that we encounter, restreyne us not from keeping on
our course still, but that we outstand all the ambushes and assaults that are
put too us. Thus ye see in effect how we must put this text in ure.

And he concludes agein, that we must hold our own too resist the wicked
days, until we be fast settled after the performance of all. Here he
puts us in mind agein, that it is not enough for us too have fought ^toutly
for a mooneth or for a year, but that we must hold out too the end, yea even
all our life long. For God has set us in this world too maynteyne the battle
until we be come too the rest of heaven. The earth then is not only as a
pilgrimage too the faithful, but also as a Camp where we must always have
enemies too trubble us night and day without ceassing. That is the cause why
Saint Paul says expressly, that we must resist till we have finished and
performed all things. And by the evil days, he means all our life, but
specially (the times) when our lord suffers us too be pinched more than
ordinary. For although God try us too the end: yet does he forbear us now
and then. For if he had not pity of our weakness, what would become of us? It
is true that we must no^ take truce with Satan: but yet does God sometimes
give us respits, so as we be not grieved with extremity. The evil days
therefore are, when there be great and in manner extreme temptations and
trials, howbeeit that all our whole life is comprehended under the same words.
It is true that that impeacheth not our continual happiness, but that God
takes us still for his people and heritage: but yet shall there always be
that euilnesse whereof Saint Paul speaks here. Then let us not make our
account of an earthly paradyse here beneath, or too reap here the fruit of
our victory, or too live in rest: but rather let us assure our selves, that
miseries are prepared for us without ceassing or number. Wherefore let us be
armed too abide them, and too overcome them. And it is no pleading against Gods
will in this behalf. It is very true that he could handle us much gentlyer,
and that he could so set us alone by our selves, as our enemies should not
come at us, nor we suffer any vexation: but it lyketh him not too do so.
Therefore we must bow down our necks, and every of us buckle himself too the
battle that God calls us unto. For (as says Saint Peter) it is good
reason that our faith which is much preciouser than gold and silver, 1. Pet. ^.
b. 7.
should be tried. Seeing that a corruptible metal is fined by fire: should
our faith which is much more excellent, be kept from coming too his pureness
and perfection? Therefore let us think well upon that which is said here, namely
that we must finish things (or go through with them.) And that is to the end
that no man should cocker himself, when he has hild his own for a while, and
taken great pain in employing him self too Gods seruis, but that he should
walk on still to the end, and put the thing in ure which S. Paul shows us in
another place, Phil. 3. c. 13.
even by his own example. For although he had done so notable things, as a man
might say, that God should have hild him quite, and given him some rest for his
often fyghting both by sea and by land diverse ways: yet notwithstanding he
says, he forgets all that is past, and streyneth, and inforceth him self
still foreward, till he may atteyne too the fellowship of the resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For what causes a number too take so great liberty,
but that they think themselves too have done enough, and may give others leave
too take their turn? why not, say they? It is now a twenty or thirty years
that I have taken extreme peynes without ceassing, and the world has seen my
faythfulnesse, zeal, and care which I have had too serve God, and my diligence
in dooyng the things that my charge required. And theruppon they conclude, that
now therefore they may well take rest. We must not so indent with God. But
whatsoever we have done, we must forget that which is behynd, (says Saint
Paul) and look foreward to the thing that is yet too come, that is too wit,
that we be not yet come to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, but that there
are many infirmities in us still, and our faith is not yet so thoroughly well
fined, but that it had need too be brought ageien too the furnace and the
fire. And therefore let us hold out till we have finished all things. And what
is meant by this All? that having lived in the obedience of our God, we dye
likewise when it pleases him, and according too his will. For it is not enough
for us too live in awe of him: but we must also even in our death, yield
record that we be wholly his, and we must not covet too live here until
we be weary of our life, but we must always have one foot lifted up too
depart when it pleases God. So then, all is then finished, when we have
lingered in this world as long as pleases God, and every man indeuered too
live according too his calling, and bin pacient too the end. Finally, be it
that we lyu^, or be it that we dye, and let us always be true sacrifyzes
to offer our selves unto God, and let us seek nothing but to yield up our
souls and our bodies intoo Gods hand. Therefore let us stand fast says S.
Paul: that is too say, that we may be able to show our selves before our God.

Hereuppon he shows with what manner of Armor we must be fenced and
furnished: that is too wit, with Faith, with Ryghtuousnesse, with Truth,
with Gods word, and with the Gospel. Now we must not be curious in
seeking here why Saint Paul gives the title of Helmet too one, the title of
Brestplate too another, and the title of Sheeld too another. For in the first
Epistle too the Thessalonians he touches the same doctrine briefly, 1 Thessalonians.
5. b. 8.
howbeeit, without following the similitude throughout, saying, that we must
be armed with the helmet of faith and charity. But he speaks otherwise in
this place. If any man would say, there is some contradiction, the doubt would
soon be dissolved, namely that Saint Paul's intent here, was not too decyfer
particularly all the pieces of a Christen man's armor, but too show briefly
that if we receive the means that God offers us, and be diligent too serve
him, we shall be furnished of all pieces, and we need not fear but we
shall have wherewith too withstand all our enemies, yea and too vanquish them.
That then was Saint Paul's meaning.

Now he sets down here first of all, that we must be girt with the
Svvoord girdle of truth, and put on the headpeece of Ryghtuousnesse. By those
two words he means soundness and holiness of life. Therefore whenever
we hear this word Truth, let us understand, that Saint Paul condemns all
hypocrisy, and will have us learn too give our selves too the serving of God
with a free heart, not with eye service, nor, as to the sight of the world, but
with a pure and right meaning mind. And to know why this Soothfastnes, or
vprightnes, and this soundness is put for a brestplate: it is not now
needful too trubble our selves much, as I said before. For the point that we
must bear in mind, is, how Saint Paul shemeth us, that if we take the armor
which God gives us, we shall be sure without fail too have victory against
all our enemies. Ryghtuousnesse is matched with it: which is a true rule
whereby too walk in the fear of God, and too live with our neighbors without
dooyng any harm, without fraud, without malice, and without extortion, and
rather too indeuer too do one another good, according too the end too which
our Lord has knit us toogither, which is, that we should so communicate with
our neighbors, as no man be wedded too his own profit, but all of us seek
the common welfare. And no marvel now though the Devil overcome us easly, and
steal upon us al kind of ways v^wares, both Evening and Morning and every
minute. For where is this soundness that Saint Paul requires here first of
all? Nay rather every of us flattereth himself, and we think we have done
much when we have used a few fair countenances, and not bin utter rebels
against God, so as the world cannot upbraid us that we have bin despyzers of
his majesty. Then if we play not the stark bedlems, but pretend some fair
show, and make some gay countenance of religion: too our own seeming we have
discharged our dewtie very well, when notwithstanding the devil in the mean
while has turned us quyte away from the soundness and substancialnesse,
whereof Saint Paul speaks here. In like case is it with Ryghtuousnesse. For
we would feign content God with a little. In deed we will confess well
enough with the mouth, that it is reason that God should be served and
honored, and that we should live quietly toogither, and indeuer too do one
another good. We will condemn Robbery, Extortion, Whoredom, Deceyt, and
wrong Dealing: but yet when all is done, we would have God too accept in good
worth, the little that he fyndeth in us, and too hold him contented with it.
But by that mean, behold, the devil fyndeth us still unprovided. Forasmuch
then as we open him such a gap, we must not marvel that he gets the
better hand of us. And therefore it were much better for us too go through with
our race, and too stick too our tackeling that we stand fast. For a man shall
see diverse that have a good zeal, as far as can be judged: and yet it
shall be but a blast, it will not continue. And why? Because we be not
fenced against Satan. And for proof hereof, if we follow the thing that is
showed us here: it is certain that the promis will never deceive us. For
although Saint Paul exhort the faithful too stand fast, and too hold out too
the end: yet is there a certain warrantyze included therein, that God will
always succor them at their need, and that they shall not find themselves
disappoynted, so they fight still under his banner, calling continually upon
his power, and using the means that are offered them by his word. Therefore if
there be such cowardlynesse in us as too be so afraid of the devil, that he
makes us too tumble down, and to start aside, and too stray quyte out of the
good way: we must impute all too our own rechlesnesse, because we have not
put on the armor that God gives us, but have hanged them up upon a pin.

Afterward here follows, that we should be shod with preparation too the
Gospel of peace. No dout but Saint Paul had an eye to the ancient fashion of
men of war. For they wore no shoes at home, but only when they went a
warfare: and that was both too defend them from the cold, and too save their
feet when they entered intoo battle with the enemy. It is said, that the
Gospel serves us for it. Howbeit there are two other words too be marked
also, in that he adds, Preparation, and Peace. Notwithstanding, that we may
lay forth things in their order, let us note that Saint Paul allotteth too
the Gospel this power and property of shooing of us, because that when we
be trained in the doctrine of the Gospel as we ought too be, then we may
walk (safely) through the world. For we see how the unbelievers are plundged
ever head and ears in it. Those whom God has not prepared too walk and too
atteyne too the kingdom of heaven, are so snarled in this world, that they be
altoogither unprofitable, as though they had their legs broken, and they sink
themselves daily deeper and deeper in it. Therefore there is but one only way
too make us wade through this world, and too atteyne too the kingdom of
heaven: which is, too have such instruction as is in the Gospel, namely that
God having adopted us too be his children, will not have us too dwell here
beneathe for ever, but that we should come unto him, yea even with all haste
and speed, and agein, that we intermeddle not our selves with the uncleanness
of the unbelievers, but separate our selves from them. Thus much concerning the
first point.

There is also the word Preparation, whereby Saint Paul does us too
understand, that if we have the skill too advantage our selves by the
Gospel, we shall be rid of all things that let us, and hinder us from
coming unto God. What is it then that we find there? It is, that whereas erst
we were as it we falen asleep, or rather doted in our pleasures and
vanities: our Lord dispozeth us too come unto him. We have seen already that
all this world is in darkness, and that as long as we abide in it, we be as
it were asleep, so as we see no way before us, and do but reele and stumble,
or rather lie along in it as dead men, Esaias. 59. b. 10.
(as it is said in Esaias): and if we be not reskewed by our our Lord Jesus
Christ, we must lie snorting in it still, and wel^er ever in that darkness.
Wherefore let us learn too put our selves in such readiness, as our loins may
be girded up (as says our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke. 12. ^. 35.
) and our lamps be burning in our hands, that we may see the way by the
light that is given us in our Lord Jesus Christ, who not without cause is named
the light of the world. Agein, John. 8. b. 12.
let us withdraw our selves from this spiritual drunkenness, which turns the
unbelievers away from the kingdom of heaven, and holds them down here
beneath, until they be come unto final destruction. Therefore let us mark
well that we cannot profit well by the Gospel, until we be put in
readiness, that is too say, until (as need is) we be weeded out from all
these things here below, and our Lord have so dispozed us too him self, as our
only travel may be too come always forewarder and nearer unto him, until
we be gone out of this world, and be also quyte rid and set looce from all
the bonds of Satan, and from all the means that he has too hinder us. If we
know this once, we shall have profited well for one day.

But Saint Paul adds one other title too the Gospel, which serves too make
us the more in love with it, saying, that it is the Gospel of peace. And
thereby he gives us courage to fight, as if he should say, my friends, it is
true that your enemies are myghtie, and will give you hard skirmishes, insomuch
that ye should not be able too withstand them, but ye should be overthrown
a hundred thousand times in an hour, if God aided you not. Nevertheless, if
ye refuze not the succor that God gives you, but rather make it effectual
by enforcing your selves to withstand all evil: ye shall have peace in the
mids of war. And why? For the Gospel brings always that benefyte with
it. Now it is much when we can fight without being afraid. For we see in what
taking they be from time to time, which are out of quiet: there is another
counsel nor aduyce in them, they be quyte out of heart, and too be short, the
trubble does always dismay them. But yet is it true, that we must have a care
with us, as has bin said before. For if we be rechelesse, we shall be
ouerraught by and by. Howbeeit, this Care is no let or impediment, but that we
may enter intoo the battle freely with a stedie and well settled mind,
forasmuch as God is on our side, and will utter his myghtie power (in our
defense.) This is the thing that ought too make us quiet, so as no such fear
attache us, as may make us too turn head, or disfurnish us of aduyce, but that
the more we be pinched, the more we may flee unto God, praying him too
succor us, and too provide for all our needs, which he knows much better
than we our selves do. Now then we see what Saint Paul's meaning is, when he
will have us too be shod with the Gospel. It is not too hold us in this
world, but rather that we should be in a readiness too travel freely toward
the kingdom of heaven: and moreover have a quiet mind too serve God, trusting
assuredly that notwithstanding all the trubbles which we have too endure, yet
we shall not perish. For he assures us not only too succor us in some one
assault, but too continue with us unto the end, even till he have delivered us
from all the greefs and trubbles which we sustain at this day.

There is further, that we must above all things take the Sheeld or Buckler
of faith, and the spiritual Svvoord which is Gods word. As touching this
Sheeld, he sets down, that by means thereof we may beat back the
burning or fyrie darts which the enemy whoorleth at us. It should seem that
Saint Paul uses here a needless speech, in putting Gods word and faith
asunder, and that he should not set down two things which are but one. For
faith is nothing of it self furtherfoorth than it is grounded upon Gods word:
and Gods word also aduauntageth us not, except we receive it by faith. But
his distinguishing of these two things, which notwithstanding go jointly
toogither, was for the easyer declaring of them. And he sets faith for the
buckler, too the end (says he) that we should therewith ward all the darts
of our enemy. Yet agein he shows us, that of our own power we be not able
too ward the blows that Satan can give us, but that they would be deadly. For
he thinks it not enough too say (simply,) too ward the blows or assaults:
but he says, the darts. Now men see that one shall sooner ^ee hit unawares
with darts, than with spears or swoordes: like as now adays a man shall
sooner be hit with a Hargabusse, or with a dubble Canon, than with a sword
that is swindged before ones face, and which he may more easly shun. Saint
Paul therefore sets down the diuelles darts, like as he had erst set
down his wyles. Now then let us mark, that Satan not only uses force, but
also might wound us too death by subtle means, if we were not fenced by
faith. For (as is said elsewhere) it behooves us too know his whiles: 2. Cor.
2^ c. 11.
and without we do so, we can never withstand him. He is the father of
lying, and besides that, has such store of wyles, as none can have more, too
beguyle us and too intrappe us. Therefore let us receive these warnings, that
we may be the more waking too apply the promises too our behoof which are
given us in Gods word. And he sets down Fyrie Darts, too show that his
wounds should be deadly (As I said before) if God did not set his power before
us, and defend us and preserve us thereby. Now we see what the force of faith
is.

Now look how much is attributed too faith, so much is taken away from men.
For faith borrows all things of Gods mere grace and liberality. Therefore let
us mark that in this text Saint Paul meant too humble us, and too show us
that God must be feign too provide us of all things belonging and requysyte
too our victory. And therefore whosoever make themselves sheeldes of any of
all the (other bulwarks that can be deuyzed, too repulse Satan withal: they
shall have but a spyders web (as they say) and Satan will but sport him at
their presumption, insomuch that when they ween they have all the mountains
of the world too fortifye them, it shall profit them nothing at all at their
need. Wherefore let us learn too make faith our bucklar: that is too say, when
we mind too enter intoo the battle, and too hold out in it: let us consider,
that God is our father, because he has elected and chozen us for his children,
of his own infinite goodness. Seeing he has assured us that he will always
be on our side, and that he is greater than all the world, and that he has put
us in good and safe keeping by ordeyning our Lord Jesus Christ too be our
Shepherd: let us gather all those promises toogither, and make a sheeld of them
too set before us whenever we be assailed, and let us defye the devil,
because we be in the protection of our God, who is of invincible power, and
because our Lord Jesus Christ has taken upon him the charge of our salvation,
John. 17. c. 1^.
and promised too be a faithful keeper of our souls too the end. When we
be once at that point, then shall we beat back the darts of the devil. For
on the one side he will labor too make us distrust Gods grace: and on the
other side he will make us believe that our Lord Jesus Christ is far of from
us: yea and he will tempt us too murmur and grudge against him, or too make us
cast forth tryflyng and unprofitable questions, or else blasphemies, and such
other things: and all these are darts. Agein, when we be tickled with any
wicked lust or longing in our hearts, it is the next way for us too be taken
tardye. True it is that at the first blush these allurementes will seem another
bitter, nor irksome, nor hard, nor any thing else: but yet for all that, they
be deadly darts: and yet notwithstanding, faith beats them all back. As
how? If we be tempted too coue^u^usnesse, because we be afraid least the
earth should fail us: God has taken upon him the charge too nurrish and
sustain us. And so, let us rest upon him, and ask our daily bread at his
hand. If the devil labor too win us too whoredom: we know that Jesus
Christ has incorporated us intoo himself, and made us his own members too
be all one with him: and shall we go spoil our selves in dung and
filthiness? What a dealing were that? He has set us free and clenzed us by
his blud: and shall we go wallowe agein in our uncleanness? Are we provoked
too gluttony? and, why not? Has not God created vittelles too our use? (Yis:)
but shall we defyle and overthrow the order that God has set, which is, that
we should be sustained by them, thereby too be directed too the heavenly
life? And shall we turn the things too our hinderance, which ^ught too be
our help? Agein, are we tempted with ambition, too gloryfye our selves? Yea:
but what example has our Lord Jesus Christ set before us? James. 4* b. 6.and
1. Pet. 5. b. 5.
Moreover if we covet too be great in this world: we shall be enemies too
God, for he resists the proud, so as their pride and presumption must needs
be pulled down. Thus ye see how we may every way beat back the darts of
Satan.

And agein, if any man appoze thee, (saying,) how can thou tell whether thou
shall be ever the better or no for all thy travel? Where is the thing that
the Gospel promises? Faith must work in this case, for we see not the
reward that is promised: but rather we see store of trubbles, incounters, and
sorrows. Too be short, we seem too be the miserablest creatures in the
world. And what shall we do then? We should needs quayle every minute of an
hour, if God reached us not his hand. And how take we hold of his hand? that
is too say, H^br. 11. a. 3.
how do we advantage our selves by his power? Faith must be feign too
work in this behalf: that is too say, we must look up too the things that
are not seen, as the Apostle says in the Epistle too the Hebrews. After
that manner shall we beat back Satan's darts.

Now finally he adds the word, which (as I said before) ought not too be
separated from faith. But I have told you already, that S. Paul meant too add
that saying, for a further declaration of the matter. As if he had said, My
friends, whereas I told you that you might withstand your enemies, and beat
back all their darts by, ^he means of faith: it is because Gods word cannot
fail you. Forasmuch then as ye have the promyses of salvation, and God
speaks too you, so as you know that he has you in his keeping, and that you
cannot be confounded, if you trust in him: therefore did I set faith before you
as a bucklar. Howbeeit, if you have faith, ye have mo bucklars than one. For
Gods word is the true spiritual sword, whereby we may not only beat back
our enemy, but also discomfit him, and beat him down under our feet. What
remains now, but to^ learn too profit our selves better by Gods word, than
we have done hithertoo? Seeing then that our Lord Jesus Christ grants us
this inestimable grace and benefyte of teaching us in his school: let us
consider therwithall too what end he does it: that is too wit, too arm us
against Satan, because we cannot live in his obedience, and keep the way that
he shows us, but by fyghting: and he also does give us armor. So then, let
us assure our selves that we have a good sword, when we can skill too apply
Gods word too our use: and moreover, that faith (which proceeds thereof)
will be a good sheeld for us.

Also we shall have the Helmet of the hope of salvation: and too be short,
we shall be thoroughly fenced and furnished on all sides. For thereof comes
the soundness of conscience and holiness of life, which he has spoken of.
Finally we shall want nothing, if we can skill too use well the means that
God sets forth for our welfare. So then, albeeit that the state of the
faithful seem too be as irksome as may be, because God exercyzeth them
against all the Devils in hell, and that not for one day only, but for all the
time of their life: yet must we think it right sweet and amiable, seeing God
prouydeth for all our needs, at leastwise so we awake, and consider the
dangers wherein we be, saving that we resist them. Let us consider (I say,)
on the one side Satan's violence and force: and on the other side his crafts
and suttleties. And therwithall let us call upon our God, (as Saint Paul will
show us agein hereafter,) and also consider the commodity that Gods word
brings us. And hereby we see how the wretched Papists have stripped
themselves stark naked out of all the armor that should serve them for their
salvation. For what is the word of God among them? A noze of wax. They have
not bin ashamed too belke out that blasphemy, both in all their books and
also in all their Sermons: namely, that there is no certeintie in Gods word.
Yea, but we did wrong too call it the spiritual sword, if it armed us not
against all the assaults of Satan. Therefore we could not repulse the
temptations wherewith we be provoked too evil, unless Gods word served us
thertoo. And if we found it not so by experience, surely Saint Paul would
never have given it that name. Now then, let us indeuer too profit more and
more by it, and let us be good scholars, and give good ear too it while God
has his mouth open too teach us: and we shall find that Saint Paul has
not in vain promised us here, that we shall ever get the upper hand, even
till we be come too the heavenly Kingdom, where we shall fully enjoy the
fruit of our victory.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too make us feel them better, and that in the
mean while we may always resort unto him, and not be out of heart, although
we be tootoo unworthy too offer our selves before his majesty, nor quayle
because of our vices and imperfections: but that seeing it has pleased him too
be on our side, he make the remedies too serve at our need which he has
given us, as we desire them at his hand: and that we may indeuer too profit
so in his word, as it may guide us forth too the end, so as we may not
quayle in any encounter, but that the Devil may be confounded, and our Lord
Jesus Christ exalted, because it is under him and by his power that we fight,
and it is he also of whom our victory proceeds. That it may please him too
grant this grace, not only too us, but also too all people. etc.

The.xlvii. Sermon, which is the fifth upon the sixth Chapter.
18. Praying with all prayer and supplication, at all times in the spirit, and
watching theruntoo with all instance and supplication for all the Saints:

19. And for me, that in opening my mouth, utterance may be given me with
boldness, too utter the secret of the Gospel.


MAny supposing themselves too have profited well in faith, are yet
notwithstanding ignorant what belongs too prayer. They think it enough if they
can say, God help me, when they see any danger at hand, and yet in the mean
while flee not too him for refuge. But such folk wot not too what purpose the
promises serve that are made unto us. For God says not singly, that he will
have a care of us, and that he will help us in all our needs: but also
allureth us too him, and therewithal incorageth us too praying. Then cannot
the one be separated from the other, that is too wit, that we should rest
upon the hope of Gods promises, and have them thoroughly rooted in our hearts:
and also be stirred up too resort unto our God, so as our faith exercyze us in
prayer and supplication. Thus see we that they be inseperable things. And
look how much we be forewarder in faith, so much with the earnester zele
should we call upon our God, and acknowledge and confess that our salvation
lies in his hand, and that we look for all good things from him. And
forasmuch as we be so ^lothfull in that behalf: he sets down two
words, Prayer and supplication, too express the better that we must not go
too it coldly, nor slyghtly, and as it were for courtesy sake: but that we
must be touched too the quick, too continue at it (as he will add anon
after) and too hold on ryghtly without ceassing at any time. True it is that
God tells us by his Prophet Esaias, that he will hear us before we cry, ^say.
65. d. 23.
and his hand shall be redye too succor us before we have opened our mouth.
Howbeeit, that is not too make us slothful, that we should lie gaping at him
with open throat (as they say:) but too show that he will not suffer us too
linger, when we shall have called upon him, as though he were careless too
help us: and that for proof thereof, he preuenteth us, as we find by
experience. Yet notwithstanding, he will have us too yield a true proof of our
f^yth by praying unto him. For the very way for us too show truly that his
promises have taken effect in us, and that we trust too them, Psalm. 50. c. 15.
is, that as soon as we be touched with any greef or affliction, we go
streyt unto him, Psalm. 62. b. 9.
and unburden our hearts there, as is said in another place. Now we see how
we must make our advantage of Gods word, whereby we be certyfied that he
will never fail us: that is too wit, by seeking the things in him which he
protests that we shall find there. And so, prayers are as it were keys
whereby too come too the treasures that God reserueth for us, and which he will
not keep from us. Therefore we must open the way too them by praying.

And yet Saint Paul thinks it not enough too say, that our faith must be
matched with prayers and supplications too our God: but he says also, Yea all
prayer. As if he should say, that in all matters, in all things both great and
small, in all our doings, whatsoever they be: that must be our shooteanker.
For it might happen that we would call upon God, only when we thought on
him, or else when we had some matter of importance in hand. But Saint Paul (as
I said) will have us too do God that homage every where and at all times,
protesting that we cannot have any good but at his hand, and of his mere free
gift. So much imports the word All. And in good sooth we see how our Lord
takes charge of our whole life, with condition that we should seek too him
even for the bacest things, and for such as we durst not require of our friend
that were our equal and companion. Even those things will he have us to ask of
him. For under this saying, that he gives us our daily bread, it is certain
that he comprehends all that belongs too our life. Alas, what a number of
small things have we need of, which we would be ashamed too be acknowen
of, even too our inferiors? And God abaceth himself so far, that he
voutsafeth too have a care of our persons, which are but wretched and rotten
carions, and yet nevertheless he will not have us too stick too ask him the
things that are expedient and needful for us. Since it is so, let us remember
well this saying of Saint Paul's, which wills us too pray too our God for all
things that we deed, assuring our selves that he will yield so far unto us,
as nothing shall (as ye would say) escape his hands.

And he says expressly, that we must pray at all times, and in Spirit.
Whereas he says, in Spirit: it is surely too exclude all Hipocrisye: for we
know that the most part of the world babble enough when they should come unto
God: howbeeit, it is but their lips or the tippes of their tungs that do
their dewtie. But that is not the manner that God will be prayed unto and
called upon: he lyketh not of such supplications, but rather abhors them,
because that when we pray so fondly unto him, we make a false shrowding
sheet of him, and that is a kind of treachery. For if we think too be heard
of God for our babbling, when in the mean while our heart is dead, and our
prayers proceed not of a right dispozed and earnest mind, we make God as an
Idol, or as a little babe, wherein we do too great wrong to his majesty,
and to be short, we do but transfigure him after our own fancy. Therefore it
behooves our prayers, not only to be made with our mouth, but also too come
from the bottom of our heart.

And now forasmuch as we have not that of our own power: the holy Ghost must
be feign to work therein. And therefore by the word Spirit may be understood,
that we should beseech God to govern us in such wise, as he touch us thoroughly,
to the end we may pray to him as we ought too do, and he also accept our
prayers, acknowleding in them the marks of his holy spirit. For we must
always remember how it is said in the Epistle too the Romans, Romans 8. c. 26.
that we know not what too pray: for as in respect of our selves, it is a
thing that surmounteth all our understanding, and the ablest of us all fails
in that behalf, notwithstanding that there are a number which bear themselves
on hand that they know perfectly how and what too pray unto God. Howbeeit
all such opinion does but shet us out of the gate, unless that upon the
knowing of our defaults and infirmities, we resort ryghtfoorth too the
remedy, Romans 8. ^. 26.
according too this saying of Saint Paul's, that the spirit of God drives us
to unutterable gronings which cannot be expressed, without the which we could
not utter so much as this word Father: Gala. 4. a. 6.
according also as he says too the Galathians, that when the spirit cries in
us, we can open our mouths too call freely upon God, Romans 8. c. 15.
as is reherced in another place. Now then, it is certain that we shall never
be thoroughly dispozed too pray unto God, except he govern us by his holy
spirit.

Moreover Saint Paul's intent (as I have declared alredie) is too exclude all
counterfetting, and that we should not hope too justify our case before God by
ceremonies, or by popeholines (as they term it) in making of long prayers and
many circumstances, but suffer the spirit too bear sway. Wherefore first of all
let us be so touched, as the spirit may be our master and teacher, and
indyte the things too us which we have too utter in calling upon our God: and
secondly let our prayers proceed from the bottom of our heart, and let us put
this saying of the Psalm in ure, Psalm. 145. d. 18.
that we must sue unto our God in truth: for it is said that he is not near
too any, but too such as have that quality. And not without cause is such
exposition set down: for (as I have declared alredie) we be so much inclyned
too shifting, that (too our seeming) God ought too yield too us and too our
nature: but it is clean contrary. Now then forasmuch as God perceyueth that
men abuse his name after that fashyon, and make prayers after their own manner,
that is too say, prayers that are wrapped in hypocrisy and untruth, and have
no substancialnesse nor soundness in them: he says expressly, that we must
not hope too be heard at his hand, nor too obtain any thing of him, except
our prayers be ruled by a right meaning, that is too say, unless we pray
with a hearty affection. Thus ye see what we have to remember upon that
saying of Saint Paul. And that whereas he says, Steadfastly, and with holding
out throughout too the end: it is too express the better, that it is never
out of season too call upon God. And even therefore is this added, because we
would feign exempt our selves from our God. Wherein a man may well perceive
how imperfect our minds are, and how destitute of wit and reason we be. For
all our welfare consists in having access too our God, that we seek help
at his hand, and too be short, in being near unto him, so as we be sure
that he regards us, and has a care of our welfare. And besyds that, who is
he that would not feign be heard? Yet notwithstanding, when we should pray
unto God, it seems that we be haled to it as it were by force, and we
should be ravished in love with it, as I have showed already. Now then, this
vice of rechlesnesse and coldness in that we never pray unto God, but when we
be compelled or constreyned, had need to be corrected. Saint Paul therefore
tells us, that we must not tarry till utter necessity enforce us, but we
must understand, that al times are seasonable and convenient too resort unto
God. Iu deed after as we be picked foreward, so must we run the
swiftlyer, according as it is certain that we be as it were spurted by the
afflictions and manifold trubbles that God sends us. And like as if an Ass
will not go, he must have a good cudgel laid upon his back: even so God
perceyuig that we come not too him with a good will, is feign too draw us too
him as it were by violence. But yet must every man cheer up him self, though
no urgent necessity compel him. Too be short, we must pray unto our God
both in time of prosperity, and in time of adversity. That is the thing
which is meant by these words, at all times.

And theruppon S. Paul says, that we must be watchful in it, even with
all instance, too pray for all the Saints. In saying that we must be
watchful, he touches a vice whertoo we be too much inclyned, yea and
wholly given over: that is too say, that we be sleepie when we should pray
unto God, and had need too be waked. Because of our heaviness and
sluggishnesse, we be commanded too wake and to keep as it were a continual
wacth, to the end we should not let occasions slip, but always resort unto
God with prayer. Now there is not so perfect a man, which fyndeth not this
malady by experience in him self: namely that when we should pray unto God, a
number of things cross us, that set us wandering abroad: insomuch as we shall
wonder, that in sted of holding out earnestly, our mind shall be rouing here
and there. Seeing then that we be so fickle, and our wits so skittish, and is
hard too hold us ^ast any while: it stands us on hand to be the more
watchful, to the intent to bring our selves back agein intoo the good way,
when we be started out of it. And let us not tarry till the devil have woone
so much at our hands, as to pluck us quyte from our prayers and
supplications, and to break of the continual course of them, and of the
stedfastnes that ought too be in them: but when we pray, let us be as it were
locked up and fast tied too it, that is too say, let all our wits be full
bent and settled upon the thing that we have too do. For even the heathen
men, when they were about too make sacrifyze too their Idols, used this
proves among them: while thou woorshippest God, do nothing else, but be thou
so wholly occupied and fastened theruntoo, as thou think upon no other thing.
If God wrested such a confession from them, what ought we to do when we
offer him the cheef sacrifyze which he allows above all other, that is, when
we confess our selves beholden too him for all good things? Should we mingle
our own vanities with it, and make our prayer too be but for custom and
fashyons sake? Now then this watchfulness whereof Saint Paul speaks, is very
requisyte, by reason of the fraylnesse of our wits, and specially because we
be so wandering as is horrible. Seeing it is so with us: when we goo about
too pray unto God, let us bend our whole mynds unto it, and let not our wits
be entangled about other cares and affections, but let our coming unto it
be as though we had broken all other bonds. That is the cause why mention is
made of lifting up of our selves in our prayers and supplications. True it is
that in offering our selves unto God, we must come with all lowliness: but
yet must we lift up our hearts in such wise, as we may be after a sort in
the presence of our God. That (say I) is the thing that is imported by the said
diligentnesse.

And he says further, with all instance: which serves still too show us,
that if we intend too be well disposed too praying, we must not go too it
lazily, yea and that if we follow that which our own nature shows us, we
shall be far of from coming at God. Therefore must every man enforce him.
For seeing Saint Paul speaks so, it is as much as if he said, My friends,
ye shall find such a coldness in your selves, as ye shall never pray unto
God, another shall ye ever be willing too pray, except ye provoke and enforce
your selves. For the Devil will always bleare your eyes, too the end ye
should not see what need ye have too pray unto God. And if ye lie sleeping
still, it will cause your God too forsake you, seeing you be so thanklesse as
too despyze his benefits, and too yield him no honor for them, no nor too
acknowledge that all your welfare proceeds of him. For like leaud lozels, we
defyle the benefytes which God bestows upon us, unless we acknowledge that
we have all things at his hand, yea even by craving all things that we want,
of him, and also by yielding him thanks for the things that we received
already. So then, let us learn too match our watchfulness with all
instantnesse.

And herein we comprehend holding out or continuance: so as it is not enough
for us too pray unto God by startes and braydes (as they say:) but we must
continue in it, and that two ways. For first when we have prayed too day
both evening and morning, and every hour: we must hold on still, and never
swerve from that trade, so long as we live. For our faith (as I said) must
exercyze it self: and the mean too exercyze it withal is this, There is yet
one other manner of perseverance or holding out: which is, that when we have
desired God too help us in this or that, we must repete the same request, not
twyce or thryce only, Esaias. 65. ^. 23.
but as often as we have need, a hundred, yea a thousand times. As for example,
Although God have told us that he will succor us before we open our mouth too
him: yet does he not show it (always) openly too the eye. Therefore we must
never be weery in waiting for Gods help. Also it is not good that we should
be heard after our own lyking, because God knows what is meet and
expedient for us. So then, he must govern us according too his own will. But
(as I said) if we pray too him after his fashion and after his manner: he
protests that we shall obtain all our requests at his hand, even before
we have uttered them with our mouth. Yet notwithstanding he will sometimes
hold us as it were at the staves end, in so much as it shall seem that he is
asleep when we call upon him, and that he has turned his back upon us.
For this cause is perseverance requisite, so that if we be pinched with any
distress, and would feign seek ease of it at Gods hand: we must not do it
once and away, but we must return too it (oftentimes,) and be (as ye would
say) importunate, Luke. 18. a. 1.
according too the similitude which our Lord Jesus tells us of the widdowe,
which had too do with a Judge that was without any fear of God, or shame of
the world, and yet nevertheless she obtained her suit even by
importunatenesse. So must we do: that is too say, we must be importunate
upon our God: not that he is slow in succouring us (as I said before:) but
because he will try the constancy of our faith. For they that pray unto God
and fall to stomacking, chafing, and impaciencie, if he relieve them not out of
hand: do not pray unto him, but (as ye would say) summon him too be at
commandment of their lusts. But it behooves us too restreyne all our
passions and desires too Gods good will, so as when we pray him too make
speed, we may nevertheless be pacient, and be contented too tarry his
leazure, in delaying too day or too morrow, or as long as it pleases him. Ye
see then that we must continue in prayer and supplication, so as we must pray
presently for the necessities that pinch us too day, and likewise too morrow,
for those that may come then: and so we must pray ordinarily every day. And
besides this, if God list not too deliver us so soon as we feign would: let
us not cease to renew our petitions still, even until we perceive that we
have profited by our praying, and that he have showed us the effect of his
promis.

Now forasmuch as it is hard for us too be brought too pray well unto God:
Saint Paul here sets us forth the thing out of our own persons, which
ought too persuade us: that is too say, that we be bound too pray unto God,
not only for our selves, that is too say, every man for himself: but also too
have a care of our neighbors, and to respect them also. It is true that if we
considered our own miseries well, and the great number of sins that are in
us, and the great need which we have to be succored at Gods hand: we should
have cause enough without going out of our selves, too employ our selves in
prayer and supplication, yea though we did nothing else al our life long but
sygh and lament before God for our offenses, and pray him to reach us his hand,
too the end that Satan might not overcome us. As I said, we should have matter
enough in our selves. But now that we must extend our prayers further, that is
too wit, too the whole Church of God, and understand that he will not have me
too think alonly upon my self, but also too be myndfull of all his chozen,
inasmuch as he has knit me too them, so as I must indeuer too comprehend them
in my prayers as much as is possible for me: seeing (say I) that we be
resolved hereof: it must needs be that we be too blockish, if we be not touched
yet more to the quick, and set on fire with this carfulness that is spoken
of here, and therwithal continue in the same.

Howbeeit Saint Paul speaks here expressly of the Saints or faithful, but
yet is that no impediment that we should not pray generally for all men. For
the wretched unbelievers and the ignorant sort have great need too be sewed
for unto God: for behold, they be in the high way too destruction. If we
saw a beast at the point to perish, we would have pity of it: and what shall
we do when we see a soul in peril, which is so precious before God as he has
showed, in that he has raunsomed them with the blud of his own son? Then if
we see a poor soul go so too destruction, ought we not too be moved with
compassion and kyndnesse, too desire God too remedy it? So then Saint Paul's
meaning in this text, is not that we should let the wretched unbelievers alone
without care of them: but that we should pray generally for all men: howbeeit
he shows us therewithal, that we must have a special care of those whom
God has knit unto us by a streyter bond. Likewise when he speaks of
Almesedeedes, Gal^. ^. c. 1^.
his intent is that they should be done too all men without exception which
have need: but yet he adds, that we must specially succor them that are of
the household of faith. Even so is it with our prayers and supplications. For
the spiritual brotherhood which God has set among us, ought too touch us the
more, and too make the Church of God too come before our eyes, and intoo our
remembrance as often as we pray. And these words, Our Father, ought too teach
us too make our prayers common. For none of us can say My father, alone of
himself, but we call him Ours, too show that we ought not to have such care
of our selves, as to forget them that belong unto us, and are linked to us with
so near a knot, as I have declared already. That then is the cause why S.
Paul says expressly, that we must pray for the Saints.

Now were this well printed in our hearts (as I said before) we should be well
waked too pray too our God without end or ceassing. For let us consider the
state and plyght of the Church in these days. Although our Lord give us some
rest: yet are our poor brethren tormented by tyrants, and by the enemies of
the faith. Some are feign too flee, some have their goods taken from them, many
be thrust intoo prizon, and other some are burnt at the stake. All these poor
souls are in unquietness, and put too some new terror every minute of an
hour. We see that there is as tirrible manacing and threatening as may be.
We see how the devil dryueth all those foreward with outrageous fury, which
would abolish the doctrine of the Gospel. We see what scatterings are made by
the stumbling blocks that Satan thrusts in by his champions. We see how a
great sort seek nothing else but too put the Gospel too all shame. And in the
mean while, the poor servants of God which employ themselves in his service,
are trubbled and vexed by all means. Then if we gather toogither all the
miseries and adversities wheretoo the Church is subject, and consider well the
distress of every of our brethren: must it not needs be that we are duller
than brut beasts, if we be not moved too pray unto God, yea even with a
right perseverance in the same? For though I be at mine ease too day, there
are many thousands in great perplexity: and I show well that I cut of my self
(as much as I can) from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, if I pitye not the
members too whom I am linked. Not without cause therefore does Saint Paul set
all the Saints here before us, when be intends too inflame us the better too
a right dispozed mind in praying, and too continewe throughout in the same.

And thereupon he requires also that men should pray for him. Ye shall pray
for me also, (says he) that God give me boldness in opening my mouth, so
as I may utter the secret of the Gospel accordingly. When Saint Paul
commends him self too the prayers of his neighbors, thereby he shows well
in what humility we ought too walk. For he did not counterfeit in exhorting
the Ephesians too such praying. He protests before God and his Angels, that
he had need of it. But now let us compare our selves with Saint Paul. What
man is of such abilttie, that he can forbear too be succored by the prayers
of his neighbors, when Saint Paul exempteth not him self from it? Now then,
let every man in his praying unto God, desire too be made parttaker of all
the prayers that are made throughout the Church, Psalm. 145. d. 18.
both generally and particularly. In deed this promis shall always stand
true, that God will be near at hand too all such as call upon him. And Jonas
failed not too be succored of God, Jonas. 2. a. 2.
though he were in the whales belly. Now therefore, when we be forsaken of men,
when we be as good as dead, and the remembrance of us is as good as buried: yet
will not God cease to regard us, and too cast his eye upon us too succor us,
according too this saying, that the eyes of God are always upon them that
fear him, Psalm. 33. d. 18.
and his ears open too such as repair unto him. Notwithstanding, too the
intent too humble us the better, Psalm. 34. c. 16.
our Lord tells us, that we have need one of another help, and that there
should be an intercommoning among us. And besyds this, there is also another
reason, which is, that he will keep our charity occupied. Wherefore, let us
learn too show both by our almesdeeds, and by our counsel, and by all other
helps, that none of us is given too him self, nor too his, too own private
profit: but that after as God has linked us toogither, every of us coueteth
too succor our members, and too communicate toogither in our prayers and
supplications. For our commending one of us of another after that manner unto
God, is the cheef dewtie of charity: And therefore it caused Saint Paul too
desire the Ephesians expressly too pray for him.

Now if any man allege that that was a sign of unbelief, for if this promis
suffyze us not, that every man shall obtain his own requests, is it not a
point of distrust? the answer thertoo is easy. For whereas God says, that he
will have pity upon all such as seek it at his hand: he means not too
disanull the thing that he commands us in so many other texts: which is,
that we should be myndfull one of another. Furthermore let us mark, that in
following Gods word we can never be blamed of misbeleef. For how comes it
too pass that men fall to misbeleefe, but by passing their bounds, that they
will needs add too that which God has uttered? As for example: We see that in
the popedom men have forged so many patrones and aduocats, as they wot not
which too beetake themselves unto. And whence proceeds that? Even of that
their heads be ticklish: and agein, that they distrusted the things that are
contained in Gods word. We have this general lesson, Psalm. 50. c. 15.
Call upon me in the day of thy need, and I will hear thee. God then will
have us too resort unto him, and too look only at him, assuring our selves
that he will never refuze us, when we pray unto him in his sons name. And our
Lord Jesus Christ comes before us, and offers himself too us, saying, that
he will bear word too and fro for us, and that as long as we hold us in that
path, we need not fear that we shall not find access unto his father, or
that he will not receive us familiarly. So does the holy scripture report. But
what have the papists done? O, (say they) we have need of aduocats too make
intercession for us. It is true: but our Lord Jesus Christ who^ God his father
has assigned unto us, ought to suffyze us, forasmuch as he only is appointed
to that office. Contrariwyse the papists make Aduocats in paradyse at their
own pleasure, Psalm. 110. ^. ^.
and in the mean while spoil Jesus Christ of the priestly dignity which is
given him of God his father, yea even with a solemn oath. The papists are not
contented with that, but have made such a patching to it, that their case is
become a horrible confuzion. As for us, if we follow that which is taught us
by Gods word, then shall we walk in faith, and we need not fear any
straying, or that we shall be blamed of unbelief: for God will always guide
us aryght. That then is the answer to this question and doubt which might be
cast, whether it be not a point of distrust too desire other men too pray for
us, seeing that every man may be heard him self, because that what things God
has joined toogither, men must not presume too put them asunder. For we must
always bear in mind how it is said, that every man must occupy himself in
praying, and moreover draw his neighbors too be matched with him: and so
shall we never be turned from the faith.

Now if any man object further, that our Lord Jesus Christ cannot be the only
advocate and patron, if we make supplication one for another: the answer
theruntoo is easy. For it is said, that Jesus Christ is the only mediator,
and that all men both great and small must resort too him too obtain our
suits. 1. John. 2. a. 1.
For unless our prayers be dedicated by his holiness, surely they shall ever
be foul and infected. When Esaias was commanded too bear the message that God
had appointed, Esaias. 6. b. 5.
he said, Alas my God, I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell among a people
that is unclean also. How shall I do then when I must call upon my God, and
speak familiarly too him as it were mouth too mouth, seeing we be full of
uncleanness and infection? Now then, all our prayers must be sanctified by our
Lord Jesus Christ, or else we shall never find favor at Gods hand. Also it is
most certain that Christ is the only advocate and Intercessour, and that all
the ancient Patriarks were feign too hold that rule, and likewise the Prophets
and Apostles in their times, and so must we also continue in the same. And yet
for all that, we be not let thereby too pray one for another, inasmuch as
we have albut one common head, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all our
prayers must be joined toogither, too the intent we may all with one accord,
and with one well tuned melody protest, that we have none other welfare, than
that it pleases God too have care of us, insomuch that that is our full
felicity, and upon that trust we come right forth unto him. The mean then
for us too continue evermore in the right way, and too see that our Lord Jesus
Christ be not defaced, is too take him for our only advocate, and not too
turn aside one way nor other after our own fond fancies, as is come to pass
in the popedom. And we see that the papists have not bin ashamed too allege
this text, too persuade us too pray too Saint Peter and Saint Paul, yea too
Saints of the Popes own forging, or rather to the Idols whom the devil has
blown intoo his ear. But here we have too consider that we be commanded
too pray mutually one for another, because God has also commanded us too
seek help and comfort at our neighbors hands. And our Lord wills it so,
and promises that we shall find it. After the same manner also does Saint
James speak of it. James. 5. d. 16.
Acknowledge your sins (says he) one too another, and pray one for another:
that is too say, when ye be pressed with any temptation, and ye feel many
infirmities and vices in you: let every man unburden him self toward his
neighbors, and say, Alas, I have such a thing that greeueth me, I have
offended my God after such manner and such. And if ye do so bewray the
infirmities that are in ye: it well stiree ye up to pray one for another. But
now is there any like thing between the Sayncts deceassed and us? Will Saint
Peter and Saint Paul come tell us their suns, too the end we might pray for
them? Or have they ears long enough too here our prayers? (No:) we see then
that God intended too restreyne men's mutual praying one of another, to such
as are conversant in this world, and are yet in the battle. They therefore that
have need of our prayers, shall also pray on their side for us, and we must
do the like for them on our side. But as for them that are departed out of the
world, it is not in us too make them our aduocats before God. For if we cannot
make an Advocate in a matter of law, that shall not be past five shillings, but
it is in the Judges power too appoint such one for advocate as he lists, and
too put him in that office: what a presumptuousenesse is it, if we will take
upon us too make aduocats in heaven? What a pride and presumptuousnesse is it?
Is it not a plucking of Gods majesty and authority from him? Now then, let us
learn too pray so one for another, as we pass not our bounds, nor wander out
one way nor other every man after his own conceyt, but be contented too have
a care of all the members of the Church, as we be bound too do, and too take
comfort and joy our selves, in that God has voutsafed too bynd all his Church
unto us, and that by the same mutual communicating, we (show our selves too)
be members of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therwithall let us all
tend too our head, knowing that our prayers should not be worthy too be
received, but rather be foul, filthy, and stinking, if our Lord Jesus Christ
hallowed them not by his holiness and perfection. Knowing this, let us never
presume too open our mouth too call upon our God, but in the name of our
mediator, assuring our selves that it is his office too bearewoord for us, and
too make us to be heard, so as we may find God favorable and foreward too
help us. That then is the mean for us too pray unto God boldly and with open
mouth, as is said in the texts which I alleged even now both out of eyghth to
the Ramans, and out of Saint James, and also as we have seen in the third
chapter of this Epistle. We must call upon God through the belief which we
have in Jesus Christ, assuring our selves that he not only came down intoo the
world too shead his blud once for the remission of our sins: but also is
incessantly before God too pray for us, so as we be fully resolved, that
although we be but wretched earthwoormes, yet God accepts us, and auoweth
us for his children by his means, and will always be merciful in receiving
our prayers and supplications, because we offer them not too him in our own
name, nor by our selves, (for in good sooth that were a foolish presumption of
our own imagination) but because he has commanded it, and showed us the way
which we should hold us too.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too pardon them, notwithstanding that we deserve
too be quyte cut of from the hope of salvation. And forasmuch as it has
pleased him too call us too him, and too promis us that we shall be received
too mercy, if we come too him with faith and humility: let us pray him too
prepare our hearts in such wise, as we may make such requests too him, as he
allows: and that therewithal he so bear with our infirmities, as we may
not fail to obtain favor, though there be many imperfections in our prayers.
And so let us al say, Almyghtye God heavenly father. etc.

The.xlviii. Sermon, which is the sixth and last upon the sixth Chapter.
19 Praying also for me, that in opening my mouth, utterance may be given
me, with boldness too utter the secret of the Gospel.

20 For the which I am an Ambassador in cheynes, too the end (I say) that I
may speak freely as it becomes me too speak.

21 But that ye may also know of my state and what I do: Tychicus our dear
brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall show you all things:

22 Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that you might know my
state, and he comfort your hearts.

23 Peace be to the brethren, and charity, with faith from God, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.

24 Grace be with all them which love our Lord Jesus Christ in pureness. Amen.


We saw this morning how we ought too be careful in praying one for
anther, and the fruit that comes thereof: namely that every man which is a
member of the Son of God, must assure him self, that the whole Church
laboreth for him, and that generally both Jesus Christ and all his must be
refuzed, if God pity us not. But heerewithal we have to mark also, that
Saint Paul in commending himself too the prayers of the Church, is not so
myndfull of his body, as of the thing that is much excellenter, that is too
wit, of the due executing of the charge and office committed unto him. If a
man be sick, or in necessitye in this world, or trubbled by his enemies, we
be wont too cry out for help and succor, and we would have every man too
occupye himself for us. And why? For inasmuch as we be fleshly: as soon as
we feel any disease in our body, we be sorye at the heart: but in the
mean while we forget the cheef point: that is too wit, the things that
concern the everlasting salvation of our souls. Agein, when it comes too the
serving of God, every man thinks he is sufficient enough of himself too do
it, without help of his neighbors. But Saint Paul shows here, that he
thinks not himself sufficient too execute the charge that is committed too
him of preaching the Gospel, without help from above: and therefore he
requires the prayers of the Church. And afterward he shows therwithall, that
he makes more account thereof, than of his life, notwithstanding that he were
hild as then in prizon, yea and even cheyned. Ye see here that Saint Paul is
hild in streyt ward, as a sorry offender, and looks daily for nothing but
death: and yet for all that, he cares not so much for his life, as for the
advancement and preferment of Gods word: insomuch that he had lever dye,
than too be slothful in doing the thing that was enjoined him. That is the
effect of the thing which we have too remember upon this text.

True it is that in the Epistle too the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3. a. 2.
he notes also the reason why he desired too be delivered from the wicked and
faythlesse, which ceased not too lay snares for him. And why? It was lawful
for him too set store by his life: but yet for all that, he did not set the
Cart before the horse (as they say:) for we see by this text, Coloss. 4. a. 3.
4.
and also by that which is written too the Colossians, that he had always more
regard too discharge his dewtie toowardes God, specially in respect of the
Church, by preaching the Gospel faithfully: than too ease himself, or too
eschew the danger wherein he saw he was. Then first of all if our Lord call
us too any charge whatsoever it be, let us learn too understand our own
infirmity, that we may be succored of him as we need, and not presume any
whit upon our own strength or cunning, but consider that God must be feign
too hold us up by strong hand, and that we have need too resort unto him,
yea and too desire (after the example of Saint Paul) to be commended to the
prayers of all the members of our Lord Jesus Christ, as in deed it is good
reason that we should pray mutually also for them. That is for the first point.

Secondly, although it be lawful for us to desire men to pray for us when we
be sick, or when we be pinched with any other affliction: yet
notwithstanding, like as we must before all things pray for the coming of
Gods kingdom, and seek the aduauncing of his glory, Math. 6. d. 33.
and make but an income of all other things else: So in this case, we must
learn not too be so wedded too the world and too this transitory life, as
too cry out for help when we be pinched with any adversity or need, and in
the mean while forget the thing that ought too be preferred before them.
Wherefore let us learn too be chare in such wise of our life, as we may
covet above all things that God should be glorified in our persons, whether it
be by life or by death, as S. Paul shows us by his own example in the
Epistle to the Phillippians. Phil. 1. c. 20.
And so ye see what we have to remember in the first place.

And he says expressly, that Utterance might be given him in opening of his
mouth. As if he should say, that God might give him such courage and constancy,
as he might not speak fayntly, but freely preach the Gospel, and not conceal
any thing that might serve too let forth the grace of our Iord Jesus Christ,
and the infinite benefytes that he has brought us. That is the thing which
Saint Paul meant by the opening of his mouth. Now experience shows, that he
did not without cause desire of God that his mouth might be opened as a gate
or door: for he uses the same term in the forealledged place of the fourth
too the Colossians. For such as shun death, (that is too wit, the most part of
them that profess the preaching of the Gospel,) will not stick too say
somewhat too the matter: but yet they do oftentimes so disgyze the right, or
else speak it so fearfully: as the hearers wot not what they mean by it,
their words shall be so entangled. Too be short, whereas they should show
with loud and shirle voice, what our Lord Jesus Christ is, what Gods service
is, what the true religion is, what faith and repentance is: they touch them as
it were at glaunce: but as for too rip up matters, and too search them too the
bottom, they cannot away with that. And why? For they see peril hanging over
their heads, if they should use such freeness. Howbeeit, Gods true servants
must practice that which Saint Paul says too Timothy: 2. Tim. 1. b. 7.
namely that they have not a slavish and cowardly heart, but march forth freely
in their vocation, too ouerpasse all the furiousness of the world, and to have
a brazen forehead, ^erem. 1. d. 18.
as it is said in Jeremy. And although they see many hard battelles, and that
they cannot please the world in doing their dewtie, but that they shall have
the enmity of many men for exalting the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ as they
ought too do: yet let them not cease too go foreward, and too overcome all
lettes. Howbeeit forasmuch as we be fearful and feeble, God must be feign
too work in us, and too give us boldness too speak as we ought too do.

Then is it not enough for us too be warned of our dewtie, but we must also
add this point of resorting unto God with acknowledgment of our wantes and
defaultes. And furthermore let us all take notice in general, that the
preaching of the Gospel is too high and weyghtie a charge, unless we be
governed by Gods spirit: according also as Saint Paul cries out in the second
too the Corinthians: Who is sufficent for it? ^. Co^. 3. b. 5.
When he speaks of the preaching whereby men should be reconcyled unto God,
and certifyed of their salvation, whereby the kingdom of heaven is opened,
whereby we have witness of the forgiveness of our sins, and whereby the
blud of our Lord Jesus Christ is given forth too wash us from all our steynes:
who is of ability meet for it (says Saint Paul) except God make us able by
woorking in us? For we cannot so much as think too do good. Yea we be so
far of from having power too do any thing in deed, that we cannot so much
as think one good thought, unless God give us it. Now then, let such as are
called too the office of teaching Gods Church, understand their own
weakness, and put themselves wholly intoo Gods hand, too be made able too
discharge themselves, knowing that they shall never bring it too pass, no nor
the hundredth part of it, unless it be given them from above. And therefore
let all men pray for those that are so ordained too be teachers and ministers
of the word: for it is a singular gift of God, when we have such Shepherdes
of our souls, as are able too guide us well. Wherefore be it known both too
great and small, that too maynteyne the Church in her perfect state and
soundness, God must be feign too give power and strength too such as should
teach, and men must pray for them: for in so doing, every man procures his
own welfare and salvation. And if we be negligent therein, it is a token that
we make no reckening, another of our spiritual life, nor of the common welfare
of the Church.

And heerin we see what we ought too deem of such as pretend too preach
Gods word in these days, and in the mean while are so fearful, that they
dare not open their mouth, until they have well bethought them, whether the
things that they intend too speak, may offend or delyght the ears of him and
of her. What a sort see we in the Popedom which row between two streams,
and would feign have it known, that they be such as would feign have leave
too preach purely? But yet for all that, they do so beepeynt the doctrine
which they utter: as they play the crafty merchantes, and there is nothing but
falsehood in them, according also as Saint Paul uses the same similitude, 2.
Cor. ^. d. 17. and 4. a. 2.
in speaking of such as abused Gods word too purchase the favor of the world,
and too maynteyne it. Now the saying of such men is, that they must stryke
sail, hold with the hare, and hunt with the hound, eschew occasion of
stumbling blocks, and that it is not for a man too strive against the stream.
As who should say, they be much wyzer than God, ^ho speaking by Saint Paul,
tells us, that Jesus Cerist must be preached thoroughly, and men must not go
about too bury him any more: for seeing he is rizen unto glory, he will have
the voice of his Gospel ring loud and shirle, without any dissimulation, as I
said before. Moreover, even where there is no persecution of sword nor fire, the
world sees that they which name themselves ministers of the Gospel, would
feign currye fauell in such wise, as there should be no shift but our Lord
Jesus Christ must stoop, and wrythe his truth too and fro at men's
pleasures. Now adays when the preachers perceive, that it is no pleasant thing
for them too put men under the yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ: what, say they?
Shall we offend great men, and such as are in authority over us? Should we
not rather win them by gentleness? Yis, but they be wyld beasts dossing with
their horns against our Lord Jesus Christ, and cannot abide that there should
be any disciplyne in the Church: and yet for all that, men must preach still
too their lyking. What a trayterousnesse and villainy were that? Yet
notwithstanding, a man need not go far too find such preachers of the
Gospel, that is too say, of leaud choppers and chaungers, which turn all
topsiteruie, knowing not what their dewtie is. The world sees such examples too
manifestly before their eyes. Therefore it stands us so much the more on hand
to mark well this text, where Saint Paul shows that the Gospel is not
preached as God has commanded it, except men go too it fully and openly, and
with full mouth (as they say.)

Now he speaks of the secret of the Gospel, too magnify this doctrine, which
else should be despized of many that will needs play the subtle and sharp witted
fellows, according as ye shall see a sort of presumptuous fellows which
think themselves so wise, that the Gospel is not for them: for there is such a
simplicity in it, as they cannot brucke. They would stye up and sore above the
clouds, and have such speculations as might amaze them, and (another they
themselves) nor any man else understand them. It is very true that at the first
sight, when men read the Gospel, they shall see that God does after a sort
play the nurce there (as he him self says) and that because he knows our
rudeness, how we be as little children: he lispeth with us. But yet for all
that, the doctrine thereof passes all the wit of man. For the very Angels do
wonder at it, Ephe. 3. b. 10.
and are enforced too honor it, as it is said in another place. ^. Pet. 1. ^.
12.
Then let us understand, that in the simplicity which is seen in the Gospel,
there is such wisdom of God as is incomprehensible, unless it please him too
reuele it too us by his holy spirit. For were we the best learned doctors in
the world, yet should we fasten upon nothing (there) unless God inlyghtned
our understanding, as is said of it in the two first chapters of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. That therefore is the cause why S. Paul tells us,
that there are great secrets in the Gospel which we understand not, further
forth than God woorketh in us: and that no tung of man is able to utter them,
except God guide both them that hear them, and are too be taught them, and
also those that speak them, so as all be governed, by his holy spirit.

And he adds, as it becomes me too speak. Wherein he shows yet agein,
that it is not enough too preach by rote whatsoever comes at the tungs end:
but all must be ruled by Gods word, so as it may perce men's hearts, and win
them too his obenience: and that (as is said in another place) there be not
only language or speech: 1. Cor. ^. d. 20.
for the kingdom of heaven consists not in gay Rhetorik, but in the power of
God. Too the end then that there may be such a lyuelinesse, as me^ may know
that such as teach us, are stirred up of God, to be as his instruments, and
too do him seruis: Saint Paul desires men too pay for him. Wherefore let us
learn, that too step up into the pulpit, and too expound some text of
scripture, is not all that is too be done, but there must be a special
handsomnesse, which grows not in the gardens of men, but proceeds of the
extraordinary goodness of God. Romans 10. c. 15.
And herein he shows that which he speaks in another place, namely that
noman can perform the dewtie of a good and faithful teacher, unless he be
sent. Now this sending imports, that God gives men that which is requisyte
for the executing of their charge, because they want it of themselves.

There is yet further, that Saint Paul gloryeth of his bearing of the
Embassage of the Gospel, notwithstanding that he be a poor prisoner, yea and
in cheynes, as if a man should now set a man in the stocks, or ^etter him.
Therefore he uses the word Ambashadour, too the intent that his imprizoning
should not prejudice the doctrine of God. No, no (says he) God auoweth me
for his Ambassador. Albeeit that men hold scorn of me, though I be thus
afflicted, and although men might loathe me too look upon me: yet is all
this no derogation too the office wherein God has put me, that is too say, too
my Ambassadourship of preaching the Gospel in his name. And it is not only in
this text that Saint Paul does so magn^fye the honorable dignity that was
given unto him, in declaring that men cannot any what diminish it: but (which
more is) he glories greatly in that he was hild so in iron cheynes and streyt
prizon. For surely it served for a good record that he had preached earnestly,
and that men ought to receive his doctrine quietly and without gey^saying. True
it is, that if we go through with our charge, and follow Gods calling with a
free heart, we shall be his servants. But yet for all that, there is not so good
proof of us as when God sends some trial, so as we be one while in prizon,
another while driven from place too place, and trubbled and vexed diverse ways.
If we see that, and agein, that we be wrongfully blamed, and torn in
pieces, and yet nevertheless do hold out still, without swaruing one way or
other for any thing that may befall: then does God ratifye and authentikly
seal our Calling, and show that he has made us his servants. Now then seeing
that Saint Paul was in prizon, and moved too deny him self, and could have
gone out if he had would, by forsaking the truth of the Gospel, and yet hild
out steadfastly, so as his life was nothing too him, but his continewall seeking
was too magnify the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: when such Constancy was
seen in Saint Paul, it might well be concluded, that there had bin no
counterfetting in him before. For when a man shall but only preach, and
afterward when he comes but to the aching of the tippe of his finger, he
starteth back, and would pluck his penny from the stake (as they say:) does
not the world see that he was but a niggler, and a player of enterludes before?
If a man be a great writer, and as excellent a teacher as can be deuyzed, and
yet notwithstanding will not shed one drop of blud when God calls him too it?
too show that the doctrine which he carried abroad was not his own: it
appears that he was but a mocker, and that he is worthy too have men spit
in his face, and too have more shame and reproach, than if he had bin an
ignorant beast. So then, Saint Paul gloryeth of his bands, saying, that
although the world made no reckening of him, but disdeyned him, yet
nevertheless God auoweth him for his Ambassador.

And heerupon let us learn not to be so scornful as to despize Gods
servants, when we see them hild in prizon, but let us understand, that God
does then exalt them too much greater dignity and honor, than those that are
mounted aloft into pulpites. He then that is in prison, and persi^steth in the
pure confession of the Gospel, is in much more honorable degree, than al they
that preach at free liberty. Mark that for one point.

And agein, in the time that God spares us and gives us leyzure, let us
learn too fence our selves so before hand with courage and constancy, as we
may be his Ambassadors whenever it shall please him, both in prizon, and in
the mids of the threatenings of enemies, and in all the rages of death that
can be put against us. That is the thing which we have too mark upon this
streyne. And so let us not be dismayed as a number of unconstant persons are,
who when they hear that a great sort are imprizoned in such a place, and such
a one was burnt in another place, are by and by out of heart, and the Gospel is
no more accounted with them. They that forge too themselves such stumbling
blocks, show well that they never had any lively root in faith. But
contrariwyse, when we see that our Lord Jesus Christ does so serve himself
by those whom he calls too trial, by putting them intoo the hands of
Tyrants, and of the enemies of his truth, and yet gives them invincible
constancy: it is a goodly strengthening of our faith, and we have cause too
be the more inflamed. For unless God wrought in them, it is certain that
there should no such strenght be seen in any man living. Therefore we must
pray God too arm us at our need, and therwithal to show us that the doctrine
of his Gospel which is of sufficient authority of it self, must be further
authorized by a manner of provision. But yet must the blud of the Martirs, and
of such as God has sanctified to his glory, serve too that purpose, because
they be as it were his Proctors before men.

Now heereuppon Paul adds, that he has sent Tychicus too Ephesus, too the
intent that the Ephesians might know in what state he was. This also is said
too the common edifying of the Church. For whereas Saint Paul speaks of his
state and doings, he means not the things that concern his body or his
health, nor any thing else that belongs too this present life: but he
refers it specially too the confession of the faith, and his free
maynteyning of the Gospel. We know that if a man be in prison, specially a
man of renown: folk will be in some care of him, (saying) Alas, will God
give him constancy? And agein* the devil sleeps not at that time. There
shall never any man of credit which has edifyed Gods Church, be cast in
prison, or impeached: but there shall some thing or other be sowed abroad, too
disgrace him, and too bring him as it were intoo a slander, and all is too
deface the things that God has done by his mean, and too overthrow that
which he has builded. That is one of Satan's policies. And therefore Saint
Paul knowing that men might sow abroad many lies, and say, ho, see ye, I
warrant ye he should not be so long borne with at Rome, specially having the
Emperor and all the Court against him: except he did yield: it may well be
said, that his case is not clear. And others, Tush, men make no account of
him, they see he is but a doting fool. And others: some one thing, and some
another, every man after his own fancy: Saint Paul (I say) perceiving that
many poor we akelings might be hindered by him, and cast intoo perpleritie,
and that othersome might be kept back from coming too the Gospel: will have
his state known, and the devil with all his slanders put too the foil, and
the mouths of all backebyters stopped, and likewise of all Colcaryers which
seek nothing but too set trubble in the Church. Also for fear least they that
had begun too profit in the Gospel, might be hindered, and the same an
occasion too shet the gate against such as were not yet come in: Saint Paul
intending too prevent all those respects, says, that he has sent Tychicus.

And we see yet better in this text, what care he had always too make the
Churches continewe in goodness. For he could have alleged that he was let
enough for himself, and that he was ouermatched with enemies: and he could
have made the^ believe, that he had had no leyzure too think of other folks,
and that for his own part, it was enough for him too do his dewtie at Rome,
without sending here and there over the sea, too confirm the Churches: for
there were a great sort of others besides him. Agein, forasmuch as God had shet
him up: it had bin enough (as a man would have judged in common opinion) that
he swarued not a side even too the death. But he contenteth not him self with
his only being of a faithful witness and martyr of our Lord Jesus Christ: but
he thinks therwithall, that it became him too prevent all stumbling blocks
which the devil stirred up one way or other, too defame the Gospel withal,
and he imployeth himself thereto, as we see here by example. Now then let us
learn to serve God in such wyze, even too the last gasp of our life, as we
may have a care of our neighbors also, and procure their welare as much as we
can, accordingly as God has bound us thertoo.

And to the intent that Tychicus should be received, he calls him brother and
faithful minister in Christ: and that is too give him credit, that men might
receive his record. And in very deed, we must iudeuer too the uttermost of
our power, that such as can serve the Church, may be advanced, and men know
what they be, and that they may have as it were their mark, so as they may
have authority as is requisite. That is the example which Saint Paul shows
us: For it was not for any vaynglorie or favor of men, that he commended
Tychicus after that manner: but his desire was, that men should know Christ's
faithful minister too their own benefyte, so as he might have access too
them, and not be rejected as one worth nothing, but that his word might be
receyned as it deserved.

Theruppon, too end and knit up his Epistle withal, Saint Paul prays, that
the brethren might have peace, love, and Faith from God, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now this word Peace is commonly taken in Saint Paul, for all
welfare and prosperity. In deed it signifies properly concord: but the
Apostles being accustomed too the Hebrew tung, have used the word that
imports both. And when Saint Paul says, Grace and peace be given unto
you: by the first he wishes Gods favor and mercy, and by the other, that he
should prosper us in all goodness and good things. Therefore in this text he
shows, that all the prosperity of the godly comes of Gods mere goodness,
and not from elsewhere. Thereunto he adds also, faith and charity. Wherein we
see that God reserueth too him self the office, not only of sending us these
outward goods which we want, but also and specially of giving us the spiritual
gifts, whereof we be utterly void and destitute. Howbeit, it is hard too make
men believe it, because they be always drunke^ with this pride, of imagining
themselves too have some ability of mind too believe the Gospel, and too
discern between good and evil, insomuch that too their seeming, it is a
needless thing to pray God too inlyghten them. But yet must we needs be
punished for our ouerweening, if we think we have either faith or charity of
our selves. So then let us conclude, that both of them be the singular gifts
of God, and let us confess, that both of them come of him, and that on the
other side he must be fayme (...): for we be blind (...) we have the word
pre^ched too us, and as it were chawed too us, so as there remains no more
for us too do, but too swallowe it down. Yet shall we continue dull like
blocks of timber, if God do not inlyghten us by his holy spirit, and bow our
hearts too his obedience. Then if God woork not so, it is certain that when our
ears shall have bin beaten with good doctrine all the time of our life, it
shall be but lost labor. And it is not only in this text that it is said so:
but a man shall scarsly find any leaf in the holy Scripture, wherein God
reserueth not too him self the giving of faith. And in good faith we our
selves see well, that the holy scripture inlyghteneth us, and how utterly we
be destitute of Gods spirit. If we compare our selves with faith, and with
the things that it brings us: we shall well see that there is just cause why
God should will us too do him homage for so great and so excellent a fifth.
Psalm. 14. ^. 2.
For it is said, that God looked down upon men, and that he found them every
chone given over too all evil, and saped in their filthiness, so as there is
not one that seeks after goodness. Agein, when there is any speaking of our
reason and wisdom, 1. Cor. 3. d. 16.
it is said to be stark ignorance, and that we be utterly brutish, and that
we must become fools in our selves, if we will profit in Gods school. And
(...) for our hearts: what are they? They be full of naughtiness and (...)
bornnesse eue^ from our chyldhood, as the holy scripture reports every where
of them. Forasmuch then as we be blind in our understanding, and froward in
will: let us come now and see what faith is. It is a co^prehending of Gods
secrets, so as we know the fatherly love that he bears us, and assure our
selves of it, and take hold of the heavenly life, which nevertheless is
incomprehensible too man's understanding: and to be short, Ephe. 3. d. 13.
are acquaynted with the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which extends high
and low, and deep and wide, as we have seen herteoofore. Now then if on the
one side we consider what faith is, and on the other side enter intoo our
selves, and examine our selves in such sort, as we find our selves utterly
destitute of all goodness: it is good reason we should confess, that until
God give us faith, we have no faith at all. That is the thing which we have
too mark upon this text.

As much is too be said of charity. For is it not apparent that every man is
wedded too the love of him self* and that (...) affections ^arye us away, so as
we seek (...) own profit continually with the hinderance of other men? And
yet this lust and (...) we cannot love our neighbors, but would rather
oppress them. So then, we must needs have Charity from elsewhere, and God must
break the cursed inclination that is in us, namely the over excessive loving
of our selves. And moreo^er when we have so renounced our selves, we must
understand that we be so indetted too our neighbors, as we must indeuer too
do our dewtie toward them. And so ye see that faith and charity are justly
called the special gift of God, and that Saint Paul does justly in this text
say: Charity and Faith be unto you frow God our father. It is certain that
his wish was not made feynedly, but that in saying so, he does us to understand
that we must have it at Gods hand. Wherefore let us lay down all foolish
ouerweening, and let us understand that all the spiritual benefyts which we
have, are the free gifts of God, whereby he shows and declares his
liberality effectually toward us. And it is certain that all the perfection
of Christians consists in faith and charity. Wherefore let us conclude, that
whatsoever belongs to the salvation of our souls, or is worthy too be
esteemed and commended, we have none of it of our own growing, but it comes
too us from above. Math. 16. c. 17.
Accordingly as it is said of the confessing of our faith, that another flesh
nor blud do show us that Jesus Christ is the son of God, Math. 11. d. 25.
but the father reuealeth it too us. And likewise also our Lord Jesus Christ
says, Luke. 10. d. 21.
Father, I thank thee that thou haste hidden these things from the wise, and
reveled them too the little ones. Therefore let us learn to be little ones,
that we may be Gods scholars, and too be fools in our selves, that we may
be filled with his wisdom, and yield him honor, according too the measure of
the gifts which we shall have received of him, and not be so wicked as too
chalendge the praise unto us, which he does justly and ryghtly reserve too
him self.

Howbeeit, Saint Paul matcheth our Lord Jesus Christ with God the father, too
do us understand, that we can obtain nothing but by the means of him, which
has reconcyled us unto God. For what is the cause that we be so corrupted
in our nature, as we be void of all goodness, and full fraught with all
vices, and too be short, that we be altogether abominable: but for that we be
utterly estraunged from our Lord Jesus Christ, John. 1. b. 14. and. Coloss. 1.
c. 19. and. 2. b. 9.
who is the fountain of al goodness? And for the same cause was he indewed
with all fullness of grace, according as it is said, that the father has not
given him (the spirit in) some certain portion, (...)
but in such wise as all of us may so draw out of him, as we can not want any
thing, for he is the fountain that can never be drawn dry. Then can we not
have one drop of spiritual gifts, but by flowing down upon us through our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only cundi^pype of them. And our Lord Jesus
Christ not only has the office of giving us at his own pleasure whatsoever i^
requisyte and necessary for our welfare, in respect that he is our mediator
(as we have seen in the.iiii. Chapter:) but also Saint Paul yields him
here moreover, that he gives us faith and charity by his own authority and
power: for he sets him in equal degree with his father. Now then let us
understand, that our Lord Jesus Christ's office of inlyghtening us by faith,
and of reforming our hearts, not only belongs too him as now in respect that
he is our mediator and Gods minister: but also that it is his own: for this
manner of speech of S. Paul's would not otherwise agree.

But here by the way a man might ask a question. For Saint Paul prays not
God too give faith too the faythlesse, and charity too them that are fleshly:
but unto the brethren, that is too say, too the body of the Church. Now if
they be of the Church, they be Gods children alredye, they be begotten agein
by the holy Ghost, and by that mean they have both faith and charity. But
herin Saint Paul shows us, that it is not enough for that God begin faith in
us, unless he continue in it too the end: and that like as we call faith the
gift of God, so must he also make it too grow and increace day by day. Phil.
^. d. 29.
And that is it which is meant by this saying, that it is given unto us not
only too believe in Jesus Christ, but also too suffer for him. Therefore Gods
giving of faith unto us, is not in such wise, as that he does but only
prepare us, that we might believe the Gospel, if we listed, and that
afterward we should bring a consent of our own, and go foreward of our selves
by our own power: No: but when God has once dispozed us too believe, he must
also give us such an affection, as may touch us too the quick, and afterward
drive us forewarde, and give us ability too persevere, so as we may profit, and
go foreward, and be confirmed even to the end. That is the cause why S. Paul
speaking here of the faithful which were brought alredie intoo the good way,
and to whom the grace of God was manifested, says nevertheless, that God
must be feign too further them and give them the gift to hold out, even by
growing more and more as well in faith as in love.

And thereby we have warning to pray God to increase and strengthen our faith,
and to inflame us with charity, and therwithall to make us know our
imperfections, so as although we see a number that come not near us, yet we
conceive not any pride too stand in our own conceits, as though we were come
too faith already. Wherefore let us assure our selves, that we be but in our
way as long as we be in this world, and therefore let us enforce our selves
foreward. For what perfection of faith so ever we can find among men: it is
certain that God will find much amiss in it, and how far foreward soever
we be, and how well so ever we have profited in charity, a man shall come
far short, of fynding that any of us has forgotten him self, and thrust
covetousness and ambition under foot, with all other things that may (...) us
from seeking the benefyte of our neighbor, and the employing of our selves too
do them seruis. Since it is so, let us learn (as I said) too know our own
imperfections in such wise, as we may mislyke of our selves for them, and be
induced thereby too do better than we have done hithertoo. And although men
praise and commend us, yet let us learn too confess with all humbleness and
meekness, that we be yet far short of atteyning too our mark.

Now hereuppon Saint Paul adds agein, Grace be too all them that love our
Lord Jesus Christ incorruptly. Wherein he shows who be the brethren that ^e
(...) of even now. Not all they that profess themselves too live after the
Gospel, but such as love our Lord Jesus Christ, yea (says he) with such
soundness, as it be not an affection that corrupts and banisheth away out
of hand. And not without cause is this said. For we see how few there are
which love Jesus Christ ryghtly and soundly. The multitude of them that pretend
too holdwith the Godspell, is great enough: but what a number are there which
renounce God in their works, when they have confessed him so in their words?
Agein, if a man examine them narrowly, which have yet some good tokens, and live
orderly enough and without blame, so as it might be said, that there is no
hypocrisy in them: he shall see them ouershoote themselves in the turning of a
hand. As for example, we see how the persecutions now adays discover such as
have not a lively root, and so do temptations likewise, insomuch that they
which have lived in good reputation, do afterward tur^e aside and go astray.
And what is the cause thereof? Some new block that Satan casts in their way,
or some other stumbling stock too make them turn out of the good way.
Therefore when all is thoroughly reckened, a man shall find very few, that love
Jesus Christ incorruptly, that is too say, which have at rue steadfastness or
stoutnesse, so as if they be tempted either with fear of death, or with
poverty, yet notwithstanding they after not, but continue still in their
calling, and show that the holy Ghost reigns so in them, as he possesses
the bottomes of their hearts, even until they be quyte rid of all the
imperfections of their flesh. No dout but the perfectest have store of them.
And like as it may well be, that a tree shall seem utterly withered, as far
as can be discerned outwardly by his branches, and yet if the root continue
still in his force, the tree shall be safe: so that although some superfluous
boughs be cut of, yet will he spring again: and it will appear plainly, that
it was still alive within: even so we from day to day cut of the corrputions
of our flesh, which are yet in us, until we be come too the fullness of the
incomprehensible perfection, wheruntooo we labor as now too atteyne.

Now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him too voutsafe too open our eyes more and more, that
we may consider the infirmities and vices that are in us, yea and those also
unto which we should be given, if God had not delivered us from them, and
should not draw us away from them day by day. And theruppon let us moorne
before him, acknowledging our selves too be wretched offenders, that are well
worthy too be condemned, if he pitied us not: And let us so profit in his
word, as it may be too the amendment of the things that are yet amiss in us:
and for the bringing thereof too pass, let us call upon the grace of his holy
spirit, because we know how needful it is for us, in respect of the
rechlesnesse, yea or rather rebelliousnesse that is in us. And yet for all that
let us not cease too go on still too the heavenly perfection wheruntoo he
calls us. That it may please him to graun^ this grace not only too us, but
also too all people and nations of the earth. etc.

FINIS.
All glory, honor, and praise, be alonly unto God, and too our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

