THE SEVEN TRVMPETS OF BROTHER BARTHOLOMEW SALVTHIVS OF THE holy Order of S.
Francis; Exciting a sinner to repentance. A Work very profitable for the
salvation of all such souls, as are bound with sin.

NOW Lately translated out of the Latin, into the English tongue, by Br. G P.
of the same order and observance.

AT S. OMERS, FOR JOHN HEIGHAM, With permission of Superiors. Anno 1626.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE. TO HIS LOVING AND Dear Father, Master H. P. his
obedient son wishes health in Jesus Christ.
DEAR SIR,
The intimacie of my ever and all bounden duty, which I acknowledge, as
tributarie due unto you, with the ardent zeal and desire, of your speedy
auersion from these broken cisternes of heresy, and your penitential
conversion unto the living waters of eternal life, which are no where
contained but in one Holy, Catholic and Apostolic church, have moved me
often times, to commend some little treatise unto you, therein to lay open
before your eyes the grievous threatenings of almighty God against sinne^s, and
to admonish you in (...), of the dangerous state wherein you live, hoping by th
s, to disburthen my self of the obligatorie duties which I acknowledge as
bound by nature* but considering* that touching this subject, many books,
have been learnedly written (tha kes be given to God) by diverse good
Catholics, and faithfully translated into our English tongue, I desisted to
proceed in so worthy an enterprise, till at length mine enflamed zeal and
filial duty, it such sort burned a fresh within me, that I could no longer
quench it, by the insurging waves of the seas, nor defer the aduenturing with
this present, to make the same known unto you.

I am nor ignorant, how far the mouths of many Gentlemen of your rank, and
neighborhood, are out of taste, and much more affected to the flesh parts of
Egypt. (Exodus 16.3.) then to the bread of Angels; I mean rather to the
reading of profane, then spiritual books, taking greater delight in perusing
strange pleasant histories, therein to solace and recreate them selves, then in
the pious works and wholesome exhortations of devout, and religious men, who
intend nothing but the salvation of your poor sinful souls: But as the
Prophet David. (Psalm. 4.3.) says. O ye sons of men, how long are ye of
heavy hearts? why love ye vanities, and seek after lying? Did they but know
what profitt, and fruit they may reap thereby, doubtless they would paint
every little sentence in the r hearts, and mediate upon them morninge, and
eueninge, and bind them for a sign on their hands, writting them in their
entries, and on the doors of their houses, that so they might always have them
in their sight, and remembrance. Deuteronom. 6.6.7.8.

Truly Dear Sir, I have endeauored in dressing this meat, to provoke your
appetite. (Genesis 27.9.) and labored, to set forth this doctrine in such a
style, that it may move you, diligently to read the same, which if you do, I
hope by the grace of God, you shall find that wonderful chaung in your soul,
which others in former ages most happily have had, and as that, almost every
day have, who by the means of spiritual books, have utterly detested their
former licentious lives, and with great fervor and zeal, begun anew in Gods
holy service.

Call to mind the treasurer of the Queen of Aethiopia, who was reading I say
the Prophet in his chariot, when God almighty converted him, by Saint Philip;
(Act. 8.30.) Remember likewise, that those so notable, and famous works,
which King Josias did in all his kingdom, proceeded from the reading of an
holy book, which Helchias the Prophet, gave unto Saphan the scribe. (4. Regum
22.13.) and S. Augustine relates. (confess. lib. 8.) how three noble courtiers
walking abroad in the evening with Theodosius the Emperor into the fields, two
of them went a little aside unto a Monks cell, and there finding a book,
wherein was written the life of S. Anthony, one of them began to read it, and
behold in a moment he felt his heart so enkindled with an holy love, and moved
with such a religious shame, that he, together with his other companion, being
in a great agony with themselves, put off their secular apparel in the very
same place where they stood, and bidding farrewell unto courtly pleasures,
began to erect a spiritual building, and did forsake all things of this
world, desiring nothing more then to follow their Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Such admirable chaunges and notable alterations, have holy books
procured, in these persons, who with due attention considered them.

Accept then (Dear Sir) this small gift, and first fruits of my poor
endeavors, which may be a means (as I hope) to call you into the path of a good
life, and induce you forthwith (by Gods grace) to make profession of the
Catholic faith, which faith unless every one keep holy, and inviolable,
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. (S. Atha. creed.) Come therefore
speedily into the foulde of Christ, if you will be preserved from the raueninge
wolves. (Ioh. 10.16.) Have recourse unto Noah's arc. (Genesis 6.18.) if you will
be saved from drowning; Be a member of the Catholic, and universal church,
which according to the Apostle is, Columna and firmamentum veritatis. (1. Tim.
3.15.) the pillar and ground of truth. And be no longer seduced by the
fallacies and deceipts, of death bringing heretics: Now at the last, as you
tender your own souls health, confess your sins with the Prophet David.
(Psalm. 50.) cry aloud unto God for mercy, with Saint Marie Magdalen. (Luc.
7.) wash the feet of our Savior with tears of true contrition: Go out with
S. Peter. (Math. 26.) and weep bitterly. For now is the acceptable time, now
is the day of salvation: The night will come when it will be too late to work;
(2. Cor. 6.2.) True it is, that the thief was saved, and found mercy at the
last gasp, but God forbid (as a right virtuous son said in the like case to
his own Father) that we should use such preposterous policy, as, when our
senses are astonished, our wits distracted, our understanding obscured, when
both body and mind are tormented with the gripes of mortal sickness, that
then we should begin to think of the weighty matters of our salvation, and
of the sudden to become Saints, when we are fearce able to behave our
selves like reasonable creatures* No; no, deceive not your self, take time
while you may, when it is once past, it is impossible to recall it, according
to the old proverb: post est occasio calua: fear not persecution, or l^sse of
goods, fear not them, that kill the body, and are not able to prejudice the
soul, but rather fear him, that can precipitate both body and soul, into the
infernal abisse of hell. Math 10.28.

Is it not a most lamentable case, that men who profess themselves to be
Christians, should have a greater care of their worldly pelf, honors, and
dignities, then of the health, and salvation of their own souls? We read in
profane authors, that when Crates began to study philosophy, he cast all
his money into the sea, saying; Malo te perdere, quam vt tu me perdas, I had
rather cast thee away, then thou should cast away me: intimatinge thereby,
that riches are not to be esteemed, but vtterliy to be renounced, and
contemned, when they cannot be kept without the loss and hinderance of
virtue. I omit to speak of Bias and Diogenes, the one whereof being
admonished to save something for himself, his answer was, Omnia mea mecum
porto, all my substance I carry with me; meaning his virtues: The other made
choice of poverty, and rather to live in washing of roots, then with
Aristippus to enjoy courtly pleasures, and by flattery to be in favor with
Princes: Alas shall these heathen philosophers (which knew not God) despise
treasures, contemn riches, and embrace poverty, only for the love of moral
virtues, and shall we, which profess our selves to be Christians, bought with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ, respect transitory vanities before the
salvation of our souls? Shall the blessed Apostle S. Paul. (Phil. 3.8.) count
all things detriment, and esteem them as dunge, that he might gain Christ?
And shall we like children be delighted with toys, and with Esops cock
prefer a barlie corn, before a rich gemme? shall we dissemble with our
consciences for the world, for fear that otherwise we should loose our
credit? Woe be unto us if we do so, seeing our Blessed Savior has said.
(Math. 10.33.) He that shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my
Father which is in heaven: And in an other place, he says, If any man will
come unto me, and hates not his Father, and mother, wife, and children,
Brother, and sister, yea and his own life, he cannot be my disciple. Luc.
14.26.

God forbid that we should delay our conversion, and with the foolish Virgins
have our oil to seek for our lamps, when the bridegroom comes unto the
marriage, left afterward knocking and calling to be received in, we be sent
back again with a, Nescio vos, I know you not, S. John Baptist, when he was
in the wilderness, showed that his commission, and embassage was to preach
penance unto the world, how that the axe was now laid to the root of the
tree; and every tree that brings not forth good fruit, to be cut down,
and cast into the fire; And that his life might be conformable to his words;
he executed in penance the greatest austerities, his meat was locust, and
wild honey, the food which he found in the fields, his apparel a garment of
camels hair, girt with a rough girdle, and his chamber and lodginge, a cave of
some craggic rock, his boulster, and bed the hard ground, bearinge with
great patience, the cold, heat, hunger, and thirst, and other common injuries
of the air: But why did this blessed and glorious forerunner of our Savior
Christ endure all this? not in punishment of his sins, he being sanctified
from his Mothers womb, but to preserve himself the better, even from the
least offenses, to tame his flesh, and bring it in subjection to the spirit,
and to dispose him self the better to receive the gifts of heaven, which are
not ordinarily obtained, but by such painful austerities.

Why then should not we imitate this Saint and conform our selves unto him,
wherein he is imitable? Why should not we embrace corporal austerities, as
much as we may, chastising our flesh, and offeringe it as a lively host,
holy and acceptable unto God almighty in satisfaction for our sinful lives
past? (Romans 12.) This path have all these holy and just men of the old and new
testament formerly trodden; For in the written law the Apostle affirms, how
they went in sheeps skins, in goats skins, wandering in deserts, in
mountains, in dens, and caves of the earth: and in the law of grace, we
plainly see, that the whole life of our Blessed Savior, the most perfect
mirror of all virtues, was nothing else but a continual act of penance,
spent wholly in watching, praying, fasting, hunger, thirst, and cold, with
other like necessities whereunto we are subject, suffering shameful ignominies,
and reproaches, and all for our example, as witness his own words, saying.
Ego dedi etc. (Joan. 13.15.) I have given you example, as I have done so do you
likewise: His prayers were so long, that S. Luke writes, that he went forth
into the mountain, and there passed the whole night in prayer. (Luc. 16.12.)
and that the example of this virtue was not left us by our Lord for speculation
only, but for our practice also, this place of scripture makes it plain.
(Marc. 13.33.) Take heed, watch, and pray, and again, watch ye therefore, for
ye know not the hour in which the Lord of the house comes. He fasted forty
days, and forty nights, in the desert. (Marc. 4.) and one Evangelist adds.
(Luc. 4.2.) that he did eat nothing in those days: neither do we ever read
expresselie, that he did ever eat any flesh in all his life, unless the
Sacrame^tall flesh of the old law, which was eaten for devotion, and not to
satisfy hunger, whereas of fish, and bread made of barley, and of drinking of
water, ma^y testimonies are not wanting: Besides all this, he was derided*
scorned, mocked, counted a fool, and when he did any wonderful miracles, they
would presently say (Mat. 13.55.) Is not this the carpenters son? do we not
know all his pedigree, how basely he is descended? a man that is a glutton, and
wine-drinker (Math. 11.19.) a friend of publicans and sinners? After our
Savior Christ's most bitter death, and passion, consider how the Apostles
passed their lives, in much fasting, long watchings, hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, and nakedness? And since their time, all these which have safely passed
the troublesome sea of this miserable world, and are now arrived at the thrice
happy haven of eternal felicity, they have all done the like; To avoid
prolixity, I refer you unto infinite examples in Egisippus and Eusebius and
others; that have written the lives of Saints in those ages, as also in S.
Athanasius, of the life of S. Paul the first Eremite, and of S. Hilarion and
the like, you may see in Ioa^nes Cassianus, Palladius, Ioa^nes Climachus* and
other holy and authe^tical authors, which have recorded things of admiration,
in this behalf: all with most rigorous asperities of life in these ancient
Christians, which intended only the mortifying of their bodies, the subduing of
their flesh, and sensual tie, repressing the unlawful motions of their
concupiscence, that they might stand more secure in this conflict of resisting
sin.

Is it possible then, that we, knowing and hearing these things, should, as
holy Job says, drink up sin, as beasts do water? where are our wits,
reason, and judgment? when we hear Christ saying. (Mat. 16.26.) what does it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and suffer detriment of his soul?
And we like swine, wallow our selves in the filth, puddle, and sincke of all
iniquity? shall we be kindly invited to the marriage dinner. (Math. 22.4.) and
refuse to come, for some base commodity, that is complacent unto our
sensuality? Certainly such proceeding would argue want of faith in us, that we
should not believe, that the divine justice will punish sin, with perpetual
bannishment, out of the celestial paradise of endless bliss, and with
everlasting pains and torments, in the horrible fire of hell.

Let us then (as the Apostle advises) (Heb. 12.12.) shake off from us, all
weight and clogg that may hinder us, let us by patience and long animitie,
run and make have unto the combat offered unto us, with our eyes fixed upon
the author of our faith, and principal cause thereof Christ Jesus, who setting
before him the joys of heaven, and conte^ning the confusion (or worldly shame
that thereof might ensue) sustained the bitter death of the Cross, and thereby
has obtained to sit at the right hand of the seat of God his Father.

Lastly, as Gods unworthy Legate, and your dutiful son, I admonish you with
the Prophet. (Psalm. 47.13.) that out of hand, you compass Sion (the Catholic
Church, and embrace her) that you build in her towers (by considering her
fortresses, the holy Doctors and Fathers, which watch, and defend her Walls)
that you set your heart on her strength (resting assured of all matters of
faith upon her (the pillar and foundation of truth) that you distribute her
houses (by observing and marking diligently, how many particular churches were
speedily founded into the world) that you may declare that, in another
generation by teaching the^ to hold fast the same faith, or to return unto
it, if they be relapsed; or to receive it, if they be estranged from it:
Because this is God our God for ever, and ever; Christ God incarnate that
works a^l this, is our very God and Savior, not for a few years, as an
hundred, six hundred, a thousand, or millions of thousands, but for ever and
ever; He shall rule as a King, and consequently have a kingdom, his Catholic
church, evermore to endure unto the end of the world: which church must be your
Mother, if you will have God for your Father: For it is an infallible rule with
S. Cyprian and S. Augustine. Non habebit Deum patrem, qui nolit habere Ecclesia^
matrem. (Cypr. simp. prelat.) he shall not have God for his Father, who will not
have the church for his mother.

It may be you shall have your Scripturarum fures. (Origin. in 2. ad Rom.)
thieves of the scriptures, your presumptuous heretics fly through the whole b
ble, quoting the Psalms. Prophets, Gospel, Epistles, very readily unto you,
as Vincentius Lirinensis says such men's fashion is, but take heed of them, for
they give you the bare text, without the true meaning, and as the Devil did
unto our Savior, they come unto you, with a, Scriptum est. (Math. 4.6.)
covering themselves over head and ears with scripture as with the wool, and
fleese of simple sheep: Beware of such f^lse Prophets which are inwardl^ raven
ng wolves. (Mat. 7.15.) work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
remembering that none shall be crowned, which does not lawfully fight. (2. Tim.
2.) Now therefore make joyful all the Angels, and court of heaven, with your
conversion strike the stroke with God, say with the Prophet, Nunc cepi. (Mal.
7.6.) now I have begun in Gods blessed service. Do you with S. Hierom,
although your Mother much lamenting, should show you her breasts, with which
she gave you suck, and your Father should weep on his knees before you,
hereby to keep you from the sweet repose and tuition of the Catholic church,
run over your Father, cast your Mother aside, and make have to the standard
of the Cross: Solum pietatis genus est in hac re, esse crudelem, this is the
greatest kind of piety above all other in this point, to show your self
cruel: I humbly implore the divine Majesty, and lying prostrate at your
feet, do beg with tears, that he would so move and mollify your heart, that
at the sound of these summoning Trumpets, all impediments being incontinently
cast aside, you may attentively harken to their dreadful echoe. Sweet Jesus
out of his infinite mercy, and by his bitter death and passion, bless, direct,
and confirm you with his principal spirit. (Psalm. 50.) that when he shall be
pleased inwardly to move you with his divine inspirations, he may graciously
inuit you to taste of the heavenly waters of his most sweet, and our holy
mother, the Catholic church. Co^tristate not any longer the holy Ghost.
(Ephesians. 4.30.) by hardening your heart, but thankefully receive and entertain
the same, with submission, reverence and respect toward so great a majesty,
and without delay make profession openly of the Catholic faith, and religion
of our ancient holy Christian forefathers, that so you may reign with our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and with them in heaven, participating there of
such joys, as neither eye has seen, ear has heard, nor ever has ascended
into the heart of man to conceive. (Cor. 2.9.) to which, God of his infinite
mercy bring us, who has so dearly bought us, that we may there reign
perpetually in glory with him, for ever.

Amen.
Your humble and dutiful son during life, G.P.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL HIS DEAR MOTHER Mistress E. P. increase of all spiritual
and temporal consolation.
TO you dear Mother, do I offer these,
My poor endeavors; which I do implore,
And beg of God-allmightie, on my knees,
At their arrival, may find open, the door.
Of your desires, What pity cannot move
For its one sake, may enter by my love.
Let me noe longer, frutelesse sacrifice,
Upon the sacred Altar of sinceare
Devotion offe^ with tear-tricklinge eyes
Dride up with sighs; redoubled are with fear
Which wakes my thoughts, with a perpetual fright
In the dead-silent hours of the night.
To think, the womb wherein I was conceau'd;
The louinge Breasts, which first gave nourishment,
Unto my tender years; whose arms received,
Into the bosom of such sweet content,
My Infancy; which tenderly to wrapp
They took delight; laid prostrat^ on the lapp,
Of more then common-care; should: what? Alas
Must I pronounce the sentence; Perrish? o noe,
Heavens forbide the fatal howerglasse,
Is not yett run: Though itt draw too too low
Return my dearest Sunamite, return,
Let not in vain, thy holy offerings burn.
It Was noe small grief you seemed for to expres
With pity moueinge plaints, and promises
By which you did conjure me (no^-Lesse
Dear to my soul then yours) to bannish these
Religious enterprises. What will be?
The Grief, when we must part, and never see.
Each other, think you? Nether is that all,
For in the day of wrath and indignation
Men shall rejoice to see their Parents fall,
By the just judgment of Gods ordination*
Thus much my filial duty forced me too
The rest I leave to Jesus Christ and you.
Your most dutiful and obedient Son G. P.

To the devout Reader.
Iuditious reader if thou seek to please
The fantasy, with Arguments of wit,
Curious conceits; know such fond passages
I do bequeath to lighter subjects fit
To thy devotion therefore (as a Friend)
My matter, not my Meathhoode I commend.
Thine G. P.

BROTHER BARTHOLOMEW UNWORTHY Servant of Jesus Christ crucified, to his most
endeared Sister, S. Marie Magdalen glorious spouse of blessed Jesus in heaven.
Behold my most dear Sister Magdalen, the spouse of Christ crucified, once
as black as the tents of Cedar, ( Cant. 1.) but afterward as beautiful as
the courtaines of Solomon, portresse of love, and patroness of all sinners,
now blessed with celestial glory, behold I say, I have finished a little
book, entitled by me, The Seven Trumpets, exciting a sinner to repentance;
And because I have written of thee, being assisted with thy holy prayers, not
any that I could find, might with such equity challenge the patronage of this
book, as thy self; For to whom might I with more conuenience present this
little work, out of which, proceeds such a sound, that terrifieth the
greatest malefactor, and awakneth the securest offender, the^ to S. Mary
Magdale^ a sinner? To whom, I say, rather then unto thee, should I the most
abject and unworthiest of all sinners, dedicate this book, that treats of
the salvation of sinners? To thee therefore my sister Magdalen, I commend it,
that thou being a daily assistant thereof, might cause it to bring forth
its intended fruits, which is the safety, health, and happiness of all
distressed, wretched, and sinful souls. Remember, oh blessed Magdalen, that
thou wast once a lost sheep, far strayed from the fold of Christ, and if
our dear Savior Jesus the careful shepherd of thy soul, had not called
thee unto him, thou had been devoured of the ravening wolf: thou know
that our Jesus did undergo death for the life of souls. Christas venit in
hunc mundum etc. (1. Tim. 1.15.) Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am the chief, and Christ himself says, Non est opus
valentibus medico, sed male habentibus. ( Math 9.12.) They that be well need
not the physician, but they that be sick, and thou art not ignorant of that
which is written of him, in the Gospel of Saint Luc. Hic peccatores recipit
etc. ( Luc. 15.2.) This man receaueth sinners, and eats with them: Oh
therefore Magdalen, let thy eyes of pity be ever watchful over miserable
sinners, intercede for the conversion, and salvation of so many souls, which
are running headlong into the abisse of eternal perdition; Thou see and
know, most dear Magdale^, what a number of souls do daily and hourly
desce^d into the bottomless pit of hell: succor, aid, and stretch forth
thy helping hand therefore to the perishing and languishing souls: remember, oh
Sister that all those souls were redeemed and bought with the precious blood
of sweet Jesus, the Savior and Redeemer of us both: Thou know right well,
the inexcogitable sufferings of our loving Jesus upon mount Caluarie, for all
us rebellious wretches: I am certain thou well remembrest that precious blood
which whilst he hanged upon the cross, thou saw distill and run down
from his sacred body, upon the earth. Remember, oh Magdalen; the anxiety of
his soul, when as thou did behold him yielding up his spirit with such
bitter pains upon the holy wood of the cross: procure by thy intercession,
that these souls which were redeemed with the precious blood, which did so
abundantly flow out of his divine head being pricked, and goared with an
unheard of crown of thorns, may be delivered from the power of sin, and
brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: succor those poor
souls, which are bought with such an abundance of blood, running like a
torrent from the most sacred hands, and feet of thy Master Jesus crucified,
obtain by thy holy prayers that those souls may be presented pure before God,
which were washed with that blood and water that issued out of thy Jesus his
side, eue^ unto his most bitter death; Thy prayers, oh Magdalen which are
enflamed with the burning love of thy dearest spouse, are of no small virtue to
procure the help of the Angel of the covenant, to put the diseased souls of
miserable sinners into the all curing waters of Bethsaida. Joan. 5.4.

To thee therefore in the name of our gracious Jesus, and his blessed Mother,
he a loving Father, she a tender Mother of al sinners, I present and offer this
little work, which I acknowledge to be thine; In the name of the most holy
Trinity, Father, Son and holy Ghost, in the virtue of the name of Jesus,
and the B. V. Marie, together with thy help, oh Blessed Magdalen, these my
Seven Trumpets are come to be sounded abroad, which by the efficacy of the
blood, death, and passion of Christ, who is Son of God, and also him self
true God and man I implore, beseech, and desire, that they terrify, convert
and reduce to repentance an innumerable company of souls, which lie demerged,
overwhelmed, and plunged in the pit, of sin, and iniquity: Amen: In the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen.

Let thy benedictio^ oh my Magdalen, descend upon the soul and body of me,
and all other sinners, which shall peruse this book, by the virtue of the
precious body and blood of our Blessed Jesus which is contained in the most
holy Sacrament of the altar,

Amen: Pray for me:
From Rome: our place of S. Fran. Transtib. Iun. 14. 1612. Thy most devoted
Brother in our Lord, Brother Bartholomew.

IN THE NAME OF THE Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen:
Here follows the beginning of the Seven Trumpets of the B. F. B.
Bartholomew Saluthius, of the holy order of the Friar Minars: of obseru.
reform.

THE PROLOGVE.
ET septem Angeli qui habebant septem tubas etc. ( Apoc. 8.) And the seven
Angels which had the Seaue^ Trumpets, prepared them selves to sound, says S.
John; after he had said in the same place; Et vidi septem Angelos etc. and I
saw seven Angels standing in the presence of God, and there was given unto
them Seaue^ Trumpets: Oh Brethren sinners, I am not an Angel, but a sinner,
not only like unto you, but worse then you, who being enflamed with the honor
of almighty God, and also moved with the desire of all your souls healths, I
have presumed to bring to light this little book, entitled The Seven
Trumpets, that they may found in your ears, and recall you to your most loving
God and merciful Father, and reduce you into the way of salvation. Oh
wretches, consider that you have strayed, and diuerted from the true path, and
do now run, and persist with a swift pace in the way that leads to
perdition: ponder well, oh ye unhappy souls, how that ye stand upon the
brimme of hell, ready every moment to be cast down headlong into the abisse
of perpetual darkness: whereupon I being stirred up with charity toward you,
in this our convent of S. John Baptist at Font: Palumb now residing, God
assisting me, together with the prayers of the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of
God, and of all the Saints and Angels in heaven, but especially of S. John
Baptist, and my glorious Father S. Francis, I do speak unto all sinners,
crying out, and compelling them with these words, Oh ye sinners, sinners I
say, turn ye to God, forsake your enemy the devil, amend and correct your
evil lives, and depart from the pernicious, and dangerous way, wherein ye
walk: turn oh brethren unto your benign creator, prepare the way by the
which your sweet, and loving Jesus, is to come to inhabit and make his mansion
in your souls; Expel and drive out, oh ye wretches, those diabolical vices,
which have prepared for themselves an habitatio^ in your poor souls: Oh ye
miserable sinners, do ye not yet perceive, that your souls are as so many
caves full of inhumane serpents, and cruel dragons. Who are al ready to
devour and tear you in pieces? These being expelled, and put to flight, let
in your most loving Jesus into the closet of your souls, who stands knocking
without, and like a tender Father, and merciful Savior, commiserating your
obduratnes, cries out, open to me: open to me I say my dear children.

Why do you therefore oh ye miscreants, admit your enemy, and deadly
adversary into your souls, and exclude, and bannish, your loving Savior and
benign redeemer? Open unto him, oh my Brethren, open unto him, and at last
acknowledge that he alone is your creator, redeemer, and Savior, turn to
your selves, and consider oh unworthy abiects, and know, that this is that
Jesus, which bought you with his most precious blood, and died for you upon
the holy wood of the Cross. Contemplate oh sinner, the great love which thy
most sweet Jesus did and does at this present bear to thee and be vigilant,
and careful least thou again offend him.

Consider that for the love of thee, he hangs conte^ned, and left of al upon
the cross: behold him nailed, through his sacred hands and feet upon the
rood, and for thy sake. Behold how for thee his divine head is girded about
with sharp and cruel thorns, that pricked him eue^ to the brains, look
upon him how he is contemned, vilified, and crucified as a public
malefactor, betwixt two theefs, and only for thee: hear what opprobries,
contumelies, and disgraceful terms he endured of the passers by, and that for
thy sake, give ear unto him crying with a loud voice by reason of extreme
thirst, Sitio, sitio, I thirst, I thirst, and only for thee: For this was that
ardent thirst (besides the natural thirst which was most vehement) to wit,
thy salvation: Hear him, not murmuring one jot, but most ardently praying for
his persecutours, and malefactors, Pater ignosce illis etc. ( Luc. 23.34.)
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: Oh the depth of the love
and mercy of Jesus, oh the Tigre-like cruelty, and obdurate malice of that
diabolical and hellish crew that crucified him* oh ye ungrateful sinners who
little esteeming of the unspeakable affection of Jesus toward you, do
accompany, and unite your selves with devils, are slaves to devils, and do
eat, drink, sleep, and live in the company of devils. who likewise at the
last shall be damned with devils, unless ye turn to your blessed redeemer!
This only thing, if ye your selves did not resist, is of it self sufficient
to reduce and convert you to your loving Jesus; that is to say, the very
remembrance of the fatherly compassion which our Blessed Savior did bear
toward you, which for you alone did suffer death, and shedd his most precious
blood: Fidelis sermo and omni acceptione dignus, ( Tim. 1.15.) It is a
faithful saving, and worthy of all acceptatio^, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, and in an other place, Empti enim estis pretio
magno. Ye are bought with a great price, glorify therefore God in your bodies.

But you wretches having no respect of him, do vilify, contemn, and trample
him under your feet, he died for you, and ye live that ye might offend him,
he laid down his soul for you, and you give your souls to your enemy the
devil: he has redeemed you from the hand of your adversary, and you do
cast, and precipitate your selves into his mouth: he freed your from the
power of death, and you by your ungodly co^uersatio^, bring death upon your
souls, and throw your selves into hell in despite of him: Oh ye unfortunate
wretches, commiserate your own most woeful condition, and if that you will not
be moved to serve him, for love, at least, begin awhile to serve him for
fear, until at the last understanding your blind errors, you may serve him
as it is fitting, for love alone. O my dear Jesus, oh loving and sweet Jesus,
open thy bowels of compassion unto all sinners, regard not their madness;
remember not their pertinacious malice, look upon the ignominies, and torments
which thou have sufsuffered for us, behold that lively, and hot blood which
gushed out, and ran down from all parts of thy torn body, have pity upon
that sinner, that takes no pity upon himself, always providing that it may
be done to the augmenting, and amplifying of thy honor and glory, here, and
for ever herafter.

Amen.
The division of the Seven Trumpets. THE I. CHAPTER.
ET primus Angelus tuba cecinit, and the first Angel sounded the trumpet
says S. John ( Apoc. 8.) without all doubt oh ye sinners, if ye will use
the benefit of your free will, together with the assistance of divine grace,
and that little exhortation of my prologue, you may very easily as ye ought,
abandon sin, fly your accustomed vices, and leave the servitude of Satan
your deadly enemy, and turn to your sweet and loving Jesus, the dear spouse
of your souls; But being that you sleep so profoundly, and so securely, that
vee do not, or will not hear the sweet sound of so grateful and acceptable
music, I have determined to send forth a sound of a more shrill, and fearful
trumpet, to make trial, whether I can awake you from the sleep, and lethar^ie
of your sins, wherein you lie drowned, and overwhelmed, being mindeful of
that of the Prophet. Clama, ne cesses* quasi tuba exalta voce^ tuam. ( Isay
58.1.) cry out and cease not, exalt thy voice as a trumpet, that a sinner
hearing it, he may be converted to repentance: But I entreat you my brethren,
that. Hodie si audteritis etc. ( Psalm. 94.) if to day you will hear the voice
of our Lord, you would not harden your hearts; Brethren, I say, in the interim,
whilst you hear the sound of these trumpets, obdurate not your hearts, lest
God be offended with you.

Et primus Angelus tuba cecinit: and the first Angel sounded the trumpet. That
I may come to my intended purpose, I have determined with these Seven Trumpets
set down in this little book to sound unto your ears, that at the last you
being awaked with the terror of the same, you may begin to forsake your
flagitious, and sinful life, and be reduced to the right way, which will
guide and conduct you safe and secure, to the happy and heavenly port of
perpetual happiness: but know for certain, that if you stop your ears at
these sounding Trumpets, at the last point, and article of your death, you
shall be called to a strict account for your so great contempt, and neglect,
which God forbid, should come to pass, but rather, that the love, and charity
which did induce me to write this book for your salvation, may mollify your
stony hearts and tame your unruly affections, that these trumpets sounding
forth your eternal bliss, may penetrate and stir up your minds and souls.
The first trumpet sounds forth the great perverseness; and malice of a sinner
wherewith he offends almighty God. The second, the filthiness of sin. The
third the detriment that sin causes in the soul of a sinner in this life.
The fourth, the harm; and loss, that shall appear in the hour of death. The
fifth, the damage that it shall cause in the terrible day of judgment. The sixth,
the ineffable punishment, that it does procure in hell. The seventh, the
society, and combination which it draws with it, in this life, in death, and
after death.

These, oh my brethren sinners, are the Seven Trumpets, which to the honor of
God, and to your souls health, and the confusion of the devil, I entend to
sound in this little book: Therefore I beseech you, that when ye shall hear
them, like well disciplined, and valiant soldiers, you do awake presently; to
enter in battle, with your enemy, and permit not your selves to be
vanquished, and trampled under foot, but like horses well exercised, and trained
up in military discipline, which at the sound of drums and trumpets, proudly
shaking their lofty, and magnanimous necks, courageously neighing, and
beating the earth with their feet, do stir up them selves, and animate
their riders, heroically to march against the army, and affronts of the enemy.
So behave your selves, oh my Brethren, viriliter agite, take unto your selves
courage, and with an undaunted spirit oppose the world, the flesh, and the
devil, necessity urges, Res nostra agitur, it is our cause that is in hand,
here is matter of great importance, namely the salvation, and perdition of
your souls: Therefore for Jesus his sake, awake out of that lethargy of vices
wherein you lie deprived of all spiritual sense, change your manners, and
institutions, lead the life of good Christians, call to mind the promise,
which you made unto your redemer in your baptism; Surge qui dormis, awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the spiritual death of sin, and Christ shall
illuminate thee. Oh Brethren, Operamini dum dies est, work while the day of
Gods mercy appears, because the night of his judgment draws near,
wherein noe man can work: let us do good to all while we have time, because
every one shall be rewarded after his death* according to his works, and
deeds: Now is the acceptable time, now is the time wherein we may buy oil for
our lamps: be vigilant therefore with the wise Virgins, to ^er in with the
bridegroom, lest you be deprived of his presence for ever. It is time for us
now, oh sinners, to awake and arise from sin. Iuxta est dies perditionis, the
day of perdition is at hand, and the last night draws near.

Therefore my sinful brethren, seek our Lord while he may be found, for
unless you will turn unto him, he will shake his sword, he will bend his bow,
and prepare the arrows of death: Return therefore, oh return ye miserable
and blinded sinners, to the sure refuge of penance. Nisi penitentia^ egaritis,
unless ye do penance, ye shall likewise perrish: oh my Brethren, a vehement
commination, a fearful threatening, denounced to that end, that every one might
be vigilant, in matters concerning his salvation, and careful to prevent
future dangers: Christ Jesus which speaks these words unto you, for his
mercies sake, infuse into your souls his divine grace, that ye may serve him
as ye ought, not of co^straint, but of a willing mind, not as servants for
fear, but as dutiful children for love:

Amen.
IN THE NAME OF THE Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen:
The first Trumpet of Gods grievous complaint of a sinner. THE II. CHAPTER.
ET primus Angelus tuba cecinit. ( Apoc. 8.) and the first Angel sounded the
Trumpet: I would to God, my dear Brethren, that the sound of this first
Trumpet would suffice, and that by this he would so powerfully touch your
hearts, that you might with internal co^punction turn to your creator, and
merciful Savior: I have not the spirit of Jonas the Prophet, who with five
words only converted the great and vaste city Nineue. Adhuc quadraginta dies
and Nineue subuertetur. ( Ion. 3.4.) yet forty days and Nineue shall be
destroyed: Jonas sounded with the shrill Trumpet of his voice, exclamations and
threatenings, but I desire not, that at the first you should hear so fearful a
sound, but that you might attend and give ear a while, to the pitiful
complaints, of your merciful redeemer, for surely there is noe soul so
frozen in sin, whom these grievous complaints would not dissolve into tears,
if they them selves did not make resistance.

Give ear therefore I beseech you, and consider, with what great grief he
bewaileth your ingratitude and unthankfulness: Obstupescite coeli, be
astonished oh ye heavens, and be ye desolate oh ye gates thereof, for my
people has committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and have dug to them selves cisterns, broken cisterns that
can hold no waters. ( Ierem. 2.12.) Oh wretched sinners penetrate, and weigh
well your misery, and see how true it is, that you have forsaken Christ, the
well of living water, and have druncke of the bitter waters of Mara. ( Exodus
15.) Know ye not yet, that vices are cisterns, that can hold no spiritual
water? do ye not perceive, that covetousness is a cisterne that contains not
the water of true delight? because the couetouse man is always sad, and never
satiated? do ye not perceive that gluttony, and intemperancy, is a cisterne
that holds not the water of satietie, because it is never filled? perceive ye
not that lust and concupiscence are cisternes, which receive not the water of
complete delectation? for the pleasures thereof consume both body and soul: do
ye not perceive, that ambition is a cisterne, that contains not the water of
a satiated desire, for the ambitious man is continually wracked? Oh ambitio,
ambitio erat, quomodo omnes torques, and omnibus places. ( D. Bernard.) oh
ambition, ambition the torture of ambitious persons, how do thou torment
all, and yet art received of all? Which your merciful and loving Father
foreseing, complains of your great folly in the precedent words of Jeremy:
and a little after by the mouth of the same Prophet, Scito and vide. ( Ierem.
2.19.) know and see, that it is an evil and bitter thing to have forsaken the
Lord thy God: observe oh sinner; with what pitiful words full of
commiseration the Lord speaks unto thee: what Adamantine heart as there so
hard, that these so merciful words can not mollify? With what pity and
clemency does he pronounce them? he seems to speak with his eyes standing
full of tears; trickling down his sacred cheeks; Moses considering the love
and clemency of God toward that wicked and ungrateful people of the
Hebrews, reprehendeth them in these words, Haeccine reddis Domino, popule
stulte and insipiens? ( Deuter. 32.6.) do thou render these things unto our
Lord, thou foolish and unwise people? is not he thy Father, that has possessed
thee, and thy creator, that has fashioned thee? oh charity, oh clemency of
God toward a sinner! oh foolishnes, oh stupiditie of a sinner, toward so
bountiful and loving a God!

Time will not permit me to reuolue the old and new scripture, for the
amplifying of this matter, which is full of the benignity of God toward a
sinner, and the contempt of a sinner toward his creator: neither did I
determine to treat of this at large, but only to insert some few things,
concerning the health and salvation of souls, almost lost, which lie daily
wallowing in the filth of of their accustomed vices: I will only say, that in
the remembrance of the exceedinge great love which God bears toward a
sinner, which the Evangelist declares in the parable of the prodigal son,
Et vidit illum a long pater ipsius, and when his Father saw him a far off,
he was moved with pity toward him, and runninge unto him, he fell upon his
neck and kissed him. ( Luc. 15.20.) And which he says else where of the
city Jerusalem: Videns ciuitatem, fleuit super eam, lookinge upon the city,
he wept over it, he did foresee the desolation that was to befall the city of
Jerusalem, the remembrance whereof so pierced his soul, that he wept
bitterly, and seeing that prodigal son, straying, ragged, and almost
famished with hunger, having consumed all his patrimony and substance in a
riotous course of living, notwithstanding all this, seeing him a far off, and
scarce hearing him uttering these words, I will arise and go to my Father,
forgetting all his former offenses, he went joyfully to meet him, and gladly
embraced him, fell upon his neck and kissed him: Oh sinners, sinners, turn
unto our Lord with the sound of this only Trumpet, consider the great affection
that Christ bears unto you, who if it were lawful so to speak, is sick with
love, and consumed with charity. ( Cantic. 25.) Oh loving and dear Jesus,
seeing thou do so infinitely love a sinner, mollify that obduratnes,
wherewith his soul is oppressed, melt and dissolve his frozen heart. I beseech
thee o Jesus, by that lively blood, that thou sheddest for us, by that
surpassing love wherewith thou did embrace us, by all the thoughts,
words, and actions thou did perform for us, to be merciful to sinners:

Amen.
Of the infinite wrong wherewith a sinner by sinning, does offend the divine
Majesty. THE III. CHAPTER.
But what shall I say now of the great injury wherewith you sinners, do offend
God? with what tongue shall it be related? with what style shall it be
exaggerated? with what terms shall it be expressed? For many reasons; the
offense is unspeakable by which God is dishonored: The first is, in respect
of the object against which it is committed, to wit God himself, who being
infinite, it necessarily follows, that sin also be infinite: which,
allthough of its own nature, be not infinite, but nothing, as holy divines
say, peccatum nihil est obiect^ tamen (that I may use the schoolmens phrase)
infinitum est, sin of it self is nothing, but in respect of the object, it
is infinite: consider oh sinner, the greatness of sin, when as it is infinite,
behold how great an evil thou committest quickly, even in a moment, ponder
with thy self, what exceeding peruersitie, and malice it is, to oppose thy
self against an infinite power, examine well how improbous and rebellious thou
art, being that thou art adverse and opposite to God whose goodness is infinite:
Oh malicious and perverse sinner, what is thy impudency, and audaciousnes, that
thou dare contest, and contend with thy God and creator? The second reason
is, that God being by his nature, presence, and omnipotency, in all places, in
thee which offendest, in the matter wherein thou offendest, in the members,
whereby thou offendest him, behold how great the offense is, thou being so
impudent, that in the divine presence of the infinite majesty of the Father,
the Son and the holy Ghost, thou do commit such indecent and heinous
crimes, which thou desire to be hidden from the eyes of so many celestial
spirits, and of which thou thy self herafter, wilt greatly repent: For whilst
thou do commit such filthy, and abominable crimes, seeking obscure places,
that thou should not be seen of men, thou lie open to the all-penetrating
eye of God: In omni loco, oculi Domini contempla^tur bonos and malos. ( Prou.
15.3.) In every place, the eye of our Lord behouldeth the good and the bad: In
a word, go whither thou will, hide thy self where thou can, do what thou
may, thou can not avoid the all-seing eye of the divine majesty.

Consider with thy self, if thou take any thing, God is at hand in thy
soul, in thy heart, in thy understanding in thy will, in thy hands and feet,
in the thing it self which thou take, in the house which thou entrest, in
the way wherein thou walk: Weigh seriously with thy self, oh blinded sinner,
how unheard of, the impudency o^ offense is of lust, for whilst thou do
commit not only lascivious, and filthy crimes, but acts proper to beasts,
which are unseemly to be named, God is in thee, in the thing, in the members
wherewith thou offendest: Not by his grace, but by his general influence, and
concurse, therefore thou sinnest, in whom God is, in the thing in which God is,
and do use those parts, and members, to be instruments of Satan, in which
God dwells, and inhabiteth: Nescitis quia membra vestra, sunt templum
Spiritus Sancti? (1. Corin. 6.19.) know ye not, that your members are the
temple of the holy Ghost? How great therefore is thy madness, impudency, and
wickedness oh sinner? How infinite the abuse, and wrong wherewith thou offendest,
and displeasest thy God and creator? But oh thou angry and malicious sinner,
while thou strikest, killest and murderest thy neighbor o^ enemy, is not God
in thee* is not God I say in the members of thee, of thy neighbor, and of
thine enemy? nothing more certain, he is in thy hands wherewith thou
killest, in the members of him who^ thou killest, in the weapon wherewith thou
killest, therefore oh wicked impious, and ungodly wretch, which having noe
respect, or reverence to so great and infinite a majesty, dare commit such
things in his presence, which thou would fear, and be ashamed to commit in
the presence of an earthly King or Prince, although of mean power and
authority.

The third reason is: Tell me, oh ye sinners, what punishment is he worthy
of, who receiving many courtesies and favors from some noble man of worth, as
a ^ouse, ornaments, and clothes, beseeming his quality, when before, he was
ragged, torn, and meanly clothed, and being restored to his former dignity,
when as before he was in great disgrace and misery, and having recovered his
health, which before was sick and infirm, and by his means made rich and
wealthy, which before was a beggar and in great want, lastly, promoted, and
placed in the chiefest degree of honor who before was contemned, vilified, and
despised of all, if this man who is thus infinitely obliged and bound to this
his friend, should in stead of giuinge thanks, intend and meditate snares and
deceipts for the taking away of the goods, estimation, and honor, and last
of all, the life of so great a friend and charitable benefactor, and should
associate him self in the company of his enemies, to the end that he might
abuse, contemn, deride, and kill him? speak I beseech thee, what penalty
shall this ungrateful wretch deserve? surely the greatest that can be
invented. Tell me now, oh most wicked, rebellious, and adulterous sinner,
what punishments, what torments art thou worthy of, when as thou do disunite
and separate thy self from thy God which made thee, which created thee, which
gave thee thy soul and body, adorned thee with faculties, and senses
correspondent, which produced thee out of nothing, when as thou were nothing,
and conserueth thee in this state in which thou now art, and for thy use and
conservation, has ordained an infinite number of creatures, visible, and
invisible, the heavens, sun, moon, stars, elements, mixed, and composed
bodies, for thy sake only, who also exceeding in love and charity, for thy
sake was made man, visible, and mortal, exposinge himself to all wrongs and
difficulties, when as he was impassible: who last of all, did offer him self
to be killed, and naked, like a public malefactor in the midst of two
thieves as their captain, crucified upon the wood of the cross, only that he
might free thee from death, sin, the devil, and hell, and to bring thee to
the eternal bliss of the celestial paradise: but thou on the contrary, do
oppose and resist with all thy forces this so benign a God, so indulgent a
Father, so gentle, and mild a Lord, this I say so infinite, and great a
majesty, thou do study and endeavor with all thy faculties, and powers of
body and soul with so odious and detestable crimes to offend, despise and
dishonor.

Oh miserable and sinful soul, what punishment ca^ be thought upon, and
ordained worthy of thy deserts? oh infinite patience, and clemency of God,
which when as thou might precipitate, plu^ge, and cast these sinners into
the bottomless pit of hell, and deliver them into the hand of the devil to
be carried into the abisse of perpetual darkness, thou do not only not do
it, but favorably and patiently expect their return, calling them by thy
divine inspirations, and heavenly suggestions unto amendment and repentance:
And also have conserved, protected, and defended such cruel, and malicious
enemies, forso many years together, as well in things appertaininge to the
body, as the soul; thou call them, thou go to meet them, thou inuitest
them, and do offer thy self unto them, as if thou were ravished with love
toward them, who art so infinitely offended, and greatly dishonored by them.
Oh immense love? oh patience, oh clemency, oh mercy of God, what great reason
had thou, oh holy Prophet to say? Misericordias Domini in eternum cantabo.
( Psalm. 88.1.) Thy mercies oh Lord will I sing for ever, the earth is full of
thy mercies oh Lord, and there is no end of thy goodness.

Let us come to the fourth reason, which declares the greatness of sin,
wherewith a sinner offends God: What do you otherwise, oh sinners, when yea
sin and offend, then balance in one scale, the infinite majesty power, and
presence of God, and your selves, your unlawful desires, and momentary
pleasures in the other? therefore tell me, oh sinner, whither of these two, is
of greater excellency, and worth, and rather to be chosen, God or thy little
momentary pleasure? your opinion is, that this your transitory pleasure is of
greater value, by which means, your Savior being rejected, you make choice of
his creature; God being left, in whom is the fulness of all things, you take
that which is nothing; the chiefest good being contemned, ye do embrace that
which bears in it self noe species, or sign of true good, but superficial,
painted, and transitory: oh injury, oh offense, oh wrong, oh dishonor,
wherewith you offend so loving a God, and benign and clement a Father!

Let us now proceed to the gift of reason: what does a miserable sinner, by
sinning, but call in question and dispute, whether his or Gods divine will is
better? whither with more promptitude he should obey God, or his own base
desire? He prefers his own will before Gods, and presently concludes, that
it is more convenient to obey his own, making himself an other Lucifer,
greater then God: Oh execrable Lucifers, oh wicked, and accursed sinners, who
when as ye are base filth and dung, are so swollen, and puffed up with pride,
that in as much as lies in your powers, you exalt yourselues above God: what
affliction therefore shall be imposed upon you in the world to come, when you
shall be delivered, and given up into the hands of that proud Lucifer, of who^
ye have been such diligent, sectatours, and vigilant servants? Oh my dear
sinful Brethren, I will not be more prolix in this argument, because the
disputation calls me an other way, it suffices me, and also ought to
suffice you, to have heard the sound of this our first Trumpet, which with a
short blaste I have sounded, that detesting, and abhorring sin, you may be
disunited from Satan, and reioyned to your sweet creator, Lord, and redeemer,
that herafter ye may desist from offering him so great injuries, and make an
end and period of so many foul and detractiue contumelies, whereby ye have in
no small measure offended him. Do this I beseech you brethren, which I beg,
and implore of you by the precious wou^des, and lively blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, lyinge prostrate at your feet upon the earth: I say unto you oh
Brethren, by the bitter passion of Jesus crucified, offend him not so often
with so many injuries, crucify him not any more with such heinous crimes:
desist my Brethren, hereafter to contemn and tread under foot the blood of the
covenant; And turning to thee oh my Jesus, I say, oh Jesus, my only love and joy,
grant pardon and remission to a sinner,

Amen.
The second Trumpet of the deformity of sin. THE IV. CHAPTER.
ET secundus Angelus tuba cecinit. ( Apoc. 8.) And the second Angel sounded the
trumpet: Give ear oh sinners unto the sound of this second trumpet, rowsing
and exciting you up, out of the sleep of sin: behold the second Angel
sounds, that he may quicken you, and put to flight all your inordinate
dispositions, that you might atte^tiuely hear him; For what does Angel
signify in the Greek tou^g, but a messenger, harbinger, and legate, in ours?
who comes and calls you that ye may be converted to your creator, return
home to your loving Father, and be reconciled to your merciful redeemer. Oh my
Brethren, if the sound and call of the first trumpet, and counsel and
admonition of the first Angel, will not any jot move you, when it plainly
propounds unto you the offense whereby ye offend almighty God, which
certainly should be a motive more then sufficient, at least, let the deformity
and filthiness of sin, which this second Angel with a horrid sound denounces
unto you, be a powerful reason to induce you: without doubt brethren, if you
would but comprehend in your minds, and ponder with your selves, the vggelines
of sin, it could not be, but that you would detest and loath the deformity of
it as you ought to do: for so great and infinite (oh Brethren) is the
deformity of sin, that it is, ex diametro, directly opposite to the beauty
and claritie of God: for what other thing is it in it self, or in its own
nature, but an auersion from the divine will? sin in it self is nothing. Et
sine ipso sactum est nihil. ( Joan. 1.3.) and without him was made nothing
(says S. John) that is sin, whose deformity is made without God: because he
does not concur to the inordination of it, although, as the most subtle Doc.
Scotus says, to the substance of the actio^ God does concur, yet not unto
the malice of the same: for examples sake, man steals, and sins, here two
things are to be considered, the one is the substance of the action, which is
to extend, put out the hand, and apprehend the thing, to this God concurreth,
for unless he did give power to the hands and feet, this act could not be
performed: furthermore besides this action, there is an inordination which
follows this action, contrary to the divine will, and law, which
contradicts, and forbids theft, the same happens, when adultery, or any
other sin is committed: go to, consider well, how great the malice of sin
is, that it is opposite, and contrary to the divine will: Furthermore it is the
common opinion of the Doctors, that sin is an auersion from the creator, and
conversion to the creature, in so much that so often as ye commit sin, ye
separate yourselues from your sweet God, and join your selves to the base and
corruptible creature, from whence it proceeds that the eternal and infinite
beauty being left, you turn your selves to the extremest deformity and
foulnes: I beseech ye for Gods sake, that ye do so noe more, turn to your
selves, oh my my Brethren, being illuminated with the resplendant beams of the
son of righteousness, behold your blindness, and misery, and separate not your
selves from this so infinite a good, lest you change the inestimable treasure
and riches of the incomprehe^sible divinity, for the dross of things
temporal, and transitory: Quem enim fructum habuistis etc. ( Romans 6.21.) what
fruit had ye in those things of which ye are now ashamed. Furthermore if ye
desire to see the foulnes of execrable and detestable sin, give ear unto the
sequel; the devil of himself was most fair, and of his own nature, next
unto almighty God, excelling al other things created in beauty and comelines:
Duo fecisti Domine, vnum prope te, and aliud prope nihil: Thou haste made (oh
God) two things, one near unto thee, the other almost nothing: says the holy
Father S. Augustine: that which comes nearest unto thee, and is more perfect
then all the rest, is the nature of the Angels, the other which is almost
nothing, is the first matter, whose entitie and being is so small, that it has
given occasion to the philosophers to say, that it is entitie only in
possibility, from whence many have denied matter to be entitie, although the
subtle Doctor defends the contrary, contendinge that it is not placed only
in possibility, but is an entitie, yet so little and small, that take away one
degree, and it is nothing: These I have said, not without reason, that I might
intimate unto you, the nature of the devil, who was created of God, the most
perfect and absolute of all things, notwithstanding with one only sin, he is
made so fearful, loathsome, and detestable, that our holy Father S. Francis,
being asked of his companion Brother Aegidius concerning this matter, was wont
to answer, that it were impossible for any man to see the devil in his
diabolical shape, and filthiness, but for the space of reciting the Pater
noster, without loss of life. Therefore oh ye sinners, how great must needs
the deformity of sin be? that has so obfuscated that nature of so excellent
a beauty, and made it so filthy and odious? oh my Brethren, gather your forces
together, march with undaunted spirits, at the sound of this trumpett, against
the violence of your enemy, cancel the bond wherein you have bound your selves
as slaves unto Satan, break the truce which ye have made with your adversary
the devil: But let us proceed further, that we may more clearly behold the
filthiness of sin: consider our first parents Adam, and Eve, who were created
with complete stature, and comelines of body, before they had sinned, because
they were endued with original justice, they were so pure and simple, that
like little children they were not ashamed of any thing that they did, but
immediately after that they had eaten of the forbidden fruit, and transgressed
the commandment of God their Father, the holy scripture says, that aperti
sunt oculi eorum. ( Genesis 3.7.) their eyes were opened, and they perceived the^
selves to be naked, and they sowed together fig leaves, to cover themselves:
neither is this all, for the scripture says in the same place, Cum audissent
vocem Domini etc. hearing the voice of our Lord God, walking in paradise at the
cool of the day, they hidd themselves in the midst of the trees, for the
fear of our Lord: And the shame was so great, that perceauing their nakedness,
it did not suffice them to cover their members, with fig tree leaves, but
they hidd themselves also in the midst of the trees, and upon this, God
crying unto them, Adam vbi es? to whom Adam answered, Domine vocem tuam audius,
oh Lord I heard thy voice, and was afraid, because I was naked; who did
intimate unto thee, that thou werte naked, but the sin of disobedience, by
eating of the forbidden fruit? oh execrable, and accursed sin? how great and
infinite is thy deformity, filthiness, and malice?

Here follows the same matter of the deformity of sin. THE V. CHAPTER.
SVch and so great (oh Brethren) is the deformity of sin, that if a sinner
should see his soul in a deadly sin, he would be utterly confounded with
fear and amazement. We read of an adulterer, who after that he had committed
adultery, returned home, whose wife and children forthwith astonished at the
sight of him, ra^ne away; for he did appear unto them in the likeness of a
devil, with fearful and huge horns, this man beholding himself in a glass,
and seeing himself to be so deformed, being stricken with an horrible fear,
with all expedition, and haste, went forth to confession, and to be reconciled
to almighty God: the people that met him, yea the very brute beasts
themselves being affrighted fled away, he seemed so terrible to them in shape
and figure, and coming to the priest (who did stand at the gate of the church,
saying his divine office) being espied of him to approach near unto the
church, he did so astonish him, as that it caused him presently to shut the
doors: The miserable soul coming to the door, intimated unto him, that he was
a sinner, and was so deformed, and of so fearful aspect by reason of his
sin, and desired him not to be afraid: this being related and manifested,
the priest being possessed with no small fear, went out unto him, who having
confessed, being penitent and reconciled, was restored to his ordinary and
natural form. Oh soul, soul, oh unhappy and wretched soul, if thou
could but see thy self being in a deadly sin, how exceedingly beyond all
apprehension, would thou be ashamed, astonished, and confounded at thy
self? how great a terror would seize upon thee, if thou should see thy
self so deformed and vggly through sin, when as before thou were most
fair, and beautiful? Furthermore, when ye commit any sin, lest you should
be seen of any one, you seek obscure places, for the performance of the same,
and if by fortune you be apprehended in the act of your offense, presently you
are most grievously ashamed, and perplexed, and although the sin be obscure,
and not revealed, yet for many years you dare not appear in the presence of
him who apprehended you. Oh blessed souls, who now rest in the favor of God,
make known unto these sinners; what baseness and confusion ye perceive in
sin, when as some time by the divine permissio^, endued with heavenly
virtues, and illuminated with the celestial beams of divine grace, you know,
understand, and apprehend, your former blemishes, and offenses, and the
multitude of so great injuries, whereby formerly you have displeased your
most gracious God: I beseech you oh blessed souls, demonstrate this unto
these sinners, and solicit your benign and clement spouse for them, that he
would be pleased for his mercies sake, to bestow some measure of those singular
graces, wherewith ye your selves were endued, upon these destressed, desolate,
and miserable wretches: effect this I beseech you, by the love of him who so
dearly loves you, and whom you likewise so much reverence, honor, and
esteem: Do this, seeing there is nothing more acceptable unto God, then to
intercead for poor sinners, for the pardoning and remission of their sins,
who were redeemed and bought, with so dear a price as the precious blood,
death, and passion of his dear son; obtain this therefore I entreat you,
while I proceed further, to exaggerate the deformity of sin.

Give ear oh my Brethren sinners, sin is so odious and abominable, that it
compelled Job to curse the hour, and day in which he was borne, with that
fearful speech, saying, Pereat dies in qua natus sum. ( Job. 3.3.) let the day
perish in which I was borne, and the night, in which it was said, a man child
is conceived: let darkness, and the shadow of death obscure it, let a miste
possess it, let it be wrapped up in bitterness, let a darkesome whirlewinde
possess that night, let that day not be counted with the days of the year,
nor numbered in the months: And a little after in the same chapter, he
utters these words full of mysteries; Quare non in vulua mortuus sum, etc.
why perished I not in the womb? why did the knees bear me, and the breasts
give me suck? what do ye say to this, oh my Brethren, that such an holy,
perfect, and just man, as Job, should say these things? of whom God with his
own mouth gave this testimony unto Satan, Numquid co^siderasti seruum meum (
Job? Job. 2.3.) have thou considered my servant Job, that there is not the like
unto him in the earth? a man simple, upright, fearing God, and retaining
innocence? Wherefore then, and to what end should such fearful words as the
literal sense gives, proceed out of his mouth, as to curse the day, the
night, and hour of his birth? surely it was only to intimate unto us, the
grievous and detestable loathsomnes of sin, in which he was conceived. Oh this
wonderful, and admirable exaggeration of sin? how fully does it represent
unto us, the filth and deformity, thereof? God grant that the terrible sound of
this trumpet, may work in you an abhorring and detestation of vice, and kindle
in your soul the fire of divine love, that you may die daily to sin here,
and live with him perpetually herafter,

Amen.
In what hatred sin is in the sight of almighty God. THE VI. CHAPTER.
O Dio sunt Deo impius, and impietas eius. ( Wisdom. 14.9.) The wicked and his
impiety, are abominable unto God. So great (Brethren) is the deformity of
sin, that God who is nothing, but beauty, splendor, and goodness, has it in
great hatred, and detestation: and not sin only, but also the sinner. The
wicked, and his impiety, are odious alike in the sight of God says the holy
scripture: By many things we may collect the deadlye hatred that God has
toward sinners, but most especially by two. The first is, that he does so
sodenlie, out of his severe justice punish it: Lucifer, and his associates
sinned, but God by no means enduring that insolent pride, precipitated them
from the height of their former felicity, into the abisse of eternal darkness,
by Michael the Archangell, prime minister in the celestial paradise: Our first
parents, Adam and Eve sinned, and God forthwith expelled them out of paradise.
There are many examples in holy scripture, which do lively set before our
eyes, the rigorous and soden execution of the judgment, and severity of God
upon sinners: The Israeliticall people sinned, adoring the golden Calfe,
presently the fire of Gods wrath was kindled, and he said unto Moses. Dimitte
me, ut irascatur furor meus contra eos. ( Exodus 32.20.) suffer, me that my
fury may arise against them. The same people sinned, in demanding Quails in
the wilderness. Adhuc escae erant in ore ipsorum. ( Psalm. 77.30.) Even when the
meat was in their mouth, the judgments of God descended upon them.

To be brief, the scripture is full of such examples, although on the contrary
his divine mercy in expecting the conversion of a sinner, far surpasses his
judgment: and the reason that there are so many examples extant of sinners in
the scripture, not punished by God suddenly, is, that he might declare unto us
the riches of his mercy, according to that saying of the Apostle. Deus aute^
qui dives est in misericordia. ( Ephesians. 2.4.) God who is rich in mercy, would
expect them, until they were converted: he expected the penitencie of the old
world an hundred years, before he would destroy it with the deluge, in the
mean time, he commanded Noah to preach penance, allthough according to the
custom of the world, they believed him not, who were wont very seldom to
believe Prophets, who did denounce any destruction unto the^, but rather did
persecute and torment them with diverse punishments: The Evangelist declares
this, where Jesus Christ our Lord, threatening Jerusalem, Jerusalem (inquiens)
Jerusalem quae occidis Prophetas. ( Math. 23.37.) Jerusalem, Jerusalem thou
which put to death the Prophets, and stonnest them which are sent unto thee.

But let us omit these, and declare how long time he expected before he would
rain down fire and brimstone, upon that obscene and co^taminated city of
Sodom: and after that he had decreed to consume it, he was so clement, that
he was compelled, and drawn unto it, as if it were by the ears, whereupon the
holy scripture says. Clamor Sodomorum, and Gomor: multiplicatus est. ( Genesis
18.21.) The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is multiplied, and their sin
aggrauated exceedingly, I will descend and see, whether they have in act^
accomplished the cry which is come unto me: Notwithstanding though he has in
so full a measure manifested his mercy, yet that he might demonstrate the hate
and detestation which he has toward sin, it appears by many wonderful
examples, how severely and justly, he has punished it, even so soon as it was
committed, which is an infallible argument of the great deformity of sin.

The second reason, by which we may understand the great displeasure which God
conceaueth against sin, is, that for the subversion of the same, he would
give his only begotten son to die a most ignominious death upon the cross,
amidst two thieves. Sic enim Deus dilexit mundum etc. ( Ioh. 3.16.) so God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son for the redemption of it:
Propter scelus populi mei percussi eum. ( Isay. 53.8.) for the sin of my
people, I have struck him; and he has laid upon him all our iniquities,
says the same holy Prophet. Oh thou sinner, consider well this place, and let
it touch thee to the quick; if the eternal Father for the bannishing of
sin, would that his own son should suffer death, who was not man only, but
also God, and that so precious a life should be given for the death of sin,
which was prized at so high a rate, that the holy Apostle says. Empti enim
estis pretio magn^. (1. Cor. 6.20.) for ye are bought with a great price, what
an infinite then, and immense indignation, and wrath, must God needs conceive
against sin? Furthermore, how odious and detestable, must execrable sin be,
when Jesus, Qui erat speciosus prae filijs hominum, who was the fairest among
the sons of men, should so abase himself, that he made himself of no
reputation, that the Prophet Isay, did say, Vidimus eum etc. ( Isa. 53.2.) we
have seen him, and there was more appearance of beauty in him* we were
desirous of him, despised, and most abject of men, a man of sorrows, and
knowing infirmity, whereupon, neither have we esteemed him, but counted him as
a leaper, and one stricken of God: oh ye Brethren sinners, if the eternal
Father would not pardon and remit sin, without the death of his only son,
how hateful must it needs be in his divine sight? and so much the more, that
it did not satisfy his infinite, and inscrutable justice, that his dear son
should only die, but that he should suffer upon the cross, a death most
ignominious, that he should be so oppressed with grief and so tirannically
handled, that his contenance and shape could not be known.

Oh sin be thou accursed, that wast the cause, that my sweet Savior Jesus
suffered, and died so shameful, and unheard of a death. Oh Jesus, my love and
delight, commiserate and compassionate poor sinful and wretched souls, the
which thou have redeemed with so great a price, as thy prepretious blood.
Neither can ye say, that dear Jesus suffered and was crucified for the fall
and sin of Adam only, when as truly he died for the sins of the whole
world. Supra dorsum meum fabricauerunt peccatores. ( Psalm. 128.3.) sinners have
builded upon my back, says the Prophet David in the person of Jesus Christ,
what need we many words? Jesus Christ our Lord died for the abolishing and
abliterating of all sins and offenses, generally and particularly, and he
suffered no more for all, then for one, yea I say, he offered himself to be
buffeted and massacred for one only soul, and if it were needful and
necessary, he would do the same again for the most abject soul that lives.

Oh therefore ye sinners, sin no more, by your so many offenses, and
execrable iniquities, crucify no more your sweet Jesus, and indulgent Father:
for what? of only the Jews do ye say he was crucified? I will tell you
brethren, that what time so ever ye commit any sin, in as much, as in your
power lies, you do crucify him again, and do cause him with every one of
your mortal sins, (if his death and passion were not already sufficient) to
undergo, and suffer the same again. Rursum crucifigentes sibimetipsis filium
Dei. ( Hebr. 6.6.) crucifying again unto themselves, the son of God: oh
therefore Brethren abstain from such infinite and heinous offenses, and offend
not your loving God any more with such death-bringing injuries, which loves
you so exceedingly, and mercifully expects your penitency, and conversion,
saying. Conuertimini ad me in toto cord vestro. ( Joel. 2.12.) turn to me
with your whole heart: oh clemency, oh benignity, oh love of Jesus, oh
ingratitude, oh obduracie, oh malice of a sinner! Oh dear and loving Jesus,
have pity upon us, look not upon our iniquities, but remember that infinite
mercy, wherewith thou did embrace us, Et secundum magnam misericordiam
tuam. ( Psalm. 50.) and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine
iniquity,

Amen.
The third Trumpet, of the detriment that sin brings to a soul in this
life. THE VII. CHAPTER.
ET tertius Angelus tuba cecinit. and. ( Apoc. 8.) and the third Angel sounded
the trumpet. Draw near my sinful Brother, and attentively give ear unto the
sound of this trumpet, if thou can not be moved to the abhorring of sin, by
that deformity which the former trumpet has sounded unto thee, at least
decree, and resolve with thy self to fly from it, for the exceeding detriment
that the soul suffers by it, even in this world: O wretch that thou art, if
thou did but know what prejudice thou receauest, when thou committest any
sin, I am most certain, thou would fly from it as from a serpent: Quasi a
facie colubri fuge peccata. Fly sin, as from the face of a Serpent, the
teeth of it, are as the teeth of a Lion, killing the souls of men. All
iniquity is as a two-edged sword, the wound thereof is incurable, says the
wise man. ( Eccles. 21.3.) Oh Brethren what a fearful speech is this, to
terrify you from sinning, and to draw you from offending your God and
Redeemer? how evidently does it demonstrate, how great, and infinite the
detriment is, and how paste cure, the ulcer of sin is? how true is it, that
sin is a sting of a venomous serpent, which causes such a wound in the soul
of man, as that without great difficulty it cannot be cured? Nam peruersi
difficulter corriguntur, perverse men are not easily reformed, and brought to
amendment: And, Impius cum in profundum venerit peccatorum contemnit. ( Prou.
18.3.) the wicked when he comes to the height of ungodliness, contemns: How
much violence must a covetous, intemperate, malicious, or angry man, or any
sinner, use to be truly, and cordially converted, which for a long time, has
been inueterated in his accustomed vices? how true is it, that sins are lions
teeth, mortally wou^ding the souls of men? Lions at one stroke, and moment,
kill and devour beasts: sin likewise in one instant butchereth souls: In
so much that it peruerteth, and molesteth all the internal, and external
powers, it darkneth and blinds the understanding, it congealeth the
affections, it debillitateth all the faculties, that they are made weak to
resist and withstand all oppositions.

I would to God that ye could perceive, what wounds you give your souls,
every time that you sin. I wish from my heart, you could see, how grievously,
and deadly, you strike, stabbe, and murder them, so often as you offend:
Therefore the holy scripture says very properly, Quasi romphea bis acuta,
omnis iniquitas. ( Eccles. 21.4.) all iniquity is a two-edged sword, which may
be understood, because it kills both body and soul; or therefore it is
spoken, to exaggerate, and make known unto us, the deadly wounds, that it does
inflict upon a soul. Neither is the scripture content with this, but it goes
farther, and says. Illius non est sanitas, there is no remedy for the hurt
thereof: neither truly is there found a natural balm against the wound of
sin, but we must seek one supernatural and divine: Quis potest remittere
peccatum, nisi solus Deus? who can forgive sin but God alone? ( Luc. 5.21.)
this blemish cannot be taken away, nor this wou^d cured, unless God himself,
the heavenly physician of souls, apply the salve: Magnus de coelo descendit
medicus, quia magnus iacebat egrotus: it was necessary that a great physician
should come from heaven, because there was a dangerous wou^d to be cured upon
earth: In a word, it is only the precious blood of Christ, that can effect
this, Et sine sanguinis effusione, non fit remissio peccatorum. ( Heb. 9.22.)
and without the effusio^ of blood, there is no remission of sin: Blind and
old Tobias, that he might recover his lost sight, was compelled to apply the
gall of a fish, taken out of the river Tigris: and thou inueterated sinner in
vices, to receive thy spiritual sight again, have need to apply the bitter
gall, of the sacred fish Christ Jesus, taken out of the torrent of his passion,
according to that of Jonas. Protecisti me in profundu^, in cord maris, and
flume^ circumdedit me. ( Ion. 2.) Thou have cast me into the deep, and the
river has compassed me, about, which truly may be understood of the passion of
Christ. Passio Christi est mare propter penalitatis amaritudinem: flumen
propter charitatis dulcedinem, S. Bon. proemio sentent.

And therefore if thou desire to be made whole, thou must have recourse to the
wounds of Christ, and that precious blood which was powered forth, and distilled
from his sacred body, hanging upon the wood of the cross: run with all speed
to the whippes, and nails, blows and ignominies, which our dear Jesus
suffered: to those torments, and sufferinges which he endured: to the pains
which he did undergo: to the disgraceful crown which was set upon his head:
to the spittings, buffetings, opprobries, accursed maledictions, and
blasphemies, with which thy sweet Jesus was oppressed: In a word Brethren, that
you may be awakened from the lethargy of sin, and abandon the society of
the devil, of necessity you must make haste to prostrate your selves at the
feet of Jesus Christ crucified, there to beg the balm, electuarie, and
potion, which may cure your inueterate wounds, poisoned soars, and apostemes:
To conclude it is necessary, to cast all our cogitation, into the immense
abisse of the passion of Jesus Christ, and that we should assure our selves,
that whatsoever he has suffered, has been for us, and that our sin has
been the only cause thereof: Last of all, that we may recover our former health,
and change our life's and conuersations, let our Lord illuminate us, and take
pity, and commiseratio^ upon us for his mercies sake,

Amen.
Other damages and losses which a soul receaueth by reason of sin. THE VIII.
CHAPTER.
SVrge qui dormis. ( Ephesians. 5.14.) Arise thou that sleep, and come from
amongst the dead, and Christ will illuminate thee: Mark I beseech you, and give
ear to this saying of the Apostle, if ye desire to know more detriments of
sin, whereby your souls are prejudiced: The Apostle does demonstrate three
harms in this place, which sin procures: The first is, that it dulleth the
soul, that it cannot well perform her function: therefore it is said. Surge
qui dormis, arise thou that sleep: The second is, that it kills the soul:
therefore it is said. Surge a mortuis. The third is, that it blinds it,
therefore the Apostle says. Et illuminabit te Christus, and Christ shall give
thee light: oh ye drowsy and sluggish sinners, how true is it, that you are a
sleep, and possessed with the lethargy of sin? Et Jonas descendebat ad
interiora nauis, and dormiebat sopore graui. ( Ion. 1.5.) Jonas descended into
the innermoste parts of the ship, and slept a sound sleep, he perceived not
the roaring of the sea, nor the violent encountering of the foming waves, nor
the great danger to which he was exposed, nor did he hear the cry, and
lamentation of the mariners, nor had he awaked, had not the Master of the
ship, stirred him up, saying unto him. Quid tu sopore deprimeris? what do
thou sleep? arise and call upon the name of thy God.

Oh sinner, how have thou descended into the interior part of the ship, our
holy Mother the church? thou lie there lulled a sleep in vices, and
iniquities, neither wretch that thou art, do thou take notice of the
troubled state of the ship, the church, exposed to the danger of shipwreck
for thy sins, on all sides tossed with turbulent winds, and storms of most
cruel enemies. Arise unhappy soul, I say, not the Master, or pilot of the
ship, but thy poor Brother, who being touched with a desire of the health of
thy soul, and of all other sinners, for the love of him who showed such great
mercy toward me, that called me from the sleep in which I did lie, I say
unto thee, wherefore do thou lie oppressed with sleep? sleep no longer,
awake oh sinful, and wicked wretch, now is the time, to think with thy
self, what miseries are imminent, now implore the divine aid and mercy, Si
fort^ recogitet de nobis, vt non pereamus. ( Ion. 1.6.) if perhaps he will
think of us, that we may not perish. Arise now with the holy Prophet David,
saying. Illumina oculos meos. ( Psalm. 12.5.) lighten mine eyes, lest I should
sleep in death, lest that mine enemies should say, I have prevailed against
him.

There are some which snorte and are sound a sleep in their sins, and there
be some which be half awake: they of the first sort, be such as daily sin
mortally, and they are in continual enmity with God, because as they that
snorte, sleep soundly, neither are they awaked of the sudden, so they that are
in mortal sin, are not easily raised out of the depth thereof: But they of
the second sort, sometimes they fall, sometimes they rise again out of their
sins, even as he that slumbereth, often sleeps, and often awaketh again,
and this is the lesser evil, although sometimes they are punished with noe
lesser penalty, then they that are sou^dlie a sleep: God almighty illuminate
you that you may not sleep, slumber, nor snorte in the depth of sin, as you
have done until now.

The Apostle prosecuteth this matter further, saying. Et exurge a mortuis, and
arise from the dead; Behold a greater danger, whereby the soul is endamaged by
sinning? for after that a soul for some time has slept in sin, it is more
negligent in the exercise of good works, and is so dulled, and in disposed,
that it seems to be dead: For as the body without the soul is dead: so a
soul is dead without God; as the soul is the life of the body, so God is the
life of the soul: know ye (dear Brethren) that there is noe dead carcass so
stinkinge, or has a more loathsome smell in the sense of man, as a soul dead
in sin has, in the nostrills of almighty God. There is an example at hand in
the lives of the holy Fathers, of an Angel that did accompany an Anachoret,
to make him understand something of the divine judgments: These in the way as
they iournied, found a dead body, the Angel passing by, made noe sign of any
offensive smell, but proceeding further, they met with a certain comely yo^g
man, richly invested, and bearing about him strong parfumes, at the sight of
whom, the Angel forthwith stopped his nostrills, at which thing the Anchoret
wonderinge, he demanded the reason, wherefore he should stop his nose, at
that comely young man, well clothed, and sending forth acceptable smells, and
immmediatly before, made no such sign at the dead body: because said the
Angel, youth laden with sin stinketh more odiously, then a putrified body:
I am fetet, now he stinketh says Martha of her Brother Lazarus, ( Joan.
11.39.) oh my my Brother sinner how grieuouslie do thou stink in the
nostrils of God, the Angels, and the Saints in heaven?

Et illuminabit te Christus, and Christ shall enlighten thee, behold another
grievous effect, and detriment that sin brings upon the soul: Oh blinded
sinners which perceive not the resplendant luster and light of divine grace: Et
confestim ceciderunt ab oculis eius tanquam squamae, and visum recepit. ( Act.
9.18) and presently there fell from his eyes, as it were scales, and he received
his sight, says S. Luke in the acts of the Apostles, speaking of the
conversion of Saul. Oh sinner, persecutor of Jesus Christ, I would to God, thou
could see with what great scales, thy eyes are covered, which do hinder,
and blind thy sight: Oculos suos statuerunt declinare in terram. ( Psalm.
16.11.) they have determined to decline their eyes toward the earth: sinners
have made a compact with the devil, to have their eyes always fastened upon
the earth.

Oh blinded sinners, that Jesus might illuminate your eyes, he would permit his
divine eyes to be ridiculously covered, and shamfully blindfolded: How
ignorant, and blind art thou, oh ambitious man, which do so steadfastly fix
thine eyes upon the vanishinge shadow of vain glory? Oh thou covetous man, how
blind art thou, to whom a lump of dust and earth, seems an incomparable
treasure? How blind art thou, oh luxurious man, to whom a stinking carcass,
seems so precious a thing? Oh intemperate man, how blind art thou, to whom
transitory pleasures seem so sweet, and inestimable? Oh all ye sinners how
blind are you, that you cannot perceive and see your great detriment, and
eminent danger? oh my Jesus, illuminate I beseech thee these blinded sinners,
that they may take notice of their errors, in which they are so miserably
inuolued: grant them to repent for their crimes and offenses, and to turn
unto thee, with all their hearts, the sweet fountain of eternal life, and
happiness,

Amen.
That a soul by sin, loses the friendship of God. THE IX. CHAPTER.
SI consideremus (fratres charissimi) qua and quanta sunt, quae nobis
promittuntur in coelis, vilescerent animo omnia quae habentur in terris. Oh
dear Brethren, if you would truly consider, what, and how great things are
promised, and provided for you in heaven, all things upon earth would seem
contemptible, and base unto you: says S. Gregory: I am not determined at this
present to speak of the great loss, which sin brings upon the soul in
the life to come, seeing that I purpose hereafter to take a more oportune
occasion, but now I wll intimate only, what, and how great a thing it is, that
a soul loses by sin in this life: In maleuolam animam non intrabit
sapientia, wisdom shall not enter into a malignant soul, says the
scripture. ( Wisd. 1.4.) behold, the first shipwreck of a sinful soul, is
the want of the taste of true knowledge, for although a sinful soul is endued
with an excellent understanding, yet is it deprived of the comfortable taste of
the scriptures, and never has the gust of the sweetness thereof. But this is
nothing in respect of that which it loses, for the soul of a sinner is
deprived of the friendship, and amity of God, which far exceeds all other
things.

Be wife now therefore, oh ye sinners, and know how precious a jewel you
loose; hear me I beseech you: So long as a soul is void of sin it is a
friend and companion of God, by how much it is intense in his worship, praise,
and honor, by so much it is gracious and acceptable unto him: from whence it
comes to pass, that these great holy men when they were living in the world,
they were called the friends of God: Loquebatur Deus ad Moysen. ( Exodus
13.11.) God spoke unto Moses, face to face, as a man speaks to his friend:
and Jesus Christ says to his disciples. Iam non dicam vos seruos. ( Joan.
15.15.) now I will call you no more servants, for the servant knows not the
mind of his Master, but you have I called friends, because whatsoever I have
heard of my Father, that I have manifested unto you: Behold by what means a
soul is made a friend and darling of God? to wit, by obeying his holy will,
and observing his divine precepts; now a sinner refuses to do that which is
always commanded by God, and in neglect of this, and performing the
contrary, he witnesses his malice, and contempt of so omnipotent, and
infinite a majesty: if God says unto him, Non assumes nome^ Domini tus in
vanum. ( Exodus 20.7.) thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, he is presently breathing forth blasphemies: If God says, Obserua diem
Sabath, keep holy the Saboth day, he will little esteem the profanation of
it: if God says, Honora Patrem, honor thy Father, and thy Mother, he will be
disobedient to them: hence therefore arises a capital emnitie betwixt the
soul and God, Iniquitates vestrae diuiserunt inter vos, and Deum vestrum. (
Isay. 59.2.) your iniquities have made a division betwixt you and your God.

Oh unfortunate soul, what an inexcogitable prejudice have thou procured,
which is the loss of Gods friendship, and to appear no other ways in his
divine aspect, then an abject? Reprobate, and wretched enemy, perhaps thou
think with thy self, that thou have lost but the favor of some ignoble and
unworthy man or Prince: Oh no, no it is no less, then the friendship of
almighty God, the creator, and conseruer of all things, and redeemer of all
mankind. Oh miserable soul, if thou would but duly consider, and equally
balance thy unheard of detrime^t, what could there be invented so pleasant, or
delightful, which might retain thee in the snares of sin? what fetters, and
chains of sin so strong, that thou would not shake off, and break in
sunder? oh what damage do you sinners suffer, when as you loose the love,
favor, and friendship of so omnipotent, clement, and merciful a God? The holy
Prophet David consideringe only that he could not be present at the solemnity
of the temple, bewailing, and lamenting, he says. Fuerunt mihi lachrimae meae
etc. ( Psalm. 41.4.) my tears have been my bread day, and night, whilst they
do say unto me, where is thy God? Que^admodum desiderat ceruus even as the
heart pants after the fountains of waters, so my soul desires after thee,
oh God, my soul has thirsted after God the living water, when shall I come
and appear before the face of God? Si ergo inueni gratiam in conspectu tuo,
etc. If therefore I have found favor in thy eyes, show me thy favorable
co^tena^ce, says Moses to God. Exodus 33.13.

This is that, that caused the Saints to be so vigilant, and industrious in
their prayers, so austere in their fastinges, mortifications, and resignations
of their proper wills, and that to no other end, but that they might be counted
worthy to be friends of God: for truly, what other is the end, center, or
repose of our soul, but God? As fire of its own nature is carried upward, and
as every ponderous and heavy thing of its nature falls downwards, even so
the soul is directed toward God, and even as the waters run into the sea,
so have our souls recourse unto almighty God; now truly from this center, from
this end, and from this sweet repose, is the soul hindered by the obstacle of
sin, and no other thing: Oh therefore sinners, enemies of God, where will you
be secure? To what place will you fly for refuge? Where will you hide your
selves, from the presence of God? Quo ibo a spiritu tuo? ( Psalm. 138.7.)
whether shall I go from thy spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy face? It
was the misery of sin that made Cayn cry out. Ecce hodie eijcis me a facie
terrae, ( Genesis 4.14.) behold thou do cast me this day from the face of the
earth, and I shall be hid from thy face, therefore every man that sees me, may
kill me: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,
says S. Paul: But do ye not tremble, oh you sinners, when your adversary is so
powerful, and your enemy so potent? woe be unto us, if he were not clement, who
is so mighty: Return therefore, now oh Brethren, unto him, which so lovingly
expects you. Humiliamini igitur sub potenti manu Dei. (1. Pet. 5.6.) humble
your souls under the mighty hand of God, that he might exalt you in the time
of his visitation, reconcile your selves unto him, and agree with your
adversary, whilst you are in the way, that when he shall see you at the point
and last article of your death, taking your farewell of the world, he may not
condemn you with the damned souls, and execrable devils in hell, but of his
mercy, extol and place you in heaven,

Amen.
That a soul by sin does lose the grace of God. THE X. CHAPTER.
GRatiam and gloriam dabit Dominus. ( Psalm. 83.4.) Our Lord will give grace and
glory: That I may comprehend the matter in few words, our Lord is he that in
this life, gives grace, and in the next, glory: But you, so long as ye are
in mortal sin, are deprived of that grace, and dying in sin, shall never
attain to that glory (which God forbid:) therefore rather turn from your
wicked ways, and learn to live unto God, for our Lord says: Nolo mortem
peccatoris impij etc. ( Ezech. 33.11.) I will not the death of a wicked sinner,
but had rather that the unjust man would leave his iniquity and live.
Therefore Brethren, consider I beseech you, the exceedinge great detriment and
loss, that you suffer by the deprivation of grace: which that with fruit, and
profit, I may intimate, and demonstrate unto you, I beseech you, and implore
this thing of you, that you would attentively hear and with diligence read
this that follows.

I have formerly declared, how a sinner loses the friendship of God, and now
my intent is to make known unto you, how he loses his divine grace, which
grace is as it were, an intermediat thing betwixt the soul and God, causing it
to be acceptable, and grateful unto him: for the grace of God is no other
thing, then a certain ornament, garment, or spiritual vestment of the soul,
by which she is made glorious and appears beautiful in the eyes and presence
of her beloved spouse Christ Jesus. Queen Hester when she would present her
self unto the King her husband, the scripture says. Circundata est gloria
sua. ( Ester. 15.4.) she was adorned with all her glory, that she might find
favor in the fight of the King her spouse: So likewise a soul, that it may
become acceptable, in the divine eyes of the King of heaven and earth, had
need be adorned with that rich garment of diverse colors. ( Psalm. 44.) which
is the variety of spiritual gifts, and graces.

But before I shall declare what this grace is, it will be needful to speak
of the common division of grace, which all Doctors affirm, saying, that grace
is two fold. The one is, Gratia gratis data, grace given gratis, and for no
precedent merit: the other, Gratum faciens, making the party acceptable, upon
whom it is bestowed. Graces of the first sort, are the fouours, and spiritual
gifts which are bestowed upon men, of which the Apostle speaks of, when be he
says, Alij quidem per spiritum datur sermo sapientia etc. (1. Cor. 12.8.) to
one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge, to another the grace of doing cures, to another the working of
miracles, to another, prophecy, to another, the discerning of spirits, to
another diversity of tounges, to another interpretation of languages, and all
these, works one, and the same spirit, dividing unto every one, according as
he will: Grace of the other kind, is a certain spiritual quality, created of
God alone, and infused into the soul, which fills and purifieth her essence:
as the subtle Scotus affirms, afterward redoundeth into the powers and
faculties, as the angelical Doctor teaches: It is not our purpose to dispute
of this matter, it will be sufficient for you to know, what you loose by your
sins.

Now the grace of God being thus understood, that it is a certain spiritual
quality created, and infused into the soul, which of its own nature, is
opposite to mortal sin, in so much that grace by no means, can stand
together with mortal sin, I say mortal sin: for grace is not excluded by
venial sin, although a soul should be blemished with a thousand venial
sins, yet notwithstanding it might obtain^ love, and favor in the sight of
God, but it is true, that when the soul is thus stained with the blemishes of
venial sins, that the mutual love and amity, which intercedeth between
God and the soul, waxes more cold and tepidd, that it cannot be elevated
with that ardent fervor of love toward God, as it was wont, neither with
that zeal does she seek his honor, and glory, as is requisite: but so
soon as one mortal sin seaseth upon the soul, the grace of God immediately,
upon, that instant, departs, and leaves that unhappy soul, which becomes
thereby, an enemy unto God, and appears abominable in his sight.

Behold now (Brethren) your infinite detriment, penetrate your great loss,
ponder well with your selves, in what a state you are, when as you are hateful
to almighty God: It is no small thing to be deprived of the favor of some
earthly King, or to purchase the displeasure of a worldly Prince, but it is a
far greater thing, to be destitute of the grace of God, and to incur the
wrath of the King of Kings: And yet this wretched world, vilifying, and
dispising this, seems to esteem of it as a matter of small moment. Oh
unwise, oh foolish, oh blind world, which folowest butterflies, and fear
the stings of flies, and gnats, but tremblest not to think of the ever gnawing
worm of conscience, and quakest not at the eternal fury, and consuminge
wrath of God. Oh (Brethren sinners) fear God, fear God I say, and remember
the saying of our B. Savior, pronounced with his own most sacred mouth.
Nolite timere etc. ( Math. 10.28.) fear not those that kill the body, but
cannot hurt the soul, but rather fear him, that can cast both body and
soul into hell fire. Christ Jesus our Lord God, for his mercies sake,
vouchsafe to infuse into your souls, the holy fear of him, for fear is the
beginning and original of all our good works: Beatus homo qui semper est
pauidus. ( Prou. 28.14.) blessed is the man that always fears, says the
wise man: give us therefore (sweet Jesus) this holy fear of thee, and
illuminate, and burn us in the furnace of divine love,

Amen.
Of the terrible sentence which is given upon a soul, at the instant that it
sins. THE XI. CHAPTER.
ANima quae peccauerit ipsa morietur. ( Ezech. 18.20.) the soul that sins,
shall die. Oh ye sinners, how fearful is the sound of this third Trumpet? It
seems like unto the sound of those trumpets, which at the last leave behind
them, a fearful, broken, and terrible note: Oh how horrid, and unpleasant is
it? give ear; The soul that sins shall die. Oh fearful sentence: but who
pronounces it? the holy scripture, the mistress of truth, in the person of
God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. But that you may with more
attentio^, give ear to the sound of this trumpet, know ye, that so soon as
ye commit mortal sin, in the consistory of heaven, by the mouth of the
most holy and blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
your sentence is denounced in these words. Let this soul be accursed,
condemned, and adjudged to death, that she may be tormented, and burned in the
everlasting flames of hell fire, in the company of vgglie and terrible devils,
in that detestable and odious place of perdition; And then all hope and means
being taken away of ever returning, if she die in this state, without penance,
contrition, and it may be confession, she is given into the hands, and
authority of diabolical, and hellish furies, for ever to be consumed in not
consuming flames. Oh that fearful and most terrible sentence, yet most right
and just!

But give ear a little further, oh you sinners, for every mortal sin that
you commit, the same sentence, in the same heaven, of the same God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, in the presence of the B. V. Marie, Mother of God, and
the whole celestial court of heaven, is again pronounced against your
souls, and all the Saints and Angels in that celestial paradise, say Amen. Oh
dear Brethren, take this council of me, turn unto almighty God, neither be
diffident, or call into doubt, the divine clemency, and mercy, for though you
were ten thousand times by sentence condemned unto hell, notwithstanding, so
long as ye live, you have time to change the sentence: Si autem impius egerit
penitentiam etc. ( Ezec 18.21.) if the sinner do penance for all his sins,
which he has wrought, all his iniquities shall be done away which he has
committed, says God by the mouth of his holy Prophet Ezechiel: thus thou
see, oh sinful soul, that God can and will change his sentence, if thou
please to change thy wicked course and ungodly manner of living.

There be two things (sinners) that God does not remember: to wit, sins, and
good works: if one has lived well, thirty or forty years, and has served
God with much fervor of spirit, and maceration of his body, with fastings,
watchings, disciplines, or other such acts, and at last should sin, and
decline from his former institution, and manner of living, God blotteth out of
his memory, all his former good works, and meritorious acts, and if he die
in such a state, he is for ever plunged into the pit of perdition: On the
other side, if any one has lived, thirty or forty years, in sins, be they
never so great, and at the last should be penitent, and sorrowful for them,
God will forgett them all, and were they as redd as scarlett, he will make them
as white as snow, and dying in that estate, without all doubt, he should be
made participante of the perpetual joys of heaven: The former ought to strike
great fear, trembling, and terror into the good, but the latter, much
confidence, hope, and trust into the wicked.

Therefore I beseech you, and entreat you (dear Brethren sinners) for Gods
sake, and the honor and love of him, that died for you, that you would leave
sinning, and be converted unto your clement Redeemer; not any longer to abuse
his mercies, but to give his divine majesty, infinite thanks, for his long
suffering, and expecting, even until this instant, of your amendment, and
conversion, and who is always prepared fatherly to receive you, if ever by
amendment of life you shall return home unto him: Dixi confitebor aduersum me
iniustitiam meam. ( Psalm. 31.6.) I said, I will confess against my self, mine
injustice unto our Lord, and thou have forgiven the impiety of my sin,
says the holy Prophet David: who is he (oh Brethren) that would abuse this so
great benignity of God? do it not, do it not, do it not, for Jesus Christ
his love, and bitter passion, who died upon the cross for you, but turn your
selves unto so loving, and fatherly a God, which does not only expect, but also
draw you, that he might pardon, free, and redeem you from sin, death and
hell. A less, oh ye fools, wherefore do you any longer defer it? Sweet Jesus
Christ, look down upon these blinded wretches, and infuse into their souls,
the light of grace, which may bring them to the participation of thy glory,
which (for thy mercy, and much suffering) vouchsafe to make the^ capable of,
that they may die, to live with thee eternally,

Amen.
That man may easily sin, but cannot of himself rise from thence. THE XII.
CHAPTER.
SIne me nihil potestis facere. ( Joan. 15.5.) without me ye can do nothing,
and in another place. Nemo potest venire ad me, etc. ( Joan. 6.44.) no man can
come unto me, unless my Father who has sent me, shall draw him: therefore
the spouse in the canticles cried out. Draw me after thee. ( Cantic. 1.3.) Now
therefore, oh sinner, it is no small evil, that thou do incur by sinning,
seeing thou have power to fall, and that it is in thy free will to sin, or
not, but being once fallen, can not of thy own forces rise again, without
the assistance of divine grace. Tell me I pray thee (speaking of thy body) that
by all probability, immediatlye after foot set upon ground, thou should
fall, how careful would thou be in walking, what diligence would thou
use, for the placing of thy feet, for the avoiding of danger, and if thou
chance to fall, how willingly would thou imitate the ass, which with great
difficulty i^ drawn that way, where he fo^merly receued any hurt: The case is
the same, oh sinner, in respect of thy soul, in the next moment thou art ready
to fall dangerously, in so much that thou have not power and ability to rise
again, what care ought thou to have then, in ordering thy footsteps? what
unwillingness to walk in that path again, in which formerly thou have received
so great hurt and danger?

But thou neglecting this, perhaps wilt say, God will help me: True it is,
thou may hope, and it is good that thou trust, and confide in his divine
assistance, but with this hope, there must be joined an holy fear to offend,
or sin against so great a majesty, for otherwise thou shall much aggrauate
thy crime, and delict, and procure the displeasure of so benign, and loving a
Father. But who has, or can assure thee, that the effectual help of God,
will always be at hand to assist thee? He can do, or omit this, as it shall
be thought fit by his divine providence: and therefore thou have great reason
carefully, and prudently to institute thy life, and to shun, and abandon all
objects and occasions, that may any way distract or hinder thee, from the union
of so mighty, and powerful a Lord.

Furthermore, when as God has administered unto thee oftentimes his divine
help, and raised thee up again, but thou continuing in vices, and still with
the dog, returning to thy former vomit, it may be (I say) then he will leave
thee, as long as that sentence of thy damnation may be pronounced in heaven,
thou art never secure; why therefore do thou study (as I may say) to sin,
and to provoke the divine goodness? Leave therefore, Brother, leave I beseech
thee, by that life and precious blood, which Jesus Christ our Lord powered out
for us, hanging upon the holy wood of the cross: Brother, sin no more, for
assure thy self, that so long as thou art polluted with the blemish of sin,
thou art no other then an adulterate person, and liable to eternal perdition.
Behold unfortunate soul, if thou should be in danger to fall into some
deep lake, or into the sea, or any other depth, or into the jaws of some
cruel wild beasts, how vigilant, and careful would thou be, for the
avoiding of so great, and imminent a peril? and yet thou seem nothing at
all, to fear or care for falling into hell, out of which there is no
redemption.

How good works, done in sin, do perish and are of no merit. THE XIII.
CHAPTER.
WHat? do thou not know, that all thy good, and meritorious acts, and deeds,
shall not avail thee any thing, if thou but once sin? This only thing truly,
ought to be a sufficient motive, if thou would admit it to thy serious
cogitation, to excite and rouse thee up, to amendment, and correction of thy
life and manners. Understand how great and ineffable, the love and benignity
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is, toward us ungrateful souls, who
has ordained and decreed, for the least thing soever, done in the honor of
him, to give, and make us capable of heaven: for one fasting, for one
mortification of the body, for one alms, for one penny given for the love of
him, for one submission, and inflexion of the body, proceeding and tending to
his glory, for pronouncing only of the blessed name of Jesus, if it be done
with due reverence, he will make us partakers of his celestial kingdom.

Consider now poor wretch, that so long as thou art blemished, and polluted
with the spott and contagion of sin, what soever thou do (were it to die)
it would not be imputed meritorious, for the obtaining of eternal salvation,
and from hence it comes, that whatsoever thou do, it does all perish,
although thou should do so much penance, so austerlie macerate thy body,
so often fast, as often as the whole world: if thou should distribute al thy
goods to the poor, and give thy body to be consumed in flames of fire, and
perform what soever can be done or said, it does not any way profit or avail
thee, for the obtaining of eternal life, so long as thou art in mortal sin:
These good works do profit thee, but to other ends, as to conseruing of thy
health, and procuring and obtaining of temporal goods, and riches, in this
life: because God out of his infinite goodness and justice, lets pass no
evil unpunished, and no good thing unrewarded: Therefore abstain thou not,
hereafter from doing well, and performing those good moral acts, although thou
be guilty of mortal sin, because besides that they conduce to that which
I have formerly intimated, it may be also that they avail so much, that thou
being freed from the guilt of sin, thou may be made more fit and apt,
that God may more freely concur with thy soul, and cause in thee penitencie,
and satisfaction for thy former sins, although of themselves they avail not
to obtain heaven.

I will here demonstrate unto thee, a certain manner of proceeding, that
although thou art guilty of mortal sin, notwithstanding, God may accept of
thy good works, to thy salvation, which is very profitable, and I earnestly
desire thee to attend and give ear unto it. When thou art about to give an
alms, to fast, to say the Rosary, to hear Mass, or a sermon, or to do any
good work, being then in mortal sin, if then thou have not opportunity, or
leisure, to go to confession, I will that thou endeavor to gain that sorrow
and penitencie for thy sins, that is requisite, with a purpose never to sin
more, and confess them, when there shall be convenient time, and occasion:
which thing being so done, thy good works shall be grateful, meritorious, and
capable of eternal retribution: But if thou obseruest not this, and remainest
guilty of deadly sin, there is no hope, that thou shall ever gain heaven,
for all thy good deeds, although they were innumerable.

Here I also tell thee, that not a few are deceived, who suppose, and believe,
that those good acts, that they do in mortal sin, after confession, and
reconciliation with God, shall be restored unto them again, and by their
merits they may gain heaven, which is is most untrue: But that thou may
fully, and truly understand this opinion, I will that thou know (o sinner)
according to all the Doctors, that there are three kinds of works: which
are, live works, dead works, mortified works: Live works are those, which
are done in grace, and these are meritorious of eternal life: Dead works are
called those, which are done in sin, which are altogether dead, neither are
capable of merit: Mortified works, are these which are done in the state of
grace of any one, but afterward, he sins, and thereby, so mortifieth, and
obscureth them, that if he should die in mortal sin, the works which before
were meritorious and lively, shall perish, and be abolished, because their
virtue and force was so debilitated, and weakened by sin.

Again these mortified works, when thou shall be received into grace, they
shall have their former nature, and that mortification being removed, they
shall be revived, and of no less merit, the^ they were formerly: But these
which were done in sin, which had no vigor, or life, although thou art
admitted into grace, not withstanding, they shall obtain nothing, unless, as
I have formerly explicated. Jesus Christ for his mercies sake, grant that he
would impresse, the horrible sound of this fearful trumpet, in your ears, and
hearts, and thereby so awake you, that you may be always fit instruments of
his divine grace, and at last to reign with him, and his eternal Father, in
the kingdom of eternal glory, in bliss and happiness, for ever and ever,

Amen.
The fourth Trumpet, of the loss that a sinner suffers through sin at his
death. THE XIV. CHAPTER.
ET quartus Angelus tuba ceciuit. ( Apoc. 8.) and the fourth Angel sounded the
trumpet: Come ye now (o sinners) to the hearing of the fourth trumpett, attend
and mark how terrible and fearful it is: O wretched and blinded souls that
you are, consider with your selves, that you must once die; Dust thou art, and
into dust shall thou return, said God to Adam, when he was penitent for his
offense. ( Genesis 3.) By the envy, and malice of the devil, sin entered into
the world, and those that are of his combination, strive to imitate him. The
holy scripture says. It is decreed, once for men to die: according to the
Apostle, Alas (oh ye sinners) what reason can you have, to be so proane and
facill to sin, when as it must needs be, that you are not ignorant of the
necessity of your deaths? Oh ye harlotes, which make your own bodies netts
of the devil, to deceive, and entrap your selves, and make your souls a prey
for the fury of the devil, with the^ to be burned perpetually in hell? how
can it be (I say) that being mindful of death, you do not desist from such
malignant offenses, and crimes?

O death, how comes it to pass, that at the remembrance of thee, sinners are
not astonished? In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou shall never
sin, says the wise man. ( Eccles. 7.40.) But which are your last and final
ends, oh ye sinners? do you know? They are Death, Judgment, Hell, and
Heaven, we will at this present proceed to treat, and say something of death,
and hereafter of the other. O happy soul which now bear in mind, and
appliest to thy heart, the last hour and moment of death. Mors est vltimum
terribilium. Death is the last thing of all that are to be feared, says the
philosopher: There can nothing be fained, or thought upon, more fearful the^
death, but thou thinking not upon this matter, studiest continually how to
sin, saying with the impious man. Let us crown our selves with roses, before
they wither, let there be no pleasant meadow, which our riot shall not pass
through. ( Wisd. 2.8.) Thus thou spendest ten, twenty, thirty, perhaps forty
years, living in this irreligious, and ungodly course of life: But tell me I
beseech thee sinner, what will all this profit thee? at last thy life shall
draw to an end, at length thy last day shall come, at length whether thou will
or not, thou must depart, at last, thou must leave all thy treasures,
delights, recreationes, and pleasures, I say to all these thou must once die.

Thy magnificent glory must have an end, thy splendor, beauty, and
comeliness must decay, and thy flesh whyther: that body of thine must turn to
dust, and ashes: thou shall die, shall be consumed, and depart this present
life: But which is most to be lamented, at last thy miserable, and execrable
soul (if thou repent not) shall depart out of thy filthy and putrified body,
to a place of greater misery, then can be expressed: But when shall this be?
when thou think least of it, when thou art least of all prepared, when thou
shall be strangely bound with the chains, and fetters of thy sins, by the
devil: The cords of my sins have bound me, says the Prophet. ( Psalm.
118.) taking upon him the person of a sinner: Man knows not his end, says
Ecclesiastes, but as fishes are taken with the hook, and as birds are caught
with the snare, so men are taken in the evil time, when it shall suddenly come
upon them. Eccles. 9.

O wretched sinner, give ear, and receive the sound of this fearful trumpet;
Thou must once die, o sinner, and thou, oh harlot, must one day be dissolved:
But when, will thou say! The time is uncertain, the time is concealed from
thee, the time is only known unto God himself, and it may be, when thou not
so much, as think of it: There is nothing more certain then death, and
there is nothing more uncertain the^ the hour of death, says S. Bernard:
This year, this month, this week, this day, this hour and moment, thou
may die, and yield up the Ghost: They spend their days in mirth, and in an
instant they descend into hell. ( Job. 2.) men shall be indulgent to their
sensualities, sport, laugh, and be merry, and in a moment shall die, and go
to hell: For when they shall say peace, and security, then shall suddenly
destruction come upon them, as the pain to a woman in childbirth, and they
shall not escape, says the holy Apostle. 1. Thessa. 5.4.

Of the last and deadly disease, and damage of the soul, and that after this
life there is no recovery. THE XV. CHAPTER.
MIserere mei etc. ( Psalm. 6.3.) have mercy upon me oh Lord, because I am
weak, heal me oh Lord, because my bones are sore troubled, says the Prophet
David. Consider a while (o sinner) that a little before thy soul depart out of
thy unclean and polluted body, thou shall be vexed and tormented with some
cruel disease or other, unless thou be killed, or die sodenlie (which God
forbid) from soden and unprovided death oh Lord deliver us, as our holy Mother
the church teaches us often to repeat. Tell me I pray thee, who has made
thee certain, that thou shall not fall down dead as thou art eating? who has
secured thee, that thou shall not depart this life, having now the bread in
thy mouth, and the cupp in thy hand? who can tell thee for a certain, that
when thou art in the highest degree of delights, pleasures, and worldly
contentments, that then even in the midst of these thou shall not be dissolved,
and descend into the abisse of perpetual darkness? o wretched, and unhappy
sinners, call to mind, and foresee what you do, and have respect unto the
end, which most certainly shall come, but when you know not.

Be it, that God, out of his infinite mercy and clemency, will not deal with
thee according to thy merits, nor take thee away with a sudden and
vnforseene, but with a common, and ordinary kind of death: In what an
astonishme^t will thou then be, when thou shall see the last messenger of thy
life, which shall be an ordinary disease, but deadly, even in thy flourishing
years, beauty, strength, or in whatsoever gift and endowmen of nature,
belonging to a co^pleate and perfect man? consider unfortunate wretch, that
thou shall not depart this life, on a sudden, without some vehement fever,
or the like disease, which through heat or cold, shall one while, cause thy
teeth to chatter, and shake, an other while, with heat and burning, shall not
only be enflamed, and molested with the grief of thy stomach and head, but thy
very heart will tremble, and quake within thee, that all thy nerves, sinews,
iunctures, arturies, and veins, shall be moved, and tremble, and all this
through thy intolerable pain and anguish, neither shall thou have sleep, or
appetite: last of all, thou shall take no rest, night, nor day.

What will thou do then, miserable soul, laden with sins, which for the
space of so many months or years lost, have not confessed, nor been
reconciled to God, and thy neighbors, nor agreed with thy adversary? who like
an other Sardanapalus, have run a most libidinous course, and lastly see
thy self to be defiled, and contaminated with the spott and filth, of thy
sins and offenses? Tell me, I beseech thee, how great will that anguish be,
and how intolerable that affliction, which then thy sins shall cause, and
bring upon thee? how infinite shall thy doloures be, which shall cruciate thee,
when thou shall call to mind the injuries wherewith so many years together,
thou have offended almighty God? Tell me, whether of these greifes will be more
vehement, the torments of the body, or the sorrow of thy soul? For when thou
shall begin to fear death, and to receive a remuneration according to thy
sins, which is death, what a present hell will it be to all the powers, and
faculties of thy soul, when as for the hardness of thy heart, thou canest not
repent? Indurauerunt facies suas etc. ( Ierem. 5.3.) They have hardened their
faces more then the rock, and would not return, says the Prophet Jeremy.

Be thou converted, oh sinner, and turn with all expedition unto thy God;
expect not (blinded soul) the last hour, in which that vnwelcom messe^ger of
death shall come and intimate unto thee, thy dissolution; It is your cause that
is now in hand, therefore be well advised what you do: it is your suite that
is now in action, therefore take counsel, prevent the future, and expect not
that latter and perilous time. What? shall you then be confessed, and brought
into the state of grace? who ca^ make you certain of that, or promise you that
the^ God will forgive your crimes and offenses, and admit you into his favor,
who have all your life time, so exceedingly offended him? But if God should
then assist you, notwithstanding it will be very painful and laborious to
remember your so innumerable sins. By what means shall you call to mind so
many wrongs, whereby you have dishonored God, when as you shall be circumuented
with so many griefs, and oppressed with so many diseases, and torments? It may
be, you shall not be capable of sense or reason: Last of all, how shall it be
manifest unto you, that you shall be of power, and ability, to make a true
confession? or speak or pronounce the words, when you shall be dried up with
heat and debilitated with extremity of sickness?

Alas (blind, and miserable wretches) why provide you not now for your
necessities? why leave you not your pernicious and wicked course of life? why
desist you not from offending your gracious God? why cry you not out with the
Prophet David? Have mercy upon me, oh God, according to thy great mercy, and
according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine iniquities? If you
will now implore the divine assistance, your dangerous wounds may be cured,
and you may find grace and mercy, at the hands of God, which at the hour of
death it may be, you shall not obtain; for then you will with fear, but now
you may with love, invoke and crave his divine clemency; then you leave not
your sins, but your sins leave you.

Wherefore (Brethren sinners) be now vigilant and careful for your souls,
beg at this instant with importunity, pardon for your so many heinous
offenses, and odious delinquences. Turn you to your Lord God with all your
hearts, he is exceedingly clement, and his mercies are many, and you shall find
rest unto your souls: Return to him with the saying of the prodigal son in
your mouths. Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am not
worthy to be called thy son, which if you shall so do, he being moved with
compassion toward you, will go out to meet you, and fall upon your necks,
and lovingly embrace you, pardoning all your former injuries whereby you have
offended him, even as a Father takes pity of his children, so has our Lord
compassion upon them that fear him, because he knows our making, he
remembers that we are but dust. ( Psalm. 102.13.) Our Lord is nothing but
clemency and goodness, the earth is filled with his mercy, and there is no end
thereof. ( Psa. 32.5.) Break forth therefore ye sinners into these words,
saying, oh sweet Jesus, our God and Redeemer, grant pardon, mercy, and
remission: help, aid, succor, and assist us, perishing souls, for thy
bitter passions sake,

Amen: have mercy upon me, oh Lord, have mercy upon me, because my soul has
trusted in thee.
Of the separation of the soul from God, in the article of death. THE XVI.
CHAPTER.
INiquitates vestrae diuiserunt etc. ( Isay. 59.2.) your iniquities have
divided between you and your God, says the holy Prophet Isay: consider now
(obdurate sinner) that thou must approach to the last moment of thy death:
persuade thy self, that thou must come to that terrible and fearful instant,
in which thy soul shall be separated from thy body: oh misery and calamity,
what will thou then say or do, when as by no means thou can hinder thy
souls departure; Thy spirit must be then disioyned from thy flesh, which I
wish may not be separated from God: Alas, alas, wretched and miserable sinner,
when thou shall see thy soul to depart from thy body, and eternally to be
separated from God, what will thou then do? oh miserable separation of the
soul from the body, but oh far more miserable, the separation of the same
from God? What will thou conjecture, when thou shall see thy self to be
excluded the presence of God thy Creator? unfortunate soul, consider what a
severe judgment there will be of thee at thy death, which the holy Apostle
considering, says. For we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the proper things of his body, according as
he h^th done, either good or evil. (2. Corin. 5.10.) Then, of all thy deeds,
even thy least actions, of all thy vain words, and cogitatio^s, which ever
came into thy mind, thou art to give and yield, a strict and severe account.
Then shall thou be constrained to answer, not only for thy lost time, but for all thy time il spent: Then shall thou understand, how profitable it would have
been for thee, to follow the counsel of the wise man, who says. Make use of
time, and decline from evil. ( Eccles. 4.23.) O miserable humane nature, which
runs to death, as the rivers to the sea. You shall all die and fall as the
waters upon the earth, which do not return.

Enter therefore into the closet of thy heart, and consider, that thou art not
to answer for thy own crimes only, but also for those, which are committed
either by thy fault, consent, counsel, or conniuency, or not hindering them
when it was in thy power: Then thou shall not excuse thy self, nor say with
Cain. Am I my brothers keeper? ( Genesis 4.9.) for truly he has commanded to
every one, the care and charity of his neighbor. Be vigilant therefore, thou
sinner, for there will be a great and difficult matter handled at the moment of
thy death. Well, will thou then know, how great an offense it is, to use
iestes, tauntes, scoffs, sportes, and other merry passages, even although
without prejudice, or detrime^t of thy neighbor? How perspicuouslie shall thou
then perceive, what it is to be distracted in time of divine office, Mass, and
other holy Ceremonies, and to be negligent, and indisposed in the church, or in
other holy places? If every sin, be it never so small, for its object which is
God, is most great, therefore also the least injury offered to God who is
infinite, is likewise infinite.

Now therefore, oh sinner, see how preposterously, and peruerslie, thou do,
when thou will not always eleuate, and fix thine eyes upon God: Be
circumspect, least thou displease him, even in the least thing, because things
seeming of no moment, are in his divine presence very great: from little and
mean things of no account, we easily fall into greater, and more enormous, as
the scripture says. He that despises small things, by little, and little
falls, says the wise man. How truly did Solomon say. The number of fools
is infinite? because every sinner is a fool, who for a little vain, and
transitory pleasure, fears not to loose an infinite treasure, permanent, and
immutable? Oh sinners turn into your selves, live in the fear of God, who
created you, for this is true wisdom, and solidd prudence. The beginning of
wisdom, is the fear of God. Psalm. 110.10.

Oh ye obdurate, and blinded wretches, look into the state of your souls,
and foresee what griefs you shall conceive, when your souls must depart your
bodies, with whom they have been with so great affection, conjoined and united.
Consider that unwilling, and most doleful departure, and separation; no man
ever hated his flesh, says the Apostle. ( Ephesians. 5.29.) but loves it with a
most vehement love, and affection; whereupon, the philosopher understanding
this natural love of the soul, said, that, death is the last of terrible,
and fearful things. Know now sinner, that this fear and terror is to invade
thee, but when this horror shall seize upon thee, the time is uncertain.

Oh my Trumpet, send forth thy sound, that thou may be heard in the
extremest, and furthest parts of the world, let thy echo enter into the
ears of the wretched sinner, that he may know himself, and knowing, may
turn unto himself, and see the infinite loss and detriment, which sin
brings into his soul, at the hour of death, and abhor it, following the
counsel of the wise man; fly from the face of sin, as from the face of a
serpent, the teeth thereof, are the teeth of lions, killing the souls of men.

O Brethren sinners, by the sacred wounds of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, I beseech you, earnestly, and entreat you, that you would not imitate
the deaf Adder, which that she may not hear the melodious tune of the
enchaunter, stops her ears, the one, by covering it with her tail, the
other, by laying it, on the ground: do you not the same, but harken and attend
to the sound of this Trumpet, with open and diligent ears, that hereby the
devils stratagemes, and diabolical invasions, being put to flight, there may
be free access for the divine concourse into your souls,

Amen.
Of the terror which the devil strikes into a soul, in the moment of death.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THe Dragon whom thou have made to deceive him, says the Prophet. ( Psalm.
103.26.) I would to God, thou could sufficiently weigh and consider, the
intolerable terror and fear, which the sight of most detestable devils shall
present unto thee, or that thou could comprehend, what an astonishment it
will be to behold a devil, I am certain thou would change the course of
thy life, and arise out of the lethargy of thy sins, if not for fear of
God, yet for fear of the devilish and hellish crew. For if the sight of a
Wolf, a Bear, a Lion, a Dragon, a Serpent, or any loathsome Toade does strike
such terror, into us, and do so astonish, and affright us, what will the
aspect of the devils do, at the point of death?

Oh you doting, and miserable sinners, if you would with due consideration
think of these fearful forms, and sightes, which the devils will lay before
your eyes, at the very instant of your deaths, without doubt you would fly
sin: For if when thou art well in health, strong, and of a good courage, any
one of the devils should appear unto thee, in the form of some cruel and
ravenous beast, thou could not but tremble, and quake, through all the
parts of thy body, what will thou do then unhappy soul, when thou shall be
debilitated, and oppressed with sickness? destitute, and deprived of all power and
strength? when thou can neither move, nor help thy self? when thou are
scarce able to speak? or hardly to intimate and make known thy necessities, by
signs, and tokens? When, last of all, the powers and faculties of thy body,
shall be weakened? What? when thou art complete in perfect strength, endued
with all the ornaments of nature, which are required to the full perfection of
a man, if then thou canest not endure the sight of a fearful devil, nor of a
devil appearing in some common shape, as of a dog, horse, or the like, what
will become of thee, when thou shall behold the devil, not in the shape of some
cruel beast, but in a form far more horrible, and that, at the instant of
thy death?

Our holy Father S. Francis, was wont to say, that it were impossible for any
one, to see the devil in his own proper form and shape which he has in
hell, but for the space of the reciting of the Pater, or Aue (allthough he were
in perfect health) without present death: what then (oh sinner) will become of
thee, yielding up thy spirit, when thou shall plainly see and perceive, that
execrable enemy of thine, in his detestable shape and form? Turn and direct
all the forces, and powers, of the supreme and intellectual part of thy
soul, to this reason, abandon thy lascivious and sinful life, now begin to
fear, that hereafter thou may not tremble, when it can no way avail thee.
Consider that, not only one devil (to thee then tormented with the pains of
death) but many, yea thousands shall appear, every one striving and endeavoring
with their diabolical actions and gestures, to molest, affright, and astonish
thee: whether then will thou fly for succor? or who then will relieve thee?
will S. Mary, whom thou have despised? Will Jesus, whom thou have blasphemed?
Will the Saints and Angels, whom thou have dishonored? Lastly, will God, whom
thou have vilified, and conte^ned? Alas miserable wretch, who will assist thee?
or what Saint will thou invoke? to whom will thou fly? for in the deluge of
many waters, none of the^ will aproch, or draw near unto thee. ( Psalm 31.) no
man shall plead thy cause, or recite thy necessities: Oh in what a depth of
miseries art thou in, at the hour of death? when thou can not so much as
commend thy soul, so agonizing in infirmities, to almighty God, when thou
can not so much as call upon thy good Angel, or any of the Saints, which in
time of thy health, thou did honor with particular devotion, that they
intercede for thee.

Oh sinners, be you now converted unto your God, now importune your sweet
Jesus, now salute the Virgin Mary, our blessed Lady, now it is time to implore
the aid of the Archangels, Michael, Gabriell, Raphaell, and of thy Angel
keeper, and all the celestial spirits; Now it is time to crave the assistance
of S. John Baptist, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John. S. Bartholomew, and of the
other Apostles; now it is time to request the help of S. Stephen, S. Laure^ce,
S. George and all the other Martyrs, now it is time to commend thy self, to S.
Benedict, S. Dominike, S. Francis, and the rest of the holy confessors: Lastly,
it is now time to cry out, and call, upon S. Mary Magdalen, who in time past
was a sinner, S. Clare, S. Agnes, S. Catharine, S. Lucie, and the rest of the
blessed Virgins, Widows, and Martyrs, now Saints in heaven.

Do thou not remember, that thou have read, or heard, how often the devils
have presented themselves, to sick me^, in their chambers, lying upon their
deathbeds, eue^ the^ drawing their last breath, and yielding up the Ghost,
sometimes in the forms of Dogs, Cattes, Hogs, or such like? one while in
one manner, an other while, in an other, always in different forms, when they
are not able to help themselves? O wretched, and unfortunate sinner, how much
do I lament thy case, who leadest so detestable a life, as without repentance,
infallibly, re^deth to the pit of hell? consider that when thou shall come to
that accursed place, no man can help thee, not thy Father, not thy Mother, not
thy kindred, not thy friends, not thy wife, not any of them which stand by
thee, are of power, to afforde thee any releife, or assistance, only God in the
time of thy death, can comfort and succor thee, only S. Mary his blessed
Mother, and her son Jesus, only the Angels, and the Saints in heaven: in
these, amidst thine extreme agonies, thou may find releife, comfort, and
consolation.

Therefore why do thou now offend them? wherefore do thou dishonor them?
why do thou inueigh against the glorious Saints of God, with thy pernicious
maledictio^s? why blaspheamest thou thy God? why contemnest thou thy Jesus, and
his blessed Mother S. Marie, and do not rather commend thy self unto them?
change now the institution, and manner of thy life: Do thou think, that
thou shall live perpetually? that thou art immortal? that death shall be
afraid of thee? can thou be persuaded, that death which exercises her
fatal function upon all men, and seized upon God himself, that it will pass
by, or exempt, thee? Alas wretch, know thou not, what the scripture says.
It is decreed, that all must once die. ( Heb. 9.27.) Remember therefore thy last
end, and turn unto thy God: Give ear unto the sound of this trumpet, if thou
intendest, when thou art come to the hour of death, to triumph over the
devil: have confidence in thy God, for in thy name (says the Prophet David)
we will despise those that rise up against us: and the same, in the person of
thy God, says. Super aspidem, and basilicum ambulabis, etc. (Psalm. 90.) thou
shall walk upon the Aspe and Basiliske, and shall tread upon the Lion and
Dragon, because he has given his Angels charge of thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways. There be three ways (oh sinner) in which the Angels do protect,
and guard thee; The first, in thy birth and nativity: the second, from thy
birth, until thy death: the third, from death, to the obtaining of eternal
life; God of his infinite mercy, keep thee in all these ways, that thou
may come to reign with him eternally,

Amen.
Of the fearful presence of the Judge in the instant of death. THE XVIII.
CHAPTER.
ALas wicked and miserable sinner, what terror and fear of necessity must
possess thy soul, when as thou now dying, must behold the angry countenance
of that great Judge, God almighty, whose glorious and pleasing aspect, holy
men could not behold? for no man shall see me and live, says God to Moses.
( Exodus 20.19.) speak thou to us, and we will hear thee, let not our Lord
speak to us, least perhaps we die, said the children of Israel to Moses:
Saint Peter who loved Christ so dearly, and was likewise so well beloved, and
esteemed of him, that he delivered his church to him, to be governed and
directed, and would that it should rely upon him as a firm foundation. He (I
say) upon a certain time, when he saw Christ in presence, astonished cried
out. Exi a me, quia homo peccator sum, go from me, oh Lord, because I am a
sinful man; what the^ will thou do in the day of thy death, when thou shall
behold the angry contenance of Jesus, burning with the fire of divine justice?
Oh worm what will then become of thee? where will thou hide thy self? whether
will thou fly? Non intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo etc. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, because no man living shall be justified in thy
sight, cries out the Prophet, in the person of a soul, striving with death.

Give ear (I beseech thee) to that which holy Job says, of the presence of
the judge, vere quod ita sit etc. I know indeed it is so, that man cannot be
justified, compared with God, if he contend with him, he cannot answer him one
for a thousand. ( Job. 9.2.) notwithstanding, Job was of that integrity and
sanctity of life, that God him self speaking of him said. Vir erat in terra
Hus, etc. There was a man in the land of Hus, whose name was Job, that was
simple, and right, and fearing God, departing from evil ( Job. 1.) And in the
same chapter, God speaking of Job unto the devil, he said. Have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is not the like unto him in the earth, a
man simple, and right, fearing God, and departing from evil, and keeping
innocence? Alas how terrible, and horrible a thing is it, at the time of death
to fall into the hands of the just judge? Truly it would seem a dreadful
thing, if one should be circumuented, and besett. with a multitude of Serpe^ts,
Bears, Dragons, Lions, or other such like devouring creatures, yet all the
terror which would proceed from these things created, compared with the
terror, and astonishment that the contenance and majesty of the angry and just
judge, shall strike into a soul, in the instant of death, it is light and
nothing.

O miserable soul, commiserate and pity thine own case, meditate upon thine
own necessities, consider what must at last befall thee, consider the last
end, and thou shall not sin for ever, says the wiseman, to forewarne thee:
o how much should thou, and indeed ought to fear, and tremble, to think
upon that last instant of thy life, in which thy soul must be dissolved, and
presented before the majesty of the angry, and offended judge? The judge
(miserable wretch) will say unto thee, give an account of thy stewardship,
render a reason of thy soul, which thou receauedst immaculate, pure and
undefiled, of me, and which being defiled, and blemished with the contraction
and spot of original sin, I have washed, and made clean with my most
precious blood. Give an account of thy Reason, Understanding, Memory, and
Will, which thou have received of me: thou wast endued with understanding, that
thou should know me, with thy Will, that thou should love me, with a
Memory, that thou should be ever mindful of me; but thou, ungrateful
soul have abused these faculties, by which thou were like unto God; let us
make man after our own Image, says God. ( Genesis 1.) These endowments, more
then divine, thou have occupied, and busied about base, humane, transitory,
and vain subjects, for so much, as thou do always think of them, love, and
embrace them, and exercise thy memory with them.

Bewail now and lament thou sinner, for the time will come, in which it will
repent thee, that thou have been no more sorrowful; forget not God now, for
there will come a time, when all thy sayings, deeds, cogitations and counsels,
shall be reduced to memory. Now endeavor to love, and honor God, with all thy
force, as he has commanded thee in these words. Love the Lord thy God, with
all thy soul, and with all thy heart, all thy neighbor, as thy self. ( Math.
22.38.) Oh miserable, mortal men, who so inconsideratly, upon the sudden
run into death: My days have passed more swiftly, then the web that is
cut by the weauer, and are consumed without hope. Job. 7.6.

Give us we beseech thee, thy grace, oh Lord, pardon and remit, oh benign, and
bountiful God, our delictes, crimes, and offenses; Remember that thou art our
Father, look not upon our ingratitude, but upon thy mercy, have respect to
me, and behold me with the eyes of pity and compassion, for I am alone and
poor, the tribulations of my heart are multiplied, deliver me, from my
necessities. ( Psalm. 24.16) Oh Marie Mother of indulgent Jesus, by whom I am to
be judged, pray for me, and for all sinners, that we may so dispose of all our
actions in this world, and so direct the course of our lives, according to his
holy and divine law, that so at the last he may show us, not his severe, and
angry, but pleasing, and amiable countenance.

Oh Marie, look to the souls of poor distressed sinners, leave us not, oh
sweet Mary, thou art our Queen, our Patroness, our Mistress, our Mother:
Marie Mother of grace, Mother of mercy, do thou defend us from our enemies,
and receive us, at the hour of our death; By the love of the blessed soul of
thy dear Son, I beseech, and humbly beg, that thou would be pleased, to
accept my poor soul, and the distressed souls of all sinners, unto thy
careful, and motherly tuition: by the precious blood of thy dear Son, have
compassion upon sinful souls: Remember Marie, that thou art a Mother, and
that our souls were redeemed and bought with the sacred blood of thy son
Jesus. O Jesus be thou now propitious unto us, that we may not commit any thing,
whereby we may deserve thy angry countenance. Oh Jesus our Father, oh Marie our
Mother, grant that we may be your true children, grant oh divine majesty,
that we may amend and correct our manners, and end our lives in the holy fear
of thy omnipotent deity; That at the hour of our death, we may behold thee
as a loving and merciful Father, and avoid the great terror, of thy angry
countenance,

Amen.
Of the gnawing of the conscience, which after a terrible manner shall molest a
sinner dying. THE XIX. CHAPTER.
AS if a man should fly from the face of a Lion, and a Bear should meet him,
and enter into his house, and lean his hand upon the wall, and a Serpent
should bite him. ( Amos. 5.19.) Behold the similitude of Amos the Prophet,
very fit for this matter; Oh wretch, what will thou do therefore at the time
of thy death? which way will thou fly? which way will thou turn thy self?
there will be imminent danger on all sides, thou shall find no place where to
hide or secure thy self, in every way, thou shall be circumuented, and
surprised with terrors, and molestations. If thou would eschew, and fly
the fury of the Lion, thou shall be exposed to the danger of the Bear: and
in flying from the Bear, taking house of some seeming refuge, thou shall be
stunge with a venomous Serpent: for truly what is meant by the Lion, but Jesus
Christ the angry judge, the Lion of the tribe of Judah? ( Apoc. 5.5.) what does
the Bear signify, but the devil? nothing else is meant by the Serpent, but
the conscience.

Behold therefore, unworthy wretch, what danger is to befall thee, at the time
of thy death: do thou desire to avoid the Lion, the angry judge, Jesus
offended? the^ the Bear, the devil will meet thee, and with his diabolical
inventions, infernal forces, and hideous roaringes, will confound, astonishe,
and affright thee, and when thou presumest of thy security within thy self,
and enterest thine own house to take rest, there thou shall find the Serpent,
thy conscience, which will permit thee to have no peace, rest, or quietness:
then thou shall see in it, as in a glass, all thy sins, and offenses, which
thou in thy life time, have thought, said, or done: neither will it only
suggest, what thou have thought, said, or committed amiss, but it will also
represent unto thee, all thy good deeds, and actions, which thou have omitted:
then (oh sinner) this Serpent, shall bite, and deadly sting thee, arguing, and
accusing thee of all thy crimes, threatening hell, perpetual death, and
damnation unto thee.

Alas miserable soul, then what a vaste, and profound sea of misery, shall
thou be plunged in, Omnes persecutores eius etc. all the persecutours
apprehended her in the midst of her tribulatio^s: these words of the Prophet
Jeremy in his lamentations, may be truly spoken of thee, when thou art
departing, and at the instant when thy soul shall be separated from thy body;
all thine enemies shall then compass thee, and in the extremest of thy
miseries, and difficulties, thou shall be environed with all thine adversaries:
God, the Devil, and thine own Conscience, the Devil will be at hand, and
call to mind all the sins which thou have committed, and will cry out unto
the judge, for justice, according to thy merit, and use all his forces to bring
thee to desperation. Thy Conscience shall sting thee, and leave no part
unwounded: al thy sins shall present them selves unto thy memory, in the very
same manner, and kind, as thou did commit them. The Devil will delineate
and draw them out, in a far more great and heinous manner, then thou
coniecturest, thou did commit them. The Judge will demand, an exact a just
account of all things, saying, Render to me an account of thy stewardship;
then thou may truly cry out with the Prophet David, I am afflicted, and
humbled exceedingly, I have roared for the groanings of my heart. Psalm. 37.9.

O wretched sinners, why do you not now at this instant amend your lives, and
manners? O rebellious miscreantes, why are you so prompt and ready to sin and
offend, your loving and merciful Father? Do you think that you are
immortal, that you shall never taste of death? Do you think that the time
will never come, when you shall give an account of your whole lives so euilly
spent? you deceive your selves (o wretches.) Amend your selves therefore (o my
Brethren) forsake your former crimes, and offenses, least you be like the Horse
and Mule, which have no understanding. ( Psalm. 31.9.) O that my words were so
ardent, and of such efficacy, that they might burn out, all the offenses from
the hearts of sinful men? To Jesus, o you sinners, to Jesus: Are you
ignorant, that he is your God, Creator, and Father? know you not that blessed
Jesus, for you was made man? For you he shedd his most precious blood upon the
holy wood of the cross, and burning with the love of you, was willing to
undergo all kinds of punishments? Are you ignorant that he offered him self,
to die such a bitter death, and only for the love of you? Christ came into the
world to save sinners. (1. Tim. 1.15.) Jesus came not for them that were well,
and have no infirmity, but for those that are ill and diseased.

Consider sinner, that Christ is thy brother. Go too, my Brethren, remember
that Jesus for you was made man, and the word was made flesh, and dwelt in us.
( Joan. 1.14.) cease therefore (oh sinners) to be any longer offensive to Jesus
your brother: wicked Saul for te^ne years did pursue David, but you by your
wicked lives, and unheard of offenses, for these many years, have persecuted
and pursued your afflicted Jesus: fear at last, poor wretches, to offend so
loving a redeemer: behold that infinite injury and wrong, wherewith you have
afflicted him, mark and duly penetrate I entreat you the manifold injuries,
which you have committed, in neglecting, and contemning so dear a Brother, so
faithful a Friend, so loving a Father, so good a God, that God who has
created you, and redeemed you with his own blood.

O you wretches, behold in what a blindness you walk and live, in so much that
you persecute your dearest friend, eue^ God himself: if it were to molest, or
vex, some creature, the fault would be more tolerable, but you persecute and
blaspheme, even almighty God himself, never ceasing to quench the spirit of
God, and to resist his sacred inspirations, which if you would know how great
an evil it is, give ear; I say to you (says our blessed Savior) that al
sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven men, and who so shall speak a word
against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but he that shall speak
against the holy Ghost, he shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come. ( Math. 12.) If you should cast or spit out your malice, against
the face of one of your enemies, which by some heinous crime had offended you,
if against one which bears an adverse mind, or affection toward you, you
might find, some excuse or evasion; but you offend God, who of his great
bounty, has bestowed such ample benefits upon you, which created and redeemed
you, which preserves, and susteineth you, who last of all is ready to give you
eternal life: what an infinite, and heinous crime is this? how loathsome, and
detestable an offense is this? (Oh my Brethren) so much, as that nature it
self abhors, and detesteth it.

I would to God, unworthy sinner, that thou could but see that indignation,
with which, so often as thou offendest thy God, the elements, fire, air,
water, and earth, heaven, stars, sun, and moon, are inflamed, and moved
against thee? O that thou could but perceive, how much the very brute
beasts, void of reason, are molested, and troubled. I would to God, thou
could behold, and with due consideration, ponder, how things even without
sense, as herbs, plants, stones themselves, do stand armed against thee, so
often, as they see thee offending their God, and Creator: know therefore thou
sinner, and persuade thy self, that if it were not for the clemency and
benignity of thy God, after thou have sinned and preuaricated, the earth it
self would open her mouth, and swallow thee, the waters submerge thee, the
air infect and choke thee, the fire burn and consume thee, the heavens send
forth lightninges, and fearful tempests to kill and destroy thee; and last of
all, what thing soever is created, would rise up against thee, to revenge the
wrong done to their God, and Creator.

O you sinners, know that, for a certain, all living Creatures, as wild
beasts, Serpents, Dragons, also ravening birds, all trees, and such like,
would oppose, and make war against you, if it were so permitted by your God:
What? do not thou think, that the house, in which thou sinnest, could fall
down upon thee, in the very act wherein thou offendest, if it were not
vpholde^ by God? What? do thou not persuade thy self, that the very bed,
wherein thou committest adultery, and dishonourest thy Creator, would be
consumed under thee, if it were not hindered by the divine providence? What
do thou not firmly believe, that the bread which thou eatest, the meat,
whereby thou art nourished, the wine that thou drinkest, would presently choke
thee, and poysen thee, so that it might cause thy death, did not the goodness of
thy God withstand it?

Consider therefore (o sinner) that if God would permit it, thou should not
live one moment longer, whereby to offend him any more, because all creatures
would rise up in arms against thee, but he reserueth this, until the last day
of judgment, although he permitted many particular sins, to be revenged, and
punished, by diverse creatures, that he might give an example to other
offenders: God grant that we may take example at such, and so soon as may be,
amend our lives, and be in his grace and favor so great, that we may be no
more enemies to him and his creatures,

Amen.
Of the separation of the soul from the body, and of the great dolors and
afflictions, which follow at that time and instant. THE XX. CHAPTER.
LEt us proceed further, and go forward to consider now, the anguishes,
dolors, and griefs, which the soul shall feel in the instant, and time of
her separation from the body. O poor soul, if thou would seriously examine
this, I doubt not, but that thou would give such charge to thy Will, that it
should never consent to the sensual pleasures of the flesh. Consider, o
sinner, that Jesus Christ himself, who was God, when he knew he was to
approach and draw nigh to his death, he did sweat blood, and being in an
agony, he prayed until his sweat became as drops of blood, trickling down
upon the earth. ( Luc. 22.44.) O wicked wretch, if God considering, that his
blessed soul should depart out of his sacred body, did so much fear death,
that such an anguish and sorrow did possess his soul, what will become of
thee?

Consider obdurate sinner, the great grief and sorrow that one friend takes
at another departure, and separation, they depart, weeping, sighing, and
lamenting their separation, neither are able scarce to speak, or take leave
each of the other; How incomparably will then that grief be, which the soul
feels at the separation from the body, unto which it has been united, with
such intimate and natural love and affection? O miserable soul how great will
thy grief be? how intolerable thy anguish and sorrow, when thou shall be
separated from this thy flesh, which thou haste so naturally loved, and never
denied it any thing? All the things which my eyes desired, I have given them,
says Solomon: O unfortunate soul what a penalty, and punishment will it be
unto thee, to be disunited from thy flesh, which so dearly thou love, and so
highly esteemest of, as that thou would not disobey it in any thing? No man
has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and succoureth it, says the
holy Apostle.

Hearken unto me, o sinner, and at this instant, consider, that the time shall
come, when the bo^des wherewith thy soul is so strictly bound and conjoined
with thy body, shall be violated, and dissolved; It shall come, o ungrateful
sinner, that most horrible time, I say, shall come, o, it shall come (accursed
soul) I say that ruefull, and dismal moment and instant shall come? O sinner
commiserate and take pity on thy self, and on thy poor soul, by serving
and pleasing God. What will it profit a man (says the holy scripture) to
gain the whole world, and to loose his own soul? Consider therefore (o thou
improbous sinner) which art so indulgent, to that flesh of thine, and desistest
not to pity, feed, and nourish it, consider, that thou must be disioyned from
it, when thou art to depart this life. Consider that when thou shall approach
and draw nere unto thy last end, thou shall be tormented, and afflicted with
some disease, that thou shall not be able to receive meat, when sweet sleep
shall be wanting unto thee, when all things shall be distasteful unto thee,
when thou can not endure to hear the voice, words, or speech, of thy Wife,
Children, Father, or Mother, or of thy most dear friends, when thou thy self
shall be distasteful unto thy self: O sinner what will thou then do, oppressed
on every side with so many infirmities, dolors, and vexations? when thou may
truly say with the Prophet; The sorrows of death have compassed me about, the
torments of iniquity have troubled me, the sorrows of hell have overtaken me,
the snares of death have prevented me. Psalm. 17.5.

O wretch, be thou converted now unto thy God, now amend and correct thy life,
implore, and crave with all submission, pardon, for thy sins past: O you
sinners give an attentive ear unto your God, who at this instant calls you,
saying; Be you converted unto me with all your hearts. ( Joel. 2.13.) O my
sweet and loving Jesus, which did vouchsafe for the salvation of miserable
sinners to come into this world, bestow such efficacy, and force upon my
words, that offenders thereby, knowing themselves, may be converted unto thee.
Remember, blessed Jesus, at what a price thou have bought their souls.
Remember what thou have suffered for the redemption of them. Grant that the
found of these my (or rather thy) Trumpetts, may awaken the souls of sinners,
and stir up their minds and affections to the embracing of thee, and the
seeking of their own salvation: O Clement Jesus, I know with how great love
thou did hasten to the ignominious death of the Cross, for the redemption
of sinners, forgett not therefore them which thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood: permit not, o Jesus, that those souls which thou have so
dearly bought, do perish, but rather grant that they may be raised up from
death, and live. Deliver my soul (o God) from the sword, and mine only one
from the hand of the Dog, save me from the Lions mouth, and my humility from
the horns of the Unicorn. Psalm. 21.21.

Invoke thy Jesus (o poor soul) with these words of the Prophet, placing
all thy trust and confidence in him, who desires nothing more then thy
repentance, and health: I thirst, I thirst, cried he, in the time of his bitter
passion, which although it may be understood of a corporal thirst, yet more
especially is it meant of the spiritual thirst, and ardent desire, which he
had for the salvation of souls: O afflicted soul, would to God, thou could
perceive that infinite love, by which thy Jesus is enflamed toward thee,
would to God, thou could comprehend that special care which thy Jesus from
thy first being, has had over thee: O therefore my loving Jesus, how comes it
to pass, that a miserable sinner can be so ungrateful, and unmindful of
thee, his so clement, merciful and loving God? O my God, can it be, that the
devil should possess the heart of a sinner, that he should become the
vassaile of Satan, thy chiefest, and most opposite enemy.

Alas miserable soul, at thy death, thou shall perceive and experience, the
devils plot, and intent, the end of his allurements, and fair profers, which
he has presented unto thee, inuiting thee to offend thy God, and to follow him
so impious and cruel an enemy of thy Savior: Then thou shall see, o wretched
soul, how malitiouslie, and treacherously the devil will handle thee; In
these thy extreme agonies, and afflictions, when thou may truly say;
Tribulations are on all sides of me: Thou shall stand in the presence of the
devil, and all his execrable companions, who so soon as thy soul is departed
from thy body, shall carry it into the infernal abisse of hell, there to live
with the damned souls, in perpetual torments, and flames of fire. God of his
mercy (o sinners) open your eyes, that you may provide for your souls health,
and avoid those horrible punishments: Hear now (o sinner) I heartily beseech
thee, set thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live. ( Isay.
38.2.) for, it is appointed for all men to die once. ( Heb. 9.27.) Thou shall
die, but to live in perpetual torments: God grant that we die, to live a
spiritual and eternal life with Jesus in glory,

Amen.
Of the place whether the soul goes, so soon as it departs out of the
body. THE XXI. CHAPTER.
Behold the Timbrell, and the Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organe,
they lead their days in wealth and prosperity, and in a moment they go down
into hell. ( Job. 21.12.) It is time now, o sinner, to draw nere to the
consideration and contemplation of thy future estate, and being; Tell me I
beseech thee, what shall become of thee, when thy soul shall depart thy body?
To what place shall she betake her self, when she shall be exiled and
banished from this flesh, with which, so long as they were conjoined, she
committed such execrable sins, and so heinouslie offended thy God and
redeemer? Hear what shall be said: Behold miserable sinners your end: Behold
the reward of your delights, the hire of your pleasures, the event of your
desires: Behold the end of all your goods, riches, and honors, in a moment you
shall forsake them, and go down into hell: O sad and heavy news, for your
delights must perish, your pleasures shall be expired, your sensual desires
shall for ever cease. Last of all; your estate shall be taken away by death:
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, said they in the persons
of all sinners. ( Isay. 22.11.) O miserable sinners, fix your cogitations upon
that dreadful time, when your souls shall bid adieu, and take their last
farewell of your corrupted, and loathsome bodies.

There be three places, in which our souls so soon as they are separated from
our bodies, may have their beings, which be these, heaven, hell, purgatory:
Think therefore with thy self o sinner, that thou art to depart into one of
these places, according to thy merit, or demerit, for our just Lord has loved
justice: Et equitatem vidit vultus eius, and his contenance has seen equity.
( Psalm. 10.8.) and therefore he rewards every man according to his works,
good or evil: Mine hire is with me to give unto every one according to his
works. ( Romans 2.6.) Those which have done good works, shall go into life
everlasting, and they which have done evil, shall go into everlasting fire,
says S. Athanasius.

Consider (o sinner) that when thou art striving and contending with death, thy
soul shall by little and little withdraw it from the inferior parts of thy
body, and shall betake her self to the heart, where she has her principal
residence; last of all, when she can find no place in the body, where she may
be received, she presently flies away, and leaves that dead carcass of
thine. But above all this, consider with thy self, what shall become of her,
after her departure: for so soon as she is departed from thy body, she
presently is received by the Angels, to go to heaven, or purgatory, or
otherwise the devils with their infernal acclamations, shall take and carry
her into hell, there to remain in perpetual punishements, and torments: think
with thy self (o thou miserable sinner) in what a miserable straight will thy
soul be, when she shall see heaven on this side, and hell on the other, and
the devils prepared, suddenly to carry her away by violence, to perpetual
torments.

Alas o wretched soul, what an alteration is this? o thou accursed, do thou
see now that there is an hell? o thou malignant Heretic, which have denied
that there is a purgatory, what say thou now, being dimerged, and plunged
in the abisseall gulf of infernal, and endless flames and torments? had
thou not rather be in purgatory even until the judgment day, or the last
moment? what say thou, O Jew, which had the holy scripture to
demonstrate, and intimate unto thee, the promised Messiah; but thou out of
obstinacy, and hardness of heart, would neither acknowledge, nor retain
him? do thou perceive the scripture to be true in this sense? do thou see
now, o Turk, the vanity of thy law, the deceipfulnes of thy wicked Prophet
Mahomet? o sinner, and false Christian, do thou acknowledge that God can
punish? do thou understand how much thou were deceived, in saying, to excuse
thy sin, God is merciful, and will pardon me? I can not believe that he
will the death of my soul, which has redeemed me at so great a price, as his
precious blood, I will afterward amend the course of my life, I will sin noe
more after this year, month, week, or day, deceauing thy self with such
like persuasions?

The days of man are short, the number of his months is with thee, says
Job, speaking to God. ( Job. 14.5.) here thou may mark, o sinner, that he
says not, the number of his years are with thee, neither does he say the
years of man are short, but his days and months: Behold sinner how much
thou deceauest thy self, measuring thy life by years? saying so many years I
shall live: enter into due consideration with your selves, bear in mind the
last end of your lives, consider the short computation, of most wise and holy
^ob, which is in months and days, persuade your selves, that you may every
day and hour, yea, every moment, and instant, fall down dead; Be ye
watchful, for you know not when the time shall be, says our Lord. Think
therefore that the last mom^nt of thy li^e is already come, and (...) at this
instant, thy miserable soul may take her last farrewell of thy stinking body,
and consider, to what place she must go. Think with thy self, o man,
although thou should be the most holy, and sanctified man in the world, that
thou art not always certain of thy salvation. They are just men, and wise,
and their works are in the hands of God, and yet man knows not, whether he
be worthy of love or hatred. ( Eccles. 9.2.) Accursed be that night, when the
soul of a miserable sinner departing without penitencie of her sins, shall
be given into the hands of a thousand devils, to the dreadful l^ke that
burns with fire, and brimstone, to be perpetually tormented with the hellish
crew: miserable soul, think thou nothing of this matter? or thinking of it,
why do thou not amend thy life, why permittest thou thy self, to be deceived
by the allureme^ts of the flesh?

Truly that soul shall be most happy, when departing out of her body, she
shall be embraced by the hands of Angels, and carried with iubilations, and
hymns, unto the celestial paradise: O unspeakable felicity! O most blessed,
and fortunate soul! Precious is the death of the Saints in the sight of our
Lord. ( Psalm. 115.5.) Consider o soul) that it is the only felicity and
beatitude, which the Saints did hope for, and attend (I beseech thee) what the
psalmist says of thy end, and destruction. The death of sinners is most ill.
( Psalm. 33.22.) mark what words the holy Prophet uses, he does not say, it
is ill, but most ill, in the highest degree, because it is so ill, that it
cannot be worse; deservedly (o sinner) is thy death most ill, for if thou
should die now presently, the miseries that would accompany thee, would
demonstrate the same, for thou should die guilty of mortal sin, and dying
guilty of mortal sin, thou should die hateful to God, and dying hateful
to God, thou die an enemy to God, the^ the which, there can be nothing more
grievous for thee, or more abominable in his sight.

Therefore (o sinner) seriously ponder, and duly consider (I beseech thee)
thine imminent danger, and great peril, accepting the counsel of S. Peter the
Apostle, who says, Be vigilant, and careful, that by your good works you
may make certain your vocation and election, for doing these things, you
shall not sin. (2. Pet. 1.10.) Mary, Mother of grace, Mother of mercy,
protect thou us from our enemies, and receive us at the hour of death; To thee
we fly, most pious Queen, Advocate, and Mother, we implore thine aid, and
assistance, even until that last terrible moment; Help us gracious Mother,
defend us most sweet, and clement Mary; Remember o most blessed Virgin, that
thou art the patroness of all sinners; Therefore I (the most wicked, and chief
of all offenders) do in the name of all, desire and crave thy succor and
intercession for us, but especially at the last instant, when our souls are to
depart out of this world: Help us Mary, and defend us perishing souls; thou
art our Mother, we thy children, therefore we wretched and afflicted, commend
our selves to thy care, for thou art our guide in our last conflict: Hail Mary
full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus, holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us
sinners, now, and at the hour of our death,

Amen.
Of the dead body, and carcass of man, and of the misery of the same, after
the separation of the soul. THE XXII. CHAPTER.
ANd it came to pass, that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels,
into Abraham's bosom; and the rich man also died, and was buried in hell. (
Luc. 16.22.) Do thou hear (o sinner) whither the soul of Lazarus the
beggar was carried? and where the soul of the rich Epicure was buried? The
poor beggar, by the hands of Angels, was placed in Abraham's bosom, a place
of perpetual rest, and tranquillity: the rich man, was precipitated into the
infernal lake of hell, a place of weeping, and perpetual misery. Consider now,
that the same shall be fall thee, if thou die not in the favor, and grace of
almighty God: And dying in his favor, having not satisfied for the temporal
punishments, which thy sins do deserve, thou shall be carried into
purgatory, and there remain until thou have paid the last farthing; But if
thou shall be dissolved, and die in the favor of God, and have satisfied for
thy temporal punishment, thou shall be assumed with troops of Angels, into
heaven, there perpetually to enjoy the heatificall vision, and ineffable
delights of paradise: But if thou shall depart without penance for thy sins,
without confession, or at least contrition, and desire of confession, and
reconciliation, when thou can attain to the act of confession, thy soul
then, at the instant of her departure out of thy body, presently being seized
upon, by a company of devils, shall be thrust into the loathsome du^geo^ of
perpetual darkness.

Think now, o miserable, and unhappy sinner, of the misery of the body, which
shall be left destitute of a soul, from which it received its form, beauty,
and comelines, and being deprived of this conjunction and union, it shall be
deformed, loathsome, pale, and wanne: Think with thy self, it began to be
filthy, and putrified, even then when it was first taken with a fever,
co^sumption, impostume, or any other disease, and from that time, to wax most
filthy, and loathsome: Think that it does agonize and sweat, even until the
departure of the soul, and continually does excreate, and spitt forth, fleam,
and other corrupted filth, and in this state, and condition, weeping,
languisheth, and decays: consider, that after the departure of the soul, the
eyes will remain distorted, thy teeth grinning, thy mouth, gaping, and thy
countenance which before was fair, beautiful and comely, shall afterward
become most hideous, and fearful to behold: consider, what loathsome
excrements it will cast forth, and of the sudden, most odiously will stink:
I have said to rottenness, thou art my Father: my Mother, and sister to the
worms. ( Job. 17.14.) O extreme folly of man, which cares for nothing but to
pollish, nourish, adorn, and make much of this putrified flesh, which (whether
thou will or no) must be eaten, and deuowred up by worms!

We read of a certain philosopher, that out of curiosity, did visit the toombe
of Alexander the great, which being opened, he found it, stinking, filled, and
covered with worms, and two Serpents, eating, and tearing his eyes; whereupon
he cried out, saying, O Alexander, how lately is it, since the world could not
satisfy, and fill thy desire, but now thou art content with three cubits of
earth, and a little toombe! Yesterday, thou did triumph and boast of the
number of thy subjects, and dominions, to day thou art filled with filthiness,
and worms! Yesterday, thou were worshipped, and honored of the world, this
day thou art of the same world, left, and forsaken! yesterday thou did feed
upon exquisite meats, and delicate dainties, this day, thou thy self art
become meat for worms!

Alas (o you sinners) and especially you, which are given to the sensual
desires, and unlawful pleasures of the flesh) set before your eyes, the last
misery of your dead, putrified, and corrupted bodies, go, and consider with
your selves, the misery, and deformity of those dead carcases, and persuade
your selves, that you must be like unto them, and more abominable, it may be:
Behold o you harlotts, how Queens, Ladies, and Mistresses do die, see o you
sinners, how Kings, Lords, and Masters without exception, perish: and consider
that the same, ye it may be, worse shall befall you: Behold how men and
women, are buried (sinners, and harlots) behold I say, in what state they are,
which are now buried, and what they were within these few days, and be you
astonished, absolutely persuading your selves, that the same, it may be worse,
shall happen unto you: And say to your selves, woe Alas to me miserable: N. O
wretched: G. O unhappy: E. Behold into what state we must also one day come?
Hear you, what the dead man says unto you. To me yesterday, to thee to day:
woe unto thee, which behouldest me, says the dead man, to every one that
looks on him.

Behold (o woman) the miseries of this dead body, which in former times, was
thy associate: Behold the mouth, nose, and countenance of it, contemplate the
breasts, and golden hairs, of which she did so greatly, as thou do, at this
present, boast and glory, consider what an alteration there is. Behold thou
proud, and inte^perate wretch, and whosoever, thou art immerst in the pleasures
of the body, smell how odiouslie and grieuouslie this dead body stinketh.
Behold that woman, o lascivious wanton, and tell me if thou know her:
Alas, o ye madd and pertinacious sinners, what is there that ca^ mollify
your minds, and cleave in sunder your obdurate and stony hearts, if the
misery of your own bodies, and consideration of the loathsome and hateful
stinch of the same, can no? Lord he stinketh, for he is now of four days,
says Martha of her dead brother. ( Joan. 11.39.) O sinner, what smell can be
compared to that of an humane dead carcass? To what end therefore, such
diligence? and such curiosity? to what end such cost? odors, paintings, and
ornaments? To what end, so many delights, pleasures, fancies, or whatsoever
may seem delectable to so corrupted, and deformed a body? I have seen the
offenders, and have pined away, because they have not kept thy law, says the
Prophet. Psalm. 118.

O my Brethren and sisters sinners, you compel me to pine away with David, for
the extremity of grief, when I consider the opprobries, offenses, and
ignominies whereby you offend your God, and the irrecuperable detriment and
damage, which you procure unto your own souls: How long shall sinners, o
Lord, how long shall sinners glory? they shall manifest, and declare their
iniquity: Let God arise, and let his enemies be dispersed, and let them that
hate him, fly from his face. As smoke vanishes, let them vanish away, as wax
melts at the presence of the fire, so let sinners perish at the presence of
God, and let the just make merry, and rejoice in the sight of God, and let
them be delighted in mirth. ( Psalm. 67.2.) Break the arm of the sinner, and
malignant, his sin shall be sought, and he shall not be found: says the
holy Prophet. ( Psalm. 10.15.) being moved with an infinite zeal of the
honor of God, and salvation of souls.

O good Lord, I am not David, but of all sinners the most wretched, of all
heinous offenders the greatest, of all wicked malefactors, the most
pernicious: notwithstanding, o my God, and dear Jesus, I am incited, and
moved, with such a desire of thine honor, and the salvation of my poor
brethren, that from the bowels of my heart, or rather of thine, I implore thy
clemency and mercy, in these words. Have mercy upon us o Lord, have mercy
upon us, for we are much filled with contempt, because our soul is much
filled, and is made a reproach to the wealthy, and despection to the proud. O
God have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, for we are all thy children,
thy servants, and creatures.

Remember, sweet Jesus, my dear Lord, that all poor miserable sinners are
thy creatures, thy servants, thy children, thy brothers, thy sisters, therefore
my Jesus, take compassion, and comiseration upon thy children, and brethren,
and show mercy upon thy daughters and sisters: we do confess, and humbly
acknowledge, that we have all offended thy divine, and infinite majesty, we
do all desire to amend, and to reform our lives, and actions, we do
confess, o my Lord Jesus, that thine ineffable clemency, and benignity has
been wronged, and abused, by us all; we confess our dullnes, and negligence,
in cooperating with the divine concourse of thy grace, and last of all, we
confess, that in all things we have been most unprofitable, negligent, and
unworthy servants, and most undeserving of such a clement, loving, and
bountiful Father, Lord, and Master.

And therefore we cast our selves down prostrate at thy feet, submissiuely
imploringe thy goodness, that thou would not have respect unto our
iniquities, but unto thy fatherly mercy, and most gracious compassion. Even as
a Father has mercy upon his son, so God is merciful unto those that fear
him, because he has known our making; He has remembered us, because we are
but dust. ( Psalm. 102 15.) Man is as the hay, his days decay, as the flower of
the field: Remember therefore my Jesus, that thou art our Father: correct, and
instruct us, as a Father, that we, being moved with thy so great, beniguity,
clemency, and charity, may fly and have recourse unto thee, like good children,
and abandoning all vices, may faithfully serve thee, and love, honor, and obey
thee, as our loving, clement, merciful, and omnipotent Father, for ever, and
ever, world without end,

Amen.
The fifth Trumpet, of the loss that sin brings at the day of Judgment.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
ANd the fifth Angel sounded the Trumpet: Draw near, and with attention give
ear unto the terrible sound of the fifth Trumpet, for, there must come a
reuolting first, and the man of sin shall be revealed, the son of
perdition, which is an adversary, and is extolled above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, so that he sits in the temple of God, showing
himself, as if he were God, and then that wicked one shall be revealed, whom
our Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with
the manifestation of his coming, him, whose coming is according to the
operation of Satan, in all power, and lying signs, and wonders, and with all,
seducing to iniquity those that perish, because they have not received the
truth, according to charity, that they might be saved. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Hear, o you sinners, the terrible, and fearful sound of this Trumpet, be
astonished, with all expedition, arise from the sink of sin, think
seriously with your selves, what exceeding great detriment and damage, it
brings with it. Alas thou unhappy soul, if thou could but penetrate the
greatness of the loss, that sin procures, how vigilant would thou be, for
being ensnared in it, and if thou being deprived of the grace of God, should
fall, how dilligently would thou rise again? Miserable sinner, if thou
would be thoroughly moved with the horror of sin, weigh well in thy
mind, what things shall befall thee, at the last day of judgment.

And first of all consider that, Antichrist, polluted, and defiled with all
kind of sin, and vices, must the^ appear, who is the chiefest enemy of
God, who shall strive by all means to seduce the faithful, and believing
Christians, affirming that he is true God: If thou desire more particularly
to know the conditions, and affections, of this hellish and diabolical
usurper, consider diligently the forementioned words; There shall come revolt
first, and the man of sin, shall be revealed etc. Turn your cogitations
(Brethren) to the names which are attributed unto him, by S. Paul: A man of
sin; The son of perdition, that wicked man, whose coming is according to
this operation of Satan: O, wretched, and unhappy shall they be, which live at
this time, for many of them, shall either be seduced, by his false doctrine, or
compelled with the extremity of his torments, and tortures, to follow his
devilish inue^tions: Contrarily, most happy are they, which shall follow
blessed Jesus, keeping his holy law, with purity and integrity of mind, for
although they shall be tormented with the diverse, and many kinds of torments
and punishments; yet they shall be saved, and receive a crown of eternal
happiness.

Time will not permit, or suffer me, o sinners, to insist any longer upon the
improbous impiety of Antichrist, neither did I at the first, intend it, but
this, I ardently desire, that you, considering the greatness, and multitude of
euille wherewith your souls are blemished, and deformed, may avoid them, with
great detestation abhor, and loath them: for what other cause is there,
wherefore Antichrist should be so impudent, and so wicked, but sin? He shall
be a most false liar, borne by the operation of the devil, who shall have a
show of sanctity, when he is most wicked: what makes him be so cruelly minded,
against the professors of Christianity, which are the servants of God, but
sin? what other reason shall there be, wherefore so many poor souls, shall
be seduced by him, but sin? wherefore the holy Apostle says; In all
seduction of iniquity, unto them that perish, for that they have not received
the truth in charity, that they might be saved: Therefore God will send them
the opinion of error, to believe a lie.

But who has secured us that, that dreadful day shall not come, even in our
time? Certain it is, that, Antichrist shall come, but when, there is nothing
more uncertain. O you unfortunate and wretched souls, what if he should come
now? what would you do? which way would you dispose of your selves? without
all doubt, should not God most extraordinarily preserve you, you would unite,
and join your selves unto him: for because you have rejected, and refused the
truth, which so often has been ministered unto you, by sermons, and other
spiritual exercises, and not only, refused it, but in some sort have scorned,
vilified, and contemned it, how just would it be with God, if he should permit
you to be seduced with the hellish doctrine of that enemy of God? that you
should hear him, obey him, worship him, honor, and follow him, and eternally
perish, and be damned with him?

Consider, o you blinded sinners, with fear and trembling, what, David the
holy Prophet says of the divine majesty, in these words. He is terrible in
his divine councels, upon the sons of men, how hidden and profound are the
divine judgments? Blessed are they which run the race of their lives with
fear, blessed is that man, says the wiseman, which is always fearful.
Consider also, o you wretches, what the holy Prophet speaks of the righteous,
and such as are enflamed with the love of God. Serve, says he, your God in
fear, and rejoice in him, with trembling: as if he should have said, you
which worship God with all your souls, serve him with all fear and reverence
him, and when soever you desire inward exultation, do it with fear and
trembling: But you, o wicked sinners who incessantly serve your enemy the
devil, lying plunged in the filth of sin, living so inconsideratly,
securely, and confidentlie, as you do, think, and verily persuade your selves
(making no doubt) that the divine wrath and judgment, shall descend from
heaven, upon the sudden, unlooked for, and more swift then the lightning:
Alas how many upon the sudden have fallen down dead, which could not so
much as say, Jesus help me? Alas how many by negligence, and sloth, have
perished, which never thinking of their ends, have lived in all kind of
concupiscence, and voluptuous delights? when they said, peace and security,
there came a sudden destruction upon them, says S. Paul. (1. Tim. 3.) Man
knows not his end, but as fishes, are taken with the hook, and birds with
the net, so are men taken in the time of persecution when there shall come,
upon them a sudden destruction. Eccl. 9.

O you my Brethren, and sisters sinners, looking into your souls, and
beholding the imminencie of your present danger, think some thing of your
ends: consider, o you unfortunate, and miserable wretches, the uncertainty of
your lives: consider the perpetual torments which are prepared for sinners in
hell: consider, o you lost souls, that you must once come to the point of
death: consider that your delights shall have an end, your pompes, honors,
glory, and whatsoever else, wherein you took sensual delight, and you your
selves, shall perish, die, and become as nothing, and your souls themselves
shall be drawn and separated from your, impure, filthy, and loathsome bodies,
whereby you have so heinouslie, and impiouslie offended your God.

To Christ therefore, o ye sinners, to Jesus Christ, o ye obdurate souls,
draw near, and have recourse to him: God calls you by my pen, by that
lively blood of Christ: O sinners by the virtue, and force of the love, and
mercy of God, I beseech you, and speak unto you in these words: Come o you
sinners, death draws nere, but Jesus Christ died for you, that you might live
for ever: Come o you sinners unto Jesus, for the devil, is at hand to throw
you into hell: Turn you to Christ, who calls you, by the sound of my
Trumpet, lest he reject, and utterly condemn you with the sound of his severe,
and bitter sentence at the day of judgment. Woe to you o sinners, woe I say
unto you, if you refuse to hear the sound of this Trumpet, whereby the divine
clemency calls you from sin and perdition, unto repentance and salvation. O
you my Brethren sinners, how comes it to pass, that your hearts are not
mollified, but are deaf, and dumb at this sound? God grant that you be not
of the number of those, of whom it is written, they have obdurated their faces
more hard the^ the rock, and they would not be converted.

Of the fearful signs which shall apeare before the day of judgment: by the
consideration whereof, many sinful souls may be saved, which otherwise might
perish. THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
ANd there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars,
in the earth distress of nations, for the confused sound of the waves of the
sea, men's hearts failing them for fear and expectation of those things which
shall come upon the whole world. ( Luc. 21.25.) And I will make wonders in
heaven and in earth, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke, the sun shall be
turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great, and terrible
day of the Lord does come. ( Joel. 2.30.) O unhappy sinners, if you would but
settle your cogitations upon these horrible things, and prodigious signs, I
do not doubt but that with fear and terror, at the very consideration of
them, your stony hearts would cleave a Sunder: What? when you shall see the
sun obscured, the moon turned into blood, the stars obfuscated, and
seeming to fall from heaven, the earth to be moved and tremble, the sea to
rage, mountains to break, and fall a sunder, and to be leuelled with the
valleys, dumb creatures so affrighted as to run here and there; Lions to
roar, Bears to make a hideous noise, Wolfes to houle, and other wild beasts,
terrible to sight, by the motion of the earth, to come out of their dens and
caves, Dragons and Birds to fly up and down the air: who would not be
astonished for fear, and dissolved with horror?

O humane misery, what shall be come of thee? What a terror will it be, to
see and hear in the fearful day of judgment, these strange signs, and
unheard of wonders? And there shall be a great tribulation, such, as was not
since the beginning of the world, even to this day, says our Lord by S.
Matthew. ( Math. 24.21.) I will not omit (o sinners) to sound my Trumpett in
your ears, that I may rouse you, out of the deep sleep of your sins, being
moved with a vehement desire of your salvation, and incited by the love of my
dear Savior Jesus: woe be unto you, if you stop your ears at the sound
thereof, but most happy if you attend, and give ear unto it, which is sent
forth for the salvation of your poor, distressed souls. Many signs there
are, which shall go before the day of judgment, but fifteen only are
remembered by S. Hierom.

The 1. sign is, that the sea shall transcend the mountains, forty cubits.
The 2. sign: the same sea shall desce^d in such a lowness, as that it shall
hardly be perceived. The 3. sign: All the unreasonable creatures, especially
they that live in the sea, shall be gathered together into lakes and pooles,
there to lament their desolation. The 4. sign: The sea, and all waters shall
burn. The 5. sign: All trees and herbs shall drop blood. The 6. sign: All the fowls of the air shall be gathered together, sending forth cries, and
lamentations, and abstaining from their usual meat and drink. The 7. sign:
All houses, and stately buildinges which are in the world, shall be ruinated
to the ground. The 8. sign: Lightnings, and fiery darts, shall fly from the
west toward the east, threatening the heavens, and striking fear, and
astonishment into the whole world. The 9. sign: The stones shall contend
amongst them selves, and in their conflict, shall be broken. The 10. sign:
Earthquakes throughout all parts of the world shall be so great, that neither
man, nor beast shall be able to stand on their feet. The 11. sign: All the
mountains shall be turned into dust. The 12. sign: All creatures shall leave
their caves and dens, and being possessed with a kind of madness, shall wander
abroad. The 13. sign, in all places the graves and toombes shall be opened,
and the bones of all the dead, shall stand upright upon their graves. The 14.
sign: The stars shall fall from heaven. The 15. sign: Every thing that is
endued with life, shall be changed, as well beasts, as men, as upon the
sudden; those men that now die, together with them, that have died since the
creation of the world, shall be revived and live again: Fearful signs they
be (o sinner) which I relate unto thee, receive them for thy instruction, and
enrich thy soul thereby, for thy salvation.

1. The sea shall transcend the mountains, to contemn thy pride and insolency
(o arrogant, and fastidious wretch.) The wicked are as a rageing sea, says
the scripture. ( Isay. 57.20.) But the sea shall ascend in such a height, as
that it shall excel the mountains, and wash away the arrogance of the proud.

2. The sea shall be depressed to that lowness, that it shall hardly apeare:
whereby, o proud wretch, it shall be declared unto thee, that at last, thou must
be deposed, and plucked down by God. Every man that exalts himself, says
our Lord, shall be humbled. ( Luc. 14.) and humility, says the wiseman,
follows the proud.

3. The lamentatio^ of the beasts, which is the third sign, what should it
demonstrate unto thee (o sinner) but that they, who have taken much delight in
vain, sensual, and lascivious complacencies, shall then be punished, and
tormented, with fearful execrations, and vlulations: Speak unto the earth,
and it shall show thee, and the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare unto
thee, says holy Ioh.

4. The fourth sign shall be, that of the sea and waters, in that they shall
consume with heat, which may instruct thee, o luxurious sinner: for even as
thou have burned in this world with the fire of filthy concupisce^ce, luxurious
desires, and adulterous actions, even so must thou burn in hell with fire, and
brimstone; their part shall be in fire and brimstone, says S. John in his
Apocalipse. ( Apoc. 21) and by this means, so much as thou have abounded in
the impious desires of the flesh, so much shall thou receive of this punishment
in this next world; How much she has delighted her self in pleasures, so
much punishment give you unto her, says the judge in the Apocalipse Apoc.
18.6.

5. What means that sweat of the herbs and trees, which is the fifth sign? O
wretch, that blood, which thou have shed with thy cruel and unmerciful
hands: Because that murder is one of those capital crimes which cry unto
heaven for revenge: The voice of thy brothers blood, cries out of the earth to
me, says God to Cain.

6. That mourning and lamentation with abstine^cie from meat and drink of the
birds, what other thing (o thou glutton) does it signify, then the pains and
torments, which shall be inflicted upon thee in hell, for thine intemperancy,
and ebriety? for they that are given unto this vice, shall be fedd in hell with
hunger, and dearth; The portion of drunkards, shall be fire and brimstone, and
the spirit of tempest, is part of their chalice. Psalm. 10.7.

7. The ruin and destruction of all buildings throughout the world, what else
does it demonstrate, but the folly and vanity of those, which placed all their
delight, and chiefest felicity, in building sumptuous and spacious pallacies?
Alas how many are there found of these times, which have more respect of the
houses in which their bodies dwell for a time, then of heaven in which their
souls should perpetually remain? woe be unto you, which join house to house,
and field to field: O miserable wretches how much better would it be for you,
if you would study to pollish, and adorn the celestial palaces of your
souls for heaven, where there are so many beautiful, and glorious
habitatio^s? In my Fathers house, there are many mansions. ( Joan. 14.2.) says
our Lord: O extreme vanity, and madness of the world!

8. What do those flaming, and burning darts, those lighninges running from
east to west, what, do they signify, but the wrath and indignation of the
angry judge against sinners, and those which have molested or wronged their
neighbors, or brothers? Every man that is angry with his brother, says Jesus
Christ, shall be guilty of judgment. Math. 5.22.

9. The conflict of the stones, signifies your Adamantine, and obdurate
hearts, which shall be broken a sunder with the judgments of God, because they
are not mollified by repentance: Heaven and spiritual things nothing profit
you, the promises of Christ will not allure you, the fearful judgments of the
latter day, the intolerable punishments of hell set before you, do not any
thing move you: O sinners more obdurate then stones, the stones claue a sunder
at Christ's passion, but you more hard then they, remain still in obduracie.

10. The great earthquakes (o sinner) which shall be so terrible, as that S.
John says in his Apocalipse; There is made a great earthquake, such an one,
as has not been since the beginning of the world; it signifies this, that
you cannot be sustained any longer by the same, and therefore it trembles, and
shakes, that it may swallow you up: Or the earth (as S. Gregory says)
therefore quaketh, because it will not receive sinners any longer, before they
have heard the sentence of the judge, pronounced against their crimes, and
offenses: Alas into how great a straight shall sinners be brought? if they look
up, they shall behold the angry contenance of the judge offended: if they look
down, they shall see hell gaping, prepared to receive them: upon their right
hand, they shall behold their sins and misdeedes accusing them: upon the
left hand, innumerable devils in readiness to carry them into everlasting
flames: Inwardly, the worm of the conscience gnaweth them, outwardly the fire
and torments scorch them, and terrify them. Which way then shall a sinner fly
or turn him self? then shall they cry out, O you mountains fall upon us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath
of the lamb.

11. The leauellings of hills with valleys, what do you think it signifies (o
sinners) but the overthrow of proud, great, and rich men, which have trampled
the poor and needy under their feet? and then all shall be made a like and
equal, every valley, says the Prophet Isay, shall be exalted, and every
mountain, and hill, shall be brought low.

12. All creatures shall forsake their caves and dens, and being possessed
with a kind of madness, shall wander abroad: what means it, think thou?
nothing else, but that no secret corner, no excuse shall be found of any: all
succor and releife shall be taken away from poor sinners, and no place or
part left, whereby they may be relieved. Not any Saint, not any Angel, not the
B. V. Saint Mary Mother of God, shall assist them, because God him self will be
so exceedingly offended with them: Alas o you wretched, and accursed sinners,
what will you then do? what will you say, o miserable souls? you shall walk,
and wander here, and there, outrageous, mad, furious, not knowing what to
say, or what to do. Now therefore, now I say, even at this instant, whilst it
is time, do that, which then (unfortunate souls that you are) you shall not
be able to do.

13. The graves shall be opened, and the dead bones standing upon them: which
shall be the thirteenth sign. Behold I shall open your toumbes, says the
Prophet Ezechiel: whereby it is intimated unto thee, o sinner, that then all
the filth and corruption of thy sepulcher (to wit) of thy defiled, and
polluted heart, shall be manifested, and brought to light. There is nothing
hid, but it shall be revealed, and nothing so secret, but shall apeare, says
our Lord. ( Luc. 12.2.) Then all thy hidden and secret sins (o thou
adulterate sinner) shall be laid open to the eyes of the whole world: what
therefore will thou do, o wretch? which way will thine unfortunate soul turn
it self?

14. The stars shall fall from heaven, says our Lord: that it may strike a
fear, and terror into all sinners, which have made themselves unworthy of
that celestial kingdom.

15. Last of all, all men shall be changed. To signify unto thee, o sinner,
that then all pleasures must have an end, and that thy self shall cease to
offend, injury, and wrong thy God, and dear Savior Jesus Christ.

To conclude: noe man does walk safe, amongst Serpents, and Scorpions: we are
here, environed with troops of enemies: wherefore as often as I think, of the
danger of the time now present, and the fearful signs of the time of the
last judgment, I cannot but tremble, throughout all the parts of my body; for
whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever else I do, I think I always hear
that terrible trumpet sou^ding in mine ears. Arise you dead and come to
judgment: for we must all be manifested before the tribunal seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the proper things of his body, as he has done,
either good or evil. ( S. Hieron. ad Eustoc. de cast. Virgin.) Consider
diligently therefore now o you obdurate and stiff-necked sinners, and
contemplate all these wonders, and prodigies, breaking your hard, and sturdie
minds, and affections, with the consideration thereof unto your eternal
saluations,

Amen.
Of the resurrection of the dead, and how that all men which are dead from the
beginning of the world, do die, and shall die unto the end of the same, shall
be revived again. THE XXV. CHAPTER.
ANd he shall send (to wit) the son of man, Jesus Christ at the day of
judgment, his Angel with a Trumpet, and a great voice, to call the dead to
judgment. ( Math. 24.31.) Alas o you sinners, what will you do, at that time,
when even the dead in their graves shall hear this terrible sound, arise you
dead and come to judgment? what will you do, when the Angel shall gather you
to judgment? you cannot then withdraw your selves, or steal away: you cannot
say, we will not: for will you or no you must come: Alas miserable souls of
condemned sinners, which from the bottomless pit of obscure hell shall hear
this fearful sound, for as soon as the Angel shall have sou^ded the Trumpett,
the full time of your torments being come, you shall be most miserably rancked
with the execrable devils your associates, whilst other diabolical spirits go
about to apprehend other accursed souls, saying, come you reprobate, and
damned souls, come you with us, that you may receive the terrible sentence of
condemnation: come and receive the full measure of your punishment due unto
body, and soul, and for ever live with us in the eternal pains of hell: O
fearful spectacle! the devils shall break forth out of hell, with outrageous
clamors and roaringes, drawing, and dragging these damned souls along with
them, which they shall beat with many stripes, and excruciate with diverse
kinds of punishments, crying out blaspheming, and detesting God: O how great,
fearful, and lamentable a spectacle will it be, to see such a troop and
multitude of devils, and damned souls, coming out of secret dens, and caves
of the earth, filling heaven and earth with their hideous outcries.

Consider o sinner, that all these devils, and condemned souls, the number of
the which, for the greatness thereof, cannot be recounted, shall cause a terror
to the whole world, by reason of the fearful lamentations of souls, and
roaring of devils, which shall be heard in all parts of the world: Alas
sinful men and women, what will you then do? Tide and bound to no place
you are, and yet you cannot hide your selves, nor fly away, but of necessity
upon that day, must appear before the Judge, to receive your sentence of
condemnation: At that day, all the reprobate souls shall go weeping and
wailing to their graves, to receive their stinking, and loathsome bodies, and
to be joined again with them, and to live with them perpetually in hell.

Consider, o sinner, that when those accursed souls shall stand at their
graves, every one of them shall cry out unto their bodies, in this manner: O
detestable, and execrable body, thou my associate, and companion, come with
me, to be burned in perpetual flames, hitherto thou have slept, and taken
thine ease, and I alone have bine swallowed up in the depth of misery, it is
necessary now, that thou also, come to be rewarded, according to thy merits.
Come, o cursed body, for I was allured by thy polluted desires, to offend the
angry Judge of heaven and earth. Come filthy, and loathsome body, which have so
often procured vomit by thine excess: thou must now be damned with the
innumerable curses of him that created thee, and gave thee to me: come you
cruel and wicked hands, which have bine e^brued in your neighbors blood, that
you may receive the reward of so many murders, thefts, roberies, and other
heinous offenses committed by you. Come you execrable feet, that you may
receive the recompense of so many mischiefs, which with great speedines, and
celerity, you have run to commit. Come my polluted mouth and tongue, that you
may receive the wages of so many blasphemies, dishonest and obsceane words,
which you have uttered. Come my deuowringe throat, which never could be
satisfied with excess, and druncknesse: The time is now come in which thou
must now pay the old score, for thy intemperancy in eating and drinking. Come
you curious, and gazing eyes, which would not be satisfied with any good sight,
come you accursed ears, whom nothing, but dishonest words and lascivious
songs and speeches would delight. In a a word, come hither, all you filthy,
and loathsome members, which, because I took care to content you, have now for
ever destroyed me: come for the hire of your beastly excess, to be burned with
me in the darksome lake of fire and brimstome without hope of ever returning
from thence again: Lastly come hither detestable body, which as thou have been
my companion in comitting of vices, so now in like manner, thou must be
partaker, with me, of all my hellish torments, and that in continual howling
and weeping; for we shall for ever live together without hope of returning from
this damnable dungeon of hell.

In this manner shall all the souls of the reprobat speak to their bodies in
the day of judgment: In like manner shall your souls o sinners, speak to
your bodies, if you die, burdened with deadly sins, and offenses, and you
shall be also cast into the burning Tophet, if you be not careful in time to
prevent. Such like words shall the damned souls utter, when by the divine
power, all the dispersed ashes of their bodies shall be gathered together, and
rising out of their loathsome graves, shall be reunited, to their accursed
souls. This being done, they shall be presented before the judge, by the
tormenting devils, that so they may be accursed, and condemned together.

But now sinners, to leave so pitiful, and horrible consideratio^s, let us
come to the contemplation of the blessed souls in paradise, the very
cogitation whereof is sufficient, to stir up your minds and affections to
embrace, and practice virtues, and to shun, and forsake vices: O how
delectable and pleasant a sight shall it be, to behold so many blessed souls,
descending from heaven, as glorious as the sun in his full beauty, that upon
the earth, they may receive their bodies: O joyful spectacle: There shall
appear the soul of the great precursor, S. John Baptist, most resplenda^t
with the beams of glory, that it may receive her dispersed, and scattered
ashes. There shall appear S. Peter, and S. Paul, the two chief pillars of
holy church, with all the other blessed Apostles. Here shall be seen the
souls of the Patriarchs, there of holy Martyrs, and Confessors, as so many
suns, and stars, shining in their glory: who singing praises, to allmighty
God, shall fill the air with heavenly Alleluiahs, and shall come to their
sepulchers, in diverse places and Countries of the earth, to receive their
bodies, endued with comlynes and glory: O worthy sight! those blessed souls
shall come accompanied with Angels: as contrariwise, the damned souls with
devils, but especially with their Angel Guardians, who having defended, and
protected them in this life, at their happy state and condition, are filled
with all joy, and heavenly delight.

Every one then of these blessed Angels, shall speak unto his most happy
soul which he has protected. Come (o soul) blessed of the most holy
Trinity, whom with all thy power thou have served, come and take again this
thy body, that together with it thou may be made partaker of celestial
joys; O what a sight shall it be to see at Rome, the two most beautiful
souls of S. Peter, and S. Paul, coming to their sepulchers, that they may
resume their most famous relics, with a company of so many blessed Angels?
Then shall the Angels, and happy souls themselves speak unto their bodies,
in these words, or the like.

Alas poor bodies of ours, which have lain so long time in the dust, without
your reward, arise, for now is the time, that you must be reunited unto us,
and receive the reward of so many molestations, greifes, and labors, which you
have suffered: come hither my feet, which have gone bare so many iourneies for
the love of God: come hither my hands, which for the love of Jesus Christ,
have performed so many good deeds: come hither my tongue, which have been
daily preaching of the praises of God, and teaching others, to conform
themselves to his most holy will: come my belly which have so often fasted,
and abstained from meats: come my loins which have borne cords, and chains
for the love of Jesus: come my whole body which diverse times, have mortified,
and subdued thy self, with hayr-cloaths, whippings, and scourges, and other
soar torments, for the love of thy Savior, for now is the time, wherein thou
must receive the recompense of these labors, and sufferinges.

O what a glorious sight will it be, to behold, throughout the whole world,
especially at Rome, so great a number of Saints bodies, arising in such
wonderful splendor, and brightness? O thrice happy then are they, which have
run the race of their life, in the path of virtue: And if perhaps through
humane frailty they did fall, without delay, they rose again, doing also,
penance for the same: These shall be of that most blessed, and glorious
number.

What say thou now, o sinner, will thou any longer harden thy heart, and
stop thine ears at the sound of my Trumpett? will thou still persist in thy
lewd, and ungodly courses? woe, woe be unto thee, if thou do so, for by
these means, thou shall come to be of the number of those miserable, and
damned souls, from which God of his infinite goodness, and mercy deliver thee,

Amen.
Of the coming of the Judge to judgment, and of the great fear which his
coming will strike into the hearts of sinners. THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
WHen the son of man, shall come in his majesty, and all his Angels with
him: Then shall he sit upon his throne of majesty, and all nations shall be
gathered together before him. ( Math. 25.31.) Alas sinners, return, forsake
your sins and accustomed vices: remember that you must be judged of
almighty God, whom by your lewd lives you have offended: consider now at
length that, after that the angels shall come to call together all the dead with
the sound of a Trumpett, the dead shall rise, and shall be gathered together,
in the valley of Iosaphat; and in the near adjoining places: the damned
standing on the earth, but the elect remaining in the air, in excellent
claritie, and brightness: And last of all, the judge shall appear in the same
air, who shall descend from heaven, accompanied with his most dear and loving
mother, attended of all the celestial quire of Angels. Consider, the ensign
of the holy Cross that shall go before him, with all the other trophies of
his victorious death and passion, which shall be carried by the holy Angels,
partly that they may be an evident testimony against all sinners, and partly
that they show the lawfullnes of the sentence which the judge shall pronounce
against the damned: and partly to encourage, and comfort all good men, which
by their force and virtue shall be saved: And then (says our Lord) shall
appear the sign of the son of man in heaven: and our holy mother, the
church sings; this sign of the Cross shall be in heaven, when our Lord
shall come to judgment.

O wonderful spectacle, never seen in the world before: this most holy sign
of the Cross, shall shine far more bright then six hundred suns, adorned
with an innumerable company of celestial colors: o happy, and thrice happy
are they, who shall behold that cross, with joyful countenance, but
contrariwise, most miserable shall be the reprobate, which against their
wills, shall be forced to see the same to their great grief and sorrow: O what
joy and pleasure, shall virtuous men have at the presence thereof? and what
excessive lame^tations, shall wicked and sinful men make, when they see the
same? with what alacrity shall S. John Baptist, S. Peter, S. Paul S.
Bartholomew, and all the holy Apostles look upon that glorious wodde of the
cross: S. Benedict: S. Charles, S. Dominicke. S. Francis, S. Clare, saint
Cecilie, saint Catharine, Marie Magdalen, and all the other holy Virgins, and
Matrones, with what gladness will they behold it?

Alas, o wicked and cruel Pilat, which condemnedst our Savior to death, how
shall thou be able to look upon this cross? O Caiphas, and you Scribes, and
Pharisees, that moved the people to cry out with an exceeding great clamor to
Pilat, away with him, away with him, crucify him him, crucify him: what
grief shall you conceive at the sight of this holy Cross? What fury and
madness shall posesse you at the behoulding of it? O ungodly Christians, who
still remain in the filth of your sins, who have trampled under foot, the
precious blood of Jesus, what will you then say and do? Thou proud man, who
rejecting all others, would submitt thy self to no body, with what
deiection will thou cast thy eyes downwards, lest thou should behold that
triumphant sign? Alas, o lascivious man, who wallowing in the mire of all
uncleanness, have lived in the filth, and mire thereof, have lived in contempt
of the blood and death of Christ, how the^ dare thou look upon that sacred
sign? Alas thou angry man, who wilt forgive nothing, wherein thou art offended,
though in the smallest matter, although thou should be asked pardon for
Christ's sake, in remembrance of his most bitter death and passion, what then
shall become of thee? how will thou look upon that sign, when thou shall see,
all hope of obtaining mercy to be shutt up from thee? Alas thou covetous man,
who for Christ's sake would not give one morsel of bread to the poor, what
shall become of thee, when thou shall see thy self destitute of all celestial
and terrestiall things? Alas thou wicked woman, that have killed so many
souls, and iniuried the blood, and cross of Christ, with thy lewed, and
dishonest life, what shall then become of thee? Thou perverse and obstinate
heretic, who daily reuilest Christ, and his holy church, thou shall then
be brought to the acknowledgement of thine errors: Alas damned souls, then
you shall behold the fruit of your sinful life past, when all hope of mercy
which you have despised here upon earth, shall be taken away: what will you
do, when, after the cross, and other signs of the passion, Christ Jesus
crucified, shall appear in his majesty?

O happy are they, who shall be able then to look upon him: O most sweet
wounds of my beloved Jesus, bestow that grace upon me, that I may be worthy
to be of the number of them, which shall behold you with chearfullnes of
heart: O most amiable Jesus, grant me thy grace, that I may be one of them,
who with joy and gladness may glory in thy wounds, with these or the like
words; Behold my most loving Jesus, who has shown so great mercy unto me, as
to draw me out of the abyss of so many sins, and freely pardoned all mine
iniquities: Behold those wounds, and precious blood, by virtue whereof I am
saved: Be you blessed o glorious wounds, full of love: Be thou blessed o my
most amiable Jesus, who have vouchsafed to beestow so great favors upon me.
To thee, and to thy sacred wounds, be attributed, all praise, honor, glory,
and benediction: Let all the Angels, and Saints in heaven, sing praises unto
thee: let all faithful people upon earth daily worship thee: let the whole
fabrique of heaven and earth, with all creatures contained therein, set forth
thy praise: God forbid that I should glory in any thing, but in the cross of
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

Now Brethren and sisters sinners, turn your selves to Christ the judge,
coming in the clouds with his divine majesty, most glorious to behold to
the Angels, and all good men, but terrible, and fearful to the devils, and all
reprobate souls, indeed all shall look upon him, shining with his resplendant
glory, but with different affections, the damned shall be forced to behold him,
to the greater augmentation of their grief, but the elect to their greater
comfort and consolation: Jerusalem wash thy heart from malice, that thou may
be saved. ( Ier. 4.14.) Sinners purge your souls, and consciences, look into
your selves, with a serious consideration of your estate, delay not, until the
terrible day of judgment shall aproach, for then it will be too late to
provide your selves, to enter into the place of eternal happiness.

Consider now sinner what helps are prepared for thee, so many teachers to
direct thee, so many co^fessors to instruct thee, so many books to call and
admonish thee, so many divine inspirations to move and excite thee, so many
prayers of the holy Church, so many suffragies of the blessed Saints: thou have
thine Angel keeper to protect and defend thee. Call to mind the manifould
helps, which thy loving Jesus, out of his fatherly care, has provided for
thee: He daily teaches, and instructs thee, continually prays to his
heavenly Father for thee, we have an advocate with the Father, says S. John,
Jesus Christ the just. (1. Joan. 2.1.) Consider what help the B. V. Marie,
Mother of mercy, patroness of sinners, procures for thee, who never cease
to pray for all, before her son in heaven.

Consider, on the otherside, if thou continuest, and die in thy sins, thou
shall be destitute of all help thou shall not find any to plead for thee, not
the Saints not the church, nor the Blessed Virgin Mary; for then the gate of
mercy will be shut up, and no entrance shall be found: sinners look to your
selves, have recourse to Christ, the fountain of living waters, whilst it
stands open: knock at the gate of mercy, before it be shut, so you shall
receive pardon, and remission of all your sins and offenses; Which God of his
mercy grant that we may all obtain,

Amen.
Of the great shame, wherewith all the damned shall be confounded, in the day
of judgment, before almighty God, and the whole world. THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
ANd all nations shall be gathered together, before him, and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd separateth his sheep from the kiddes,
and shall place his sheep on the right hand, and the kiddes on the left. (
Mat. 25.32.) O sinners, what torments and vexations shall you have in your
troubled souls, when you shall stand in the presence of God and the whole
world, to be condemned for your iniquities? what shame will it be to thee, when
all thy misdeedes shall appear, and be manifested unto all. And I will reveal
thy secrets before thee, and will show thy nakedness to the nations, and thine
ignominy to the kingdoms, says the Prophet Nau^. ( Naum. 3.6.) Noe means can
be used to cover thy sins, which thou have committed so closely; then what
vices soever thou did in secret, endeavoring to hide them, from the eyes of
men and Angels, shall be brought to light: Then traitor, all thy treacherous,
and bloody plottes shall be revealed: Then deceitful companion, all thy crafty
plottes, and fallaces, shall be detected: o wonderful, and maruailous thing,
then shall they read one another sins, in their foreheades, as in books;
The husband shall see all the dishonest behauiours of his wife: the wife, all
the faults of her husband, every one shall have his vices, and disordered
affections plainly known: O the justice of almighty God, which will discover
that, which a sinner thought would have been for ever concealed?

Call to mind, sinner, what shame that will be for thee, to be set before the
eyes of the whole world, to be seen of al both within and without? Alas how
many shall there be, who whilst they lived in this world, were reputed Saints,
were reverenced of all for such, but then shall be known to be far
otherwise? How many treacherous and devilish plottes, how many adulteries, and
robberies, shall openly be declared to the eyes of the whole world? O my sweet
Jesus, which see al things, that descriest whatsoever is committed in private,
pardon sinners, Jesus help them, that doing penance, they may not be
confounded with that last and great shame; Jesus remember that thou art our
Father, our Lord, and God, therefore forsake us not, but turn thine anger from
us: suffer not the fire of thy wrath to consume us; Let not that perish, Lord,
which is altogether thine. Have mercy upon us, crying out unto thee. I have
strayed, as a sheep that is lost seek thy servant, because I have not
forgotten thy law: He has forsaken me, and there is none that seeks after
my soul. Psalm. 118.

Many poor afflicted souls of sinners, make such lamentations, relieve and
succor them Lord, leave them not, who are thine, they wholly give up
themselves unto thee, they fly to thee for refuge, they crave, and look for
help of thee alone: Alas sinners, men and women, without doubt, our case is
most miserable unless we live well, and honestly, and be converted unto our
Lord God, seeing we yet receive help, whereupon if we perish, it is our own
faults. The Saints, the Angels, the church, yea, heaven and earth, and every
thing else, is ready to help us, the Blessed Virgin Mary is ready to succor
us: our sweet Jesus to releive us, and in a word the Blessed Trinity, is
prepared to defend us, whose we are, of whom we are created, and preserved:
God does lift us up, but we cast our selves down, procuring to our selves our
own damage, and withal, the infernal pit of hell: God would have us be
saved, and our Lord Jesus Christ died for us all, he is the propitiation for
our sins, says S. John, not only for ours, but for the sins of the whole
world. (1. John. 2.) Therefore sinners if we be damned, we can give no lawful
excuse, it is our own mischief, and we are the cause and beginning of our
own destruction.

Alas therefore brethren and sisters, let us shun and detest our former vices,
which if we cannot do at the first for the love of God, (which we ought to
bear toward him, as a Father) yet at the least, let us do it, to avoid the
shame, which will otherwise befall us, before the whole world in the day of
judgment; And thus doing, I hope at last, we shall be brought to forsake them
for the love of God: o heavenly consideration, o fruitful and profitable
contemplation, I could wish that thou were engraven in the hearts of all men,
for surely thou would be then a great help to miserable, and wretched
souls, which now are like to be damned by their own foolish madness. O
sinful man, what do thou? what think thou? whither go thou? why
do thou hasten with such speed unto thy destruction, ruin, and damnation?
show them a way o Lord, that so great a number of them may not perish; preserve
Christian souls from destruction, seeing that so many Turks, heretics, and
other infidels are daily damned, who obstinatly refuse to acknowledge the truth
of the holy Catholic church: But there is a means found out already
(Christian Brethren and sisters) which still remain in your sins: If you
will enter into life, keep the commandments. ( Math. 19.17.) you know, you
are commanded of God, to lead a life worthy, and beseeming Christian
profession: to abstain from sin, and fly the apearance of evil, to love
virtue, and embrace godliness: God almighty grant that we all may perform
this, that our souls in the day of account may be saved,

Amen.
Of the fearful sentence which Jesus Christ will pronounce at the day of
judgment, blessed and happy are they who seriously ponder it in their hearts,
and souls, for this is the most compendious way to forsake sin, and to turn
unto God. THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
THen shall the King say to those that are on his right hand. Come ye blessed
of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. ( Math. 25.34.) There are two things, which may move, and excite you
(sinners) to forsake your enormous crimes, and vices, and with an unfeigned
repentance to return to your God. One is, the consideration of the blessinge
which the good shall have: the other is, the pondering of the fearful
sentence, that Jesus Christ shall pronounce against the damned: to the good he
shall say. Come ye blessed of my Father, inheritt the kingdom, prepared for
you from the beginning of the world: But to the wicked, Go into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels: the one shall be called
to a paradise of pleasures, the other shall be sent into a lake of torments:
Nothing is more glorious, or beautiful, then paradise, nor any thing more
horrible, and loathsome then hell: nothing more delightsome, then heaven,
nothing more detestable, then hell: therefore sinner consider well of these two,
such contrary places: Think of heaven, that forsaking sin and doing
penance, thou may come to enjoy the unspeakable pleasures of it: Think of
hell, and learn so to order thy life, that desisting from thy former courses,
thou may escape the grievous punishments of the same.

Wise sinners, and blessed, are they, who change their ill manners, forsake
their lewed courses, and satisfy for their misdeeds, for at their death, they
shall be saved: but miserable are those, who give themselves over to the filthy
lusts of the flesh; and with greedines do commit all sin; for they after
this life, shall find no redress: Happy are those who strive here to adorn
their souls with virtues, for in the day of judgment, they shall find mercy,
and obtain everlasting joys: but wretched are they, who followinge the
pleasures of this world, dye in their sins, for in the great day of their
visitation, they shall be perpetually damned: And they that have done good
says S. Athanasius, shall go into life everlasting, they that have done ill
into everlasting fire: Happy are the good, to whom God of his bounty, will give
the treasures of heaven: miserable the wicked, whose portion shall be with the
devils, in torments of hell.

O hard heart, which art not moved with these things! O impiety of a sinner,
who does not think of these things, and by hearty co^tritio^ return unto
God! thou have but one poor soul sinner, and that in the day of judgment,
shall either be cursed, or blessed of God, shall either ascend into heaven, to
live for ever in the company of Saints and Angels, or else descend into hell,
to be punished for all eternity with the company of the damned spirits: If thou
be wise, thou will be wise for thy self, says Solomon. ( Prou. 9.10.) Thou will be wise (sinner) if thou detest, and hate sin, and turn to God; Thou will be foolish, and worse then madd, if, in continuing in thy wickedness,
thou forgett thy Creator. Alas what a number of perverse and madd fools are
there, who are hardly corrected? There is an infinite number of fools. (
Eccles. 1.15.) Wretched sinners, how sottish have you been, and yet still
remain so, which for a small temporal pleasure, like a shadow quickly
vanishing, you loose so great a substance of eternal good?

Consider (sinners) that there is no day, nor hour, nor moment of time
passes, but many millions of souls, such as yours are, descend thick into
hell: The sinner has given up himself, to a spiritual kind of sluggishnes,
not taking any care for his salvation, he co^sidereth not that death is
present, every hour and moment, to give him a mortal stroke: Alas how many
have gone to bed at night, and never arose again in the morning: consider,
consider, sinners, your last, ends, which are not far from you: How fares
it with thee (o sinner?) in what case is thy poor soul? full of vices, and
heinous crimes, covered over with darkness, in the devils possession, fast bound
with many strong chains, that now thou may cry out with the Prophet. I am
wrapped round about with the cords of sinners. ( Psalm. 118.) although thou can
not say that which follows, and I have not forgotten thy law.

But let us return to the terrible, and fearful sentence, which Christ Jesus
will pronounce against the damned, ponder and seriously consider it, imprint it
in your hearts, that it may be a spur and incitement unto you, for the
following of virtue, and avoiding of vice: meditate upon that saying of worthy
S. Hierome, a man admirable in sanctity, and holiness of life. Whether I sleep
says he, or wake whether I eat, or drink, write, or read, sit, or walk,
that terrible speech always seems to sound in my ears, arise ye dead, and
come to judgment: if men of such innocence and integrity of life, so much
feared that horrible day, what will you do, miserable and blind sinners,
against whom the sentence of condemnation is to be pronounced?

My God and sweet Savior give that power to my pen, seeing it is wanting to
my tongue, that this short and rude work of mine, written without elegancy of
words, and that the sound of these my Trumpets, may so move the hearts and
minds, of those that shall read and hear them, that at length they may
forsake their former courses, and fully resolve with themselves to turn to
their Creator, and Redeemer. My God, and sweet Savior, since it has pleased
thee to inspire me with thy heavenly grace, to set forth this my poor labor,
for the salvation of poor souls, redeemed with thy most precious blood,
grant me that favor, that I may awake sinners, by this my writing, and sound
of my Trumpets, from the lethargy of vices, to the glory of thy name, and
salvation of their souls: My God and sweet Savior, for thy mercies sake,
suffer not I beseech thee, this my labor to be read, or these my shrill
Trumpets to be heard of any sinner, without profit, and commodity, but that
the noise of them, may force the devil to tremble, and the powers of hell to
shake.

Brethren sinners, if you shall perceive your hearts to be moved with their
sound, I pray you despise, contemn, or resist it not, but thankfully
acknowledge that motion, and heavenly inspiration to be from God, who calls
you out of his tender mercy: Return to God, sinners, men, and women, death is
at hand, and yet God, as a kind and loving Father, by the sound of these
Trumpetts, gently calls you: Awake out of your deep sleep of sins, wherein
you have been buried so many years, and make him an answer. Sinners, our
most merciful Lord sends forth, this sound both pleasant, and harsh of mine,
or rather his Trumpetts, that it may be for the good, and salvation of your
souls, I pray God it may obtain the end, for which it was intended: Pray for
me, and I will not cease to be mindful of you all,

Amen.
Of the going, and departure of the damned to hell in the company of all the
devils. THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
ANd they shall go into everlasting punishment, but the just into everlasting
life. ( Math. 25.46.) They that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
they that have done ill, to the resurrection of judgment, says S. John. (
Ioh. 5.29.) Sinners stay here awhile, and fasten your souls upon the
cogitation of that horrible spectacle, and seriously consider how the damned
persons go down into the dark pit of destruction, with fearful howling and
lamentation, in the company of innumerable forlorn devils: O fearful thing,
whose terror is able to break, and cleave in pieces the hardest marbles; yet
nothing at all moves the heart of man! O the misery of humane nature, which is
not rent a sunder with so pitiful a spectacle?

Sinner, consider that as soon as those wretched souls, shall have the
sentence of comdemnation pronounced against them, the earth shall cleave in
sunder, and all the devils, and damned spirits, shall be swallowed up in one
gulf, and be thrown down into the obscure abisse of hell: O terrible, and
mourneful night, when weeping, and gnashing of teeth, and woeful lamentations
of forlorn souls (now reunited to their bodies) shall continue for ever? O
miserable disjunction, and division, the husband shall be separated from the
wife, the daughter from the mother, when the one shall go to heaven, a place
replenished with all good, the other into hell, a place of all torments!

O God of all mercy, open the eyes of blind and obstinate sinners, who never
trouble their minds with thinking of either heaven or hell, but only devise
how to wallow still in the filth of sin. Surge, surge, quidormis, arise,
arise, thou that sleep: Neglect not thine own salvation, that Christ may
help thee: Behold he calls now by my pen, he desires to awake thee out
of thy sleep, by the loud sound of my Trumpetts: Qui fecit te, sine te, non
saluabit te, sine te, says S. Augustine, he that made thee without thee, will
not save thee without thee, but will, that thou labor to thy power, to
dispose, and prepare thy self, to e^tertaine those wholesome counsels, and
exhortations, which he of his mercy offers unto thee.

Hereupon it is, that God provides, that his truth should be made known unto
thee by teachers, that thou should be admonished by confessors, and ghostly
Fathers, hereupon he speaks unto thee by spiritual books, and by the
scripture, that thou may harken, and give diligent ear unto him: This if
thou do, in his good time, he will bestow that grace upon thee, if thou refuse
not to receive it, which will enable the to forsake thy lewd course of living:
take heed sinner, how thou behauest thy self, for if thou stop thine ears
at his call, and running away from him, contemn his vocation, he will turn
away from thee, and suffer thee, to continue in thy miserable estate, and
condition, and in that shall thou die, and so dying, shall be damned.

Alas who is there, which would not be moved at this, and willingly forsake a
thousand worlds, that he might not loose God? which if he would not do for
the love of God, at least he would, that he might not incur the loss of so
great a good as heaven, or procure unto himself so great a mischeife, as is
the obtaining of held: The loss of heaven is no trifling matter, or to go into
hell, is not of a small moment, that a man should not regard whither he come
thither, or no: The damned shall go, yea, be cast down headlong into hell,
with the accursed crew of infernal spirits: and ye sinners, unless you do
penance, you shall all likewise perish: the blessed shall be taken into
paradise, and if you amend your lives, you shall be in the number of them. The
Saints shall enjoy all kind of good, and you also, if you will, shall be made
partakers with them: The damned shall be cast into hell to be tormented, in
everlasting flames, and you except you alter your purposes, and course of
living, shall be in the same number.

Good Lord, what gladness shall the blessed have, when they shall enter into
heaven, exulting and rejoicing in the delightful company of sweet Jesus, and
his Mother, the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints, men and women! Stay
here a while (sinners) and behold this most beautiful company, and society:
See how the heavens shine with light: Hear the harmony of celestial hymns:
give care to the music of Angelical voices; behold the Saints leaping for
joy and gladness about the throne of God: see how Jesus Christ, and his blessed
Mother, embrace, and kindly receive all the Saints: Behold the Angels
triumphing: Harken to the quire of heaven singing most sweetly, to the honor
of Jesus, and his Mother, the B. Virgin: O Jubilee, o gladness, o mirth, such as
shall never be ended! O excessive joy, which shall never cease to be in the
inhabitants of this paradise? o happy are you, and happy again, you which are
there all ready, and you which hasten to come thither: pray for us, you that
have your souls there, that we may be made capable of your unspeakable joy,
and gladness.

O heavenly Queen, Mother of God. O Marie, my Lady, and Patroness, pray for
me and all sinners, that we by thy merits, and intercession, may deserve to be
reckoned in that blessed number, praising and extolling thy God, and ours, for
all eternity: O powerful God, who have created us, despise not our prayers,
graciously hear our petitions, and give us that grace, that to thy honor and
glory, we may refrain from the filthiness of sin: look not upon our
manifold misdeedes, which we have committed, nor upon the innumerable
injuries wherewith we have offended thy sacred Majesty.

Go to sinners, and be of good courage, Dulcis and rectus est Dominus, our
Lord is sweet and righteous, says the Psalmist: Bonus est Dominus, our God is
God, to them that trust in him, to a soul that seeks after him: Endeavor
(sinners) strive and labor so much as lies in you, that you may be assured of
the mercies of God: Misericordia Domini plena est terra: the earth is full of
the mercy of our God: there is no created thing on the earth, under heaven
wherein the most gracious benignity of God does not appear, and except we our
selves be in fault, we may be sure of salvation, because of his part, he is
willing to receive all: Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri, God will have all
men to be saved. 1. Tim. 2.^

Alas sinners, purpose, and resolve to forsake the world, with all your hearts;
worship God, who loves you so dearly, bestows so many benefits upon you, and
still desires to bestow far greater upon you. Be not faint hearted, doubt not
any thing, have recourse unto Christ so soon as you can: I dare be your
surety, to make you al which are obnoxious to sin, secure, and safe, if you
desire indeed to come to Christ Jesus; Come hither Brethren and sisters, be
not dismayed, come to the most sweet and amiable wounds of sweet Jesus, come
to crucified Jesus: Do you not see, how he stands with his arms stretched
out, to embrace you? To Jesus Brethren sinners, to Jesus sister sinners: have
recourse to Jesus, who never refuses, or rejects any: come to Jesus, full of
love, who expects all, calls all, thirsts after all: Hic peccatores
recipit, this Jesus receaueth sinners. ( Luc. 15.2.) Christ Jesus came to the
world to save sinners, says S. Paul.

O loving Jesus, who wholly give thy self for sinners: O unthankful sinner,
who belongest wholly to Jesus: how great is thy mercy o Jesus? how great is thy
benefit o sinner? Propter scelus populi mei, percussi cum, for the wickedness of
my people, have I smitten him, says the eternal Father of his son. ( Isay.
53.9.) He bare our sins in his body upon the wood, says the same Prophet:
If then Jesus has bestowed so many great benefits upon a sinner, and loves
him so tenderly, whence is it sinners, that you fear Jesus, who is become your
friend? do him therefore no wrong sinner, come forth to thy Jesus: behold how
he expects thee upon the holy wood of the cross, his hands and feet being
pierced through with sharp nails, that he might give thee hope and confidence
to come unto him. Let this crucified Jesus, be engraven in my heart, and in the
soul of every sinner, that so we may change our lives, and reform our
conuersations, to our salvation, and to the honor and glory, of the most holy
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,

Amen.
The sixth Trumpett: Of the damage that sin brings to a soul in hell, and
of the most grievous punishments wherewith the damned are there tormented. THE
XXX. CHAPTER.
ET sextus Angelus tuba ceciuit. And the sixth Angel blew his Trumpet. ( Apoc.
8.) Sinners give care unto the fearful and terrible sound of this Trumpet, and
see whither it be of power to move your souls. O the misery of man's heart,
which destroys it self, by its obstinacy and hardness, and extolleth it
self to the highest degree of mischief, from whence there is noe hope of
returning safe! Behold in this world, there is nothing more pleasing and
delightsome to our fight, then the light of the su^ne, so in the other world,
and in all the celestial orbs: yea if there were so many worlds, that they
should pass nu^bering, there would be nothing more glorious or amiable to
behold, then God almighty. O exceeding delight to behold God, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost: to behold the divine essence, which is one and the
same in every one of the three persons, in which, all sweetness, and
comeliness, all treasures, and riches, are to be had in abundant manner.
Behold God is a thing so sweet, and pleasant to the taste, that the Prophet
David when he had lost it, or at least seemed to loose it, cried out, saying.
Fuerunt mihi lachrimae meae panes die ac nocte, etc. My tears were unto me
bread, day and night, whilst they said daily unto me, where is now thy God?
The spouse losing her beloved, can find no place, wherein to rest, whereupon
she says. In lectulo meo, per noctes quaesius, quem diligit anima mea. In my
bed by night, I sought him, whom my soul loves, I will arise and go about
the city: by the streets and high ways I will seek him, whom my soul
loves: have you seen him, whom my soul loves? Cant. 3. All Gods servants
and friends, did exceedingly lament, if in this world, at any time, they have
felt the spirit and soul to become dry, and not to have the accustomed
consolations, and usual sweetness of their beloved: yea they did languish and
pine away with desire to find him again, pitifully wearying themselves, in
weepings, watchings, and prayers, supposing themselves to be most unfortunate
for this loss.

The misery of the state of a damned soul is, that it loses God, not for a
small time, not for a day, a year, or a thousand years, but for all
eternity, so that if the damned souls should be asked in these words, what
shall you never see God? they would all answer, never, never, never; And if
they should be asked, shall you never then see that thing which is, not only
most beautiful to behold, but also the best that can be desired, or sought
after? They would presently with one consent, answer, no, no, no. If they
should be demanded, what is the cause of this their loss? they would with
lamentable crying and howling, tell you, sin, sin, sin: But if you should
go further with them, and ask them, with how many sins they have lost, so
infinite a good, and are deprived of so beautiful a sight, one would say, with
a hundred, an other with a thousand, another, with ten thousand, and lastly,
another with innumerable sins: But how terrible, and fearful would it be to
you, if one should say, amongst the rest. Alas most miserable, and forlorn
wretch that I am, who with one, only deadly sin, which endured but for a
moment, have deprived my self of all the celestial benefits! Alas then
unfortunate catiffe, art thou deprived of the vision of almighty God, for one
only transgression? his answer would be, I am, I am, I am: Moreover.

Consider sinner, that there be two kinds of punishments which the damned
suffer in hell, the one is, that which we call, pena damni, the punishment of
loss: the other is, pena sensus, the punishment of senses we will speak
hereafter of the latter, and now something of the first: This, pena damni,
punishment of loss, is the greatest evil, of all evils, and the greatest
loss of all losses, the greatest privation that can be imagined, to loose God,
and never to have the sight of him: To live without God, is the most grievous
punishment which the damned can suffer: who do not so much as hope once to see
him, because they be certain never to behold him: O intolerable punishment!
God will send in to the hearts of the damned a desire, and wonderful thirst of
those things, whereof they cannot be partakers, he will cause in them, that they
shall know and understand the admirable good which is contained in him, and the
great sweetness and delight, which arises from the conte^plation of his divine
majesty: they shall know that they have lost all these things by their
sins, having no hope at all, ever to enjoy him; He shall make them
understand, how the blessed live in perpetual pleasures which shall never fail
the^; whereupon the damned shall frett, and pine away with grief, they shall
know how they might have obtained the same if they had exercised them selves in
virtuous actions, and had refrained from sinner and vices; whereupon they shall
run madd for grief and pain, seeing they ca^ never recover their great
damage, which by their negligence they have incurred.

O sweetness flowing from the divine sight! The holy Prophet, when in this life,
he did but call to mind his God, languished with a wonderful kind of
sweetness, which thereby he did conceive, Memor fui Dei, etc. I have been
mindful, says he, of my God, and have exercised my self, and my spirit
failed me. ( Psalm. 76.4.) The ^ouse in the canticles cried out for this
sweetness of love. Fulcite me floribus; Stay me up with flowers, comfort me with
apples, because I la^guish with love. ( Cantic. 2.5.) O most sweet and pleasant
God, how delightful art thou? Blessed are they, that dwell in thy house, they
will always be praising thee: O forlorn, damned wretches; but most happy
they which live in heaven, because they always behold the face of God.
Videbimus eum sicuti est (peccatores) we shall see him as he is, sinners, in
the other life, in heaven, even as the Angels, and all the blessed Saints do
now behold him: But the damned see him in no sort, and have no hope, at all,
ever to see him: Videbimus eum sicuti est, we shall see him as he is. If any one
in this world could look upon the sun, and see clearly how it runs in his
orb and sphere, and not have his eyes dimmed with the exceeding light and
splendor thereof, he would count himself in a manner happy; But if we lead our
lives, as it beseems Christians, we shall see our God, who in sple^dour and
brightness passes without comparison a thousand, yea innumerable suns: Nec
oculus vidit etc. Neither eye has seen, nor care has heard, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive, what things God has promised them
that love him, says the holy Apostle. (1. Corin. 2.9.) and before the Prophet
Isayas: Beati oculi qui vident, etc. Blessed are the eyes which see those
things which you see, says Jesus Christ to his Apostles, when they saw him
but in the flesh, subject to labors, travails, pains, and death it self:
what blessedness will you think it now to behold him, resplendent in all his
glory? What joy to see him, not only as man, but also as true God, endued with
such beauty and brightness, as that noe man is able to express with words,
and that in the company of all the Saints, attended with an infinite multitude
of Angels?

I altogether faint and languish in my heart and soul, when I have but only a
bare thought of these things: Brethren, do you not likewise perceive, a
great delight and comfort when you think upon God? do you not consider, when
you meditate upon terrestrial, and created things, referring them to God
their creator, and efficient cause, that you receive a wonderful sweet
content from them? O what a meditation is here for you, to contemplate the
fairness, and largeness of the Imperial heaven? O Israel, Magna est domus
Domini, and ingens locus possessionis eius etc. O Israel: says the Prophet,
great is the house of our Lord, and large is the place of his possession, he is
great, and having no end, high and mighty. ( Baruch. 3.25.) In domo Patris mei
mansiones multa sunt. In my Fathers house, there are many mansions, says our
Lord Jesus. ( Ioh. 14.2.) O how many diverse places and seats are there in
heaven? which the Saints enjoy. What is it then that now hinders your will?
what lets you that you cannot be inhabitants of that heavenly city? I am
non estis hospites and aduenae etc. ( Ephesians. 2.19.) You are not now pilgrims
and strangers, but you are the citizens with the Saints, and domestickes with
God: Our merciful Lord Jesus Christ (sinners) has reckoned us amongst the
citizens of heaven, by his bitter death, and passion, he has made us heirs,
and coheires, of a kingdom, haeredes quidem Dei, cohaeredes autem Christi,
heirs truly of God, but as coheires of Christ.

Alas miserable wretches, what mischief is it, that depriueth you of so large,
and fair an inheritance? sin: some small puff, or blast of pride, some
little delight of your polluted bodies, some gredie desire, or thirsting after
humane affairs, some light passion of hatred, some foolish plotts to be
revenged, accursed be all those sins, which procure such loss and damage
unto us, as to deprive us of heaven, and of the beatifical vision of the
almighty: of the most pleasant sight of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and this is the portion, which befalls all the damned in hell: O most
loving Father, O blessed Son of God, and holy Ghost the comforter, full of
love and charity, for thy mercies sake suffer us not to be deprived of those
thy great and large promises: permit not, Lord God, our merciful Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, permit us not to loose the joyful sight of that glory
in the life to come, and the comfort of thy grace in this life present,

Amen.
Of the fire of hell, and the pains of sense which the damned do suffer in
the company of devils. THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
PRaeparata est enim ab heri Tophet, etc. for Tophet is prepared since
yesterday of the King, deep, and wide, the nourishment thereof is fire and
much wood, the breath of our Lord as a torrent of brimstone kindling it. (
Isay. 30.33.) Go to now sinner, call to thy remembrance those grievous
punishments, which thou shall endure in hell, unless thou amend thy life; And
first of all consider, that in hell, there is a wonderful denowring fire, ever
burning, and yet never consumes those miserable damned: Praeparata est ab
heri: It is prepared since yesterday, that is from the beginning of the
foundation of the world, there is a place prepared which is called Tophet,
which signifies a misleading, or beguiling, that is hell: whither all the
souls misled, and beguiled by the world, the flesh, and the devil, presently
resort.

This Tophet, and this hell, God the King of Kings has prepared, to revenge
and punish those execrable devils, and all sinners together with the^:
Prosu^data etc. It is deep and vaste: hell is large and of great compass,
says the holy Prophet I say: Nutrimentum eius etc. the fuel of this place is
fire, and wood* and God with his breath does continually kindle and set it on
fire. Whereupon (sinners) it is most clear, that hell is a very dark place,
in the most inward, and deepest parts of the earth, broad and wide, and so
ample, that although souls should fall down therein, as fast as the rain upon
the earth, yet would it never be filled: In this place, the fire allwaies
burns, and without ceasing or intermission, cruelly torments the devils and
damned persons, and will so torment and woefully burn them for ever.

The holy Doctors do hold, that this fire is corporal: Ignem infernalem
corporalem esse non ambigo, says Saint Gregory. I do not doubt, but that
the fire of hell is corporal: And although no corporal thing has power to
work on a spiritual thing, naturally, yet notwithstanding, by the divine
power, that fire which is corporal, and of the same nature with ours, never
cease after a wonderful manner, to torment all the devils, which are pure
spirits, and all the damned souls, which likewise are without their bodies,
until the day of judgment, and then their bodies also shall burn with them,
for all eternity.

Alas miserable sinners, this is the place appointed, and prepared for you,
where you shall burn with all the accursed crew of devils for ever, except you
amend your lives, and by repentance turn unto God: That fire shall burn for
ever, and never be extinguished: Nutrimenta eius ignis, etc. The nutriment
thereof is fire and much wood, neither shall there want, one daily to blow it,
for the breath of our Lord, like a torrent of brimstone does kindle it: But you
must by no means suppose, or think that there is wood in hell, necessary to
increase the fire: but the sacred scripture, speaks so, to this end, that it
may be presented more lively unto our understanding, which better comprehends,
and perceaueth natural things; neither can we but say, the devils, and
souls before judgment, and the bodies of the damned after judgment, be
understood by wood: for even as the wood shall be cast into the fire, so the
devils and the damned spirits before the day of judgment, and their bodies
after, shall be cast into the same: O wonderful misery, and calamity,
whereinto a sinner falls, seeing that he must go down into hell, where he
shall burn for ever and ever, and never be consumed!

Think with thy self, that thou cannest not without marvelous pain, hold
thy fingar in this our fire, for the space of one Aue Maria: but according to
the opinion of the Doctors, this our fire being compared with the fire of hell,
is like a painted fire: O ineffable misery! Put thy fingar a while to a
painted fire, and thou shall perceive no sensible pain, but thrust it into a
real fire, and thou shall not be able to endure the same; So truly stands
the case here, for so mighty, and so forcible is the fire of hell, and
tormenteth the soul in such sort and so intolerably, as that, suppose any one
could deliver, and take a soul out of hell fire, and cast it into some burning
furnace of our fire, the soul would imagine it to be, no other thing, then a
recreation, or some sweet cooling air, in respect of the intolerable burning
heat, which before, it did suffer in hell. What say thou sinner, if thou
deny it to be true, thou art much deceived, and deluded, neither do give
ear to that which the scripture affirms in many places: And besides, thou
shall altogether gainsay what we before have produced out of the Prophet Isay.

But if this does not satisfy you, how will you give credit to that, which
the holy Evangelist cites in the parable of the rich glutton? Mortuus est
autem and dives, and sepultus est in inferno: the rich man also died, and was
buried in hell. And being in torments, he saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus
in his bosom, to whom he cried out saying, Father Abraham have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus, that he may dipp the tipp of his finger in water, and cool
my tongue, because I am pitifully tormented in this flame. ( Luc. 16.22.) do
thou hear wicked sinner, what the holy gospel says, would thou know by
what name he calls that fire, Crucior in hac flamma, I am tormented in this
fl^me, therefore Christ him self says in an other place, speaking of hell.
Ibi erit flecus, and stridor dentium, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of
teeth. ( Math. 8.12.) Our Lord in these words declares and sets down, two
very terrible punishments of hell, when he says, fletus, and stridor dentium,
weeping, and gnashing of teeth: by weeping, he shows that there is fire in
hell, for the fire has alwais smoke mixed with it, which hurts, and
offends the eyes, and so consequently procures weeping: but when he says,
stridor dentium, gnashing of teeth: he manifests unto us, that there is a
most vehement cold in hell, of such efficacy, as it forces them, who suffer
it, to gnash with the teeth. Job also sets down these two kinds of
punishments: Ad nimium calorem, transeat ab aquis niuium, etc. Let him pass
from the waters of the snow, to excessive heat. Job. 24.19.

Alas wretched sinners, what woeful punishments do expect you? your poor
wretched souls shall be tossed from one place to another, from cold to heat
and scorching, and from thence again into cold, from flames into snow, from
ice and froste in to fire, and all this with ineffable torture, and unspeakable
pain: Herupon you may easily conjecture, what torment, grief and sorrow it is
to be in hell, by going our of fire and heat, into frost and cold, neither is
there any of you ignorant, if, upon some occasion, your hands should become
nu^med with cold, and afterward should put them to the fire to warm them,
what pain you should feel thereby; For the marvelous force of the ^eate,
which violently piercinge the fingers, endeavors to expel and drive out the
cold: O the miserable state, and condition of mankind: what grief and
torment should thou feel, sinner, if in the height of summer, when thou art
sweating and burninge with heat, thou should be cast into a cisterne full of
snow and cold water? without question thou could not long endure in this
affliction.

Alas, think, therefore seriously with thy self, of those horrible, and
intolerable pains of cold, and heat, and fiery flames, which thou shall
suffer in hell: Discedite a me maledicti, in ignem etc. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire. ( Math. 25.41.) will Jesus Christ say to the
damned, sitting upon his tribunal seat of judgment; whereupon it is manifest,
that there is fire in hell; Discedite a me, depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, not at the first prepared for you, but for the devils, but
seeing that now by your sins you have deserved the same punishment, discedite
a me, depart from me, with the company of all the damned spirits, that
together with them, you may be punished in everlasting torments: Sinner, what
will thou now say? will thou derogate from the credit of the holy gospel, the
words of truth, the words of Christ, who is truth it self? if thou do so,
thou art in the number of heretics; if an heretic, thou shall have the
punishment of heretics, and of all them, who will not give credit to the
Catholic faith.

Of the diversity of punishments wherewith the damned souls are tormented,
without any hope of intermission or mitigation. THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
QVantum glorificauit se etc. As much at she has glorified her self, and has
abounded with delights, so much give her of torments; says S. John in his
Apocalipse. ( Apocal. 18.7.) These words the divine justice will use to you,
sinners, in hell: The justice of God will cry against you, and command the
devils to torture you, according to the measure of your sins, and
iniquities. Harken, sinners, what diversity of punishments is kept for you,
understand wretched souls, those manifold torments which are reserved for
your transgressions, you shall be sure, never to come out from thence, never to
obtain the least rest and repose, that can be imagined, never to be freed from
any one kind of these punishments: Pater Abraham, etc. Father Abraham, send
Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe of his fingar in water, to cool my tongue,
because I am tormented in this flame: these be the words of the rich glutton.

Many and sundry punishments are there ordained in hell, and all of them very
cruel, you shall be continually, and swiftly tossed from one to another; This,
wretched sinners, shall be your recreation, rest and repose: These innumerable
punishments, which are prepared for you, forlorn souls, are reduced by the
sacred scripture, and holy Doctors of the church, unto tenn heads: Of the
first we have already spoken, which is the fire of hell, wanting all comfortable
light, stinking and burning, and the greater your affection was in this world
to commit sin, so much will God, use the more, his severity and justice
against you: This fire is provided especially for you, who have followed the
pleasures, and lusts of the flesh: for seeing that you have given way to your
sensual appetites, and have been polluted with all manner of uncleanness,
therefore this loathsome fire, and stinking pittes of brimstone, are prepared
for you: Quantum hasit amor, tantum affligit dolor. ( S. August.) how much love
and delight you have had in sinning, so much sorrow and pain shall you have to
recompense the same.

Think with your selves, if you must suffer and endure, such intolerable
pains for every deadly sin, how miserable will your case be, who all your
life time, have defiled your souls with the filth of concupiscence? what will
become of you Epicures, who for so many years have made Gods of your bellies?
what will become of thee harlott, which for so long time have had familiarity
with co^cubines? what will become of thee, impudent whore, which have so many
years together, allured, enticed, and drawn all passengers, by signs,
laughings, gay attire, and deceitful paintings, to the unlawful use of thy
body? what will become of thee silly woman, which have stolle^ away many souls
from Christ, and cast them down headlong into the pit of destruction? Alas
voluptuous persons, men, and women, where will you be hereafter, who now daily
heap sin upon sin, without remorse of conscience, without shame of men, or
fear of God? what do you think of your selves, who have done acts against
the common course of nature? what punishments? what torments? what miseries do
wait for you in hell? who is able (I will not say to number) but to think of
the innumerable pains, which are appointed for you?

Consider sinners, you especially, who follow with great delight and
diligence, the pleasures, and lusts of the flesh, consider what I am to tell
you further, of the fire of hell? Although in hell, there is but one common fire
to torment the devils, and damned souls, yet in diverse places, and parts of
hell, there shall also be diverse fires, whereof some shall be greater, then
others, burning more, stinking worse, that there, sinners may be punished,
according to the diversity of their offenses: But let us come now to the
second kind of punishment.

Ponder with thy self, that besides this fire, there is a wonderful intense
cold, which some shall feel more, some less, according as they be laden
with the burden of their iniquities: Alas you sloathfull, sluggish, and cold
Christians, in holy religion, and in God his divine service, this extreme
cold, these unspeakable tortures, and torments, will he inflict upon you;
congealing you like ice, and causing you to gnash with your teeth, as our Lord
says, Ibi erit fletus, and stridor dentium, there shall be weeping, and
gnashing of teeth.

The third kind of punishment, is, the vggly shape and deformity of worms
which shall be continually biting, and gnawing of you: vermis eorum non
morietur: their their worm shall not die, says the Prophet Isay. ( Isay.
66.24.) Vindicta carnis impij, ignis and vermis, the revenge of the flesh, of
the wicked, is fire, and the worm, says the wise man. ( Eccles. 7.19.)
Dominus dabit vermes and carnes eorum, the all powerful Lord, says Judith,
will give worms to their flesh. ( Iud. 16.21.) The more that sinners have
delighted them selves in foul, filthy, and enormous vices and crimes, the more
shall they be tormented in hell, with strange vggely monsters, of serpents,
toades, dragons, and such like, which indeed are nothing else but devils, in
the form and shape of these living creatures, allthough some Doctors affirm
such creatures to be really there, that the torments of the damned souls may
be more cruel, and intolerable.

Woe to thee then wretched woman, which placest thy felicity, in carnal
impuritie, think how thou shall be often times compassed about with serpents,
dragons, toades, or other some vggely and deformed creatures, worse then the
former, all which shall bite thee with their venomous teeth, and tear those
parts of thy body, wherein thou tookest greatest pleasure and contentment,
with incredible torture: O misery, and calamity! O thing unheard of! yet for
all this, the woeful sinner does not consider them: The dainty damsel, and
brave citizens wife, do not trouble their thoughts with these things: Alas how
many are there, which have wholly given them selves to the sinful lusts and
sensual delights of the flesh: and in a moment, when they have the least
thought of it, have descended into the bottomless pit: Ducunt in bonis, dies
suos: they lead (says holy Job) their lives in good things, but in an
instant go down into hell: O the calamity, of the blind and foolish world,
which after such a manner, utterly overthrows it self?

The fourth punishment is, that intolerable stinch which shall fill the
nostrils of the damned, with ineffable vexation: This stinch, of the holy
scripture is called. Fetor sulphureus, a stinch mixed with brimstone: ignis and
sulphur etc. Fire and brimstone, and the blast of storms, is the portion of
their cupp, says the psalmist. ( Psalm. 10.7.) pars iniquorum etc. the portion
of the wicked shall be in a lake, or poole burning with fire, and brimstone:
The reason wherefore the fire, the cold, and the stinch of hell, are so
excessive, and so insupportable, is, because they can never vent forth, but are
shutt up, and kept close within the hollow parts of the earth; even as fire in
a furnace kept in on every side, is of greater force to burn, then if it had
compass to dilate it self, that the flame and heat thereof might euaporate.

Weigh the matter exactly, and consider awhile, sinner, what an ill savor thou
should smell, if thou were shut up close in a sink, full of all filthiness,
and corruption, where no air can come in, in the which dead carcases lie,
where pitch and brimstone is burning: Out of this gather, what ill savor thou
shall find in hell, where the damned bodies shall stink far worse (without
comparison) then the carcases of dogs, or of any other filthy carraine: But
contrariwise, the bodies of Gods servants, and blessed in heaven, shall send
forth, throughout every part of the same, most delightsome savors. Consider
sinner, what a stinch, that will be of hell, where so many bodies of damned
persons, of men and women, shall be, not for one day, but for eternity: All the
damned shall be there kept close prisoners together, one lying upon another,
and one infecting another with his stinch and loathsome savor. Sicut oues in
inferno etc. as sheep, they are put in hell, death shall feed upon them,
says the Prophet. Psalm. 48.15.

Of the fifth, sixth, and other above mentioned punishments which the damned
suffer in hell. THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
THE fifth punishment of hell, shall be the fearful sight of devils, and
damned persons, who all very deformed, shall appear with foul and vggely
visages to behold, because the damned, both men and women, shall be like the
devils themselves. Ponder a while sinner, how loathsome dead bodies seem to be
in their graves. Consider with what horror and dread, the dead body of any man
or woman does affright thee, so soon as the soul is departed from it: think
what an ill smell proceeds from it, when it remains but one day without
burying. Weigh with thy self, how horribly stinking are the bodies of those
that be dead, which have been buried three or four days in their graves:
Domine iam fetet, quatriduanus est. Lord now he stinketh, he has been four
days in the grave, says Martha of her brother Lazarus.

Alas miserable mortal men, what do you do, being cruel, outrageous, and
unnatural against your selves? Why do you condemn your selves after such a
lamentable manner, and that for just nothing? O consider wretched sinners, if
the sight of one devil, strikes such terror into you, that although he
appear in the shape and likeness of no vggely creature, you are not able to
endure him long, what will become of you then, when you shall see in hell so
many devils, so many men, so many women, all alike in one ill fauorednesse, and
horrible aspect? O Alas miserable sinners, what sight will it be to see in
hell, innumerable devils, foul and vggely, running about hell, with woeful
noise, and clamours, who with whippes and scourges, shall now vex this man,
another while that woman, and so grievously torment all, that Dionisius, an
approved author says. Teterrima quaedam in daemonibus phrenesis and furoris
amentia inest: There is a most mischievous franticknesse, and madness of
raging anger, in the devils.

The sixth punishment of the damned, shall be in an insatiable, and most
vehement hunger, wherewith gluttons, and all those shall be tormented, who like
brute beasts, place their felicity in banquets, iunketts, and merry meetinges,
without any fear of God, or remorce of conscience, who break the fasts
instituted by our holy Mother the church, neither do they regard Lent, and
other times of penance, which she has carefully ordained for their souls
health and salvation. They eat often, deuowre and consume not only their goods
and estate, but that also which should maintain and relieve poor widows,
and fatherless children: Herupon our B. Savior threatens the^ in the
Gospel, in these words: Va vobis qui saturati estis, etc. Woe be to you that
are now filled, because you shall be hungry. ( Luc. 6.23.) In like manner God
speaks by the mouth of the Prophet Isaias, saying. Serui mei comedent, and
vos esurietis etc. Behold my servants shall eat, and you shall be hungry. (
Isai. 65.) Behold my servants shall drink, and you shall be thirsty, my
servants shall rejoice, and you shall be confounded, my servants shall praise
with ioyfulnes of heart, and you shall cry for sorrow, and for contrition of
spirit you shall howl: And the wise man gives us this counsel: Ante obitum
tuum, operare bonum, etc. Before death, work thy good, because thou shall
find no meat with the^ in hell. Eccl. 14.

Alas thou gluttonous companion, consider that extreme hunger, and thirst,
which thou shall endure in hell, where thou shall have nothing, but thine own
flesh to feed upon, Vnusquisque carnem brachij sui vorabit, etc. ( Isay. 9.)
Every one shall deuowre the flesh of his own arm, says the Prophet Isay.
Speaking of the damned: Do thou know miserable glutton, what thy fare shall
be in hell? wormwood and gall: Ecce ego cibabo vos absynthio etc. Behold I
will feed you with wormwood, and will give you gall to drink: says the
Prophet Jeremy. ( Ierem. 23.15.) Do thou know sinner, for whom thou shall
be meat? for death it self: Sicut oues in inferno etc. They are put in hell
like sheep, death shall feed upon them. ( Psalm. 48.) Alas foolish and madd
gluttons, what will you do then, when having nothing to refresh your selves
with all, you shall perish for hunger, but although you might have all the
dainty dishes, which the world could afford you, they would in no wise,
satisfy your appetite.

The seventh punishment, shall be an intolerable thirst: As we read, the
rich glutton was her with cruelly tormented, when he cried out; Father Abraham
etc. ( Luc. 16.) And it follows; that I may cool my tongue, for I am tormented
grievously in this flame: Vae qui consurgitis ad ebrietatem etc. Woe to you
that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to drink, even until evening,
that you may be enflamed with wine. ( Isay. 5.) and Solomon says. Be not in
the feasts of great drinkers, nor in their meetings, which take flesh together
to eat, for they that are given to drinking, and that pay shotts, shall be
consumed: Alas wretched and covetous persons, which would never give so much as
a cup of cold water to him that was thirsty, nor a small morsel of bread to the
poor, needy, and hungry: this hunger, and thirst shall molest, vex and torment
you, above all others, Fili recordare etc. Son remember, that thou have
received good things in thy life time, and Lazarus evil things: Thus does
Abraham speak to the rich glutton: The same I may say to you rich covetous
me^, who will not show pity or commiseration to any: Alas, how woefully shall
all those pine away with hunger, who in this world have gorged themselves with
wine and sugared soppes, and have enlarged their possessions with the goods of
the needy, and distressed, with the rents and living belonging to te church?
Fumus tormentorum etc. The smoke of their torments shall ascend for ever, and
they shall have no rest day or night, says S. John in his Apocalipse. ( Apoc.
14.11.) And the Psalmist says. Laborabit in eternum, he shall labor for all
eternity, and shall live yet unto the end. Psalm. 48.9.

The eight punishment of the damned shall be, to be fast bound and chained: Our
Lord affirms it in the Gospel: Ligatis manibus: Bind him hands, and feet,
and cast him into utter darkness: Iniquitates capient impium, his own
iniquities shall overtake the wicked, and he shall be linked with the cords
of his sins, says Solomon. ( Prou. 5.22.) Congregabuntur congregatione
vnius fascis: They shall be gathered together, in the gathering of one bundle,
and shall be shut there in prison. ( Isay. 24.22.) Alligate eos in fasciculos,
etc. Bind them into bundels to burn, says our Lord, speakinge of the Tares
of the field, ( Math. 13.30.) whereby the damned and reprobate are understood:
Consider sinner what a multitude of bundles of men and women, shall be in hell,
for they that have been participant of the same crimes, and defiled themselves
in the like offenses, shall be gathered together, into the same bundle, to
receive most cruel torments* woe to you, who will not pardon, nor so much as
look upon your enemies, what will you do then, when you shall be fast chained
to those, to whom in this world, you did bear deadly malice and hatred?

The ninth punishment, shall be obscure darkness, and thick smoke: Terra
miseriae, and tenebraerum: A land of misery and darkness, where the shadow of
death is, and no order, but everlasting horror inhabiteth. Although indeed
there shall be great darkness, yet the divine justice has so ordained, that
one damned shall clearly see another: That of this mutual behoulding of one
another, their torments may be the more increased and augmented.

The tenth punishment is, an intolerable filthiness of that foul, horrible,
and stinking hell, that nothing can possibly be compa-with it: Go to now
sinner, consider how thou shall be shutt up and bound fast, in this place,
having no hope at all, ever to come out again: O the calamity, and misery of
mortal men? who cast themselves headlong down thither, for just nothing: Quae
videntur temporalia sunt, quae non videntur eterna. The things that are seen,
are temporal, and transitory: but those things that are not seen, are
eternal, and everlasting, says the holy Apostle. (2. Corin. 4.18.) Your
delights, and pleasures (sinners) are very short: but the torments of hell, to
which you hasten, are of long continuance: your pasttimes vanish away, like
smoke, but your punishments shall be permanent: your sportes and merry
conceits, quickly consume, and pass away like a cloud, but your troubles and
afflictions, shall never have an end.

Alas therefore, sinners, return at length to God, why do you not forsake your
iniquities, and transgressions? why do you not fly the devil, your cruel,
and deadly enemy? woe to you sinners, men, and women, who live as if you
should never die? who take no care for the time to come, but pursue your wicked
and sinful course of life, even as if you had no souls to save, neither were
there any hell to torment you: Sweet Jesus, for his clemency, and tender mercy,
open your eyes: Sweet Jesus for his most bitter death and passion sake,
change and turn your hearts: Jesus the true son of almighty God, and the
B.V. Marie, his dear beloved Mother, bring you back again into the right
path of salvation, that you may not be damned in the bottomless pit of
destruction,

Amen.
The Seventh Trumpett, of the society, and company, which a sinner draws
with him, in life, death, and after death. THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
ET septimus Angelus tuba cecinit. And the seventh Angel sounded the Trumpett.
( Apoc. 8.) Hear now at length, the last Trumpet sounding, which if it shall
nothing, move thee, thou give me but small hope of thy salvation: Consider a
while, sinner, whose companion thou shall be, so long as thou live:
Afterward we will speak of thy company in death, and after death: Et
societas nostra etc. And our society is with the Father, and the Son, says
S. John, speaking of good men. (1. John. 1.3) O happy and fortunate men,
wheresoever they go, they have the Angels, and God himself, in their company,
for where two or three, are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of the^, ( Math. 18.20.) But sinner, who shall associate thee? Alas
wretch, the devil, shall be thy daily companion, and attendant; For what end
and purpose? That he may tumble, and fling thee down headlong, that he may
kill, and murder thee, that he may enforce thee to commit all kinds of vices,
and lastly, that he may carry thee with him into hell: The Doctors affirm, a
certain devil to be assigned to every man, who does continually watch, and
follow him, nor ever leaves him while he lives, that he may entrapp and
ensnare his soul: What then sinners do you? can you for all this, sleep, and
short, seeing, that the devil every day watches so narrowly for your
destruction? Can you so carelessly neglect your own salvation, and suffer the
devil always to busy himself in the work of your damnation? will you not
yet take any thought upon this matter? Are you still delighted with so
mischievous a companion? Madd men, and cruel against your own sinful
souls! O wicked and senseless creatures, which are so in humane against your
selves.

Ponder, sinner, that withersoeuer thou walk, there is a devil ready to be
thy lackie: Think how sometimes, he goes before, sometimes he follows, one
time on the right hand, another time on the left hand, now he goes before to
overthrow thee, now he follows, providing snares to catch thee, now he
stands at thy left hand, by calamities, and distresses, to bring thee to
despair: and by, and by, he is on thy right hand, by honors, and dignities to
puff thee up with pride, and arrogance, thereby to give thee a greater fall.
Consider when thou eatest, he is about thee, to make thee exceed by gluttony.
When thou speak, that thou may stumble, and faulter in thy speech: Think
that when thou awakest, he causes thee to be drowsy, when thou sleep, he
deludeth thee by strange visions, and deceipts, many subtle devices, many
deceipts, and crafty sleights does he imagine: How many netts, how many snares
does that tira^t lay for the miserable souls of sinful men? In how many
ways and comers, does that enemy sit lurking, to spoil, rob, and murder
all passengers? Fratres sobrij estote etc Brethren be you sobre and watch,
because your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, goes about, seeking
whom he may devour, says the holy Apostle S. Peter. (1. Pet. 5.8.) which
worthy sentence, our holy Mother the church, has appointed to be daily sung at
Compline in all places, where the divine office is said: Circuiui terram, etc. I
have compassed about the earth, and walked along through it, says the devil
to God, asking of him, from whence he came. Job. 2.2.

What is the reason, why the devil so vieweth the world? why he walks
through the earth so diligently? for your souls, for your souls I say; God
and his Angels, seek to save your souls, the devil with all greedines
thirsts after your damnation: Da mihi animas etc. Give me the souls, take
thou the rest, says Abraham. ( Genesis 14.21.) The devil says the like to man;
the true servants and worshippers of God, are enflamed with desire to win
souls: so likewise all the devils hate them with extreme indignation, never
ceasing until they have brought them, as low as hell: The Angels and good men,
and the devils are merchants of souls, but after a different manner. For the
first, by all means endeavor to conduct them into heaven, but the latter to
make shipwreck of them, in the bottomless pit of hell: That soul makes an
ill, and an unlucky journey, which takes the devil for her companion,
serving him daily by sin, contemning God, and rejecting his most sacred law:
But on the other side, that soul makes a prosperous journey, which follows
the Angels, and Gods servants, for they will assuredly lead her into paradise,
shewinge her the way which they have trodden, namely the keeping, and true
observing of the divine precepts, and commandments. Thine Angel Guardian
(sinner) will never forsake thee, so long as thy soul remains in thy body,
exciting thee to shun evil, and to chose that which is good: The devil a
most cruel tyrant, thy companion, will not be idle about thee, but will provoke
thee unto all sorts of wickedness, and tragression.

Now then (sinner) how do thou behave thy self toward thy good Angel?
how do entertain this thy most faithful, and loving keeper? Alas silly
miscreant thou refusest thy good Angel, and thy blessed Savior, to join thy
self to the infernal Prince of darkness, whom thou seruest with all homage,
diligence, and industry. Consider (sinner) with what straight obligation thou
art bound to God, and thy good Angel, who continually defends, and
accompanies thee, and keeps thee from the assaults, and snares of
innumerable damned spirits: Think how many years are passed, wherein thou
have lived in the sure custody of infernal enemies, offending, dishonouring,
and dispising thy God, who all this time has expected thee, ready to embrace
thee in his arms stretched out upon the cross, there manifesting his
benignity, mercy, love, and charity toward thee: It is not long since,
sinners, that the devil would have quite destroyed you, and have carried you
hence, had not the goodness and clemency of our most sweet, and mild Jesus,
hindered, and withstood him, who gently preserved you alive, expecting, and
looking that you should do penance, calling you by inward motions, and
inspirations, and admonishing you, by wholesome instructions of devout
preachers, and spiritual books.

Consider wicked, and forlorn sinner, how great thine ingratitude has been
against God, who so earnestly desires thy conversion, saying. Conuertimini ad
me, turn to me, in your whole heart. ( Joel. 2.) Turn to me, and I will
turn unto you, says God. ( Zach 1.) Turn then speedily unto him, as to
your loving God, sinners, seeing that his tender mercy so kindly inuites you.
Will thou leave him (sinner) to take the devil? take heed what thou do.
Nunquid non ipse est Pater tuus? Is not he thy Father, that has possessed
thee? has not he made thee, and created thee? It is a nation without counsel,
and wisdom: O that they were wise, and would provide for their last end,
says the holy scripture. ( Deuteronomy. 32.) O the blindness of man! O the madness
of a sinner! who forsakes his God to follow a most terrible devil. Remember
well, and call to mind, sinner, that he is thy God, that has created thee,
that alone has redeemed thee, with his most precious blood.

Tell me I pray thee (sinner) whose air is this wherewith thou breathest?
Whose earth is this which sustaineth thee, and houldeth thee up? The water
which washes thee, the fire which warmeth thee, whose I say, are all these,
but Gods? who gave thee clothing, wherewith thou coueredst thy nakedness?
had thou not it from God? from thy Jesus? Who gives thee bread to eat,
water to drink, but only thy God? will thou then be unthankful unto him, who
bestows so liberally these benefits upon thee? who affords thee health? Who
maintains thy life? is it not God that gave the same unto thee? My God and
sweet Savior, my benign, clement, merciful, and loving God, what justice,
and equity is it, that we should all be converted unto thee? It is good for
me to cleave to God, to put my hope in our Lord my God, said the holy
Prophet, who knew how many great good things proceeded to him from his God. (
Psalm. 72.) but you, forlorn sinners, and silly miscrea^ts, are so far from
desiring to come to God, who is willing and able to purge and sanctify you,
that willingly, and with free consents, you associate your selves with the
devil, who will make you devilish, like unto himself, when as otherwise you
might be made one with God by the ardor of love and charity: Deus charitas,
est etc. ( Joan. 4.) God is charity, and he that abides in charity, abides
in God, and God in him, says S. John: If any man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our
mansion with him. ( Joan. 14.) Delitiae meae etc. My delight is to be with the
sons of men. Behold here the inexcogitable felicity of the good, and the
ineffable misery and calamity of the wicked: for the good shall remain in
the blessed company of almighty God, but the wicked, and tra^sgressors,
shall for ever be shut up amongst the damned crew of infernal devils.

To conclude, assure thy self (sinner) that whether thou eatest, or drinkest,
whether thou sit, or walk, whether thou sleep, or wake, or what thing soever
thou do, thou art always in the company of innumerable devils, who daily
stand attending thee, ready to carry thee along with the^ into hell. And
again, persuade thy self, that they would not be long without the prey of thy
poor soul, if Gods clemency, and the custody of Angels were not present to
defend it from them: Our Lord by the merits of S. Marie Magdalen (in
remembrance of whose conversion, the church every year solemnly celebrateth
her festiual day) so change the minds of sinners, but especially, of those,
who are to read this little work, that, utterly forsaking the familiarity of
the wretched devils, and damned spirits, they may obtain a heavenly society,
and friendship, with Jesus Christ, their God, their Father and Creator, world
without end, Amen. And I humbly beseech every one, that shall read this book,
that he would pray for me miserable sinner, living or dead: Sweet Jesus bless
us all:

Amen.
IN THE NAME OF THE Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen:
Of the society which sinners have in their death, and how dangerous their
state is about the hour of their death. THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
IT is an old Proverb (sinner) well known unto thee. Qui male viuit, male
moritur. He that lives ill, dies ill: What then do thou suppose will become
of thee, who have lead so wicked a life so many years? It may be, thou will
say, with S. Paul, dives est in misericordia etc. ( Ephesians. 2.) God is rich in
mercy, and will show singular clemency unto me in death: But this befalls
but to very few, for although some sinners have been saved at the last gasp,
as it happened to the good thief, yet woe to them who sin, presuming upon
such a confidence; Paenitentiam in extremis nec damnamus, nec approbamus, we
neither approve of, nor condemn repentance deferred to the last end, says S.
Augustine: It is only known to God, what such men's cases shall be: This is most
certain, that all sinners, that are saved, must have an exceeding great, and
perfect sorrow for all their offenses, and injuries, whereby they have offended
his divine Majesty: But who is he that shall be assured to have this
consideration with himself, how he has formerly lived, in sin and iniquity,
to have a sufficient contrition and sorrow for offending God, at the time of
his death? Let no man seduce you by idle, and frivolous words, says S. Paul.
Ephesians. 5.

What then sinner, can thou be so foolish, as once to harbor such a thought
in thy mind, that the devil, thine adversary, who has been thy companion all
the course of thy life, will leave and forsake thee at thy death? be wiser then
so, for otherwise thou will be far deceived, yea rather, at that time he will
show all his malice, and use the greatest care and diligence that he can, to
obtain the victory, so long desired of him: Then shall thou behold the vggely
shape of thy infernal companion, then shall thou clearly see, how horrible his
countenance is, for then God will permit thee to discern him whom thou have
served, and to whom thou have bound thy self as slave for so many years.

Alas (sinner) what will thou say, when the devil, boasting and exulting over
thee, will terrify thee with his fearful deformed face? If happily thou
purpose to go from him, and to return to Christ by doing penance for thy
former lewed life, then he will demonstrate, and lay open before thine eyes,
some subtle deceipts, and fallacies which before he kept secret: Alas wretch,
with how many difficulties will he then circumuent thee? and the more, because
thou shall not know what to answer in thine own behalf: thou shall be sore
besett on every side, and prevail nothing at all, thou shall be cast headlong
into the gulf of eternal perdition: Alas miserable, unfortunate, and forlorn
sinners, you will then have no time to take an inward hatred of your heinous
crimes, and misdeedes: The devil will stand in your presence, alleging, and
reciting al your enormous faults, and offenses, declaring them to the full: to
the which you will not know what to answer, or to make any excuse, for your
selves.

Harken (sinners) to a terrible example, which makes for our purpose, and is
related of John Climachus, in the eight sermon of his book of sermons, the
history is thus: A certain Monk called Stephen, dwelling in mount Sinay, was
wonderfully delighted with the tranquillity of a solitary life, who (as this
author reports) was adorned with rare virtues, learning for many years
together, to become a valiant soldier of Jesus Christ: This religious man, the
day before he died, would some times look on the right side, other times on
the left side of his bed, as though there were some present, that demanded a
very strict account of all the things which ever he had done: We indeed, saw
no body says he, to talk thus with him, yet sometimes he would say, Truly
so it is, again he would say, I grant it, but this I have confessed, and for
the same, I have fasted, and lamented so long a time: Another while, he would
say, it is true, and presently after, you belie me, it is not so, I never
committed any such crime, the^ shortly after, he would tell them, verily, you
accuse me unjustly, and lay this infamy undeservedly upon me; But this most
of all amazed us, when he said, I yield, that it is true, neither do I know
what to reply, or answer for my self: yet I put my trust in God who is
merciful: so that this obscure judgment which none there present did
understand, was most terrible to relate, but especially in this, that the
devils should accuse him of things which he never did: O wretch, that I am, to
what straight was that Anachoret brought into, a true lover of a solitary, and
an heremiticall life! who after that he had continued a monk for forty
years, and had shedd forth many profitable tears, yet after all this, he
affirmed that he could not say any thing for him self, or give a sufficient
answer to excuse his offenses: Woe, woe then to us: where was that large
promise which allmighty God had made by the mouth of his holy Prophet
Ezechiell? Si impius egerit paenitentiam. ( Ezech. 18.27.) If the wicked shall
do penance for all the sins which he has wrought; all his iniquities which
he has done, I will not remember: He could answer nothing, nor allege this
in his behalf, whereupon, God is only to be praised and extolled, who knows
the cause and reason of all things: And so much the more, for that some monks
affirmed, that this Stephen so long as he lived in the desert, fedd and
nourished a Leopard with his own hands: yet this Heremit, of such fame, and
note in the world, being called to give an account of his life, left no
certainty behind him, what sentence passed on him, whither he was accepted
before God or no. This history Climachus relates.

Have you given ear to this, sinners? how is it then, that you live so
securely, being contaminated with vices and loathsome sins, supposing that
you shall die well enough, when Alas you hear that so famous an Heremit, a man
of such notable sanctity, who did great penance full forty years, now
dying, had nothing to answer, when a reckoning was to be made? O how narrowly
shall our life be discussed, and examined, when we shall be summoned by death,
to appear before the tribunal seat of almighty God, to render a strict
account of the same?

We read in the Chronicles of our sacred order, that when a certain brother
died, who had lived well, and devoutly, and given good example to all the
comunitie, a Doctor of divinity being slack in perfourming his office, which
was, to say Mass for this dead brother, according to his obligation, thinking
indeed, that seeing he had lived so virtuously, he did not stand in any need
thereof; Hereupon, one day, betimes in the morning, this deceased religious,
appeared unto him, and said. Salve Magister, vbi est illa charitas, qua te
sacrificium pro me facturum promiseras? God save you Sir, what is become of
your charity, in that you promised to offer, the holy sacrifice of the Mass
for my soul? I thought (replied the divine) you had no need thereof; No need
of it, said the other? Vtinam scires quam severe negotium in morte
transigatur. I would to God thou knew how severely our business is handled
after death? Know thou, that I am punished in purgatory, with most grievous
pains and torments, for which if thou will offer this holy sacrifice for me,
forthwith I shall be freed: when he had said this, he departed, and the Doctor
fulfilled his promise.

Alas therefore sinners, take heed what you do, refrain from your mischievous
acts, do penance for your former offenses, delay not, diligently to cast up
your account: Lord God almighty, cleave in sunder the stony hearts of
wandering sinners, that thou may be worshipped, and poor souls redeemed
with thy most precious blood, may be saved: Take away Lord Jesus, and utterly
destroy the power of Satan, which he so long has exercised with all cruelty,
against the miserable souls of men, that so this damned spirit may be put to
utter shame, and confusion: thy holy name be praised and glorified, and
sinful souls delivered,

Amen.
Of the society which the soul of a sinner has after death. THE XXXVI.
CHAPTER.
ITe maledicti etc. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his Angels: Is not this the sentence (sinners) which Jesus Christ
the judge, will pronounce in the last judgment, against the reprobate, who
have died in mortal sin? go ye cursed into everlasting fire, in the
company of all the devils: Consider therefore what associates you shall have
after death, think that you shall be amongst the most cruel enemies of your
souls: But how long shall you tarry with that cursed crew? for one? tenn? or a
thousand years? yea for ever, miscreants, and for all eternity: Alas what
misery? Alas what torments and pain will you have to continue, imprisoned in
that infernal dark dungeon? Ponder that after death thou shall be wholly in
the devils custody, where thou may be sure, that these deadly enemies of
God, and of mankind, will use all cruelty to afflict thee, which possibly they
can devise: When, I pray thee will the devil begin his dominion over thee, in
respect of thy soul? In the very day of thy death, and departure out of this
life: for so soon as thy soul shall leave thy stinking and vile body,
presently will these cruel fiendes lay hold upon her, and entertain her with
store of tortures: Consider with what fury, and madness, they will take
possession of thy soul: Think what strange kinds of torments they will
invent to punish her? O there is nothing which we can excogitate so horrible as
this: Know for certain, that after death and judgment, the devil may dispose
of thee, as he lists, as well for thy body, as thy soul.

Alas obdurate sinner, cannest thou imagine, that thou have no need to do
penance, seeing that thou have delighted thy self with all carnal pleasures,
and lasciuiousnes, even to the full? Thou art deceived wretch, if thou suppose,
that thy body, which for so many years together, has been exposed to al
abominable vices, shall not at last receive recompense for its former
lewednes: Thou greedy glutton which Epicure-like, make a God of thy belly,
do thou not expect the wages which thou have deserved? Thou bloody
companion, which desire nothing more then to be revenged of thine enemies,
ma^gling their bodies at thy pleasure, do thou think to go unpunished, or
that, infernal fiendes, shall not in the same sort, dilacerate and disioint
all the parts, and members of thy body? O the madness, and blindness of
mankind? which unawares, casts it self down headlong into hell? what will thou do wretched sinner, when thou shall be brought from one company of
devils to another, far worse, and more furious? What will thou say,
lascivious maid, when thou shall be tortured in one part of hell, and from
thence in a sudden be thrust into another, where an infinite multitude of
executioners expects thee? What course will you take sinful men and women,
when you shall see your selves daily to be punished with new, and strange
devised punishments?

Consider sinner, that thy pleasures and pastimes are but transitory: call to
mind, wanton woman, how that beauty will decay, thy comely countenance be
consumed, and thy body become a prey for devils: Tell me I pray thee lewed
woman, have thou never seen any one possessed in all thy life? do thou
remember how the damned spirits toss those miserable creatures, and torture
their bodies in most pitiful manner? Go to then, and consider, how they will
deal with thee, when they shall get thee, in their regiment, when by the
divine justice, thou shall be delivered up into their hands, to be afflicted
both in body and soul: Consider seriously, if those which the devils
possess, ar handled of them, in this sort, upon whom as yet, they have no
power at all, but only so far as God does give the^ leave, for they have
power over the body alone, but nothing to do with the soul: what will then
become of thee, when both in body, and soul, thou shall be wholly delivered up
to their cruelty? which is not the same case with possessed persons, because
they are very seldom tormented of more devils then one at the same time: woe
to you men and women, which now disquiet not your thoughts with these things?
for afterward you will feel the smarte, for your negligence.

What (sinner) do thou think, that it will profit thee any thing, if thou
complain and say; Alas you afflict me, leave off, punish me no longer, and
commiserate my poor case? Noe, noe, it is otherwise, yea the more thou shall
bewail, the greater blows shall they lay upon thee. What can thou reply,
that thy grief and torments might be diminished? The time will never come in
which these grievous pains shall cease: Ite in ignem, etc. go (says our
Savior) into eternal fire, who shall reject thee with terrible sentence, and
adiudge thee to these perpetual flames. What punishment will it be unto thee,
when thou shall call to mind the angry countenance of Christ Jesus, whom after
death thou did behold in judgment? Good God; Numquid qui cadit, non
resurget? Shall not he that falls, rise again? and he that is turned away,
shall he not turn again? why the^ is this people turned away with a
co^tentious reuolting (says the Prophet Jeremy 8.4.)? It is man's frailty to
fall, angelical purity to amend, and devilish malice to persevere in sin,
as a certain Doctor affirms.

Alas Brethren and sisters, sinners, be not so careless of the time to come,
return to your God, be sorry for your offenses committed, and earnestly beg
pardon for the^ of the divine clemency, whose property, is to forgive sinners;
Deus cui proprium est misereri etc. God whose propriety, is, to have mercy,
and to spare, says our holy Mother the church, receive our humble petitions,
that the pittifulnes of thy mercy, may gently absolve us, and all thy
servants, whom the chains of their offenses have fast bound: Return to your
Lord God, and get again into favor with your sweet Jesus: Are you afraid
(sinners) that he will not receive you? think not so sinners: Misericordia
Domini plena est terra, the earth is full of the mercy of our Lord, and his
tender compassions are over all his works, says the holy Prophet David;
Fidelis sermo, etc. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. (1. Tim. 1.15.) Meditate
a while upon the great love wherewith thy God was moved to come down from
heaven, and to dwell upon the earth for thee, he was made man for thee, and for
thy sake after thirtie-three years spent in austerities, contempts and
reproaches, he shedd his most precious blood upon the cross: Alas this alone
ought to be sufficient, to break in pieces your stony hearts, to bring you
back again into the right path.

O Jesus my love, through virtue of thy holy name, convert sinners and those
that go astray, take commiseration of their sinful state: pardon them, and
be reconciled with them, that they may avoid and shun the tyranny of the
devil; Grant this, my sweet Jesus I humbly beseech thee, through the merits of
thy death, and passion, through thy most precious blood, which thou did
shedd for me, and for all sinners upon the holy wood of the cross: Grant
this I beseech thee, for the love of thy most sacred passion, for the love of
thy most dear, and pure Mother: Grant this mercy, my beloved Jesus, to all
sinners, for thy exceeding great clemency, give them pardon, and forgiveness,
in honor of thy Angels and blessed Saints,

Amen.
IN THE NAME OF THE Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen:
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE 1. CHAPTER. THE division of the Seven Trumpets. The 2. Chapter. The first
Trumpet of Gods grievous complaint of a sinner. The 3. Chapter. Of the infinite
wrong wherewith a sinner by sinning, does offend the divine Majesty. The 4.
Chapter. The second Trumpet of the deformity of sin. The 5. Chapter. Here
follows the same matter of the deformity of sin. The 6. Chapter. In what
hatred sin is, in the sight of almighty God. The 7. Chapter. The third
Trumpett, of the detriment that sin brings to a soul in this life. The 8.
Chapter. Other damages and losses, which a soul receaueth by reason of sin.
The 9. Chapter. That a soul by sin, loses the friendship of God. The 10.
Chapter. That a soul by sin, does lose the grace of God. The 11. Chapter. Of
the terrible sentence which is given upon a soul, at the instant that it
sins. The 12. Chapter. That man may easily sin, but cannot of himself
rise from thence. The 13. Chapter. How good works, done in sin, do perish
and are of no merit. The 14. Chapter. The fourth Trumpet, of the loss that a
sinner suffers through sin at his death. The 15. Chapter. Of the last and
deadly disease, and damage of the soul, and that after this life, there is no
recovery. The 16. Chapter. Of the separation of the soul from God, in the
article of death. The 17. Chapter. Of the terror which the devil strikes
into a soul, in the moment of death. The 18. Chapter. Of the fearful presence
of the Judge in the instant of death. The 19. Chapter: Of the gnawing of the
conscience, which after a terrible manner shall molest a sinner dying. The 20.
Chapter. Of the separation of the soul from the body, and of the great dolors
and afflictions, which follow at that time and instant. The 21. Chapter. Of the
place whether the soul goes, so soon as it departs out of the body. The
22. Chapter. Of the dead body, and carcass of man, and of the misery of the
same, after the separation of the soul. The 23. Chapter. The fifth Trumpet, of
the loss that sin brings at the day of judgment. The 24. Chapter. Of the
fearful signs which shall appear before the day of judgment: by the
consideration whereof, many sinful souls may be saved, which otherwise
might perish. The 25. Chapter. Of the resurrection of the dead, and how that
all men which are dead from the beginning of the world, do die, and shall die
unto the end of the same, shall be revived again. The 26. Chapter. Of the
coming of the Judge to judgment, and of the great fear which his coming
will strike into the hearts of sinners. The 27. Chapter. Of the great shame,
wherewith all the damned shall be confounded, in the day of judgment, before
almighty God, and the whole world. The 28. Chapter. Of the fearful sentence
which Jesus Christ will pronounce at the day of judgment, blessed and happy
are they who seriously ponder it in their hearts, and souls, for this is the
most compendious way to forsake sin, and to turn unto God. The 29. Chapter.
Of the going, and departure of the damned to hell, in the company of all the
devils. The 30. Chapter. The sixth Trumpett: Of the damage that sin brings
to a soul in hell, and of the most grievous punishments wherewith the damned
are there tormented. The 31. Chapter. Of the fire of hell, and the pains of
sense which the damned do suffer in the company of devils. The 32. Chapter.
Of the diversity of punishments, wherewith the damned souls are tormented,
without any hope of intermission or mitigation. The 33. Chapter. Of the fifth,
sixth, and other above mentioned punishments, which the damned suffer in hell.
The 34. Chapter. The Seventh Trumpet, of the society, and company, which a
sinner draws with him, in life, death, and after death. The 35. Chapter. Of
the society which sinners have in their death: and how dangerous their state
is about the hour of their death. The 36. Chapter. Of the society which the
soul of a sinner has after death.
APPROBATIO.
EX mandato Reuere^di admodum Patris nistri Fatris Ioannis Genings, Prouincia
Angliae satrum Minorum Ministri Custodis, diligentius perlegi has septem Tubas,
Reuerendi Patris Frat. Bartholomei Saluthij, e lingua Latina in Anglicam
fideliter transpositam, quas peccatorum auribus insufflandas iudico.

Datum Duaci 23. Nouemb. 1625. Fr. Franciscus a S. Clara Sacrae Theol. Lector,
and Conuentus Duaceni Guard. indig.

VIsa approbatione Reuerendi Patris Fratris Francisci a S. Clara Sacrae Theol.
Lector, obseruatis obseruandis secundum institutionem sacrorum canonum, per me
imprimi liceat, in Collegio nostro,

Duac. S. Bonauentura 23. Nouemb. 1625. Fr. Ioannis Genings Prouinciae Angliae
Min. Custos.

The Approbation.
BY command of our Reverend Father, Brother John Geninges, Superior of the
Province of England, of the holy Order of S. Francis, I have diligently perused
these Seven Trumpets, of the Re. Fa. Bro. Saluthius, translated out of Latin
into English; which I judge most necessary, to excite sinners to repentance.

Bro. Francis of S. Clare Reader of Divinity.

Having seen the Approbation of the Reverend Father Bro. Francis of S. Clare,
Reader of Divinity, supposing that the ordinatio^s of the holy Canons be
observed, I give my leave for the Impression.

Bro. John Geninges, Minister Custos of the English Province.


