Two godly and learned Sermons, made by that famous and worthy instrument in
Gods church, M. John Calvin. Which Sermons were long since translated out of
Latin into English, by M. Robert Horn late Bishop of Winchester, at what time
he suffered exile from his Country, for the testimony of a good conscience, as
his Apology in the beginning of the book will witness.

And because these Sermons have long lain hidden in silence, and many godly and
religious persons, have been very desirous of them: at their earnest request
they are now published by A. M.

At London Printed for Henry Car, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, over
against the sign of the blasing Star.

The glory of the Honorable, is the fear of God.
coat of arms or blazon 1584

To the Right Honorable and his very good Lord, Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and
one of her highness most honorable privy Counsel. etc. A. M. wishes
continual happiness, both in this life, and in the life to come.
WHen these two notable and famous Sermons (right Honorable) had past the
Printers press, and the daily request of zealous persons was to have the^ in
their hands: in respect of the worthiness of the Book, and the unfeigned
duty I owe to your Honor, I determined to present them to your godly and
learned judgment, being perfectly assured, that your honor being such a
certain friend to all godly and virtuous exercises, this little Book could
not demand a Patron more fit to countenance it, which although it shall
happen to endure the malicious cauiles of the enemies of Gods truth, as the
Author himself is well known to have tasted: yet so much the less shall the
enemy boast of his wickedness, when he sees stamped in the forehead of this
little Book, the noble name of him, who is and ever has been a refuge to the
Godly, and from time to time a ready defender, to imbolden them in such
excellent studies. As for the reverend Father that took first the pains to
translate them, I doubt not but he was well known to your honor, and for his
sake, I hope they shall be the better welcome: and for my self, both the
cause that moved me to enter into this boldness, and the affection I have
continually borne to your honor, in this small gift I refer all to your
honorable construction, desiring God to bless you night and day, in all you
go about.

Your Honors ready at commandment. Anthony Monday.

The Apology of Master Robert Horn, late Bishop of Winchester* Grace,
peace, and mercy, from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
AFter that God had stricken our head sheephearde, under Christ, that worthy
King and confessor, Edward the sixth (good Christian brethren) which he
threatened by his faithful servants long before, if we would not turn from our
sins and wickedness: I perceived that it could not be avoided (God so
disposing the matter for our unthankfulness) but that the kingdom of God, at
the least for a time, must be taken from us, and the Christian flock dispersed.
The which thing began to appear to me more plainly, when I saw Gods book,
Gods word displaced, and Idolatry brought in.
containing the word of life, taken forth of the Churches in the Bishopric
of Duresme, and a foul sort of Idols, called lay men's books, brought in
therefore: when the common prayer commanded by public authority, 2. Tim.
4.2*
set forth after S. Paul's rule, to the edifying of Christ's congregation, in
the vulgar tongue, was against Gods law, and also against the laws of the
Realm, banished, and in the place thereof, a kind of prayer used far
dissonaunt from Gods law, and the example of the primitive Church, in a
strange tongue, farced full of superstition, idolatry, and false fables, having
nothing tolerable in it, saving that the people could not understand it, and
therefore were less harmed thereby: although I suppose, the popish Prelates
keep it in a strange language, least that if the common sort of men should
hear it in their own tongue, they would perceive it to be vain, false, lying
fables, and therefore credit their doings much worse in all other things. But
especially, when I saw the Lords table, whereon was ministered the holy Supper
of the Lord, according to his own institution and ordinance, was carried away,
the Communion abhorred as heresy, and for these, Baals altars reared up: and
his Priests and monkish hipocrites, returned to their abominable, blasphemous,
and idolatrous Mass, as Dogs to their vomit. Wherefore, I began to record
with my self, and call to my remembrance (not without earnest calling on Gods
name, for the assistaunce of his spirit) mine own state and condition, and to
examine more deeply, both ye doctrine which I had taught, whereof I perceived,
that of necessity I must render an account, and that within short time, and
also my duty of allegaunce unto the Queens highness, wherein I found my self
so clear and blameles: that if the devil himself, and all mine enemies,
should do their worst, they could not have accused me justly, neither of word
nor deed, perpetrated against her grace. And as concerning the doctrine which
I had taught, the more dilligentlie I did examine it by the holy Scriptures,
and the testimony of the ancient Fathers, the more sincere and pure it
appeared: I was the more earnestly persuaded, and settled in the truth thereof,
my conscience did more plainly lay to my charge, that I could not revoke,
say against, nor dissemble it, without blasphemous contempt of God, No man can
speak against the truth, without great blasphemy to God.
and most horrible denial of his Son Jesus Christ. So that I found no fault
in my self, as touching my preaching: but that as an unprofitable Servant, I
did not so much as I ought to have done, although I had done much more, then
some thought I should have thanks for. But what soever men thought or spoke, as
touching thankful reward for my labor, I persuaded my self, that I should
have all things weied after equity: and therefore considering both mine own
integrity, that I had offended no law of the Realm, but lived like an
obedient subject, and also that the same men bare the chief rule under the
Queens highness, and should be my Judges, as did know that the sword was
delivered them, for the defense of the good and obedient subject: so soon as I
heard tell, that I was exempted the Queens highness pardon, I took my journey
toward London, with so much convenient speed as I might. Where I found all
things far otherwise then I would have believed, if I had not been put in
experience thereof my self. For I found in the place of equity, prejudice: for
law, lust: for reason, will: and such as should have given sentence, according
as matter had been objected and justly proved, plaide both the part of the
accuser, of the witnesses, and also of the Judge: and gave this sentence
immediately, that I should either undo that I had done, or else: what that or
else meant, I knew well enough, for I had the exposition thereof by his own
holy ghost. Then my good L. Chancelour (who was always sure at a need,
perceiving that I stood to this, that I had offended no law, to help at a
pinch) objected, yea, three or four times for failing, a matter no less
malicious then false. And because nothing should be left out, that might help
foreward the matter, this good old father of Duresme (who had plaide three
parts before, right well) charge me with a matter, not only malicious and
false, but so foolish, that I had much to do to refrain my self from
laughter, I could not choose but smile. At the last, my L. Chancelour, after
certain talk had unto me, and mine answer made, concluded, that it was not
only preaching, wherewith I should be charged, the which he perceived I
sufficiently defended by the Kings law (in deed I had asked counsel, of them
that were learned in the laws of the Realm) but also matters touching the
Queens highness, which were the same, wherewith he and the Bishop of Duresme
had charged me before, as I learned by three or four of the Bishops own
servants, who had made no false report of their Master, before in my
matters: but as they wrote home to Duresme, to their companions, what things I
should be charged with all, and what should be my judgment, so afterward I
found it true. And therefore upon the monday at after noone, which was the
thyrtie of October, after it was told me by a friend of mine, dwelling in
London, who was familliar in the Bishops house, and at that time frequented
it the more, to hear somewhat as touching me, that he had learned, and was
credibly informed, both that all my goods at Duresme, was seized on in the
Queens graces name, and that I my self should on the morrow be committed to
the Tower: both because I had contemned the Queens highness Letters, and also
for that I was a Scotte. I say, after I heard these things, considering how
many godly learned preachers were imprisoned, and commanded to their houses
for religion without all doubt, and yet an other pretense made, perceiving,
that abiding could not profit my self, nor yet the congregation, my departure
might do both: I committed my self to the guiding of the Lord, and went my
ways, not making any man privy to my departure. Marvel not good brethren,
though after that I was entered into my journey, I were troubled with sundry
cares, but cheefely with this, least that I should now be apprehended by mine
enemies, and so give them that they would have been glad of, some honest
color, wherefore they might have seemed justly to have wrought on me their
will. For they that were not ashamed to invent, false and feyned accusations,
how would they have reioysed, yea triumphed over me, when they might have laid
to my charge, flying the Queens Realm: and that not only without her graces
lycense, but being co^uented before her highness honorable Counsel, and
commanded to attend, till they espied a time for me. You may be assured, a
Lawiers wit, wanting neither cunning, nor yet good will, and having full
authority to say, and do what he list, could easily have amplified this
crime, and have formed of a small Gnat, a mighty Elephant. But after that the
Lord had delivered me, at the least, for this time, out of the mouth of the
Lion, and saved me out of the hands of all mine enemies, which hated me: I
began to study with my self, and more dilligently consider, to what end GOD
had wrought thus my deliverance, which was not that I should now live as one
that had no regard of Gods glory, nor of mine own duty. But that, as I was
appointed to be a workman in his vineyard, and a watchman over the house of
Israel: so I should now most earnestly hunt those wild swine that destroys
the Lords vineyard, gather together (so much as in me lies) the Lords
sheep, that now are dispersed through out mountains, hills, and groves, and
to give them warning of the fearful sword that hangs over their heads.
Which thing I shall not cease to do, by the aid of Gods most holy spirit.

(...) the na^ of the ^sts, to ^er and ^e evil ^e god^
But for so much as I know right well, the proud Papists, whose mouths are full
of bitterness and curssed speech, will not cease, yea, out of their Pulpits, with
boasting and glorious words, to carpe and flaunder me for my sudden departure,
as though thereby they had vanquished and overcome Gods truth, which I had set
forth: and my kinsefolks and friends, will much lament my state, taking this
to unkindness, that I would not make them privy of my purpose, thinking that
they should have turned my mind: and also (which moves me most of all) the
weak flock of Christ, whom I had fed with the true doctrine of the Gospel,
may by the subtle persuasions of the crafty hypocrites, be brought in doubt
of the verity thereof, as though I my self should have forsaken it, and
thereby be offended, and be brought from God: I say for these causes, I thought
it best to answer the malicious hypocrites, whose mouths although I could not
stop, yet at the least they should not hereafter say, but that they were
warned, if that they would not cease to speak, that they ought not, they
should hear that they would not: and hereby to satisfy my kinsefolke and
friends, who I know of freendshippe and loving kindness, look upon my matter
with a wrong eye. And also to admonish the weak christian brethren, both to
beware of the leven of the dissembling hypocrites, who although they be clothed
in Lambs skins, yet by their fruits, they may know them to be ravening woolues:
and also to confirm themselves in that doctrine which I have preached unto
them, which also they have received, and not to be easily carried away into any
other contrary, although an Angel should come from heaven, and preach it to
them. Who so will advisedly behold, A compari^on between the Phari^eis, and the
popish pre^ates.
the manners and conditions of the Scribes and Phariseis, whilst Christ walked
here upon earth: what shifts and practices they used to maintain their
cloaked holiness, their dyrtie traditions, and vaineglorious estimation, and
therefore to deface Christ, and to suppress his holy word: and also will (with
judgment) compare our popish Prelates, with the whole rablement of their
chickens, unto them: shall plainly see them so like in conditions and practices,
and so lively represent, (as it were) the phisnamy of their old auncetours, the
Phariseis, that he would say and affirm, that they were even the self same
risen, from death to life again. Yea if bishop Caiphas were here in his own
person, he would for joy burst out and say, as Demea said by his son
C^esipho: Oh oh lachrymo gaudio, laudo, patrissat, salnos sit: spero, est
similis maiorum suorum. For what was in the Phariseis of old time, wherein ours
now do not excel them? What pride, what vainglorie, hypocrisy, trust in their
own righteousness, glory in their works of devotion, covetousness, traditions,
misconstruing of Gods law: superstition* hatred of the true religion,
persecuting of the Prophets of Christ, and of his Apostles, slaundering of
Christ: to be short, what wickedness, either in manners or in religion, can
be found in them, but that the like and much more, The Papists have found out
that which the Phariseis never heard of.
does plainly appear in ours? Yea, ours have found out for us an infinite
rablement of idolatries, which they never heard of, and would have abhorred, as
Masses, invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, and such like. But they
could never away with Christ nor his Apostles, but always spoke evil of them,
and of the Gospel, because it rebuked their vices. And what is the cause that
our Bishops and Priests may not now abide the self same doctrine, nor the
Preachers thereof: but for that they disclose their hypocrisy, and proud
dissembling with God and the world? What will they now say, by the doctrine,
and the Preachers thereof? What shall now be the talk in alehouses, tauernes,
and banquets? What shall now a sort of leude Priests, iangle in their
assemblies at markettes, when they have all their cups in? What shall now
Antichrists champions blouster and blow^ out at Paul's Cross, The Papists
slaundering of the god^ie.
and elsewhere? But that such Preachers as had used that place now of late
years, were carnal and fleshly Gospellers, such as would not live chaste, set
naught by fasting and prayer, and preached carnally carnal liberty, such as
spoke to please men for profit and promotion sake, last of all, such as were
rank seditious heretics, their doctrine was new, against the teaching of the
Catholic church, and at the last, they began to suspect it themselves, and
therefore durst not abide by it, but ran their way out of the Realm. Shall
not this be the sum of their brauling divinity? But how much are we bound,
Christ his example, a comfort to the godly.
to our heavenly master Jesus Christ, that both gave us warning that they
should thus entreat us, and also for our comfort, that he should taste of this
kindness before us? Matthew. 10.24.25.26.
There is no Disciple better then his instructour, nor no servant above his
master. It may suffice the scholar to be as his teacher, and the servant as
his master. If they have called the master of the household Beelzebub, how much
more his household servant? But fear them not (says Christ.) But when these
spiritual Preachers, call us carnal gospellers, what mean they thereby? Mean
they that we be sinners, A question demanded.
and that our flesh is not so subdued, but that it will lust against ye
spirit? Or mean they, that we have pleasure in sin and in sinners? Or they
call us sinners, because we could not live chaste, that is, The Answer.
godly without a wife? If they mean after the first sort, we confess with
the Publican, That we be sinners: And say with S. Paul, Luke. 18.13. Galat.
5.17.
That the flesh strives against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
insomuch, that we do not those things, the which we would feign do. If they
understand their carnal Gospellers, after the second sort, we have to thank
them, that they will both show plainly whose children they are (for herein
they resemble the old Phariseis) and also that they will serve us herein, as
the Phariseis did Christ: for the self same thing, was in this wise laid to
his charge of them, and has continued a common practice, since that time till
now, and is not like to decay in these men's hands, but if it be against their
will. After our savior Christ had dimissed John's Disciples, and preached to
the people, they praised God: but the Phariseis and the Lawiers despised Gods
counsel, and said: Tush, he is but a glutton, ^th. 11.19
and a swilboule, a bolsterer of Publicans and sinners. This was a common
objection and slander, that the Pharisees used to deface Christ's preaching,
^th. 9, 11.
and dissuade the people from it. For he receives (say they) sins, and
eats with them.

What were these complaints and slanderous accusations, wherewith they went
about to bring Christ in hatred of the people, but the self same that now is
objected against us? ^th. 9.14. ^th. 12.2.
Wherefore (say they) do not thy Disciples fast? Wherefore do they that which
is not lawful, ^e slande^s spee^s of the ^ariseis a^nst christ (...) the
iu^ying of ^mselues.
to do on the sabbath? We and John's disciples fast. No, no, even as he is
himself, such are his Disciples. He is wholly given to serve the belly, he
fasteth not, he neglects the Sabbath, he sets naught by prayer, he is a
carnal man, wholly given to carnal liberty, and to preach the same, and such
are all his Disciples. But we fast, we pray, we chastise our selves: we are
not like these men, we fast twice a week, we are not so carnal as this man,
and his Disciples.

Were not these the goodly and holy persuasions of the old Phariseis, against
Christ and his doctrine? Did they not in defacing of Christ and his
Disciples, advance and set up themselves? Did they not by this color of
calling Christ, such a Preacher of carnal liberty, creep into the
consciences of the simple, there to place themselves surely, under the
pretense of a more perfect holiness? And what mean our Pharisaicall
hypocrites, by tearming the Preachers of Christ's Gospel, carnal Preachers of
liberty, but the self same thing? But this is to be noted, of these
hypocrites, The intent of the popish hypocrites, by their railing.
in all their Sermons, when they thus rail against the Preachers, it is to
this end, to dissuade the people from the doctrine of only salvation by
Christ: and to keep this estimation of themselves, that they be holy, pure,
and godly lyuers: and therefore, men must hear and follow them, all other are
but carnal sinners. In this wise the Phariseis persuaded the blind man, whom
Christ restored to his sight again, saying: John. 9.24.
Give God the praise, as for this man, we know is but a sinner. As though they
should have said, believe us, follow our doctrine, be our disciple, for we be
holy, we serve God, we keep the ordinance of our mother the holy Church: and
to maintain this their hypocrisy with all, when other shifts failed, they
tell a false lie on Christ to bring him in hatred, saying, He is a sinner: and
yt they know it so to be. You may be sure, these honest men, would not else have
said it. But if they should have him examined what sin they knew by him, they
should have had nothing to say.

And what I pray you, knows our religious phariseis by the Preachers, whom
they call carnal, saving that which is confessed, that we be all sinners, and
have need of Gods mercy? Do they know us to be dronkardes, thieves,
murderers, whoremongers, common braulers, or such open offenders, as the
Congregation took offense by our living: if they do, let them openly rebuke
it, that other may be afeard to do the like: 1. Tim. 5.19.
Let them prove it by two or three witnesses, after S. Paul's rule: And I for
my part, shall not only make open confession, but also shall make open
satisfaction, as the order was in the church of ancient time. If they have
none of al^ things to charge us with all (if they had, we should have heard
tell of it or now) thanks be to God for his mercy toward us, for this was
only his work in us, Such as their Religion is, such is their life
and God grant these unshamefast hypocrites true repentance, and amendment of
their lives, for a number of them be notorious Tauernehaunters, common
braulers, very dronkards, known Sodomits, and manifestly proved whoremongers.
And if they will say, this is spoken of malice: I protest before God, that is
not truly said, for I do not name them, because I love the men, although I
hate their conditions.

As touching fasting, prayer, and preaching liberty, when did ever any
Preacher speak against true prayer, Christian fasting, or set men at liberty
to sin: but always inueighed against abuses, in popish prayer and fasting,
as Christ rebuked the prayers and fastings of the pharisaical hypocrites,
which in deed was all one with these men's prayers and fastinges. And the
liberty we preached, was not to give the flesh occasion to sin, but to
comfort by the death of Christ, the conscience ouercharged and laden with
sin, and such burdens of Pharisaical traditions, as they were not able to
bear. But this I know well, they will charge me with all, and many others,
that herein I showed my self a carnal Preacher, for that I did not live a
sole life, without marriage, as they do. If they live chaste without marriage,
let them give God thanks therefore: I do not envy in them that gift of God.
But surely God gave not me that gift, that I could live a Virginal chaste
life, but after the manner of hypocrites, and therefore did enter into that holy
state of Matrimony, Which is honorable among all men: Iebr. 13.4.
to the end I might serve God in pure chastity of Matrimony.

The Papists ^biection.
And where as they say, that although it be the gift of God, yet may we attain
it, if we will fast and pray, for God has made us a promise, that he will
hear our prayers, and grant our peticions. I grant he will so do, if we
ask after his will, Answer. 1
and if that the thing we crave appear to him, that it be profitable for us,
for he knows before we ask, what thing we have need of. And I doubt,
whether all the Priests that say, they have chastity, by this that they
pray and fast (as they say) obtain, and have it or no? We read in the
scriptures of many godly men, that earnestly and faithfully begged of God,
that thing which they obtained not, and yet God heard them, and loved them: but
he knew that to grant their peticion, was not so profitable for them. As
Saint Paul testifies of himself: How he was vexed with the prick of the
flesh, 2. Cor. 12.7.8.9.
the deuilles messenger, he did desire the Lord thrice to be delivered there
from, but he obtained not, but had the assistaunce of Gods grace promised,
where withal he was bidden to be content.

I will not now enter into the disputation of this matter, I may be so
occasioned that I shall speak of it another time. But I will heerin purge my
self of this crime, whereof I and my fellow preachers are accused as carnal,
because we are married, and I will purge my self after the order of the Canon
law, as I saw it put in practice once in Cambridge, for the purgation of an
holy and learned Virgin, if all unmarried Priests be Virgins.

The order was, An example of the oath of unmarried ^riests that (...) virgins.
that being accused of whordome, four or five as honest as himself, and of no
lower degree in the University, must (after he himself have taken an oath,
that he is no whoremonger) swear, that they think his oath to be true. Which
done, the matter stands clear, and he may justly take an action of
slander against them that accused him.

Now do I affirm before my Judge Jesus Christ, and his whole Church, that I
have not sinned, because I took a wife, and therefore am falselie accused as a
carnal or fleshly man, (...) notable ^biection, which all ^he Papists ^re
not able ^o deny.
for so doing: and for my purgation herein, and to prove my saying to be
true in deed, and also to approve my doing herein, I take witness to the
law of God, the law of nature, and the civil laws, till three hundredth
years after Christ's ascension, the example of Christ's Apostles: S. Paul's
counsel to the Corinthians, and in many other places, the Council of Nice,
and all the Fathers of the Church, to the second Carthage Council, which was
four hundred and twenty years after Christ's ascencion. If these suffice not,
or else may be excepted against, when I hear it, I shall answer it. If
these be allowable and sufficient, then am I falselie accused: for all these
testify plainly, that it is lawful and godly, and in no wise forbidden, but
that a Priest may marie. Wherefore, I end with this saying of S. Augustine: S.
Augus^
Quest. nou. and veter. test. quest. c.xxvii. Talis est enim quorundam
versutia, quia vt sanctitatis and castinoniae, amatores se simu^ l^nt, nuptias
esse dicunt da^nandas, vt per hoc commendentur, and populum a veritate
auertant* Such is (says S. Augustine) the subtlety of some men, because they
would feign themselves, lovers of holiness and chastity: they say, marriages
are to be damned, that by this means they might be commended, and turn the
people from the truth. The Papi^ proved h^pocrites s. Augusti^ words.
Mark that S. August. notes these men of hypocrisy, subtlety, of seeking
worldly praise, and deceiving the people. Consider also, that the marriages of
Priests were not forbidden in his time: but then this painted holiness began,
as you may perceive by his words, and was confirmed by the second Carthage
Council, shortly after his death. When these subtle hypocrites, who condemn
holy matrimony, as carnalitie, and feign themselves chaste lyuers, to be
esteemed in the world, and that they may the rather deceive the simple people,
have run till they be weary in this race: then heap they this on also, to
aggrauate the matter, and make us more odious unto ye people, that all our
preaching was but flattery, to please the Magistrates and the Nobility, that
we might thereby advance our selves, and clime to promotion. But here must
you note by the way, or else their tale is not worth the hearing: that look
what crimes soever they lay to us, they themselves be clear, and free from
them, and they be replenished with the contrary virtues. We are carnal, they
are spiritual, we cannot live without wives, they live chaste Virgins, our
Ladies husbands, we do no good works, all the world may wonder of their good
works, we preach to please men, they spare no man, we sought to live idlelie
and delycatelie, they study, they preach to their flock daily, we sought for
promotion, and would heap up living upon living, they will none, if you will
give it them, or at the most, they will have but one at once: if they thought,
that you would not thus esteem and judge of them, they would no more impute
unto us these faults, for they should but loose their labor, and miss of the
thing they hunted after. I dare say, their own consciences does accuse them
of belying us, when they say, we flattered the Magistrates. The Rulars
themselves took us so much contrary to flatterers, and men pleasers, that
they did much blame us of too bold and plain rebuking their sins, insomuch
they would at the last hear no moo Sermons: which was a manifest token, that
Gods plague was at hand, as in deed it shortly followed, upon them and the
whole Realm. And for the Lordly loytering Prelates, with all their kennell of
dumme dogs: I trust they will bear us witness, we flattered them no deal.
Who then did we go about to please, the poor sort? There was no promotion,
nor profit to be wunne.

God knows, and let the world judge, God knows the secrets o^ all hearts.
whether we sought more to please men, and to procure to our selves promotion,
honor, estimation, ease, and profit: or they that now wype their hands so
clean. But let them wype their hands so clean as they can, let them handle
the matter never so cunningly, in charging other with their own faults: yet
will they bewray themselves, when they go most about to cover and hide their
faults. But herein do we rejoice, that our case is at this present with
these, as Saint Paul's was with the Galathians, and the Thessalonians: for
after he had instructed them perfectly and truly, in the doctrine of
salvation, ^ Paul's ^ctrine to (...) Gala^ans and ^hessalo^ans, poy^ed by ^se
tea^ers.
there entered in among them false teachers, which did not only poison the good
doctrine of the Gospel, which they had received, with observations of Moses
Law, and superstitious ceremonies: but also the rather to bring their wicked
purpose to pass, did slander S. Paul of flattery and covetousness: and
therefore he writes to both the Congregations, and purges himself of that
false accusation, saying to the Galathians. Now, ^ala. 1.10.
whether go I, about to please men, or no? These. 2.4.
And to the Thessalonians: We speak unto you, not as men pleasers, but to
please God, who tries our hearts. Neither have I lived among you at any time,
with flattering words, as you know, neither by occasion of covetousness, God is
witness, neither seeking praise of men, neither of you, nor of others. We had
instructed the people, and taught the pure doctrine of Gods word, we had laid
no other foundation, but Jesus Christ: and in comes a sort of false
teachers, and does not only tread down the doctrine of Christ, and fill all
full of superstition, idolatry, and false religion, but to bring this the
rather to pass, do accuse us of these crimes, they themselves are only
guilty in. This has been the practice of all heretics, and false teachers,
since the beginning, as does well appear to them that are exercised, in the
hystories of the Church, whom these hypocrites do follow so near, and have
learned their cunning so perfectly, that thou may easily perceive the Greek
proverb, truly verified in them, (...). But what marvel is it, though they
now rail and rage, against the Ministers of Gods word, call them heretics,
seditio^s, and new fangled fellows, when their auncetours the Phariseis, did
the same against Christ and his Apostles? The Papists would rail against
Christ him self, if they durst: but because they dare not, they revile his
word.
Wherein these Antichrists byrds, would not be one foot behind them, if they
durst for the people, who would not suffer Christ to be evil spoken of by
name. But that they dare not attempt against Christ by name, they will do
against his holy word, under the name of new learning, and new preaching
against the faith of our mother holy Church. Do they name it new learning,
because they have not been wunted unto it, but now of late years? So may
Christ be called unto them, a new Christ, because they were never acquainted
with him. How many of them have this acquaintance with Christ, A question
demanded of the Papists.
that they know and confess him to be the only satisfaction for our sins,
the only redeemer, the only mediator, our only righteousness, that he
offered upon the Cross once for all, did make by that one oblation (not to be
iterated) a full and perfect sacrifice, for all the sins of the whole world.

Their answer.
They will say, that they have been so trained up in the knowledge of Christ,
that they know and confess all this to be true. And thus far were well
content, to follow the late Kings proceedings. Yea, they followed it, as a
currish Dog does f^llowe, when he is drawn^ against his will: then he
draws back^ with all his force, to pull his neck ou^ of the collar: and if
that will not be, h^ goes on snatching and gnawing the band, and cease not,
till he have gnawne it in sunder. Or do they name it new, because their holy
Father the Pope, they and his whole Clergy, does so judge it, and can in no
wise brook it? In this sense Christ himself called it new learning, when he
answered John's Disciples their question of theyrs, and the Phariseis fast. For
when they misliked his doctrine, because it was utterly against them, and they
could in no wise away withal: Christ shows this reason of their offense:
Old rotten vessels, can hold no new wine. Math. 9, 17
This new wine of the Gospel, cannot abide in a popish heart, replenished
with superstition, idolatry, and false religion: but it must needs be spewed
out again, or else the vessels, will utterly burst in sunder.

But they call it new learning, Why the Papists call the Gospel the new
learning.
and therefore the teachers thereof heretics, because it is but a new kind
of heresies, found out of late years by the Germans, and had been always,
and is condemned by the holy Church. God has blessed the Germans, (his name
be praised for it) wonderfully with the sincere knowledge of his truth, and
they do continue therein, and daily increase, although our English hypocrites
brute abroad the contrary. But yet they were not the first inuentours
thereof, for they herein have taught nothing else, but that they received of
Christ, and was the learning of the Church, till Antichrist of Rome wexed so
strong, that he bannished Christ and his Gospel. And this doctrine which they
call heresy, The church of Antichrist the continual enemy to the Gospel.
is not at any time condemned by the Church of Christ, but by the Church of
Antichrist, as shall plainly be proved, when they have decreed against any
particular part thereof. But this must not be forgotten, that you understand
when they speak of the Church (although they name it Christ's church) that
has always condemned this doctrine* they mean in very deed, a congregation
of Bishops, Monks, and Friars, sworn soldiers to Antichrist the Pope* And
think you this Church, will decre^ any thing against it self? And where they
will defend themselves, with the reason of long ancient custom, I answer
with Saint Augustine. Aug. lib. de bap. paruul.
Lib. de baptis. paruul. And it is recited in the Pope Decrees, for a decree of
the Church. Did. 8. can. qui contem. Qui, contempta veritate praesumit
consuetudine^ sequi, aut circa fratres inuid^s est et malignus, quibus veritas
reuelatur, aut in deum ingratus est, cuius inspiratione ecclesia eius
instruitur. Nam Dominus in euangelio, ego sum inquit veritas, non dixit, ego
sum consuetudo Itaque veritate manifest^a, cedat consuetudo veritati.
Reuelatione ^g^tur ^a veritatis, veritati cedat consuetudo, quia et Petrus qui
circumcidebat, cessit ^aulo veritatem praedicanti. Jgitur cum Christus veritas
sit, magis veritatem quam consuetudinem sequi debemus. He that contemning the
truth, does presume to follow custom, is either envious and malignaunt to
his brethren, to whom the truth is revealed, or else he is unthankful to
God, by whose inspiration his Church is instructed. For the Lord in the Gospel
says: I am the truth: and he said not* I am the custom. Therefore when the
truth appears, let custom give place to the truth: for Peter himself who
did circumcise, did give place to Paul, preaching the truth. Therefore, seeing
Christ is the truth, we ought rather to follow the truth, then the custom.
Herein is to be marked this, that the holy Father does give example of S.
Peter, who forsook custom, to follow truth.

The Papists say they be Peter's successors: so in some respects they be.
Our Prelates say, they be Peter's successors, why will they then not follow
Peter herein? They be his followers in title and name, but nothing in deed.
Saving that they deny Christ, and pluck out their swords to persecute them
that serve and believe in Christ: as Peter did smite Malchus, one of them that
came to apprehend Christ. And yet they differ from Peter, that where he of
blind zeal drew out his sword to defend Christ, they of malicious purpose,
bend all their power with fire and sword, to destroy Christ. And is it any
marvel, though we run away from the cruel claws of these wild beasts,
in whose hands there is no mercy?

The cause why the godly fled in time of trouble.
We fled not because we did suspect our doctrine: but because we knew well
their cruelty. We went not away, because we would not abide by our doctrine,
and prove it true: but for that truth could not be heard with indifferent
judgment, I pray you mark this practice, and look if the like were ever
found in any History? They cast the cheifest learned men in prison, The
Papists cast in prison, and banishe the chief learned men* and then call for
disputation, when no body is to answer them, nor any that they will suffer to
come.
or commanded them to keep their houses, and not to come abroad, or
bannished them the Realm, as Peter Martyr, I. a Lasco, with others: and when
they be sure of them, that they shall not meddle (for they were not able to
abide their learning) then to blind the eyes of the people: they pretend a
disputation, and call the matter into question, when there is no man to
answer them, as they think, and also when they be already determined, let
the truth appear never so plain to the contrary, what they will decree.

Then cries a stout champion at Paul's Cross boldly, where be our new
Preachers now? Why do they not now come forth and dispute. Think you this
lusty roysterkin does not know full well, that they be fast enough, they may
not come to answer him? Yet by those whom God has delivered out of their
hands, although they be nothing to be compared in learning, to them they have
locked fast up, it shall plainly appear to all indifferent men, that their
doctrine is true, and may easily be maintained by the Scripture, and testimony
of the ancient Fathers of Christ's Church. And that the contrary cannot be
defended, neither by Gods word, the ancient Church, nor by no honest way: and
therefore they are driven with shame enough, to bolster and keep it up, with
fire and sword, with thus will we, and thus shall it be. And because they would
seem in the face of the world, to do it by learning, and the consent of most
part of learned men of the Realm: they gather a sort of blind Priests
together, into the convocation house, The practices of the Papists, to uphold
their Religion.
whose lyuings hangs (as they call it) of making Christ's body, and of
pretensed chastity, being (for the most part) unlearned Asses, and filthy
whoremongers, and these with a shoute of yea, yea, yea, or nay, nay, nay, must
determine these matters: as if the masters of the Pythonesse, Acts, 16.16.
which had a spirit of Pytho, and thereby brought to them great profit: Acts.
19.24.
and Demetrius the silver smith, with the whole congregation of the Artificers,
who had rich lyuings by Idolatry, should have been appointed clerks in the
convocation house at Philippos, or at Ephesus, and with their yea, yea, or nay,
nay, have determined this question, whether Paul and Silas had been seditious
heretics: would not (trow you) the most part have cried with a loud voice,
yea, yea, yea? Oh, Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia pectora cogis? Whether
this stand with reason, that those Priests, whose living depends only of
superstiton, idolatry, and false religion, and are (for the most part) blind
ignorant asses, should be only judges in the weighty matters of our
Religion, I report me to the indifferent man. An other practice, which in very
deed was, that moved me most to save my self from them, by fleeing out of the
Realm, they have, not lately invented, but derived from their forefathers,
the Iewishe Phariseis, and yet put not in ure of many years. And that is, that
they will not leave a live, one learned man in the Realm, which is not of their
own sect, no, nor yet ere they have done, one Noble man that now lives,
although they will not pretend Religion to be the cause, but invent some other
weighty matter.

I must needs here give the Noble men warning of that I heard, A note of the
Aurhor, to the noble men.
because I love them, and am sorye to here, strangers speak this dishonor
of them, that they are not able to rule themselves, and therefore must desire a
polshorne Bishop, to govern them and the whole realm. At my last being at
London, waitinge at the Parliament house of my Lords of the Counsel, as I was
commanded, I met with a familiar acquaintance of mine, although not of my
opinion in Religion, but one, that for the matters of Religion, does favor
the Popish Bishops, and is both familier with the best of them, and also
taken to be a wise man, and of a great foresight, as he is indeed. He asked
me of my state, saying thus unto me, did not I tell you, that your Religion
would not continue? And so would have persuaded me to have given place, and
revoked mine opinion: wherein when he saw he prevailed not, he said freendly,
he was sorry for me, and wished that he were of power to do me pleasure: to
whom I said, it was sufficient to me, that he would continue his familiar
freendship with me: and there upon I charged him (as I was often wont) of
freendship to tell me, what he thought of our Bishoplike proceedings. Whereto
he answered, as in matters of Religion, very well. But in other matters
nothing so. For, says he, I have entered talk with some, that be most nigh of
their Counsel, and I perceive this by all their proceedinges and purposes,
that they are fully bent, to set up ye power of the clergy, as high as ever
they were, above the Laity, and I have good reasons that moves me also to
think this to be true. Whereunto I said, that can never be brought to pass:
For although the Noble men do favor their Religion, yet will they never
suffer them to clime so high again. Tush, says he, they shall first of al
help them to bring to pass at this Parliament, that they would, and then they
will have their heads off one after an other. What, said I, they will never so
do, for the Nobility favors them. Yea says he, and they favor some of
them again. But they love none of them all so well, but they love themselves
better. They see that the whole youth of the Realm, and especially of the
Noble, and the worshipful are infected with this heresy, and new learning, and
they shall hereafter undo again, all that they now do, and then the latter
end shall be worse then the beginning, and therefore, will they chop of the
heads of the Fathers, and thereby both their children are disenherited, and
shall be able to do no harm, and also they may in their place, make Noble men
of their own kindred and friends. What (said I) it were too much cruelty:
whereunto he says, yea, yea, they think it is better an inconvenience, then
a mischief. God deliver the noble blood of England, out of the danger of
these dissembling woolues. But let the Noble men consider, how many of their
own friends, and most dear dearlinges, with whom they were joined in
confederacy for the bishop of Rome, wretched Winchester, and deuillish
dreaming Duresme, have brought to confusion, and they shall have sufficient
warning, how they may trust these bloody butchers. If doctor Ridley were a
live, the bishop of Duresmes chaplein and one hand, he would vouch it to his
face, as he did ye last time that ever he spoke to him, that he cares not
whose blood he shed, to bring his purpose about.

And what would this insatiable bloodsoking hypocrit have cared, to have
wrought my destruction, whom he took to be an enemy to his deuillish
devises. He invented all the ways he could, to bring me to revoke the truth:
he caused two Noble men to charge me with preaching, as he termed it heresy,
he himself accused me, that I had infected his whole dioces with new learning:
but when that would not serve, because I had done nothing, but that was
confirmed by ye laws of the Realm, he was not ashamed to lay to my charge,
that I was not an English man borne: that I had exercised his office in his
bisshopricke, that I had brought in a wife of mine own into that Church, where
never woman came before. And then the L. Chauncelour charge me with contempt
of the Queens highness, as though I should have received three letters of
co^maundment, to repair and make mine appearaunce before the Council, and
would appear for none of them. If both these butchers, had been so well
known to King Henry the eight, for rank traitors to the Crown of England,
as they were in deed, which now they show plainly, as I am well known to
be a mere natural English man, they should never have brought that noble
Realm, now in danger to be over run, and conquered with strangers: the
which thing men that be half blind, may plainly see they go about. I never
meddled with his office, I was in danger of much displeasure, as the honorable
Counsel did well know, because I would not take upon me his office. And
herein he utters his malicious hypocrisy, and what an unshamefast bawd he
has been, is, and will be, to the Monks of Duresme, when he says, there came
never woman within that house, before my wife came there. For he knows right
well, that the Church of Duresme, was replenished with married Priests. For
Bishop William, by the help of Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, did
obtain license from Pope Hilderand to banishe the married Priests, and to
bring Monks from Warmouth and Iarrow. And also it is not unknown to him, nor
to his Chancellor, nor to any one of his officers, that every Monk of them
al for the most part, has a Concubine in the town, who has come, and does
come, to their Church and Chamber, and no fault found, but that honest men of
the town, and also of the Country are offended there with, but dare say
nothing, for fear of the great bawd their Patron. Yea the Bishop and his
Monks knew full well, that I did know to much of their iugling, and
therefore it was time to rid me out of the way.

But when Winchester came in also with his false accusation, (for I never
received one letter nor token of commandment, from her highness, nor from her
honorable Counsel, but a letter the post delivered me by the way, as I was
coming to London) and laid it earnestly to my charge, as though I had been a
stubborn rebel, I perceived they would serve me as they had done others, I
mean, to punish me for religion, and pretend treason: and subornate two or
three false witnesses, as they have plenty in store, to affirm that I had made
some offense to the Queens highness, as their great grandsires played with
Christ, saying, Math. 22.17
that he did forbid the people to pay tribut unto Caeser. Wherefore I thought it
best to deliver my self out of their hands, by forsaking my native Country,
seeing there was neither equity, nor just justice to be looked for, my doctrine
was never so pure, my hehauior never so upright, and I never so able to
answer with truth, to that was objected. And therefore my friends and
kinsfolk, have no cause to be sorry for me. For although I have lost a great
living, all my goods, have not one farthing left me, am bannished my native
Country, shall use no more the familiar company of my friends: what have I
lost? Nothing, but shall be a great gainer: Mat. 16.26.
For if to save these things, a man loose his own soul, what has he won?
And if the departure from these, have everlasting life to reward, what damage
is there? Our Savior Christ, whose promise is much more sure and precious,
then the uncertain, and flattering glory of the world, has made faithful
promise: That whosoever forsakes house, Math. 19.29 Math. 6.26.
brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, liuelode, for his name
sake, the same shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. As for living, he that feeds the sparrowes, will not see me unprovided
for. Godliness is great riches, when a man is content with that he has. When
we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content. For this is a plain
case: 1 Timothy 6.7.^ Heb. 13.14*
We brought nothing into the world, nor we can carry nothing away. We have
here no dwelling place, but we seek a city to come, the heavenly Jerusalem,
where our savior Jesus Christ is. For whose sake, I count all things but
loss, Philip 3.8.
and do judge them but doong, that I may win him. In him only rests the
whole riches of Gods treasure, he is the only way to everlasting life,
whereunto who so will attain, must seek it in the Scripture, in the Gospel
of Christ, and not in the filthy damnable traditions, and deuillish doctrine of
the Papists. Wherefore, dear brethren, seeing you have tasted of ye sweet
bread of life, Mat. 16.6.
Gods most holy word, take heed of the Papists sower leven, that works
death. And because I would you should not be ignorant, how you ought to behave
your selves, where so much Idolatry is openly commanded, and how to learn
your Christ's cross a new, I mean to bear Christ's cross laid on your
backs, to follow him strongly, and not to faint: I have translated for you,
two Sermons, of that great learned and godly man, I. Calvin, made for that
purpose, and these have I done travailing, having no place certain where I
will remain, but I trust, shortly to be: where I will stick down the stake,
till God call me home again. But for so much as the Bishop of Duresme, did
openly to my face, call the doctrine which I had taught in his Dicoces, as
touching the popish Mass, heresy, I shall by Gods grace, good Christian
brethren, declare and prove by the Testimony of the Scriptures, and also of
the ancient fathers of Christ's Church, that the popish Mass is the greatest
heresy, blasphemy, and Idolatry, that ever was in the Church, which shall be
the next thing, that you shall look for from me, by God grace. In the mean
season, remember good brethren, that our unthankfulness was the cause of this
our plague. Let us cry therefore unto the Lord, powringe forth before him
faithful tears, and he will deliver us, that we may truly honor him in the
gates of the daughter of Syon, that is, openly in the midst of the faithful
congregation. Amen.

A Godly and learned Sermon, made by Master Ihon Calvin, wherein all
Christians are admonished, to fly outward Idolatry. Taken out, of the third
verse, of the sixteen Psalm.
I will not communicate with their bloody sacrifices, neither will I take their
names, in my mouth.
THe doctrine, which we shall entreat in this place, is plain inoughe and easy,
saving that the greatest part of those, that profess themselves to be
Christians, do seek out and bring, I can not tell what subtilties, to cloak
their evil withal. But the sum of this whole doctrine is, that after we know
the living God to be our father, and Jesus Christ our redeemer, we ought to
consecrate, both body and soul unto him, who of his infinite goodness has
taken us into the number of his sons: and to acknowledge with all kind of
benevolence, honor, and obedience, the same benefit which our most dear
Savior, did vouchsafe to bestow on us, after he had bought it with so great a
price. And because we are bound, not only to renounce all infidelity, but
also to separate our selves from all superstitions, which do as well disagree
with the true service of God, as the honor of his Son, and which can by no
means agree, with the pure doctrine of the Gospel, and true confession of the
faith: I said this doctrine of it self to be so easy, that only the
practice and exercise thereof, ought to remain unto us, saving that many men
do seek certain deceytfull shifts, through which they will not be overcome
in that thing, the which is most cheefely condemned, by Gods own mouth.

This cause constrains us at this time, to tarry longer in the declaration of
this matter, that every man may know, his own duty, and deceive not
himself, thinking that he is escaped, when he is covered, as the common saying
is, under a wet sack. But for that there be many of this opinion, whose
Churches are thorowlie purged from the filthiness, and Idolatries of the
Papisme, that this argument or Treatise, is but superfluous, before we pass
any further, it is not unprofitable to declare such men, most fowlie to be
deceived. First, when it is declared, how great an offense it is, for us to be
polluted and defiled with the Idolaters, feyning our selves to cleave and
consent to their impieties, we are admonished to mourn for our former sins,
and to ask of God forgiveness of them, with all humbleness, and in this
thing to acknowledge, the singular benefit which he gave unto us, drawing us
forth of that same filth, wherein we were holden down and drowned. For we
truly are not able to set forth, this so great a benefit woorthely enough.
And for that we know not, what shall happen unto us, and to what end GOD
does reserve us, it is very expedient to be prepared and armed in time, that
into what state soever we shall come, or with whatsoever temptations we may be
oppugned, we never swerue from the pure word of God. First, it may be, that
many of this our Church and Congregation, shall travail into some Papisticall
country, who ought greatly now to be in a readiness, and armed to battle.
Then albeit God does give us at this time liberty, to serve him purely and
godlily: yet we know not how long this benefit shall continue. Let us therefore
take this time of our quietness and tranquilitye, not as though it shall always
last, but as it were a time of truce? wherein God does give us leisure to
strengthen our selves, least when we shall be called, to utter the confession
of our faith, we be found new, and unprepared, because we conte^ned the
meditation of that matter in due time. Neither truly ought we to forget in the
mean while our brethren, which are kept under the tyranny of Antichrist,
oppressed with most miserable bondage, but to take care, remembrance, and
pity over them, and so pray God to strengthen them with that constancye,
which he requires in his word. We must also admonish and solicit them by
all ways, not to rest in places, where men are fast on sleep in their
voluptuousnes, but to apply dilligentlie thought this, and will, that they
confess the glory, due unto God. For we are not taught of God, only for our
selves, but that every man, after the measure of his faith, should brotherly
communicate, with his neighbors, and distribut unto them, that thing he has
learned, and known in Gods schole. Now, see we then that it is profitable, yea
truly necessary so well to our selves, as to our brethren, that the
remembrance of this doctrine, should be renewed very often, especially seeing
the text it self, which we shall expound, does lead us to the same purpose.
David does openly protest, and as it were does make a sollem vow, Psalm. 16,
4.^.
That he will never be partaker, in the Sacrifices of Idolaters, and also that
he will so detest, and grievously hate the Idols, that he will not at any
time once name them, as though, he should defile his mouth in naming them. This
is not the fact of some one mean man, but the example of David, the most
excellent King and Prophet, which ought to be unto all Gods Children, a
certain common rule to right and Godly life. And to the intent, we may the
better perceive this thing, and more vehemently be moved, with the true fear
of God, the cause is to be noted which he adds, wherein truly rests, as it
were a certain foundation, of that same alienation and offense, whereby he
does most greatly abhor the Communion of Idolaters. The Lord (says he) is
mine inheritance. Psalm. 16.6.
But is not this thing common to all faithful, and godly men? There is no man
truly, which would not glory in so excellent a thing. And this is sure
without all doubt, that God being once given unto us, in the person of his
Son, does daily entise us to possess him. But there be very few, which
are so affected in this part, as the greatness, and worthiness of this same
matter, should seem to ask and deserve. Neither truly can we by any means
possess God, unless on this condition, that we also become his. David
therefore of good right, and woorthelie did set forth the foundation of his
godliness, and Religion in this sentence and reason, seeing that God is his
inheritance, he will refrain from all pollutions of Idolles, which do turn
us from God himself.

This is the cause why the Prophet Esaie, when he had vpbraided the Jews, that
they had given themselves to false and strange Gods, whom they had made, added
afterward: these, says he, are thy portion, signifying by these words: that
God does deny to the worshippers of Idolles, all bond and fellowshippe of
covenant, and disenheriteth them, and utterly depriueth them, of that so
infinitlie great benefit, which he would have bestowed on them, giving
himself unto them. So man will except and say, that the Prophet entreats in
that place only of them which put their affiaunce in Idolles, and deceyueth
themselves through opinion and incredulity.

I grant, but this also I answer, Gods honor abused through Idolles.
if they that do transfer Gods honor unto Idolles, are utterly separated
and cut off from his fellowshippe, they also do err and declyne somewhat from
him, which do feine themselves to consent to superstitions, through fear and
weakness of mind. For no man can in heart, or any conformable fashion, or in
will, and in purpose of mind, or feyning, or by any true or feyned way,
approach to Idolles, but he must so far go back from God. Wherefore, let
this sentence be thorowlie persuaded, and remain deeply printed in our
hearts, that they which seek God with a true and pure mind, to the end, to
possess him for their enheritaunce, will have no communion and fellowship with
Idolles, with whom God has that divorce and debate, that he would have all
his to proclaim and make continual and deadly war upon them. And in this
place David by name does expres, That he will never be partaker of their
oblations, ^sal. 16.5.
neither have their names in his mouth and talking. He might have said on this
wise, I will not deceive my self with the unwise, and foolish devotions of
the unbelievers, I will not put my trust in such abuses, nor I will never
forsake Gods truth, to follow these lies, but he speaks not on this manner,
but does rather promise constantly, that he will never be conuersaunt among
their Ceremonies. Therefore he does testify, that so far forth as
concerns the service of God, he will abide continually, in all purity and
holiness, both of body and soul.

And first in this place we must consider, whether this be not Idolatry, to
signify and declare by outward tokens, our agreement, with those
Superstitions, wherewith the service of God is corrupted, and utterly
perverted. They that swim (as the common saying is) betwixt two waters, allege
this saying, seeing that God would be honored in spirit, Idolles can by no
ways be honored, unless a man put his trust in them. But to this may be
easily answered, that God does not so require the spyrituall service, and
adoration of the mind, that he grants and remitteth the other part of our
nature unto Idolles, as though that part should seem nothing at all, to
belong unto him. For it is said in many places, that the knees must be bowed
before GOD, and also the hands lyfted up to heaven.

What then? Surely, the chief honor that God requires, is spiritual, but
the outward signification, whereby the faithful do testify, that it is God
only whom they serve and honor, must so immediately follow, that they must
at one time be joined together. But one place shall so suffice for all, to
confute that objection which they snatch of one word, that they shall be
plainly rebuked and convicted.

In the third Chapter of Daniell it is written, that Sidrach, Misach, Dani. 3.
and Ab^dnago, refused and denied under any manner of color, to consent unto
the superstition, set up and erected by Nabuchodonozor, Declaring that they
would in no wise honor his Gods.

If these goodly witty Sophisters, had been there at that time, they would
have laughed to scorn the simplicity of these three servants of God. For I
suppose, they would have taunted them with such like words, you foolish men,
this truly is not to honor them, seeing you put no affiaunce in these
things. There is no Idolatry, but where there is devotion, that is to say, a
certain bending, and application of the mind, to honor and worship the
Idolles. But these godly men, did follow a better and wiser council: for
this answer which they made, proceeded not of their own wit, but rather of
the holy Ghost, which moved them thus to speak, whom if we will not resist, we
must accept this place, and this example, as a certain rule and definition,
that Idolatry is an outward action against Gods honor, yea, although it
proceed not from the will and purpose of the mind, but be only colorable
and feined. In which matter they make goodly cauillations, that there is no
Idolatry at all: when as our affiance is not put in Idols. Yet shall these men
continually remain condemned, by the sentence which the mightiest Judge has
pronounced. But these men do contend only for that name, only going about
somewhat to lesson their fault, which they can by no means defend nor excuse.
Yea, they will grant that this thing is evil done, and not rightly: yet
notwithstanding, they would have this fact to be judged as a certain venial
sin.

But although we grant them, as touching the name, that thing they ask, yet
they shall not get so much thereby, that they may make their cause much the
better. Let us say thus, that such manner of feined worshipping of Idolles, is
not called Idolatry: yet nevertheless, it shall be a traiterous enterprise
against God, a certain fact repugnaunt to the confession of faith, and a foul
filthy pollution, most full of wicked sacrilege.

I pray you, when the most sacred service, and honor of God is so violated,
that we falselie break that promise we made to him, that through cowardice and
faintness of stomach, we deny crookedly and falsely our Christian profession,
that we become inconstaunt and double, that we defile our selves fowlie with
those things, which God has curssed with all kind of malediction. Is this so
light a matter, that after we have done it, we ought only to wipe our mouth,
and confess that we have committed a certain small fault? Let us therefore
put away th^se shifts, specially, seeing they serve for no other thing, but
to make us bolder, and to give us greater liberty to sin, and does nothing
at all diminishe our fault? There be also other more impudent, which do not
only, changing the name, go about to persuade that it is not so great and
unworthy a sin: but do plainly and precisely deny it to be sin. It is
sufficient (say they) that God be honored with heart and mind. Even so truly,
if the heart it self were not double. For when the mind is truly sound and
pure, the body shall never be drawn into a contrary part.

I would know of them what that is, that moves and leads their feet to
the Temple. For when they go to hear Mass, their legs will never be
styrred of their own motion, but must needs be moved by the inward power of
the mind. Then must they needs confess, that there is in themselves a
certain desire and motion of the mind, whereof they be carried to worship
the Idolles, and chiefly, because they covet to apply them selves after their
will and opinion, which are enemies to the truth, yea, and do so conform
themselves to please them, that they do much more esteem their favor, and
their own life, then Gods honor and glory.

Besides this, their impudency is so manifest and shameful, that I am ashamed
to dispute against it, as though it had some color or likeness of reason, yet
I must needs do it, seeing they do please themselves so greatly, and are,
as it were men droonken in their own opinions and pleasures, fallen fast on
sleep.

They think this is enough to worship God in spirit, whose then shall the
body be? Truly, Saint Paul, Moves us to honor God, both in body and
spirit, 1. Cor. 6.19.20.
for they be his own, and belongs to none other.

God has created the body, and shall it be lawful for us, therewith to serve
and honor the devil, as though he should seem to be the aucthour and maker
thereof? It were better, they would profess themselves openly to be
Manichees, and deny that God made the whole man. If they had never so little
taste of the Gospel, they would not burst out into so lycentious impudency.
But now it is plain enough, that they in no wise know, what is the power and
greatness of this benefit, to be redeemed with the blood of Gods son. And
to prove this true, how can we look for the resurrection of the flesh, except
we believe that Christ Jesus is the redeemer, both of bodies and souls? Saint
Paul also does admonish us, ^ Cor. 7.22, ^.
Not to be the servants of men, because we were bought and purchased with so
great a price, which is the blood of Gods son.

Then he that does join and addict him self to the wicked service of Idols,
does he not tread under his feet, the most sacred blood of Jesus Christ,
wherein does consist the price of the eternal and immortal glory, which we
look for in our bodies? What reason is it, that our bodies should be defiled
and profaned before Idolles, seeing the crown of eternal life is promised
unto them in heaven? This wallowing in Satan's stews, and most filthy
defiling, is it a mean and way, whereby we may come to the kingdom of God?
Moreover, it was not said without a great cause, Our bodies are the temples of
the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.19.
therefore they which perceive not, that they ought to be kept in all
holiness, do plainly show themselves, to perceive and understand nothing
at all of the Gospel.

Also, they declare that they know no whit at all, what is the power of Jesus
Christ, and of his grace. For when it is said on this wise, Gala. 5.30.
That we are bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh: We ought to
understand, that we be joined with him, both in body and soul. Therefore, no
man can defile his own body, with any manner Superstition, but he does
separate himself, from that conjunction and union, whereby we are made the
members of the son of God. But now let these witty and subtle doctors,
answer me, whether they have received baptism only in their souls, or
whether God has commanded rather, and instituted, that this sign should be
imprinted in our flesh. Shall the body then wherein the mark of Jesus Christ
is printed, be polluted and defiled with so contrary, repugnaunt, and so
wicked abominations? Also, the Lords Supper, is it received in the mind
only, and not also in the hands and mouth? Has God engraven in our bodies,
the arms and badges of his son, that we afterward should pollute our selves
with all uncleanness, with most foul spots and shame, and so unseemly
deforme our selves, that no kind nor likeness of Christian beauty should
appear?

It is not lawful, in coining one piece of gold, to print two contrary
coins, neither to set two seals, the one repugnaunt to the other, unto one
writing: and shall a mortal man take upon him, to counterfeite and corrupt
Baptism, and the most holy Supper of Jesus Christ, and also be bold to
say, that there is no evil in so great and mischeeuous a fact? Such men
truly are worthy, that their servants should persuade, and make them
believe, they have a great pleasure to do them service, when notwithstanding,
they give themselves to sleep, pleasures and all idleness, and do not move
one finger to do any work at all.

If they say it is not a like reason, because we have need of their labor
that be under us: I answer, although GOD have no need of us, yet for that
he will use our labor, service, and obedience, to serve and honor him,
truly, it is too much unseemly, and for us the greatest shame and infamy,
to do all things otherwise then he will, and clean to be void of the
study and duty, which we owe unto him, yea, our shame is so much the
greater, that the woorme of the earth, and an vnlyuing Creature, shall require
more power over us, and honor then his Creator.

But yet we must talk with these beasts more plainly. They say it is lawful
for them, to feine and cloak whatsoever they will among the Papists, and to
conform themselves to that manner and fashion of religion, which is thought
most apt to nourish superstition.

Who is he then that gives them bread, to be fed therewithal? Who does make
the ground fertile, to bring forth fruit? If GOD do feed and nourishe them,
in those places where they dwell, as he does all other men in the other parts
of the earth: why do they not honor the giver of the benefit, with that part
of themselves, which is so bountifuly nourished of him? Why do they rather
obey, and serve the devil with their bodies? If these men were in any part
Christians, I would use with them more weighty and higher reasons: and I would
ask of them, to what end we live in this world, and whereunto our life ought
to be referred. But Oh miserable case, that they which with subtilties and
shifts, will dally with GOD, are so brutishe, that they must be handled, as men
not only destitute of Gods spirit, but in a manner void of natural common
sense.

They think this is a sufficient excuse, to say, they do nothing in this
kind, but for fear of peril and danger, but if this color may take place,
then must we say, That Joseph should have done none evil, Gene. 39.
if he had committed whoredom with his Mistress, when it was violently
offered him, seeing he should not have followed his own will, but have given
place to necessity and violence, which she did unto him. It should have been
a foolish fact of him, to enter such peril and infamy, as afterward he
suffered, by the false accusation of that naughty woman, seeing he might have
escaped those euilles, if he had accomplished her will. But we ought rather to
follow the example of Joseph, and allow the testimony of the holy Ghost, who
does commend his constancy.

If there be no wickedness, in taking upon us Idolatrous religion, when we
do it to avoid the raging cruelty of the Papists: the servant shall not
sin, who for his Masters pleasure, shall play the bawd, kill, and play
the traitor, for fear to displease him, under whose power he is. But I abide
too long in this matter, wherein (as I said before) there is no doubt or
difficulty. It shall not be far from the purpose, to consider into how great
confusion they fall, which travail with all their crafts, to escape Gods
judgment. Others there be, that have found an other shifte and starting hole:
they grant, that the superstition of the Gentiles, is a wicked and detestable
Religion, but it is not all one reason of these, and the superstitions which
are in the Papisme.

False religion a corrupting of true religion.
As though all the false religion that ever was among the Heathen, was not a
corrupting and deprauation of the true Religion of God. From whence did the
Heathen draw, and take to themselves their Ceremonies, but of the holy
Fathers? In which doing this was their great fault, that they depraved and
utterly perverted, those things which they had received, well and wisely
instituted of God. But yet all the abominations that ever were in the world,
have been cloaked with a beautiful title of God himsefe, and the culture of
his Religion. But those counterfeite Religions, had never that commendation,
power and authority, that God did any time approve those seruice^ and
congregations, or that faithful men did use and frequent them.

Go too, let us proceed further. Although I should grant the Idolatry of the
Papists to be unlike, and differ from the superstition of the old Gentyles,
God does forbid false religion.
yet can they not deny, but God so earnestly did forbid the Religion,
wickedly set up in Bethel, as all other superstitions which were instituted and
celebrated in other places.

When the Calves were erected in Dan and Bethel, this was instituted and done
under a certain color of his name, which had brought his people out of Egypt,
and yet the same Religion which was there appointed, is manifestly against the
doctrine of the law. God does condemn all those that goes thither, to
defyle and pollute themselves.

And truly, the Supper of Jesus Christ and the popish Mass, are no less
repugnaunt and contrary, the one to the other, then the Sacrifices of Moses
and Jeroboam. From whence then is this dispensation and lycense, to go and
hear Mass under this color, that the Supper of Jesus Christ is but
transfourmed, yea, rather in deed defourmed? But I say and affirm
contrariwise, that all they that do fear GOD truly, and honor him
godlilie, ought so much the more to hate and detest it, for that it does more
openly violate and profane the holy institution of Jesus Christ, then if it
were not so repugnaunt and contrary unto the same. Wherefore, let us keep this
common rule generally, that all the ordinance and inuencions of men, proponed
and taken in hand, to corrupt the simple truth of Gods word, and to pervert
that Religion which he requires and allows, are very sacriledges, with
which the Christian man, may in no wise communicate, without that injury and
contumely, which treads under feet Gods honor most wickedlie.

I know well enough, how grievous and intolerable, this severe judgment
seems to them, which would after their own lust and delycate mind, be more
nicely and meekely spoken too and taught. Wherein, what would they I should
do? What moderation and lenity should I use? Truly, now I perceive how tender
and deinty they are, I covet so much as may be to spare them, but both I and
they must be condemned so soon as God has spoken: therefore if we will tender
our own salvation, let us take it in good part.

They say, they find no man more severe and sharp then I am, but I will
declare unto them, on the other part, that I handle them more meekely and
tenderly, then the truth of the cause, the woorthynesse of Gods name, and
their salvation, did require. Which thing being so in deed, truly they
cannot excuse and deliver themselves, from the necessity of that duty and
testimony, that the Prophet Jeremy does require of the Jews, captives in
Babylon, whom he not only forbids to come near the abominations of the
Chaldeans, or colourablie or feinedlie, to give any consent to them: but also
does give a plain commandment, that they should declare the wicked Religion
of the Chaldeans, to be unto them a most filthy savor. You shall say to them,
Iere. 10.11.
(says the Prophet Jeremy) the Gods which have not made heaven and earth,
shall perish both out from the earth, and also from under heaven.

There is also in this place an other cyrcumstaunce to be marked, that when the
Prophet had written his book in Hebrew, yet he put in this sentence, expressed
in the common vulgar speech of the Chaldeans, as though he would by this
means, constrain the Jews, to change from their tongue, to the end they
might more apertlie profess, the hatred and disagreement they have with the
wicked Idolatours.

Now let our nice yonglings complain of me, as though my advertisement
exceeds all measure, and yet I have not at any time desired the half part of
that duty, which the Prophet requires and asks so earnestly. But
whatsoever be the manner, either of my saying or moderation, or else of my
silence and taciturnitie, nevertheless, we are tied and bound to that law,
which God does give unto us. And truly, it is not without a cause, that God
speaking to his faithful, says to them, You are my witnesses, and my
servant whom I have chosen.

Wherefore, whosoever will prove him self to be a member of Jesus Christ,
ought by all means to declare, that the praise and honor of Gods name, does
so appertain to him, that they which by their feining, do hide and bury the
testimony of his truth, do leave themselves inexcusable.

What I pray you is to be thought, of them that do all their life time
subvert the same? Of what sort are they, that do not only hyde the
profession of the Christian Religion, and shows no token thereof before men,
but also commits many things, and those most contrary and unseemly. This
therefore rests, that Gods children which live, where these impurities and
abominations roman, do mourn after the example of the godly man Lotte,
and also speak so freely, against so many and so great abominable vices of
men, as God shall give to them power and opportunity.

Let us now come to show certain kinds of Idolatries, which are of most
estimation in these days. Among which sort, the Mass is chief, whereof I
have touched something before. For although it be so famous and notable
blaspemye, both in absurdity and greatness of mischief, that nothing can be
imagined more foul and wicked, yet still be there patrons found for an evil
cause, which do trifle forth in this part.

But will they, nill they, they shall be compelled to confess this that I say,
that the Mass by it self, is a denial of Jesus Christ's death, and a
certain Sacrilege invented and ordained by Satan, to abolishe the Sacrament
of the Supper. Neither are they able to deny, but that their invocation of
Saints, and Suffrages for the dead, are wicked abuses, whereby the invocation
of Gods name, a thing of all other most holy is profaned. And they, who among
the Papists, do defile them selves with these abominations, do think
themselves guilty of no fault.

What should we do, say they? It is not lawful for us to correct and amend
those things, which we know evil and faulty, we are private men, and they
that have the power and public authority, do earnestly defend these
things. Therefore we must suffer that violent necessity. I grant all this to
be true. But I say this is not to the purpose. It belongs not to their
office, to correct and appoint a common order for the people, neither does any
man require this at their hand, yet nevertheless, they are admonished to
amend themselves, and to institute an honest and mannerly behavior of private
life, which thing without all doubt pertayneth to their duty.

Neither do we command them, to cleanse the Temples and the common streets,
but that every man keep, his own body and heart in purity and holiness, and
labor by all means that God may be honored, served, and obeyed, in his own
house. For these are far unlike, and much dissonaunt, to abolishe the Mass
in any Region, and not to be present at it, when as the use thereof, and that
Religion can by no other means be let. But they repeat and iterate their
saying, that is, that they do not deny the death and passion of Jesus Christ,
seeing, they have no such purpose, to worship it in their mind.

But I do ask of them, what is that a Christian man does confess with his
mouth, but that same that he believes in his heart? This is plain and
manifest enough, that this thing which they do, is most disagreeing with the
confession of faith. So that, as much as in them lies, they do not only hide
the true and proper testimony of faith, but also do utterly deny and forsake
it. I will yet talk with them something, more familliarlie and plainly. For
the Papists do say, the Mass is a Sacrifice, wherein they will offer Jesus
Christ, to reconcile themselves to God.

But if this be so, it follows, that Jesus Christ has not obtained unto us,
by his death, righteousness, and eternal salvation. Let them seek all the
compasses and shifts they will, yet must they come hereunto, that all which
go to Mass, under the name of devotion and Religion, do profess that they
consent therewith. Therefore as much truly as in them lies, they show that
they have not their redemption perfect enough, by the death of Jesus Christ.

There be many that speak not so largely, neither suffer their talk to
wander thorowout all sorts of Masses, that is to say, Sacriledges. They
choose out one kind of Masses only, and that they defend: it is called the
parish Mass, or the high Mass, for in this they think, there is more
likeness and agreeing with the Supper of Jesus Christ.

And truly it might be said not vnaptlie, that all Masses, which are sayd^
both of the Priests of the lowest degree, and also of the Chanons, or of those
Priests that have certain Chappelles, and all other which are founded by any
man's will, or that are so saleable, that they be set forth daily to sale:
that all these I say, are not unlike to harlottes, Masses (...) unlike to
harlottes*
which in the stews setting themselves to sale without all shame and honesty,
do make their bodies common to all men: but the high Mass to be very like the
same harlotte, which does craftily abuse the honest name of an husband, to
hyde her unshamefastness, and to retain and defend the estimation of an
honest and chaste wife.

Although this similitude does not agree on every part, because that an
harlotte joined in matrimony to an Husband, will have some shamefastness and
modesty, that she will not set forth and make her self common to all that
comes: but the parish or high Mass, is an whorish Idolatry, of all other
most common, ready and set forth to all men's desires and wicked lusts:
although these fylthie bawdes, do color and smoothe here with this color
and such beauty, that they retain still some relics of Jesus Christ's
Supper. It is with these as with the Thief, who braggeth and bosteth himself
then more highly and gloriously, when he has wunne, and is clothed with the
spoils of him, whom he has slain, and whose horse he rydeth on.

We (say they) seek the Supper of Jesus Christ, and when we cannot, being
oppressed under that tyranny, wherein we dwell, have the same pure, we must be
content with that which is left to us, looking for the helping hand of God.
Forsooth a goodly and pretty excuse. Because they have no right and perfect use,
of the Supper, as though they had gotten a prouiso: they witness and openly
profess, that they have not Jesus Christ, the eternal and only Priest, and
therefore every week do seek a new Sacrifice, to put away their sins. For
all this is in the high Mass, as well in that which is said in the name of
Nicholas, or for the dead. In which thing they feine themselves to worship an
Idol, and yet do boast that they seek Jesus Christ: and because they would
not seem to fight against GOD, without sword or buckler, they bring and object
the authority of this or that man, as though the absolution of any one man,
may exempt and deliver them, that they be not condemned of God. I will not
say, that they lie egregiously, when they allege such men as they do, for
the defense of their cause.

But in case it were so, that a devout and godly man, were sometime of this
mind, that he thought it was nothing evil to come to the high Mass, yet
afterward when he knows the truth, if he does disalowe and condemn his
former judgment, his later is so much the more to be believed, for that God
has brought him, or rather compelled him to disalowe the same: and because he
perceyueth, and plainly knows, that he is overcome in that thing which he
before did greatly embrace and allow.

But what need we herein to stir the truth, as if we should blonder and
trouble a water that is pure and clear. Do they think that with the
judgment and saying of a mortal man, they may stop God and hedge him in?
We know that there is nothing besides the truth, that in judgment ought to
prevail, without the respect of any person. This matter is such, that the
parish or high Mass, is instituted to sacrifice Jesus Christ, and to
reconcile the favor of GOD, both for quick and dead, and also that a piece of
bread should be there worshipped, as though it were the son of God. I do
not examine thorowlie, all the abominations and wickedness, that are in that
Mass* for they be almost innumerable. But I (...) rehearse only the worsser
and grosser. Now let them that do but feine a consent with such wickedness
and corruptions, wash their hands so clean as they will, yet shall they never
be more just and innocent then Pilate. But this is a marvel, that these good
and religious parishioners at Easter time, do seek, some by Chapel, or some
mockchristian Monk, which may prepare and deliver unto them the apish and
counterfeit supper. If the high Mass is most nearest the Supper of Jesus
Christ, as they say it is, why do they not observe and keep it? But now
after that they have been at the high Mass, every Sundaye through the year,
because they would seem to communicate in the Sacrament of the Supper a right,
they sodeinlie shake off and forsake the high Mass. But we should not marvel
at such inconstancy, for this is a sure and due punishment, for them which
have laid no foundation at any time of truth in their minds, that they should
always waver, and be contrary to themselves, in all things that they do, and
take in hand. As touching that same hypocritical Supper, I know that they be
of this mind, that they suppose it to be the greatest injury to themselves
that may be, when it is rebuked and improoued. But what can we do in that
matter, seeing it is nothing agreeable to Christ's rule? Neither do I find
fault with this, that they do it secretly, for I know that the Supper was
never better celebrated, nor more devoutly, then when the Disciples went into
some secret place, to sly the tyranny of the enemy.

But here are two faults, truly not to be suffered. One, that they which do
make such a Supper, and like apes do falselie and corruptly counterfeite, the
true Supper of Christ, do feine that they keep and worship their Mass.

The other is, that the Minister, which for the most part is some Religious
man, the rather to dissemble the matter, does not that office as a Christian,
but as a Priest of the popish profession: and in this they suppose they have
an honest and sure defense, if the Mass sayer have not this purpose, to show
the bread and wine to them to be worshipped, if he leave out the Canon, wherein
are contained many great impieties, and if he deliver the Sacrament to all that
be present under both kinds.

But when they shall come before the highest Judge, then shall they feel the
fruit that they sought, by such glosing and lies, yea truly, they ought now
already to perceive it. For I do judge, those same goades and pricks,
wherewith their consciences are pricked and wounded, to be a grievous feeling of
the same judgment. And truly this cause must be decided, and plainly debated
in that same place and court, where the truth has her grave and true
witnesses. For to be short, they do know themselves guilty of the matter,
which they have purposed to declare, both to Gods enemies, and also to the
common people. But God must needs deny himself, if he allow the order and
doing of that profession. If all the men in the world, with one mind and
purpose, would conspyre to pronounce these men righteous: yet none be he never
so ready and mighty, can excuse and deliver them from this, but they shall be
thought to halt on both sides. And GOD does declare by his Prophet, that no
such halting of any man, shall be ever allowed before him.

As touching the man, whom they choose to be the Minister of their Supper, it
is a foolish thing to abuse his person, as though they could seem to make him
an apt man to that office and function. Yea, but the virtue of that same
Sacrament (say they) rests not in the worthiness of the Ministers. That I
grant and add this too also, if any devil should minister the supper, it
should be never the worse. On the contrary part, if an Angel sing Mass, yet
then should it be no whit the better. But we are now in an other question,
that is, whether orders given by the Pope to a Monk, do make him apt, to the
office and function of a Pastor.

If they say contrary that they perceive that thing does make nothing to the
purpose, and that they do not choose him i^ that sort, the thing it self
shows contrary. But let it be, that they as touchin^ the Minister have no
such respect. Y^^ must I abide in that outward profession which they take upon
them and worship yea, I must press it earnestly, as a profe^sion most
contrary and unworthy a chr^stian man. The manner how the papists do defend
them selves.
For this is plain and man^fest, that they do and will defend and ^uer
themselves, under the person of Priest, made for the nonce to color a^
dissemble.

But if they would rightly and lawful^ celebrate the Supper, it were their due^
so to separate themselves, from the ord^ and profession of Idolatours, that the
should appear, in that to have nothi^ common with them. But now they so far
from this separation, that they scribe themselves into their fellowship and
Communion, and do every one them, feinedlie profess themselves to members of
that body.

After this, they will compare us to old heretics, that did refuse the use
the Sacraments, for the vices of the Ministers, as though we do here
respect the proper sins of every man, and not rather the common state and
condition.

I do pass over this matter shortly, because that which is spoken, is
sufficient enough, to convince so foul and shameful impudency. But if these
men be so foolish and dull witted, that they perceive not this filthiness,
the word of God must suffice us, as when the Lord says by the Prophet
Jeremy: Israel, Iere. 3.12.
if thou do turn, turn unto me. In which words is most plainly
expressed, with what simplicity and integrity of mind, we ought to deal
and walk before GOD, without any thought and will to return to those things,
which we know are not thankful nor allowed of him.

Which is a cause, why S. Paul does testify, that he was sent to turn the
unfaithful from their vanities, unto the living God, as though he would say,
it is to no purpose, to change some one old and accustomed evil* with other
hypocrisies and feininges, but utterly to abolishe all superstitions, that the
true Religion may be set in her own purity and holiness. For without this
Faith and integrity, men never come the right way unto God, but do always
waver and are uncertain, to what part they may turn themselves. There be
others that are come thus far, that they disalowe and refuse the Mass, but
they would have some patches kept still, which they call Gods service, least
as some men say, they should seem to be destitute of all Religion. And it may
be, that some of these be moved with a godly mind and zeal: at the least I
will so think, but whatsoever their zeal and purpose be, yet may we not
say, that they keep the true rule or any good measure.

Many say we may come to their baptismes, because there is no manifest
Idolatry in them. As who would say, that this Sacrament were not also
corrupted, and utterly deformed with all kind of corruption, in so much as
Jesus Christ may seem to be yet still in Pilates house, to suffer all
opprobries and shames. To conclude, where as they say, that this is the cause,
why they would retain some Ceremonies, least they should appear to be void
of all Religion: if one should examine their consciences, the same truly will
answer, that they do it to satisfy the Papists, and they change their
countenance to fly persecution. Other some do watch a time, least they come
in the Mass while, and yet they come to the Temple, that men should suppose
they hear Mass. Othersome do come, but at Euensong time, of whom I would
know, whether they think this to be nothing, that at that same time the Idols
be honored, that the Pictures and Images be sensed with Fumigations, that a
solemn prayer is made in the intercession of some Saint, and grounded on his
merits, that Salve Regina, be soong with a loud voice, and that on every
side, a matter is heard so filled and replenished with deuillishe and curssed
blasphemy, that the mind, shall not only abhor the offense of the ears
and eyes there present, but most vehemently the thought, and recordation
thereof.

I do pass over, Singing in an unknown tongue, is an open ^^ophaning (...)
Gods lord. ^ Cor. 14.
that the singing it self in an unknown tongue, is manifest profanation of
Gods praises, and of holy Scripture, as Saint Paul does admonish in the
foureteenth to the Corinthians. But let this fault be forgiven them. If they
come to Euensong, to give some sign and testimony of their Christianity, they
will do this chiefly on the solemn Feasts. But then there shall be solemn
ensensing the cheifest Idolles, and great plenty of sweet fumigations powered
out, the which is a kind of Sacrifice as the Scripture teaches.

It was also a manner used among the Gentiles, and whereby they compelled the
weak men to deny God. And for this cause, the greatest part of Martyrs did
suffer death constantly, for that they would not make perfumes, and burn^
incense to Idolles.

When these men be come thus far, that they receive in their noses the savor
of the Sensours, they also pollute themselves with that pollution, which is
most greatest and execrable there. And yet they think we ought, to hide and
cover this so great wickedness and mischief.

But I beseech them, in the honorable and holy name of God, that they will
dilligentlie mark this saying of the Psalm: That Idolles are so to be detested
of the faithful and godly man, Psalm. 16.5.
that they should not be in his mouth or tongue, least the talk had of them
should seem to contaminate and defile him.

This one word, ought to fray and withdraw us from all Congregation and
fellowshippe of Idolatours, because that we living in that Congregation, may
easily be wrapped in and defiled.

But to speak plainly and freely what I think of all these, which seek a
mean way, betwixt GOD and the devil: they have double and variable minds,
and I cannot find out a more apt and fit comparison to set them out, and
paint them in their lively colors, then that same which may be brought of
Esau, that same filthy and double man. Gene. 28.6, 7, 8, 9.
For when he saw his brother Jacob, sent by his father Isaac into
Mesopotamia to seek a wife, because the women of the land of Canaan, did so
much mislike the father and his wife Rebecca, that they thought their life
bitter and irksome to live among them, and rather wishes death, he marieth a
new wife, somewhat to satisfy his Parents, but he does not put away the old.
So that he does keep still, the evil whereof Isaac did so greeuouslie
complain, but somewhat to amend the matter, he marieth a new wife.

Even so, they that are wrapped up in the world, that they can in no wise
follow God, do mingle and toss together, many and diverse kinds of Religions
and Superstitions, that they may apply and conform themselves by some way,
to the will of God, and they always keep still some corruption, so that
whatsoever they do, cannot appear to be pure and sincere. I know also right
well, that there be in those places many miserable souls, which live there in
great difficulties and cares, which truly coueteth to walk rightly without
hypocrisy, and yet cannot loose themselves, out of many doubts and scruples,
which is no marvel in so great and horrible confusion, as we see at this time
in the Papisme.

Yea, I do greatly pity their miserable state, which seek means whereby
they may serve God devoutly, and live among the enemies of Faith, if it may
be possible by any ways. But what will we? I can do nothing else to the one,
or to the other, but declare their error and sin, that they themselves may
add the remedy. If they come hereafter to ask of me this or that, more
dilligentlie and particularly, I will send such curious inquisitours to the
common rule which I have of God.

I speak this, for that there be some of this sort of men so importune, that
if a man should answer all their difficulties and doubts, he should seem
never to make an end of any thing. And me think such men, may well be
compared to them, who after they be taught in a Sermon, to use sober apparel,
and decking of the body, without all dissolute and sumptuous trimming, they
would have the Preacher, to make their hose and sewe their shoes.

Well, what must we do then? In this matter, there is a certain thing set
before us, whereunto we ought to dyrect and confer our whole mind, study,
and thought. That is, that the zeal of Gods house may eat up our heart, and
so move us, that we bear and take upon our selves, all dishonours,
contumelies, and opprobries, which are done most unworthily against Gods holy
name. When such desire of Gods honor, and fervent love shall be kindled in our
hearts, not like dry stubble soon set on fire, and easily extinguished, but
like a fire that burns continually, a man shall be so far from suffering,
or approouing these abominations, wherewith the name of GOD most shamefullie
and vnwoorthilie is polluted, that when he shall behold them, he shall be able
in no wise to suffer dissimulation, silence, and taciturnitie.

And it is dilligentlie to be marked, that he says, The zeal of Gods house:
that we should know that to be referred, unto the outward order, which is
instituted in the Church, that we should exercise our selves in confession of
our Faith. I do not weigh the mockers, which say, that I my self living here
without any danger, yea, rather in great quietness, do talk goodlily of
these matters.

I am not he, with whom these men have any thing to do: For this is well
known, I have here no land of mine own. So may we think and say, of all
these Philosophers, which give their judgment without knowledge of the cause.

For seeing they will not hear GOD, who does now truly speak so gently to
them, to teach them: I do declare the day and judgment, at what time being
called before the judgment seat of GOD, they shall hear that sentence,
against the which there shall be no answer nor defense.

For seeing they will not hear him, as the best and most meek master, they
shall then know at the last, and feel him, as their most severe and just
Judge. At which time, the stoutest and the craftiest of them, shall perceive
and know, that they were deceived in their opinions.

Let them be so well exercised and prepared as they will, to obscure or
subvert justice, and equity, yet their lawlike and judicial ornaments, and
the badges of the great dignity and power, wherewith they now proudly wax
insolent, shall not then give them the victory. I speak this, because
Counsailours, Judges, Proctours, advocates, and such other, bearing the swinge
in Courts and judgments are not only bold to strive with God, and so to
contend, that they would seem, to have gotten a certain right, to scorn and
mock his Majesty, but also rejecting all holy Scripture, do spue out their
blasphemies, as the greatest sentenses of the Law, and most high Decrees.
These men whom the world does honor as certain Idolles, so soon as they
have spoken one word, cannot suffer reason and truth to have any place to
rest in.

But yet by the way, I do admonish and warn them beforehand, that it shall be
better for them, to have some remembrance of that same horrible vengeance,
which is ordained for them that change justice with iniquity, and truth with
lying. Neither the Doctors, and Chamber-masters, the delitious banquettours,
and very voluptuous men, take any higher degree here, then that they may
chatter in their feasts and banquettes, and babble forth their words against
the heavenly Master, to whom truly all men ought to give most diligent
ear.

Neither can their goodly and famous titles, pluck any man from this
judgment, in which the Lordly and reverent Abbottes, Priours, Deanes,
Archdeacons, as chief Masters of the game, shall be compelled to lead the
dance in that condemnation, which God shall make most grievous. Now although
the Courteours are wont to gratify men, with the sprinckling of their holy
water, let them not think, that they can with that kind of doing, satisfy
God.

To conclude, all iesters, and praters, let them hold their tongue, and boast
not out their merry witty sayings, unless they will feel his mighty hand,
at whose word they ought to tremble. Wherein their error is too much foolish,
that believes because they take me for their adversary, therefore, they shall
not have God to be their Judge. Let them scrape my name out of their books,
and utterly blotte it forth, specially, in this kind of cause and question,
wherein my purpose is only that God be heard and obeyed, not that I should
rule men's consciences after my lust, and charge them with any necessity or
law.

As for all others, which do not so proudly despise Gods word, and yet are so
delicate and weak, that they can in no wise be moved, I do most heartily
beseech them, that they will take more thought, and regard to their own
duty, salvation, and Gods honor, and do more flatter themselves, as they
have done hitherto.

Let them therefore open their eyes, and rear up themselves, that they may
behold the myserie wherein they are. I know well enough the euylles,
diffyculties, and stoppes, wherein they be wrapped among the Papists: I do not
speak unto them, ^ds ho^ur is to (...) preferred ^ore all ^nges.
as though it were an easy matter, in the mids of the Idolaters, to take
upon them and defend, the pure and sincere Religion of GOD, but if they lack
strength, I advertise them to fly unto God, the aucthour of all power, that
they may be made strong by him, and learn to prefer his glory before all
things of this world.

For I do earnestly desire, that all faithful men which are myserablie
afflicted in the Papisme, should understand and know this, how that the
Prophet Jeremy remaining at Jerusalem in Iewrie, ^e. 29.
did send this advertisement and exhortation unto the people, which were holden
captive and oppressed in Babylon.

If the tyranny of the Pope and of all his ministers, be to them sharp and
cruel, they must consider, that the Jews also of that time, suffered heavy
and bitter bondage, and yet they are commanded in the vulgar speech of the
Country, to execrate the Idolatry of the Chaldeans.

It is not reason, that the tyranny of men should break, or any deal diminish
from us, the due honor we owe unto GOD. Here is no exception or pretense of
privilege, which high or low, rich or poor, may, or ought to usurp unto
themselves. Let all men therefore bow down their neck, and with most
humility submit, themselves to God.

Let the poor man have the true fear of God, let him not say inconstantly, I
know not what to do, least God answer him, neither know I what to do with
thee. The rich and wealthy men, let them not like dronken sluggardes, ^leepe
in their wealth, and consume in their prosperity, and abundance of all
things, as it were in a certain draffe tubbe, but rather after the example of
Saint Paul: let them learn to esteem all that, as dyrte and damage, which
does withdraw us from godly and Christian life, nor may seem any thing to
hinder us.

We also which live here in rest and quiet, enjoying the use of the greatest,
and singular benefits of God: let us not forget that I touched in the
beginning, that we apply these things to our learning, that whatsoever
hereafter befall us, or into whatsoever Country we shall be led, yet we
may always constantly abide in the pure confession of our faith, detesting
all Idolatrous religion, superstitions, and abuses, which are against Gods
truth, do obscure his honor, and utterly subvert his Religion. Amen.

A Godly and learned Sermon, made by M. John Calvin containing, an exhortation
to suffer persecution, that we may therein follow Jesus Christ and his Gospel,
taken out in this saying, in the 13. Chapter to the Hebrews. ver. 13.
Let us go forth to him without the gates, bearing his opprobrie.
ALL the exhortations which can be made, to instruct us to suffer patiently and
constantly, for Christ Jesus name and his Gospel, shall not much move us,
unless we know and be perfectly persuaded of the right, truth, and
worthiness of the cause wherefore we contend. For when we be in that ieoberdy
and danger, that we must loose our life, we ought to be most certain of that
thing, wherefore we enter into so great peril.

But that constauncie and fyrmenesse of mind, cannot be had, unless it be
deeply founded in a certainety, and sure persuasion of faith.

There be many, which will unadvisedly and rashly, venture to dye, for
certain foolish opinions, invented of their own brain. But such
forewardnesse of mind, ought rather to be thought a furiousness, then a
Christian zeal and love.

For assuredly, there is no firmness, either of mind, or wit, or of
common sense, in these men, which do cast themselves into peril with such
hardy rashness. How so ever it be. God will not acknowledge, and take us for his
Martyrs and witnesses, without a good cause.

For death is common for all men, and also the condemnation of Thieves, and of
Gods children, the sufferaunce of shame and punishment seems to be all one,
but God makes a difference betwixt them, because he cannot deny, and forsake
his own truth.

This also is required, that we have a sure witness void of all error, of
that doctrine, which we will defend. Wherefore as I said, there is no
exhortation so weighty, that can move and persuade us, to suffer for the
Gospel, but if a true certayntie of Faith be imprinted in our hearts.

For to put our life in danger, without any consideration unadvisedly, and
chaunceablie, is most against nature. And so to do, should be thought rather
rashness, then Christian boldness. Moreover, God allows nothing that we
do, unless we be plainly persuaded, that it is for his names sake, and for
his cause that the world is so against us, and does hate us.

But when I speak of such certainty, and persuasion of mind, I do not
only understand this, that we should know to discern and judge betwixt
the true Religion, and the foolish oppinions, and constitutions of men, but
also that we be thorowlie persuaded of everlasting life, and the Crown
promised unto us in heaven, after our conflict in this world.

Let us now mark well, that these two reasons do pertayne to our duty, and
must be joined together, that the one may in no wise, be separated and
disioyned from the other. It is meet therefore, to take our beginning of this:
that we understand and know, what is our Christian Religion, what Faith it is
that we ought to hold and follow, what rule of life God has given us?
Neither must we only have our minds instructed with this godly doctrine, but
also have our minds so armed and prepared, that we may freely and boldly,
damn all errors, lies, and superstitions, which Satan has brought into the
world, to corrupt the pure simplicity of Gods doctrine. Therefore it is no
marvel, that there is so small a number of men, that have a ready mind and
desire to suffer for the Gospel, and that the greatest part of them, that
profess themselves Christians, knows not the power of the Christian
Religion, and their own profession.

All men are careless in a manner, and do not delight to read the Gospel.
All men in a manner are negligent, and have no desire, or very small, to hear
and read, who thinks it sufficient, if they have gotten some small taste of
the Christian Faith. And this is the cause, why there is seen in these no
surety and constancy of mind, and that so soon as they come into any
conflict, they are so abashed, as though they should by and by vterlie perish.

For which consideration, our desire ought to be greater, to pursue and search
out, most dilligentlie Gods truth, that therewith our hearts may be persuaded
without any doubt. Neither is this all to have such knowledge and understanding.

For we see many so well trauayled in Gods doctrine, that they seem, as though
they were stained and dyed therewith, in whom nevertheless, there is no
desire and love of GOD, no more truly, then if they had known nothing at any
time of the godly doctrine, but by a certain unsure, light, and wavering
opinion.

But what other cause is there, of this so great uncertainty and leuitie, but
that they did never perceive in their mind, the majesty of the holy
Scripture. And truly, if we would rightly weigh, that it is God that speaks
to us therein, we would hear him with more diligence, attention, and
reverence. In reading of holy scripture* w^ must think^ us in a scol^ of Angels.
If we would think in reading the Scripture, that we are are in the school
and discipline of Angels, we should have another manner of desire to exercise
our selves in that doctrine, which is set forth unto us, to comfort,
strengthen, and instruct our minds.

The way ^ow to pre^are our ^lues unto ^atience.
Now we see what is the way, to prepare our selves to patience, and sufferaunce
for the Gospel, that is, so to go foreward in the doctrine thereof, that
being thorowlie persuaded of the true Religion, and that doctrine which we
ought to hold and defend, we may nothing esteem, and despise all the frauds
and illusions of the devil, and all the inventions of men, as things not
only of no value, but also execrable, because they utterly corrupt the
Christian sincerity. And herein we differ as true Martyrs of Jesus Christ,
from the furious and stifnecked men, which suffer for their own foolish
opinons.

Secondly, we ought to be so minded, that being assured of the right, and
goodness of the cause, we should be enflamed with this due desire to follow
God, whether soever he shall call us, to embrace his word with such reverence
as it is worthy, and being called back from the deceytfull fashion of this
world, as men ravished, with their whole mind and endeavor, should be carried
to an heavenly life.

But O most miserable case, that when the light of God does shine unto us, in
these days, so bright as it did never shine in the remembrance of men, yet so
little zeal, favor, and love should be found. Wherein our misery is so much
the greater, that in so great filthiness and unthankfulness, we are not
overwhelmed with blushing shame.

For we must shortly come before that Judge, before whom our vice and evil,
which we by all means go about to hide, shall be brought forth, with that
rebuke and check, whereby the just cause of our destruction shall appear. For
if we be so endebted and bound to GOD, that for the knowledge he has given
us, we ought to give to him honorable and thankful testimony: why is our
stomach so abashed and fearful, to enter into the battle? Especially,
seeing GOD in this our age, has so opened himself, that it may be rightly
said and truly, that he has opened and plainly set forth, the greatest
treasures of his secrets.

(...) we had a^ regard God, we ^uld not ^ne his ^ly gospel ^o lies.
May not this be said, that we so think of God, as though we seemed to stand
in no need of him at all? For if we had any consideration of his Majesty, we
durst never be so bold to turn the doctrine, which proceeds out of his
mouth, into Philosophy and vain speculation. In fine, we can have no excuse,
but this must be unto us the greatest shame, yea, an horrible condemnation,
that in so great knowledge, obtained by the singular goodness of GOD, we have
so little l^ue and mind, to defend and keep the same.

^e con^ncie of ^artyrs in ^de time.
For first, if we will call to our remembrance the Martyrs of old time, and
compare their wonderful constauncie, with this our tender slothfulness, we
shall find passing great cause to detest our own filthiness. For they were
not for the most part so travailed and exercised in the Scriptures, that they
could learnedly dispute of all matters.

But first of all, they knew and held fast this, that there is one God, whom
they ought to serve and honor: then, that they were redeemed with the blood of
Jesus Christ, that in him only, and in his grace, they should put their
affiaunce, and trust of salvation.

Moreover, they did judge all other inventions and ordinances of men, to
worship God, so unworthy filthiness, that they could easily condemn all
Idolatries and superstitions: to conclude in few words, this was their
Divinity, there is one only God, the maker of the whole world, which has
declared unto us his will by Moses and the Prophets, and then by Jesus Christ
and his Apostles.

We have one redeemer, Idolles ar^ to be detested of all men.
with whose blood we were bought, and by whose grace we hope to be saved. All
the Idols of the world, are to be detested and accurssed. They came stoutly
and boldly to the fire, or other kind of death, and punishment, instructed
with no other doctrine and more hidden knowledge. And the number of them was
not small, as of two or three, but so great that the multitude of them, which
were cruelly vexed and tormented of the tyraunts, seemed innumerable and
infinite.

But we are so taught and instructed, that we pass all our auncetors, in
knowledge and understanding of holy Scripture.

We think in our selves, and it is true, as touching the understanding of the
Scripture, God has endued us with so much knowledge, as he has given to any
age at any time. And yet there is in us scantly, the least drop of fervent
love toward God. There is no reason why we should nourish this nice
^owardnesse of mind, unless we would willingly and wittingly provoke the wrath
and vengeance of God, against our selves.

What must we then do? Truly, we must take to us a stout, bold, and
constant mind. We must cheefely consider how precious, and honorable, the
confession, and testification of our faith is before God. For we do little
know, how God does esteem this confession, when our life which is of no
value, is more set by and dear unto us.

Wherein our wonderful and beastly foolishness is showed: for we can not in
this sort spare our life, but we must needs confess that we set more thereby,
then by Gods honor, and our own salvation. A certain Heathen man could use
this saying, that it is a miserable thing, to forsake and betraye the causes
why we live, for the conservation of life. Yet he and his like did never know
truly, to what end men were set in the world, and wherefore they lived
therein.

They might well say, that virtue is to be esteemed and followed, Virtue is be
embraced of all
and that we ought to live an honest life, without blame. But all their virtues
were nothing else, but colors and shadows. But we have better understanding,
God is to be honor with all uerence.
whereunto our life must be referred, which is, that we honor GOD, with all
praise and glory, that he himself may be our glory.

Without him, our life is miserable, the which we cannot continue the least
moment, but we shall heap upon our selves, a perpetual malediction. And yet
we are nothing ashamed for the winning of a few days, for this feeble life,
to refuse the eternal kingdom, and to separate our selves from him, by whose
power we are, and have our being in this life.

If a man should examine the most unlearned, yea, those whose wit is so dased,
and whose life so voluptuous, that they be most like to brute beasts, what
manner of life is appointed them, they durst not say plainly and openly,
that it should consist only in eating, drinking, and sleeping. For they know
that they are created to a better, woorthier, and more higher thing: which is
nothing else, but to serve and honor God with all kind of honor, and to
suffer our selves as good children, to be ordered and revealed by our most
benign Father, that after the end of this frail and unsure life, we may be
received into his eternal heritage.

In the appointing, and winning of this end, consists the cheifest, and
greatest point of our felicity, yea, all the whole weight of everlasting life.
But when we carry our minds and thoughts another way, and do snatch fast
hold of this present life, wurse then a thousand deaths, what excuse can we
have? For, to live, and be ignorant of the causes, wherefore we live, is
unnatural. But to forsake the causes, wherefore we live here, for the desire
and love to prolong our life, as it were for three days, in this deceytful
world, and to be separated from God, the aucthour of life, is such a bewitching
and furious madness, that I know not with what words we ought to express and
show it. But whatsoever knowledge we have, and how soever our life is
appointed, for so much, as notwithstanding, the persecutions are no less and
bitter, let us consider how and by what means, the Christian men may confirm
them selves in patiencie, and so strengthen their minds, that they may
constantly venture to danger their life, for Gods truth.

This same Text which we have recyted, being well understood, may bring us to
that indifferency of mind, yea, to that willingness, that we shall not
refuse, to suffer death for Gods name. Heb. 13, 13
Let us go forth of the City (says the Apostle) after the Lord Christ,
bearing his opprobrie. First, he does teach and admonish us, that although
the swords are not already drawn to kill us, or the fires kindled to broyle
and burn us, yet that we cannot truly be joined with the son of GOD, so
long as we have the roots of our thoughts and desires, fixed in this world.
Wherefore the Christian must always, although he be in quiet, have one foot
lyfted up ready to the battle, and not only that, but also his mind must be
utterly separated from the world, although his body be therein. Although this
at the first sight, may seem unreasonable, yet one saying of Saint Paul, We
are all ^lled to ^ffer per^cution.
ought to be sufficient to persuade us, for that we be called and appointed to
this, to suffer persecution. As though he should say: Such is the condition of
our Christianity, that we must needs enter in, and pass through this way, if
we will follow Christ.

In the means season, to ease our infirmity, and to mitigate the tediousness
and heaviness, which persecutions brings, ^ll daun^ers to be ^ffered for ^e
gospel ^ke.
we have this great and sweet comfort, that we suffering all these
incommodities, opprobries and dangers of life for the Gospel, do as it were
set our feet, in every footesteppe of Gods son, and do follow him as our
Prince and guide.

If it had been only said unto us, that we must pass through all the
opprobries of the world to keep the Christian profession, and also suffer
death freely and without fear, when soever Gods will were, me think we
should have had some color to answer and say contrary, that it is a thing
diverse, and abhorring from our nature, to wander so without a guide. But seeing
we are charged, and commanded to follow the Lord Jesus, his leading ought to
seem so right and honorable, that we have no just excuse, to refrain or
refuse his commandment.

But that we should have more earnest love and desire toward this lawdable
and healthful example, it was not only said, that Jesus Christ does lead
the way as guide and Prince, but also that we are made like unto his image.

For so Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Romans speaks, That God has
chosen and called all them, Romans 9.
whom he has taken into the number of his children, that they should be like,
and be fashioned after the Image of him, which is appointed pattern, and head
over all. What, are we so nice and tender, that we can, or will bear, and
suffer nothing at all?

Then must we needs refuse Gods grace, whereby he calls us to the hope of
salvation, and leads us thereto by this way? For these two are so joined
together, that the one can not be separated from the other, that we be the
members of Jesus Christ, and that by means of this conjunction and communion,
we be exercised with many afflictions and calamities. This same manner of our
life, is so joined with Gods son, and such conformity to him, we ought to
esteem more then we do, and also to judge it not, only by all ways most
worthy to be professed, but also to be followed.

^ffering ^rsecution ^r the gos^lles sake, (...) the iudg^ent of the ^orld, is
the ^eatest in^my we (...) suffer.
The suffering of callamities for the Gospel, in the opinion and judgment of
the world, is the greatest infamy, but seeing we know that all the unfaithful
are so blinded, that they can see or rightly judge nothing at all, ought not
we to have clear eyes, and to judge more perfectly? It is shame to be
afflicted and vexed of them, that occupy the seat of justice.

But Saint Paul does show us by his example, that we have great occasion, To
glory in the scarres of Jesus Christ: and as it were in certain marks
imprinted in us, wherewith we being marked and deckte, God does acknowledge
and receive us for his servant and elect. And we know this, that S. Luke does
rehearse of Peter and John, That they were very glad and joyful, Acts. 5.41.
that they were thought worthy to suffer for the Lord Jesus name, slander,
rebukes, and shame. Wherein two things may be seen contrary in themselves,
shame, and honor, by this that the world running headlong in fury and
madness, does judge against all reason, and by this means does change the
glory of God with dishonor and infamy. Let not us now disdain so to be
despised, and to be rebuked of the world, that we may hereafter obtain with
God and his Angels, honor, glory, and praise. We see what great labors
ambitious men, takes to obtain the order of some King, and after they have
atcheeued it, what triumphs they make: but the son of God does offer to us
his order, and yet every one despises it, and is turned with the whole power
of the mind, to the vanity of the world. I pray you, when we behave our
selves so proudly, and vnthankefullie, are we worthy to have any thing common
with him? Although our understanding can perceive and comprehend nothing
herein, yet of a truth, these are the proper and honorable badges and arms
of heavenly nobilite. Imprisonmentes, banishments, maledictions, after the
opinion of men, bring nothing else then great shame and infamy. But what, do
they let us see, what God does judge and pronounce of these things, saving
our own infidelity? Wherefore we must labor, that the name of Gods son be
of such authority, weight, and honor with us, as it is most worthy, that we
think we are well and honorably dealt with all, that his burns as it were
certain badges are printed in us, or else our unthankfulness can in no wise
be borne. If God should persecute us after our merits, has he not just cause
every day, to chastise and punish us infinite ways? Yea surely, no deaths
put unto us, were able to recompense the least part of our mischief. But of
his great and infinite goodness, he treads under foot all our sins, and
does utterly abolishe the same, and where as he might punish us according
to the greatness of our sins, he has invented another marvelous way,
whereby the afflictions are traduced from our deserved pain and punishment, to
a great honor, and a certain privilege, and singular benefit, because that
by the pertaking and suffering of them, we are received into the fellowship of
Gods son. May it be otherwise said or judged, then that we, seeing we
despise and disdain this so excellent and blisful condition and manner of
living, have little profited in Christian doctrine? This is the cause why S.
Peter, After he had moved us to live a godly and holy life in the fear of God,
1 Pet. 4, 15.1^
far from that life, wherefore other men as thieves, whoremongers,
adulterours, and menkillers suffer: By and by adds this, If we must suffer as
Christian men, therein we give glory to God, for that great and singular
benefit, which he has bestowed upon us.

Nor it is not for nothing, that the holy man speaks thus, what are we, I
pray you, that we should be witnesses of Gods truth, and as it were proctours
appointed to defend his cause.

Behold, we be miserable men, as it were woormes of the earth, creatures full
of vanities and lies, yet God will have his truth defended by us, which is
truly so great honor, that it seems not to pertain to the Angels in
heaven. This one reason well considered, ought it not to inflame and stir up
our minds, to offer our selves wholly to God, and to show our whole endeavor,
in so holy and excellent a matter to please him? And yet many cannot forbear,
but that they will speak against God, or at the least they will complain,
that he has no greater regard to ease their imbecillitie.

It is a marvelous matter (say they) that seeing God has borne us thus much
favor, that he has chosen us to be his children, yet he will suffer us to be
so cruelly vexed and oppressed of wicked men. I do yet answer these men,
that although we knew no reason, why GOD does so deal with us, yet his
authority should be such with us, that we should apply, and conform our
selves to his will.

jesus Christ (...) an exam^e to us.
But now when we see Jesus Christ to be set for an example to us, least we
should seek any other, ought we not to think our selves greatly happy, that
we be so drawn after his Image and likeness? Moreover, God do show us many
causes why w^ should sufer persecution.
God does set forth and show plain and manifest causes, wherefore he will
have us to suffer persecution, among which, if there were none other, but that
reason and advertisement, which Saint Peter gives, We must needs be very
peeuishe and sturdy, unless we be satisfied therewith

This is his reason, that seeing gold and silver, which are corruptible
mettalles, are purged and tried in the fire, it is reason that our faith also,
which in value excels all riches, be tried and approved with such
perrilles of life and greeues.

He could by and by after our calling, without any conflict, and suffering of
these callamities, have crowned us. But as he would have Christ to reign in
the mids of his enemies, even so he would have us also dwelling among the
self same, to bear and suffer their violence and oppression, until we be
delivered, from these afflictions and callamities by him.

Ind I am not ignorant, that the flesh will then greatly spurn, and refuse
to be ruled, when it must be brought into this state, but yet the will of God
must rule all our thoughts and lusts. If we feel in our selves some
contradiction and resistaunce, it is not greatly to be meruailed at. For that
is planted and engraven in our nature, to fly the Cross. Yet let us not abide
still, in that tenderness of the flesh, but let us go on forewarde, knowing,
that our obedience is thankful and acceptable to GOD, so that we cast down
our senses and appetites, and do so subdue them, that they be under his power.

Neither did the Prophets and Apostles come to death with mind, that they did
not perceive their will to be against it, and enclining an other way. They
shall lead thee whether thou would not, (says our Lord Jesus to Peter.)
So when such fear of death does prick our minds, let us labor by all
means, that we may have the ouerhande, or rather, that GOD may overcome: and
in the mean while, let us thus persuade our selves, that it is to him a most
pleasant Sacrifice, when we resist our appetites, and do so withstand them,
that by this means being subdued under his power, we may order and lead our
life after his will and pleasure.

This is the cheifest and greatest battle, whereunto, God will have all his,
with all their power to apply, to the end they may labor, to cast down and
depresse, all that which does so much, exalt it self in their senses, wits
and appetites, that it does carry and withdraw them from the way, which God
does show to them.

In the mean season, the consolations are so great and weighty, that it can
not be expressed, how much deintie cowardnesse is in us, when we wexe faint
hearted, and give over for these perils and troubles.

In old time, the number was almost infinite of them, which for the desire of
a Garland, made of corruptyble leaves, did refuse no labor, pain, and
wrastlynge, and also did so suffer Death it self, that they might seem, to
have their life in no price.

^od does ^repare for ^is elect, a ^owne of ^mortall ^lory.
And yet there was none of them, but did contend chaunceably being uncertain,
whether he should win, or lose the game* GOD does set before us an immortal^
crown, wherein we may obtain his own glory. And he has not appointed us,
an uncertain and chaunceable conflict, but does promise such a reward, to the
which we ought to confer all the counsayles, studies, and desires of our
life. What is the cause, that we are so faint hearted in the largeness and
worthiness of this honor, which is certain and eternal? Do we think that
this was spoken in vain, that we shall live with Christ, if we be dead with
him? The triumph is prepared for us, but we so much as we may, do fly from
the conflict and battle. But this doctrine is such, that it seems plainly
to disagree with man's judgment. This is true.

Neither also Christ, when he pronounces them Blessed, Math. 5.10.
which suffer persecution for righteousness sake: does propound such a
sentence, as the opinion of the world would allow or receive. Yea, he will have
us to think, that to be the cheifest felicity, which we judge the greatest
myserie. We think our selves most miserable, when God does suffer us to be
afflicted and oppressed with the tyranny and cruelty of our enemies. But we
do wonderfully err in this, that we set not before our eyes Gods promises,
which do plainly confirm unto us, that all things shall come to our
profit, joy, and salvation. We cast down our stomachs and despair, when we
see wicked and naughty men, to have the vpperhand on us, and to do that
cruelty to us, that they seem to tread down our neck with their feet.

But this same most cruel vexation of the wicked, and so great trouble and
confusion of things, as Saint Paul warns, Ought rather to confirm our
minds, raise up, and lift them into heaven. For because of our own nature, we
are bent to the study, and love of things present, and are so enflamed, that
with our whole knowledge, mind, and cogitation, we are occupied in to much
living and using this vanity: God, when he suffers us to be thus evil vexed
and handled, and the wicked to grow and flourishe in all things, does teach
and admonish us by these plain and notable signs of his most just judgment,
that, that day shall once come, when all things that be now troubled and
confused, shall be settled. But if that same time seem far and long too, let us
fly to that remedy, and let us not flatter our selves in our vice. For this is
certain, that we have no faith at all, unless we cast the eyes of our mind,
to the honorable coming of Jesus Christ.

And because God would leave out no consideration, that might be apt to move
and stir us, he does set forth on the one part promises, on the other part
threatninges. Do we feel, that the promises of God have not force enough, and
authority in us? To confirm them withal, let us join thereto the
threatenings. We show our selves woonderouslie froward, since we believe Gods
promises no more then we do. When the Lord Jesus Christ says, He will
acknowledge us for his own, Math. 10, 32 Luke. 2.
and confess so of us before his Father, so that we also confess him before
men: what should let us, to give to him that confession, which he requires of
us?

The worst they can d^ us, is to tak^ away our lives.
When men have done all they can, the wurst they may do, is to take away our
lives. How precious then shall the heavenly life be unto us, when it is
compared with this present life, which is lost? It is not my purpose in this
place, to collect all the promises set forth in the scripture, to this end.
Yet since they be repeated, and so oftentimes renewed unto us, we ought so to be
exercised, not only in reading, but also in the knowledge, and consolation of
them, that we might be as it were died, and surely confirmed in them.

But if when the plague hangs over our heads, three or four of them are not
sufficient, to confirm and strengthen us, truly, an hundredth should be
sufficient, to overcome all adverse and contrary temptations. But if GOD with
these great sweet promises, can not entise and draw us to him, are we not
very great dullardes, and betle heads, when neither the severe threatninges,
can work any more in us? Jesus Christ does appoint a day, to accuse all
them before his Father, Which deny the truth, for fear of loosing this life:
Luke. ^, 2
for whom he declares destruction, both of body and soul to be prepared.
Also in an other place he protests, that he will refuse all manner of
communion of them, That deny him before men. These words, ^h. 10, 32
unless we be utterly void of all sense, Gods ^d does (...) terrify (...)
minds, thing I terrify ^n.
ought vehemently to move our minds, and so to fray us that for fear the
heaires of our head should start up. But how soever it be, unless we be so
affected and moved, as the greatness of the matter and danger requires,
there remains nothing else for us, but to look for horrible and most
miserable confusion: wherein we may excuse our fault, so much as we lust, and we
may say, that in this great frayltie and weakness of nature, we rather are
worthy of mercy, then of any severity and sharpness of punishment, it will
not serve. For it is written on the contrary part, ^br. 11. ^at faith
That Moses after he had seen God by faith: was so hardened and strengthened,
that no violence of temptation could melt his mind, and bend him from that
great constancy. Wherefore, when we be so tender and flexible, that there
appear in us no power of firm and constaunt mind, we signify and declare
plainly, that we be utterly ignorant of God and his kingdom. Also, when we
are warned, that we ought to be joined and coupled with our head, we have
gotten a goodly color, to exempt and separate our selves from him, if we say
we are men. And were not they that were before us, men so well as we are? Yea,
if we had nothing else, but even the bare doctrine of godliness, yet were all
the excuses that we can bring, weak, and of no value. But now are we worthy
more greater check and condemnation, since we have so great and notable
examples, whose great aucthorite, ought vehemently to excite and confirm our
minds. There are two chief parts, Two parte^ to be considered.
of this our exhortation, or consolation to be considered. The first is, that
this has been a common state to the universal body of the Church, always,
and ever shall be to the end of the world, that it was vexed with such
injuries, and contumelies of the wicked, as it is reported in the Psalm: Psa.
129.2,
They have vexed me even from my youth hitherto, and have drawn a plough over
and over, every part of my back. The holy Ghost in this place, does bring in
the old Church, speaking on this wise, that it should not seem now unto us, a
new thing nor grievous, if we see in these days our cause and condition to be
like. Saint Paul also reciting the same place of an other Psalm, where it is
said, We were as it were sheep led to the slaughter: ^al. 44.22.
does declare that this pertained not only to one age, but it was and shall
be the common, usual, and continual state of Christ's Church. So that if we
see in this time, the Church to be so handled and vexed, by the insolency and
pride of the wicked, that some bark at her, some bite her, many afflict her,
and always invent some mischief, and pestilent destruction to her, yea and
set upon her without ceasing, as it were mad dogs, and wild ravening beasts,
let us call to remembrance, that she was so vexed, afflicted, and oppressed in
all times before. God does give unto her sometime, some rest and refreshing,
and as it were a time of truce. And this is that which is spoken in the Psalm
above alleged, ^sal. 2.3.
The righteous Lord does cut in sunder the cords of the wicked: And in another
place, That he breaks their rod, ^sa. 125.3.5.
least the good being too much pressed, should faint, and move their hands to
iniquity. But God would always have his Church to be tossed in this world, and
as it were always in a certain conflict, reserving for her quiet rest in
heaven. The end of these afflictions was always blessed, yea truly, God
wrought this, that the Church always pressed, with many and great diffycult
calamities, was never utterly oppressed. As it is said in another place, the
wicked with all their labor, did never obtain that they desired. S. Paul
also, does so glory, of like happy end and issue of afflictions, that he
shows this grace of God to be perpetual in his Church. We (says he) are
pressed with all kind of afflictions, 2. Cor. 4
but we are not killed with sorrow and care: we live in great need and
poverty, yet are we not forsaken, we are cast down, but we perish not,
always carrying about the mortification of our Lord Jesus Christ, that his
life also may be declared in our mortal body.

This issue and end, as we see that God has always made it happy and
prosperous, in the persecutions of the Church, ought to bolden us, seeing we
know that our fathers, who also acknowledged their frayltie and weakness, had
always the victory over their enemies, because they continued constaunt in
patiencie.

I do entreat this first part of my exhortation breefely, that I may come
the sooner to the second, which does more pertain to the purpose. And that
is, that we apply certain examples of the Martyrs, which were before us, to
our consolation and comfort. And in this kind or number, there be not two or
three, but a great and thick cloud, as the Apostle writes to the Hebrews.
Whereby he signifies, That there is so great a multitude of them, (...) 1.12.
which has suffered for the testimony of the truth, that so well the
abundance of excellent examples. As the most grave authority ought to
provoke us to contentation, patiencie, and moderation of mind.

And least my Oration should wexe too long, in heaping up together an infinite
multitude of examples, I will only speak of these Jews, which suffered most
grievous persecution for the true religion, ^euous ^secutions ^ered by (...)
Jews.
both under the tyranny of King Antiochus, and also shortly after his death.
We cannot say, that then the number of the afflicted men was small, when a great
mighty army as it were of Martyrs, was prepared to maintain and defend the
religion. Neither can we allege that they were certain excellent Prophets,
whom God has chosen forth and separated from the common sort of people: for
there were women, boys, and infantes, also in that number of Martyrs. Neither
will we say, that they passed through the persecution, only with some light
loss, without great peril of life, without great pains and torments of
bodies, seeing, there was no kind of cruelty unproven in afflicting, vexing,
and tormenting them.

Let us hear also what the Apostle does say of them, and does set forth
for us to follow. Hebr. 11.36, 37, 3^
Some (says he) were hanged up like belles, and stretched, despising to be
delivered, that they might obtain a better resurrection: Other were proved
with opprobrious words and stripes, or with bonds and prisonment: Other were
stoned, or cut in sunder, or killed with the sword: Othersome went wandering
hither and thither, through hills and caves of the earth.

Let us now come to make comparison betwixt them and us. ^ompa^n be^en them
(...) us.
If they suffered so many and great torments for the truth, which was as then
but obscure, what ought we to do in this great light, which has shined unto
us in this time? God speaks unto us now, as with full mouth. The greatest gate
of the kingdom of heaven, is made open unto us. Jesus Christ coming from
heaven unto us, does so call us to him, that we have him present as it were
before our eyes. Into how great ingratitude, and shameful wickedness shall
we run into, if we have less stomach and love, to bear and suffer for the
Gospel, then they had which did behold the promises of God, but as it were a
far off, who had but a very little door opened to enter into ye kingdom of
God, who had received only a remembrance and obscure testimony, in figures of
Jesus Christ? ^at mat^ cannot (...) declared (...) they ^ght.
These great matters cannot be declared, and expressed with any words, as they
be worthy. Wherefore I leave them, to be weighed in every man's thoughts and
meditations. This doctrine as it has a common and universal reason, so it
must be referred to the exercise, and order of every man's life. But every man
must apply it, to his proper use and profit, apt for his own consolation. And
I speak this for this cause, least that they which see themselves to be in no
manifest peril, should suppose this doctrine to be vain, and not to pertain
to them. Now they are not in the hands of tyrants: but what know they, how
GOD will deal with them hereafter? Therefore we must be of the mind, that if
any persecution, which we looked not for, happen unto us, that we fall not
thereinto unawares and unprovided, but that we come to it, prepared long before
hand. But I fear, there be many death ears, to whom this my oration is made,
without fruit. For they that live in quiet, having all things at will, are so
far from preparing themselves, to take and suffer death when need shall be, that
they have no care nor thought of serving God at all. But this ought to be all
our study continually, especially, in these great troublesome times, wherein we
live in great peril.

In the mean time, they whom God calls to suffer, for the testimony of his
name, must think in very deed, that they were prepared long before, and
brought to this sufferaunce of euylles, by the motion and certain judgment of
the spirit, that they might bear themselves therein boldly and constantly.
Then also they must dilligently call to their remembrance all the exhortations
which they have heard before, and be so styrred up with advertisement of them,
as the valiant Soldiour to take his armor, when he hears the Trumpet blow.
But what seek we? Truly in these perilles we do nothing else: ^ersecution is
a ^ouchstone.
but seek shifts and ways how to escape. I mean this by the most part of
men. For this same persecution is as it were a touch stone, wherewith God does
try and prove, who ^e his: but there are few found of that faith, courage,
and godliness toward God, that they will offer themselves franckly and
freely unto death, for his names sake This is a thing almost incredible, that
they which do glory, that they have some knowledge in the Gospel, are so
impudent and unshamefast, they will use such cauillations.

Some will say, what shall it avail to confess our faith before those
stubborn styfnecked men, which are purposed to war against God himself? Is
not this to cast pearls before Swine? As who would say, Jesus Christ does
not most plainly declare, that he does require of us the confession of his
name, yea, among most perverse and wicked men? But if this our testimony do
nothing profit to their edifying, yet shall it profit to their confusion.
Always the confession of our faith, does savor sweetly before God, although
it bring death and destruction to wicked men. There be other also which will
say this, what shall our death profit, when it shall seem to give more
offense, then utility? As though God has left to themselves free choice to
dye when they will, or when they shall think it the most apt time of death? But
we contrariwise do obey him, but as for the fruit that must come by our
death, we leave to the hand and providence of God.

Wherefore the christian must most chiefly in what place soever he be, Every
man must live in that simplicity and integrity, that God requires.
dilligentlie see, that he live in that simplicity and integrity that God
requires, and that he be not brought from the mind and manner of godly and
holy life, at any time with any dangers or threatenings. Let him eschew so much
as is possible, the raging madness of the woolues, so that the same wariness be
not joined with the prudence and craftiness of the flesh.

We ought (...) commit ^ur life in^ Gods ^and.
First of all let him do this, that he give over and resign his life into the
hands of God the most faithful keeper. When he has ordained and kept
dilligently, this manner and fashion of life, if afterward he fall into the
hands of enemies, let him think and persuade himself, that he is brought
into that place of God, for this cause, that he may have him a witness of his
son. Therefore, seeing he is called and brought to the confession, by the
certain decree of God, there is no way to go back, unless he will be
unfaithful unto him, to whom we have promised, all our endeavors both to live
and die: yea, whose we are, although we had promised nothing at all.

I mean not hereby to drive every man of necessity, at all times, to give a
full and perfect confession of their Faith, no, not sometimes when they be
asked. For I know, what measure and moderation Saint Paul used, who was ready
with heart and mind to defend the Gospel, as any other.

Neither was this spoken by the Lord Jesus, and promised without a cause, that
God would give us in that time and matter, a mouth and prudence. As though he
would have said, the office of the holy Ghost, is not only to confirm us
that we may be willing, bold and strong, but also it consists in giving us
judgment, prudence, and counsel, how we may, as it becomes, govern and
rule our selves, in so great and so hard a matter. Truly, this whole Treatise
is to this end, that they that be in such distresses, should desire and
receive from heaven, that moderation and prudence, not following the counsel
of the flesh, to seek some shifts to escape. But there be that do object in
this place, that the Lord Jesus, yea, when he was asked, would make to them no
answer. But I say, that this suffiseth not to take away that rule, which he
has given to us, to witness our faith, then when the confession thereof is
necessarily required. Furthermore, that he did never dissemble or keep
silence, for this purpose to save his life. Last of all, that he did never make
so doubtful an answer, but that it contained an apt testimony, of that
which he had spoken before, or else did first satisfy them, that lay in wait
to mark both his words and deeds. Wherefore, let all Christians be well
persuaded, and sure of this thing, that no man ought more to esteem his life,
then the testimony of the truth, wherein God will have the praise, and glory of
his name to appear.

What this word, Martyr, signifies.
Is it without cause, that he calls all those his witnesses (for this does
the word Martyr signify) who are brought to make answer before the enemies,
of Faith and Religion? Or is not this rather the cause, for that he would use
all their speaking, and whole course of life, to the confession of his name?
Wherein every man must not so look to his neighbor and fellow, that he will
seem to do nothing at all, without his example and testimony. And this
curiosity is so much the more to be eschued, because we are prone to this vice
of our own nature. Peter when he heard of Christ, That he should be led in
his old age, whether he would not, he enquired what should become of John his
fellow and companion. There is none of us, which to avoid peril and danger,
would not gladly make answer in that wise, because when we should suffer any
thing, by and by this comes into our mind, what is the cause wherefore I
should suffer more then others? But Jesus Christ does counsel and admonish
otherwise us all in common, and every man priuatlie, to be prepared and ready,
that as he calls one or other, so every man come forth in his order. And I
have showed this before, that we shall be unarmed and unprepared, to take and
suffer Martyrdom, unless we be fensed and armed with the promises of God.

Now remains to declare plentifully such promises, not that we will set
forth every one exactlie, but to show the chief and most excellent thing,
which GOD would have us to hope for, to comfort us in our callamities. And
there be three such things: the first, that seeing all the times both of our
life and death, do consist in his hand, he will so defend us by his power,
That not one heaire of our head shall fall, but after his will. Wherefore, all
faithful men ought thus to be persuaded, in whose hands so ever they be
tossed, that God in no wise will lay aside that governance and custody, which
he has taken upon him for them with so great care.

If this persuasion of Gods fatherly care, and providence did rest and cleave
deep in our hearts, we should be delivered out of hand, of the greatest part
of these doubts and difficulties, which do now trouble and hinder our duty.
We behold now the bitterness of the tyrants, and unbridled cruelty, brawling
peeuishlie in all sharpness of punishments. And hereby we judge, that God
has no more care, nor regard, to defend and keep us in safety. And therefore
we be so styrred and provoked, by our own reasons to look and provide for our
selves, as though the whole hope of Gods help and succor were clean taken
away. But on the other part, the so great providence of God, as he has showed
unto us, ought to be unto us like a strong fensed Castle, which can be
ouercommen with no power. Let us therefore learn and hold fast, this short
sentence, that our bodies are in his hand and power, who also did create them.

And this is the cause, wherefore God has delivered his, after a marvelous
sort, and contrary to the opinion and hope of all men, as Sydrach, Misach, and
Abednego, Dani. 3.26. Dani. 6.20
forth of the burning Oven: Daniell out the Lions den: Peter out of Herodes
prison, wherein he was shut and watched, and dillygentlye fast bound in
chains.

By these examples, he would declare unto us, that he could stay our enemies,
as it were with a certain bridle, and that he had that power, that when he
would, he could preserve, and as it were pluck us out of the mouth of Death
it self. Not that he does always thus deliver his from such perils, but
of right, having the authority to appoint our life and death, he will have us
persuaded, that we are so continued and kept under his custody and tuition,
that whatsoever the tyrauntes do invent, or with what fury soever they set
upon us, yet it is only in his hand, to appoint life or death: and
therefore this matter ought only to be referred to his will.

But if he suffer the tyrauntes to kill us, yet our life is unto him dear,
and much more set by of him, then it is worthy.

The which he did plainly declare to be so, when he pronounced by the mouth of
David, ^l. 116.15.
That the death of his Saints was honorable and precious in his sight. And also
when he said by Esaie, ^y. 26.21.
That the earth it self should show forth the blood that was shed, which
seems altogether hidden. Now then let the enemies of the Gospel, be as
bountiful and prodigal in shedding the Martyrs blood, as they will, yet this
must be, that they shall make a reckoning, and horrible account of the
effusion, of that dear and precious blood, yea, even to the uttermost drop.

^owe the ^apists do ^lory when ^hey burn ^he faithful.
But now, in this time they do scornfully and proudly laugh, when they burn
the faithful men, and after they have dypte and washed themselves in their
blood, they become so dronken, that they care nothing at all, what murders
they do. But if we will have this stay and moderation of mind, that we can
patiently abide* God will at the last declare, that it was not without a cause,
that he so greatly esteemed our life, and had it in so great honor.

In the mean while, let us not take it to grief, if it be now bestowed to
confirm and garnishe the Gospel, which excels heaven and earth in
worthiness. And that we may be more surely persuaded, that God will never
leave us, as abiect^s in the hands of the enemies, let us not forgette the
same saying of Jesus Christ, wherein he says: Acts. 9.4.
That it is he himself, whom men do persecute in his members. God said
before by Zachary: Who so touches you, Zacha. 2, 8.
touches the sight of mine eye. This is much more expressed, if we suffer for
the Gospel sake, it is even as the son of GOD himself were, and suffered in
that affliction.

Therefore let us think so, that Jesus Christ must forget himself, if he
should have no care and thought of us at that time, when we be in prison and
danger of life for his cause and glory: and let us also know that God will
take all the contumelies and injuries, as done against his own son.

Let us come to the second place of consolation, which is one of the greatest
among Gods promises: that is, that God will so hold us up with the virtue of
his spirit in these afflictions, that our enemies whatsoever they do, nor
Satan their chief captain, shall in any thing go away with the upper hand.
And truly, we do see how in that necessity, he does show the succor and
helps of his grace. For the invincible stoutnesse and constancy of mind,
which is seen in the true Martyrs, is a notable token of that same most
mighty power which God uses in his Saints.

^wo things ^eeuous in ^rsecution.
There be two things in persecutions grievous, tedious, and intolerable to the
flesh, whereof, the one consists in the checkes and rebukes of men, the
other, in the pain and torment of the body. ^od does ^omise his ^lpe in ^th
kinds.
In both these kinds of temptations, GOD does promise so his assistaunce,
that we shall easily overcome all the infamy, and violence of the greefes and
pains. And truly, what he promyseth, he does perform in deed, with most
manifest and assured help.

Let us then take this buckler to defend us against all fear, and let us not
measure the power of Gods spirits so slenderly, that we should not think and
believe, that he will easily overcome all the injuries, bitterness, and
contumelies of men. And of this divine and inuinsible operation, among all
other, we have a notable example in this our age.

A certain young man, who lived godlilie here with us in this City, The
great constancy of the yo^ man.
when he was taken at Dornicke, was condemned with this sentence, that if he
would deny the confession of his Faith, he should be but beheaded, Question*
but if he perseuered in his purposed opinion, he should be burned. When he was
asked, whether he would do, he answered plainly: Answer.
he who will give me this grace to dye patiently for his name, will also work
by the selfsame grace, that I may abide broyling and burning.

We ought to take this sentence, not as pronounced of a mortal man, but of the
holy Ghost, that we should think, that GOD can so well confirm, and make us
overcome all pains and torments, as to move us to take any other kind of
meeker death in good part. Yea, we see also oftentimes, what constancy he
gives to evil and wicked men, who suffer for their evil deeds and
wickedness.

I do not speak of such, as be obstinate and hardened in their wickedness,
which have no repentance, but of them which do perceive consolation by the
grace of Jesus Christ, and so do take and suffer quietly, and with good
will, most grievous and sharp pain: and as we see a notable example in that
thief, ^ke 23.
who turned at the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Will God, who assisteth with
so great power wicked men, that suffer condignly for their evil acts, forsake
them who defend his cause, and will he not rather give them inuinsible power?

that fruit (...) Martirs ^ght to ^oke for.
The third place of promises, which God promises to his Martyrs, is the fruit
which they ought to look for of their suffering, and of death it self, if
need so require. But this fruit is, that after they have set forth and
honored Gods name, and edified his Church with their testimony, they may be
gathered together, in immortal glory, with the Lord Jesus: But because we
have spoken largely enough before, of this reward of eternal glory, it is now
sufficient, to renew the memory of those things that are already spoken.

Wherefore, let the faithful learn to rear up their heads to the crown of
immortal glory, whereunto God does call them, let them not take the loss of
this life greeuouslie, considering the greatness, and woorthines of the reward.
And that they may be sure, and perfectly persuaded of this so great a good
thing, as cannot be expressed with any speech, nor in thought to be
comprehended, nor with any honor enough to be esteemed, let them have
continually before their eyes, this like and conformable reason with our Lord
Jesus Christ, that in death it self they behold life, as he by ignominy of
the Cross, and infamy, came to glorious resurrection, wherein all our
felicity, triumph and joy consysteth. Amen.

FINIS.

