Three Propositions or Speeches, which that excellent man M. John Calvin, one
of the Pastors of the Church of God in Geneua had there.

To which also is added, an exposition upon that part of the Catechism, which
is appointed for the three and fortieth Sunday in number.

Translated into English, by T. VV.

Imprinted at London for George Bishop. 1580.

To the right worshipful, Sir Richard Knightley Knight, and the Right
Honorable the Lady Elizabeth his wife. T. W. wishes all growth in goodness,
with constancy and continuance in the truth of God for ever and ever, through
Christ our Lord.
WHEN I (Right woorshipfull and Honorable) enter into a deep consideration,
not only of mine own particular grievous offenses, but also of the general
sins and transgressions of the whole land, continually committed against God
and good men, I am wonderfully cast down in my self, and overwhelmed (as it
were) with heaviness, for those great judgments that by the reason of these
our iniquities we have, as it were with gable ropes, pulled from God against
our own souls. But when I thoroughly weigh what slender means are used to
bring men too God, and unfeigned repentance, from their former evil ways
(that so the plagues hanging over our heads, may be utterly removed from us
and our country, or at the least so lessened, that we be not swalowed up of
the same) I am almost as a man altogether past hope, that we can be set free
or delivered from those judgments and punishments, which the Lord by
manifest signs and tokens from heaven, and by continual threatenings and
outcries, of his faithful ministers, has now a long time denou^ced against
this proud and thanklesse generation. For what between idle and Idol ministers
on the one side, and blind, wilful, and superstitious people on the other
side, iniquity is grown to so great a height, that as men make little or no
conscience at all of committing sin, so they seem to be sunk deep in their
rebellion, and are grown as a man would say, senseless of their
tra^sgressions, insomuch that men can hardly tell what to pronounce unless
they should say thus, that by our deeds we allow that, which by words in
popery, we do justly condemn, to wit, that blindness and ignorance is the
mother of devotion.

Is it not both strange and pitiful, and yet in my persuasion, I take it to
be for the most part very true, that after twenty years public preaching
and professing of the Gospel under our gracious Sovereigns reign, the people
are very little, or no whit at all edified in the knowledge of faith, and less
builded up (if less can be) in the fruits of obedience and holy life? Not
that I deny the Gospel, to have taken good root in sundry men's hearts: but
this I mean, that that number is very small, yea even as it were a cottage in a
vineyarde, or like a Lodge in a Gardeyne of Cucumbers, or like a besieged
City. Isaiah. 1.8.
If any man would doubt of the truth of this, the matter it self is more
manifest, than that it needs to be proved: for if a man would but make his
eyes and his ears, witnesses (as it were) of this matter, how can he pretend
ignorance? Who passes through any place of the land that beholds not, and
hears not, generally and in the greatest number, pestilent pride, mischievous
murders, wicked whoredoms, open oaths, beastly blasphemies against God,
common contempt of magistracy and all goodness, besides a thousand such like
abominations? So that a man may perceive not a window only, but a wide wicket,
or barn door rather, set open to all manner of licentiousnes and naughty
behavior. And surely if these faults were in the meanest only, they were
very grievous before God and man: but what are they then, when the hands of
the greater me^ be the chiefest in these iniquities? Be it far from us to be
Stoickes, who thought all sins equal. Christians should know (and the
rather because the Lord also has revealed the same in his word) that some
sins be more grievous, than other some are in his sight: yea that one and
the self same sin, is very much aggrauated, and made more heinous, eue^ in
respect of the circumstaunces, as time, place, person, manner of doing, etc.
And what I pray you is the cause, of this so great disorder and licentiousnes?
Is not ignorance and negligence in Priests (as they call them) and people, the
mother and nurse of all these and such like wickednesses? If we might through
Gods especial blessing once have the points and principles of Christian
religion, diligently and purely propounded, and the matter of manners, sensibly
and sincerely set forth, and by the means of our Magistrates, Gods own
discipline, for the better fructifiyng of his word, allowed of and established
amongst us, and our posterity, we should, no doubt, see, not only these
gross iniquities utterly banished, but also the very inticeme^ts and
prouocatio^s to evil, quite and clean removed: but till then we may not
look for any better fruits than these that we have already reaped and
rehearsed. True it is, that God can bring light out of darkness, and make his
glory shine forth in our shameful falls: but none ought therefore to love
darkness (nay we must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darknsse, Ephesia. 5. 11.
but reprove them rather) or delight in sin, Heb. 3.13.
but rather take heed that our hearts be not hardened through the
deceitfulnes thereof. If any will offend that grace may abou^d, Romans 6.1. Luke
12.47.
their condemnation is just: and he that knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes. He that cannot lie, has spoken this,
and therefore no reason at al why we should doubt of it: and he that does what
pleseth him both in heaven and in earth will in time perform it (without speed
in an unfeigned repentance) upon us all both high and low, which also should
hasten our turning. Amos. 6.3.
We see then that we have no cause at al to dally and delaie, and to put the
evil day far from us, as the wicked do, Romans 2.4.
but rather while the Lord in long suffering forbeareth us, calling us to
amendment by his fatherly visitations, that every one of us should in time
think of and use, all the means of our earnest and hearty conversion unto
him, Hebr. 3.13.
and while it is called to day, reverently hearke^ unto his voice, speaking
unto us out of his word, least otherwise we be shut out of his heavenly rest:
for mine own part (how vile so ever I be) I may (I thank my God for it) in
singlenes of heart protest thus much, that it grieueth me to the heart, to see
the great defectes and wantes, that I know in that behalf: And that I have
some care (though not so great, as many other good brethren have, neither I
able to do so much as they) by travail in writings of mine own, and
translating of other men's labors, to help forward, the increase of
knowledge, judgment, and practice, that so Gods glory may be advanced, and
his Church furthered in the way of life and salvation. Amongst the
testimonies whereof (besides that which I have already published to the view
of the godly) I would have this my simple and small translation accounted also:
wherein what I have performed, though I my self would say nothing, yet other
men might both judge and report, specially if they were able and would
confer it, with the French copy. This they shall assuredly find, that where
as few or almost no places of scripture were quoated therein, I have added a
great number, setting besides in the marge^t some shortnotes which do serve,
both for the clearyng of some dark places, and also comprehend the sum (as
it were) of the whole matter. All that I have done whatsoever it be, I offer
unto you (right worshipful and Honorable) and in you, to the whole church of
God in this la^d, beseeching the Lord in mercy to remove all my sins, and so
to make it profitable both to you and all those, into whose hands it shall
come. The considerations inducing me, to offer it unto you, are indeed
particular, as first to testify the unfeigned good will, which I bear toward
you in Christ, in whom (to be short) I have a mind chearefully to travail,
what in melyeth, and by all the means that possibly I can, to build you up in
sincere knowledge, sound zeal, and careful obedience of Gods blessed truth,
though the means and ability that I have to perform the same be very small
and slender.

Secondly to set out my duetifull thankfulness, for sundry kindnesses and good
turns received from you, which I confess to be more than I am able to requite
the least part, leaving the full recompense thereof too the Lord (who has
faithfully promised in his word and therefore will assuredly perform it,
ple^tifully to reward it, eue^ in this life, if he see it so good, but
speciallly in the resurrection of the righteous) and yet thinking it meet and
convenient to show my self at the least thankful in words, by such weak
presents as I am able to yield. 2. Cor. 8. 12.
Wherein I take this to be no small comfort unto me, that I deal with them in
whom I am persuaded, this part of Gods image amongst the rest, shines forth
very clearly: to wit, that you accept of me, and the things that come from
me, according to that I have, and not according to that I have not. But the
causes which have led me to publish the same for the benefit and behoof of
Gods Saints are as general, so many, but chiefly three. First, that thereby
I might give some light of knowledge, to the poor ignorant people of our land,
who know not, (because I fear me they have seldom or never heard the same)
sundry excellent points of doctrine here propounded, and namely these great
articles of our religion, to wit, the unity of the Godhed, and the trinity of
the persons: the inseparable uniting of the two natures in the person of our
savior Christ, from the time of his conception in the womb of his mother: his
offices, of kingdom, Priesthood and prophecy: Gods everlasting election, and
his free justification of us in Christ, with such like. If any man think these
points over high for our rude people (as I know there are some men otherwise
greatly to be reverenced, which stand much upon that) I would wish them to
consider not only this, that the Lord has revealed these points in his
word, to the end that they should be taught unto the people, but also to weigh
how that without the sound knowledge thereof, it is impossible for men ever to
attain salvation. So that they which stand so nicely upon these matters, do
not only bewray, great, either ignorance, if they can not preach them, or
unfaithfulness, if they do not utter them, Acts. 20.27.
because they keep back some part of the most necessary points of Gods
counsel, but also testify what little hunger and thirst they have, for the
salvation of their brethren, who ought to be as dear unto them as them
selves. John. 17.3.
Does not Christ him self say, that this is life eternal, that men know God
to be the only very God, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ? And does
not Paul pray, Ephesians. 3.18.
that the Ephesians may know, the breadth, length, depth and height, that is
all perfection if it were possible? Oh but it is not yet time to propounde
them, say they. Hebr. 5. 12.
Surely then I know not when it will be time. I fear me, least that may be
justly verified in us, which the Apostle speaks of the Jews, that whereas in
respect of time we ought to have been teachers to others, yet we have need,
again to have the first principles of the word of God laid amongst us, and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Is it not a
shame to be children always? and are not those nurses much to be blamed, that
either cannot or will not in xx. years space teach their children to speak
readily, and to go strongly? Would to God we might once set aside the
doctrine of the beginning of Christ, Heb. 6.1.
and be lead forward to perfection. And yet in all this I allow not of their
curiosity, that with unwashed hands, and void of reverence (to the end they
may be thought profounde, and deep in judgment amongst men) will enter into
vain speculations concerning these and some other points of which sort are
the Popish School Doctors, yea and many amongst us that to much do tread in
their steps. There is a mean (if we could see it, and GOD would give us
grace to embrace and use the same) between fantastical curiosity, and
beastly blindness. It behooves all, but specially those that profess
godliness, as on the one side to know and prove, what that good acceptable and
perfect will of God is, Romans 12. 2.3
so to take heed on the other side, that they presume not to understand above
that which is meet to under stand, but that they understand according to
sobriety, and as GOD has dealt to every man the measure of says: and seeing
secreate things belong to the Lord our God to leave the^ to him alone, Deuteronomy.
29, 29.
least otherwise entering into the curious searching of them out, we be over
whelmed of his glory: and again seeing that the things revealed belong to us,
and to our children for ever, in care and conscience to labor all the days of
our life to a diligent perfourma^ce of the same, rather then to entangle our
selves with fables, genealogies and frivolous questions, which breed
conte^tions and brawlinges, rather than godly edifiyng, 1. Tim. 1.4.
which is by faith.

Secondly, that by this means I might stopp (if it were possible) the mouths
of brawling and contentious Papists, who stand very much upon that Fable of
Peter's being at Rome (the principal bullwarke of the Popes supremacy) and
that same diuelishe doctrine of men's merits, tendyng to the great dishonor of
almighty God and the woonderful disgrace of our savior Christ's obedience both
which and sundry other points in controversy betwixt us and the^ (...) these
speeches large^ (...) ^^^ficientlie handl^ (...) is behalf of (...), who
either (...) enough already (...) these points: or else would (...) them
through forgetfulness too die out of their remembrance: For the first sort,
may easily be confuted, by the pitiful practice and lamentable experience,
that the Lord has showed us, and daily does show us to the contrary: a better
proof we cannot have in my poor opinion, than that accursed rebellion in the
North, Cutbert Maines practices in the west, the continual sending over of Bulls
and Bables, besides a wonderful number not only of old subtle foxes and
cruel wolves, which lie lurking in their holes, waiting for the dark night of
ignorance and blindness, where in they may rauine to the full, as heretofore they
have done, but of young cubbes also, sundry of them little above twenty years
old (a woeful thing to behold) who are not ashamed, privately in corners, and
openly in great assemblies (as ^^r majesty's Commissioners for ca^^
Ecclesiastical, I am sure can well report) boldly too speak for, and stiffly
to defend after their beastly manner, sundry points and principles of that
popish religion. And as for the other who would have Popery wear away,
without naming of it, I say that they offend doubly: first in that they fight
directly against nature. For let a man sow what good and wholesome seeds he
can in his garden, and have not a care for the clean keeping thereof, as that
it may be thoroughly weeded, when the time and season requires, no doubt, but
that (as experience also teaches us) it will in short time be clean
ouergrowne, and become (as we say) a Wilderness or Forest, if not altogether
past hope of recovery, yet dangerous and chargeable to attempt the redress
thereof.

Secondly in that they do not enter into a deep consideration, of the
corruption of man's nature, and Satan's cunning in this subtle shift. John
3.19.20.
That man is inclined to love darkness, and to hate the light, Genesis 6. 5.
Genesis 8.21.
yea that he deuiseth and does all the means whereby he may continue therein,
is more plain then needs to stand upon, because that all the thoughts and
motions of his heart are evil, and that every day, yea every hour of a day,
and every moment of an hour, from his youth upward. And what Satan means
hereby, they that are acquainted with the depth of his assaults, may easily
perceive, to wit, still to keep me^ in the possession of their old Idolatry
and superstition. This rather rests in my judgment carefully to be forseene
unto, and diligently to be performed, that is, that as the doctrine of truth,
should be more often sounded into the ears and hearts of the poor ignorant
people, and that Romish religion soundly and with authority confuted by the
Ministers and preachers of the word: so all the Magistrates, are humbly and
earnestly to be entreated, and that on Gods behalf and the peoples, to draw
out the swoorde of justice, and execute the same upon the disobedient
rebellious, and obstinate sort: which if it might be, yet now at the length
practiced, no doubt but it would somewhat delay the heat of these lusty
bloodes (as you would say) that spare not to broch and spread abroad
deceaueable errors (which the ancient among them, supposed great clerks and
gray headed men, dare not openly and in plain terms aduouch for fear of some
punishment) and bewray the hardhartednesse, cankred malice, and cursed
hypocrisy, of that horned generation, who then, either for fear of due
punishment, would renounce their religion, though it were but dissemblingly,
or else declare their want of wit, and wilfulness, in yielding their bodies a
sacrifice to Satan, as Story, Felton, Maine and some other have done,

The third and last reason is, that I might in Christ comfort some, who^ I know
to be sore pressed and beaten down, with the fearful feeling of the weight,
of their own grievous iniquities and transgressions, and so in charity reach
out my hand, to help them what in me lies, out of the claws and clouches of
sin and Satan. It is very true that the Author does not of purpose handle
in these discourses, that most sweet point: and yet notwithstanding, shall
the afflicted conscience find herein, many notable sentences te^ding to that
end, which if they be well weighed, and rightly applied to the soul, will no
doubt be both comfortable and profitable too them: comfortable, in that they
will serve to raise them up in spiritual joy, and assured hope, of the free
pardon and full forgiveness of all their sins, through Christ's death and
blessed obedience: and profitable in this, that they shall instruct them to
walk, with greater care and conscience of perfourmaunce, both of general and
special duties, before God and their brethren, than heretofore they have
done. Now because this number is very small (for Satan and sin hold the most
part of men Captives in senselesnes of their evil) I think it good in this
place to add this warnyng: that my meaning is not hereby to work carelesnes,
in the hearts and heads of any whatsoever dissolute persons, (who I know are
over ready, to snatch that to them selves, which does not belong unto the^,
and under that pretense to abuse Gods goodness, Jude. 4.
and to turn his grace into wantonness:) but to minister comfort of conscience
rather, to those that are cast down, with the true taste and feelyng of their
filthiness, and the wrath of God against them for the same: whose case though
for a while it be miserable in respect of themselves, and lamentable and
pitiful to the^, that are truly touched with Christian charity, and unfeigned
good will in the Lord toward them, yet is the state of it self profitable,
because that thereby, as it were, by a bridle, the Lord withholdeth his from
running ryote, with the rest of the world, and shall be in the end (assuredly)
comfortable, because that being exercised in that schoolehouse of God, and
feelyng the joy and comfort of him, that is the father of mercyes, and the God
of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.3.^
they shall be able, not only to comfort them selves, but to comfort others
also which are in any affliction, by that comfort, wherewith they them selves
are comforted of him.

So that, so far of should we be, from disliking either in our selves or
others, this feeling estate of our own wretchedness and misery, that we
should rather esteem of it, as one of the speciallest blessings that can come
unto us in this life: as whereby indeed Gods glory is greatly magnified, his
mercy merueilously manifested, we our selves rightly instructed, in care and
conscience to walk before him, and others which are afflicted, in us and by us
Christianlie comforted through Christ. But touching this point, and the
particular consolations, that God has left us in his word, to cheer us up,
when we shall be so cast down, I shall say more hereafter God willing, in a
several treaty that I have begun (if the Lord strengthen me to finish it) of
that question and argument. In the mean while, I beseech all Gods children, and
amongst the rest, you (Right woorshipfull and Honorable) as most dear unto
me, to accept of that lovingly, which I have presently don and published under
your names, whatsoever it be: Whereof, this is all that I mind to say at this
time, that as the Authors worthy name and just credit, can not but commend
the matter: So these few lines that I have written (as my bodily weakness, and
inward grieves would suffer me) touching some points (wherein I might have
been long and large I confess) will be sufficient I hope, to stir up the
Christian Reader, the better to love and like, and the more willingly and
diligently to read and peruse, this present treatise, that so he may profit in
sound knowledge and blessed obedienee: which if it shall please God in mercy to
grant, I shall have that which I greatly desire, and so shall think my poor
pains well bestowed, besides all that, I shall be thereby encouraged, to go
forward with some other work (as occasion shall serve, and the Lord shall enable
me) either of this excellent man's, or mine own. The god of al grace bless you
both, and al yours, with the whole household of faith wheresoever, making us al
through the single sight, of our spiritual and bodily wa^ts whatsoever, in
assured persuasio^ to repair unto him, who has a ple^tiful supply for all
distresses, that so we may in the end truly magnify, the rich grace and
mercy of this our good God in Christ. So be it. At London, the 20. day of this
December. 1579.

Your Worships and Honors always ready and humble. T. W. The Lords most
unworthy.

A Proposition, or speech made by M. John Calvin, upon the beginning of the
Gospel according to Saint John, in which the deity or Godhead of our Lord
Jesus Christ is excellently proved.
1 In the beginning was that word, and that word was with GOD, and that word
was God.

2 This same was in the beginning with God.

3 Al things were made by it: and without it was nothing made of that which was
made.

4 In it was life, and that life was the light of men.

5 And that light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not.


THis word Gospel, The word Gospel what it means.
signifies the declaration that God has showed us, of his love in our Lord
Jesus Christ, when he sent him into the world: which thing we ought well to
mark, because it is very much to know the use of the holy Scripture, even in
respect of the words it uses. It is true that we ought not to stand simply
or only upon the words: and yet for all that we are not able to comprehend
how excellent Gods doctrine is, unless we know the proceeding that it uses,
and also what is the style and speech thereof. And indeed we are so much the
more to mark and weigh this word, because it is a very common received sentence
to distinguish the holy Scripture into the law and the Gospel: Division of the
Scripture.
and those that speak thereof in that sort, mean, that all the promyses which
are contained in ye old Testament, ought too be referred to this word Gospel,
True it is yt their meaning is good, but for all that, ye holy Scripture uses
not such manner of speech, If any man speak, let him speak as the words of
God. 1. Pet. 4.11.
and we ought to be sober in that respect, and to yield such a reverence too
Gods spirit, as to keep such a manner of speaking as he himself uses to
teach us withal. Behold thus much then concerning the word Gospel, which
is a publishing that God has made unto us at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ his son, declaring himself a father to all the world: as also Saint
Paul speaks thereof in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephe. 2.1^
when he says that Jesus Christ came to preach the Gospel unto them that
were nigh, and to those that were far of from God: nigh, to wit, the Jews,
who were alredye entered into the Covenant with God: and far, to wit, of the
Pagans and Heathen, who are as it were far removed from his Church. Now when
we shall have looked every where, we shall find that this word Gospel is
not taken in any other signification. And behold also wherefore men have given
this name or title to the iiii. histories that are written touching our Lord
Jesus Christ how he came into the world, and was conversant therein: how he
dyed, rose again, and went up into heaven: men I say, have given the name or
title of the Gospel to this. And why so? because the substance of the Gospel
is comprehended in the person of God his son as I have already said. The
ancient fathers had in deed the promyses of salvation: they were also very
well assured that God would be their father, The difference between the
fathers under the law, and us under the gospel.
but yet they had not (in such plain sort as we have) the gage and pledge of
Gods love toward them, and of their own adoption. For when Jesus Christ
came intoo the world, then God signed and sealed his fatherly love unto us,
and we had the full testimony of life, and in deed have also the substance
thereof in Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 1.20.
as I have already said. And this is the cause why S. Paul says that all
Gods promises are in him, yea and Amen: to wit, because then God ratified and
confirmed all that which he had spoken before, and had promised to men. So then
it is not without cause that these four histories (wherein is declared unto us
how the son of God was sent, that he took man's flesh, also that he lived
here upon earth amongst men) have been so named. Men then have comprehended
all this under the word Gospel, 2. Tim. 2.8.
because therein it is declared and set out unto us, how God has made perfect
and accomplished all that which was requsite for men's salvation, and that we
have had the fullfilling of al, in the person of his son. Indeed S. Paul
speaks of his Gospel, but after what sort? It is not as though he had
written an history of the Gospel, but because his doctrine was conformable and
agreeable, to all yt which is contained therein. So according to that which I
have already said, when the Gospel was preached unto us, S. Paul's Epistles,
not called the gospel, and in what sense
it is a plain manifesting of Jesus Christ to the end that we should know
that in him all things are perfected, and that we have the truth of that,
which had bin promised in all times before. And yet for all this, S. Paul's
Epistles, are not called the Gospel. And why so? because that therein we have
not a continual history which declares unto us after what sort God sent his
son, how it pleased him that in putting upon him our nature, he might have a
true brotherhood with us, how he died, rose again, and ascended in to heaven.
This I say, is not largely laid out, with a continual order and course of
speech in S. Paul, very certain is it, that the doctrine which is contained
in his Epistles, is conformable and agreeable with the doctrine of the Gospel:
But for all that, that word Gospel, is specially attributed too these four
histories, for the reason which I have already alleged. Now where we say
that the substance of the Gospel is comprehended in the person of the Son of
God, this is not only to say that Jesus Christ came into the world, but that
we should know also what his office is, what charge God his father has
committed unto him, and what virtue and power he has, which thing we ought
too mark well: for from thence we may gather the difference of the Gospel
according to S. John, Wherein the 4. Evangelists agree. Heb. 4.15.
and those which the other three wrote. The iiii. Evangelists agree very well
in this, that they declare unto us, how the son of God appeared in the
world, that he became true and very man, like unto us in all thing, sin
excepted. Afterward they declare unto us, how he dyed, rose again, and
ascended into heaven. To be short, all that was committed unto him, to draw
us to god his father by, is declared and set forth unto us therein. But there
are two things which are peculiar too Saint John: One is, John has two
things peculiar too himself from the other Evangelists.
that he stays and stands upon the doctrine of Jesus Christ, more then the
other Evangelists do: The other, that with a greater liuelynes he declares
unto us Jesus Christ's virtue and power. True it is, that the other
Evangelists speak well of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, but that is rather
briefly and shortly, as who have collected some small Summaries and
Abridgementes thereof. John. 6.1.2.
But S. John makes a long and large declaration thereof, as we see in the sixth
Chapter, where mention is made of that miracle which he wrought in the
wilderness, when he refreshed and fed so great a multitude. For therevppon S.
John comes to enter into speech and to show how Jesus Christ is the bread
of eternal life. We see then this doctrine of Jesus Christ, which was declared
at large by S. John, and that with a more great dilating and discoursing
thereon, then is set out by the other Evangelists, yea we see that they quite
and clean omitted that doctrine. So much also may be said of the rest: for
after that he has touched some miracles and histories, he always comes
back to the doctrine, and takes occasion too enter into the matter too handle
and speak of the power of our Lord Jesus Christ: John. 12. to 18.
as from the xii. Chapter til you come to the history of the Passion he
intreteth of nothing, but this doctrine. So then now we see what difference
there is between the Gospel according to S. John, The Gospel according to S.
Io. gives light to the other Evangelists.
and the other three Evangelists, insomuch, that to speak rightly, the
Gospel according to S. John, is, as it were the key, too give us some
entrance and opening to the other. For if we read S. Matthew, S. Mark, and
S. Luke, we shall not so well know wherefore Jesus Christ was sent into the
world, as when we shall have read S. John. Having read S. John, we shall
know afterward too what end it serves us, that Jesus Christ has wrought,
and also that he has taken man's flesh, and that he died and rose again: We
shall know I say, what is the end and substance of all these things in
reading this Gospel. And this is the cause why he stands not so much upon
the history, as we shall see by the order which he will keep hereafter. It is
true, that these things rightly deserve, to be more largely diducted and laid
out: but because there is great matter in the Text which we have to expound,
I do but touch these things as briefly as I can. Wherefore let us content
our selves with that which we have su^marily and shortly touched, concerning
the office of Jesus Christ: Wherefore Christ came in to the world.
that is to say, that S. John declares unto us how he was sent of God his
father, to the end he might accomplish and make perfect the salvation of men.
He declares how he took man's flesh, nnd how he dyed also, and rose
again, that he is the pledge of Gods love, that he is (as it were) the soul
of our redemption, and that Gods promises are in him ratified and established.
Moreover we must mark (as I have already said) that S. John touches the
stories more briefly then the other three Evangelists do, The sum of the
Gospel according to S. John.
but for all that he stays him self more upon the substance of the matter,
that is to say, too declare unto us what the doctrine of Jesus Christ is: and
what charge God the father has committed unto him: and to be short, what is
his virtue, his power, and goodness toward us. As concerning the
signification of the word in it self, Gospel is as much too say, as a good
news or glad tidinges: but this word ought to be unto us as it were hallowed
or sanctified, to the end to cause us to hate the things of this world, and
to the end that we might know, that all our goodness and our felicity,
joy, and glory is in Jesus Christ alone. Wherefore when we shall pronounce or
speak this word Gospel, which is as much to say, as good news or glad
tidinges: Let us learn not to rejoice beyond measure, in the things of this
world which are brittle and vain: let us not rejoice in delights, Wherein
true Christians should chiefly rejoice.
in pleasures, nor in any thing whatsoever it be: but let us be glad and
rejoice in this, that Christ was sent unto us, that God is offered and given
unto us in his person: that Jesus Christ is come too the end that he might
be our reconciliation between God and us that God accepts us for his
children, to the end we should not perish and be condemned. Behold how this
word ought to be sanctified or hallowed unto us, to the end to cause us
reverently to regard that inestimable goodness, which has been brought unto
us by our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is expressly said, that this Gospel is
according to S. John, The Gospel is from Jesus Christ. John. 7.16.
too the end we should know, that it is not from a mortal man, but that S.
John, was only the minister or mean thereof. From whom then shall we say
that we hold the Gospel? From Saint John, or from Jesus Christ? Certainly
from Jesus Christ. And in deed Jesus Christ uses this manner of speech, as
to say, that the doctrine is not his, but that he preached it in the authority
of God his father from whom it proceeded: and all this is to the end that we
should bear so much the more reverence to this doctrine, and that we should
not receive it, as a common thing, but as the pure truth of God, which was
preached and declared by his only son. S. John then was indeed the mean or
instrument that God used, even as a Pen that will write in a man's hand, but
yet for all that we must not receive the Gospel, which was written by him, as
from a mortal man. Let us now come to the Text. The word (says he) was in
the beginning. The purpose of Saint John is too declare unto us how the son
of god did not then begin to be, when he appeared or showed himself in the
world: neither yet that then he began only too spread abroad his power in
every place, Christ is very God from all eternity.
(for he was already from all time, and before al time, his power abroad
already in himself, and he took it not from any other) but that there was a
power which was in the word of GOD from the beginning, which at the last was
manifested, and we know it now, seeing Jesus Christ has been sent into the
world. Wherefore S. John mente too declare here that when Jesus Christ came
into the world, he that ca^e was our eternal God, who also has redeemed us.
But yet to ye end that we may the better understand the whole, we must
particularly and by peecemeale mark the things that are here spoken. The
word was in the beginning. There is no doubt, but that he here calls the
Son of God The word. The reason is, Why Christ is called the word.
because it is that very wisdom which has always been in GOD, and his
Counsel, and his power. True it is, that we have not in this place the
things declared and set out, as they are in their own greatness and
excellency, I mean, even as they are here propounded and set forth unto us
by S. John. For albeit that the spirit of God spoke by his mouth, yet so it
is, that he has not yet declared and set forth the matters unto us, in their
greatness and majesty. The Lord in setting out him self and Christ to us, had
respect to our weakness.
And herein we derogate nothing from the spirit of God, when we say, that he
has not fully and in perfection set out the things which are here signified
unto us, for the holy Ghost therein applies him self unto our infirmity
and weakness. And indeed, if we should hear God, speaking unto us in his
majesty, it should be utterly unprofitable for us, because we could
comprehend or conceive nothing thereof.

So then, because we be carnal, he must needs stut and sta^mer as it were,
or else he would not be understood of us. By this then we see, that we are
too understand, that God is as it were become little, and has abased him
self, that he might declare himself unto us: And yt so it is, tell me, how
should it be possible to express what Gods majesty is, If we speak men's
speech and words? Is it not think you a far unequal measure? S. John then
albeit he be the holy Ghosts instrument, speaks not of these matters,
according to their greatness, and yet notwithstanding he speaks in a speech,
which is as it were unknown to us. And therefore we must conclude, that the
secrets which are contained in this place, are not so openly and plainly
declared, as that we are able too understand the same, in such sort as we
understand the matters of the world: but let us content our selves with that
which is here simply declared unto us: God has in his word revealed
sufficient for his children.
for our Lord knew that which was sufficient for our good, and he applied
himself unto us and our infirmity, in such sort that he has not
forgotten or omitted any thing which was good and profitable for us to know. So
let us learn to keep us fast too this purity and simplicity of his
doctrine, considering how the world in this behalf has been foully abused by
foolish imaginations, and vain speculations, and by a certain devilish
boldness: For when the question has been to handle these matters, men have
overwhelmed themselves in as much as they meant (besides the revelation of of the
doctrine) to search out with a certain curiosity and boldness, the eternal
essence and being of Almighty God: as a man in the Papacy shall hear
disputations that are made thereof, even as if men disputed of a flock of
Gotes, or I know not whereof. They have no more reverence to God, the^ to a
beast: Now we need not seek out a better witness against the doctrine of the
Sophisters of Sorbone to know that the Devil reigns there, Sorbone, is the
name of the place, where the brotherhood of the Sorbonistes, do yet remanine to
this day in Parris.
and has always reigned there, the^ this. And this I say, that albeit their
doctrine were not false, yet so it is that when men see they have so little
reverence and regard to Gods majesty, we must needs say that it is a
diuelishe doctrine, even that I mean, which is at this day practiced, by the
Sophisters and Sorbonistes, in all the Popes Colleges. So then, let us (as I
have said) content our selves with that simplicity, which is declared unto us
by the holy spirit, for he touches and speaks of that which is good and
profitable for our salvation: and as I have already declared he has here
brought and delivered unto us that which was meet and fit for us to know.
James. 1.17. ^^man. 11.29.
Let us come now to this true word. When S. John calls Jesus Christ, That
word, it is as if he should say: the eternal counsel of God, or the wisdom
that remains in him. Notwithstanding we must mark that GOD is not like to
men: when we have a Counsel it may alter and change, but it is not so with
GOD: for that which is in GOD is unchangeable. Though man be wavering, yet God
is constant.
Besides the counsel which we have, is not our very Essence or substance: but
the counsel which is in God, is verily and truly God: for God is not as a
veil or couerture, where there are shadowie places, as Saint James uses this
similitude, James 1.17.
we are as a shadow that flitteth up and down, and we cannot abide firm and
constant. But this is not in God: for that which is in him, is of his essence
and eternity. And this is the cause wherefore S. John declares, that this word
is verily and truly God. But as concerning the word, we must not (as I have
already said) imagine a counsel or a wisdom in God, which should be like
to the word of men. True it is, that we may well take some comparison from our
selves, but yet we ought always to mark, the long distance and great
difference, that is between us and God: An apt similitude.
for if the heavens be much higher than the earth, much more must it needs
be, that we should know and confess, that God is more high than we, yea
there is no proportion or resemblance as it were between God and men. So then
when men shall bring or allege unto us some similitude taken from the
creatures, we must always mark this great distance and difference, which is
between God and us. There are two parts or powers of a man's soul, to wit,
understanding and will. See his Institut. Lib. 1. Cap. 15. Sect. 5.7.
As a man may very well say, that in the soul of a man, there is a certain
understanding, which is in such sort joined to the soul, that the soul can
not be without understanding. There is also a will, not as when we have now
one desire, now another, but a certain power (as a man would say) to will,
which thing man has in him self, for man is not as a stone, or as a pile of
wood without sense and reason, but he has imprinted in him this property,
to will this or that. So then we may take and use such similitudes: but yet
notwithstanding we must consider, that speech is here had of so high things,
as of necessity all man's understanding and wit must be abased and brought
low: and we must handle them, and entreat of them in all humility, applying
them to their true meaning, Curiosity and vain imaginations must be avoided.
and must not be over curious: we then have that fond imagination which has
borne swaye and ruled heretofore in the world: but we must come to Gods
school, to hearken to that which he shall speak unto us, and to fly from
all that which men shall set out, and shall be found contrary to that, Gods voice
must only be obeyed.
which the holy Ghost has left us. Now furthermore we must also mark, that
some having been thrust forward by the devil, have perverted the meaning of
this doctrine, affirming that this word was nothing else, but some certain
counsel, deliberation and purpose that God had to redeem mankind in the
person of Jesus Christ (who was a certain form, A perilous opinion confuted.
as they call him, as when a man shall have purposed to dosome work, and shall
have conceived the same in his spirit or understanding) leaving not by so
saying, euerlastingnesse of essence or being to the son of God. But we see
already, and shall see hereafter more largely, how and in what sort Saint John
calls Jesus Christ that word of God, thereby to declare and set out his
deity, as I have already said. And that so it is, behold a plain
testimony of God him self, for he says, that this word was in the
beginning: so then it must needs be, that it has been eternal and
everlasting. It is true, Genesis 1.1.
that some will reply against it, because Moses says, that God in the
beginning created heaven and earth: and that now S. John says, that this word
was in the beginning, that it seems hereby, seeing that so it is, that the
heaven, the earth, and other creatures had a beginning, that we can not prove,
the eternity or euerlastingnes of Jesus Christ, because it is said that the
word was in the beginning. An objection answered.
But the answer is easy: to wit, that when Moses speaks of the beginning,
we are to remember and mark whereof he speaks: that is of heaven, of earth
and other things, that have indeed a beginning. But now let us weigh and
mark, that which Saint John says: In the beginning (says he) was that word.
And where was the beginning? verily in God. And what is Gods beginning, I pray
you? Certainly he had none: for otherwise it must needs be, that God should
be framed and made. So that when mention is made of the beginning of God, we
must conclude, that it is such a beginning, as has not any time at all. There
is then much to be said, and great difference also, between Moses his place,
when he says, that God created all in the beginning, and this, when it is
said, that that word was in the beginning. For Moses speaks of the creatures,
which had their beginning to be at a certain time. But here Saint John
speaks not of any thing but of God, which can not be without his eternity
and euerlastingnesse. Wherefore we must conclude, that this beginning, has not
any beginning. And hereby we see that Jesus Christ has been always. It is as
much then, Jesus Christ is our God eternal. 1. Tim. 3.16.
as if Saint John had said, that Jesus Christ is our eternal God, who has
appeared and been made manifest unto us in the flesh, as also Saint Paul
speaks thereof. Now he adds afterward: This word was with God: as if he
should say you must of necessity separate and distinguish him from all
creatures. Mark the purpose of the Evangelist. We must not so much as imagine
(says he) that this word had any thing at all, like unto creatures: we must go
out of the world, we must ascend above the earth and heaven, when we think
upon this word. A man might demand, A hard question answered.
Before there was either heaven or earth, was it possible, that this word
should be in the beginning? yea indeed, for S. John for a full answer,
seperateth this word from all the creatures: as if he should say, when I
speak unto you of this word, you must come to God, for it is in God. Let us
then regard and consider it, as a certain eternity or euerlastingnesse,
which is not in the creatures, neither in the heaven, nor in the earth, nor in
any thing whatsoever. And notwithstanding all this, yet so it is, that the
Evangelist in this place sets out unto us, The father distincted from the
son, not in essence, but in person. 1. Cor. 8.4.6. 1. Tim. 2.5.
a distinction between God and his word. And what manner a one is this
distinction? It is not of their essence, for he means always that this word
is God: and we must conclude, seeing that we have but one only God, and that
there is but one simple essence or being in him, that Jesus Christ, that is to
say, this eternal word whereof mention is made in this place, has not been
separated or sundred from God his father, in respect of essence: and yet
notwithstanding there is some distinction. And how is that the^? thus it is;
because we are not able to comprehend that which is so high above all our
understanding and reason, the ancient Doctors have used the word persons, and
have said, that in God there are three persons: How there are three persons
in the Godhead.
not as we speak in our common speech, calling three men three persons, or
else as in the Popedom, they will be so bold as to point three Puppets or
Munkeyes, and say, Lo the Trinity: but this word persons in this matter, is
used plainly to express and set out the proprieties, that are in the essence
of God. The word substance, or (as the Greeks speak) Hypostasis is indeed
more meet and convenient, because it is a word of holy scripture, and the
Apostle uses it in the first Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews, when he
says, Hebr. 1.3.
that Jesus Christ is the lively image, and the brightness of the glory, yea
the image or ingraued form of ye substance or person of God his Father. When
he speaks in that place of the substance or person of God, he means not
the essence or being, but he speaks of this propriety which is in the
father, to wit, that he is the fountain of all things. Gods word only, must
be the rule of our faith, in all points, but specially in the article of the
Trinity.
But now let us look to their three substances or persons, as we call them,
and mark how they accord and agree, so farfoorth, as God teaches us
concerning them (as I have already said:) for we must not at any hand go
beyond these bounds and limittes. And therefore let us have an eye thereto,
so farforth as shall be requisite, for the exposition of the place. When men
speak of God, true it is that men of them selves are confounded, and know not
what to think or imagine, saving that they go astraie in their own
cogitations and thoughts, Romans 1.21.
as Saint Paul says: and thereupon it falls out, that they wax thereof
over proud, through their own prudencie and wisdom: and therefore God also
does in such sort punish them, that they entangle them selves, in such
horrible labyrinthes and mazes, that they can not at any hand come out. But
when we will suffer God to guide us unto him self by the holy scripture, The
Trinity proved.
we shall know him so farforth as shall be necessary and meet for us. For we
shall come to the father as to the fountain of all things: and then we can not
conceive or think upon the father without his counsel and eternal wisdom:
besides there is a certain virtue and power that remains in him, which we
shall also perceive and feel very well. Mark then how we shall find these
three proprieties in the essence of God. And this is that which Saint John meant
to say in this place, that that word was with God. If there were not some
distinction, he could not speak so, for that should be to speak improperly to
say, God was with him self. So then let us know, that this word has some
distinction, and is indeed to be distinguished from the heavenly father: Christ
begotten from before all beginnings.
for it is that word, that was begotten from before all time, seeing that God
always had his counsel and his wisdom. And we must not for all that so much
as imagine or think upon a beginning: for we may not say, that God has at any
time been without his understanding, counsel and wisdom. So then we must
not set aside, and separate from God the propriety of this word, as to say,
that we could judge, that there had been some certain time wherein it had not
been with God: for this should be to make an idol of it, The Trinity,
destroieth not the unity: neither does the unity infringe the Trinity.
Gregor. Nazi. in sermo. de sacro Basil.
as it were. But as I have said, the three persons are but one God: and yet
for all that we must distinguish them, because there is a certain and an
assured distinction of them, as is in this place declared. And with all let us
remember an old Doctors sentence, which is very worthy to be thought upon,
because it is excellent. I can not (says he) think upon these three
proprieties, that are set out unto me in God, but that immediately my
understanding comes back again to one: and on the other side, it is
impossible for me to know one only God, but that I regard and look upon all
the three proprieties, and see them distinguished in mine own understanding,
according to the light, which is given me thereof in the holy scripture.
Behold how the faithful shall know God: knowing the father, they will come
to his wisdom, who is this word of which there is spoken in this place, they
will come also incontinently. to that virtue and power whereof we have in part
said somewhat. And when they shall have once known these three persons, they
will not any more straggle and wander hither and thither, but they will come to
this one and only essence, to know that there is no more but one only God,
yea such a one and only God indeed, as has in such sort created the world,
that he has not left undone any thing of all that, which was requisite and
necessary to accomplish our redemption. Thus much then we are to mark, as
concerning that which is said, that this word was with God, to wit, The
perfection of Gods works.
that the Evangelist meant to separate Jesus Christ from all creatures, and yet
notwithstanding to declare unto us, the distinction which is between him and
the father. Now he adds, that that word was God: and this he does the more
fully and better to express, that which he meant, Christ is very God.
to wit, that Jesus Christ was not a thing created, which had had a beginning,
but that he is our true and very God. This place has been ill understood of
some, Read this with reverence and judgment.
and they have also foolishly translated it, as to say God was the word: for
if we should say, that God is the word, the father should be no more God, the
holy Ghost should be no more God. But S. John meant to speak altogether the
contrary, to wit, that this word is God, as if he should say, that Jesus
Christ in respect of his deity and Godhead, is of the same essence with the
father. So he shuts not the father out from the deity, but declares that
there is no more, but one only essence in God: and although there be a
distinction between God and his word, yet must we always come back to this
simple and plain truth that they are one God, which we must worship. Arius,
Nestorius, etc.
It is true that the old heretics travailed very sore, to pervert this place
to the end they might not be enforced to confess, that Jesus Christ was our
true God. But we see here, that Saint John speaks so plainly, of the
euerlastingnes and eternity of this word, that there is no place left, either
for wrangling, or starting into holes. He adds afterward that this word was
in the beginning with God: He had not before spoken these two words together:
he had only said, this word was in the beginning: also, it was with God. But
now he joins both of them together. Mark then how we ought in such sort
to behold Jesus Christ that we should continually believe, that he is very
God, and of the same essence with the father. Christ in respect of his
humanity a creature.
Indeed he was created in respect of his manhood, but we must pass further,
to the end we may know him to be our eternal God, who is so indeed our God,
that withal he is also, the wisdom of his father, which has been with God
from before all time. Behold then, what is the sum of this place. Now if we
shall keep and hold fast this exposition, (as it is simply and plainly set
down unto us) it shall be sufficient for us, to instruct us to our salvation.
And this verelie is all that that we are to know touching this point: for if
we begin here foolishly to dispute, that will fall out upon us, which in this
behalf is fallen upon the Papists, as I have already said. Blessed are
they, whom other men's harms make to beware.
Moreover let us note, that this is a certain foolish study and endeavor, to
labor much to confirm that which the Evangelist speaks in this place, by
the doctrine of the old Philosophers, as there are certain people, that let
and trouble them selves in it. It is true that we shall find in Plato, It is
a fond travail to confirm divinity by Philosophy.
that he had some understanding of God: for when he speaks of God, he
says that God always had his understanding in him self: and almost all
other Philosophers speak after this manner. Now these that are so curious and
desirous, in such sort to make the Philosophers agree with the holy
scripture: suppose that they have much profited the Christian congregation,
when they are able to say, that the Evangelists, who have spoken after this
manner, have not been alone, but that the Pagans and Heathen them selves have
indeed known such things. Verily this is much to the purpose: it is even as
if a man would put a veil or shadow, before brightness or light it self.
Behold God, who inlightneth us by the doctrine of his Gospel, A fit
similitude.
and we will come and put a veil or shadow before it and say, he, this light
and brightness will be more apparent and glitteryng by that veil. It is very
certain, that God would, that even these things should be known to the
Heathen Philosophers, Heathen Philosophers (...) some light, ^^d wherefore it
was given them.
to make them thereby so much the more inexcusable before his Majesty: but
that proves not this, to wit, that his doctrine should be confirmed by
that which they have said: for verily we see, that so much the nearer they
thought to come nigh unto God, so much the further off in that respect they
removed them selves. And therein was fulfilled this sentence of Saint Paul
which he utters against all mankind: Romans 1.21.
that all they that would be over sharp sighted and subtle witted, and did
not seek God in such reverence and humility as they ought, are fallen into a
bottomless depth of error. And certaynely this is a just judgment of
almighty GOD, when we proceed so far to defile his doctrine mingling it
amongst the foolish inventions of men. But let us now go further. The
Evangelist says: that all things were made by it, and that without it
nothing was made of all that which was made. After that he had assured us, of
the eternal essence of that word of God, he adds a confirmation, thereby to
set out unto us his eternal deity, to the end we may be very certain of
the whole matter. The creation of all things by Christ, is a plain proof of
Christ's Godhead.
All things (says he) were made by it. The essence of God is known to us,
not only by that which we can conceive or comprehend thereof in our own
understandings, but also when it pleases him to declare him self unto us by
his creatures: for when the scripture handles that, then does he make him
self visible, and not only visible, ^om. 1.19.20.
but S. Paul passes yet somewhat further, saying, that although we were
blind, yet we may thereby feel him as it were with the hand. So then though we
had our eyes shut, yet so it is that we may know this power of God. Act.
17.27.28.
And how so? Because it is here within us. In whom is it that we live, that we
have our moving and being? It is in God, who has breathed life into us, and by
whom we subsist or stand. This then is that which S. John shows us, saying
that all things were made by it. By this we know, that that word of God
has been from the beginning, who also is our God. God applies himself to our
rudeness.
And how know we this? Certainly we cannot climb so high, and therefore
God is come down even unto us, God I say, with that his word, so that we may
know him. And albeit that our understanding stretches not it self so far,
neither yet is able too ascend above the clouds, yet so it is that we are
constrained to know that this word is truly God. And how so? Because all
things were made by it. In it is it then, that all things have been, as the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews shows the same. Heb. 1.2. Heb.
11.3.
We confess (says he) that the word of God is eternal and everlasting. And
why so? Because so it is, that by this word all things were made. And this is
also the same that S. Paul speaks in the xvii. Act. 17.24. Act. 14.17.
Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, that GOD has not manifested himself unto
us, without a large testimonye and witness, because we may behold him in all
his creatures. So then, in as much as all things were made by his word, we
must know that he is our eternal God. There are certain Heretics that
suppose, He meneth Seruetus and his adherentes, as I take it. See Institu. Lib.
1. Cap 13. Sec. 7.8.23. Genesis 1.3.
that this word of GOD, had beginning in the creation of the world, because
there was never any speech had of the word, until such time as the world was
created: As Moses says, God said; let there be light, and the light was made
etc. Now they would infer heerevppon that that word then began. Is it
so? we may rather contrariwise by that conclude, that that word is eternal.
For if a man begin to do some thing, we cannot thereupon say, that he was
not before that. If this be true in creatures what will it be, when we shall
come to God? So then albeit that word of God has not spread abroad and made
manifest ye power thereof, before the creation of the world, yet none can
thereupon conclude, yt it was not already before that time. And this is that
which S. John mente to set out and declare by this manner of speech, wherein it
is said, that all things were made by this Word. Moreover let us mark,
that when we speak of God the Father and of his word, we say then, that
God made al things whatsoever, and that by his word: A good rule which ought
well too be remembered
and this word by, is attributed only unto Jesus christ. True it is yt when
we speak of God singly and by himself, and without distinction of the persons,
we may well say, Romans 11.36,
that all things are by and from God: but when there is a distinction, as in
this place there is, behold then the propriety which belongs and agrees to
Jesus Christ, to wit, that al things were made by him. And this is that
distinction of persons which I have already spoken of, that is, that all things
are of GOD the father, but that Jesus Christ is the mean thereof. Mark then
what S, John meant: as if he should say, that GOD by his word has made all
things. Wherefore GOD shows that he is the fountain of them all, and that
it must needs be that he should make and create all things, but yet by the
mean and power of that his word. And without it nothing was made of that
which was made. Saint John comes here too repeat the same Sentence, not
only because it is his custom to repeat one and the self same thing after
two sorts, Two causes of S. John's repetition.
but also by reason of men's ingratitude and unthankfulness. For albeit that
it said unto them, that God made all things by his word, yet they do not
at the first, conceive, understand, or believe the same. We see that Gods
Creatures touch us not to the quick, and that we are so dull and so
blockishe in our understanding, that we are not able too comprehend these
things, even in such plain and simple sort, as they are propounded and set out
unto us. Wherefore S. John, that he might the better express the same unto us,
adds, without it nothing was made, The dulnes of man's wit in Gods matters,
should teach us true humility.
of that which was made. As if he should say, Surely we are accursed if we
do not receive this eternal word of God, seeing that by it it is that we
have been created, yea that all the world has been made, the heaven, the
stars, and the earth, which brings forth for us our food and nourishment:
to be short, that all good things have been given us by the means of this
word. So then seeing we perceive that our life proceeds from thence, we must
wholly keep our selves fast thereto, and cast from us all that, that men will
set before us to the contrary. This is here a double exposition, in respect
of the placing of the words, not that they are changed, but because we have
diversely disposed and placed them. Our sort read it thus: We must heed lie
look how words and matters are placed in the scripture.
That by that word all things were made, and that without it nothing was
made, and end there their sentence: afterward they add, All that which was
made, was life in it: But this declaration is not aptly set. It is true that
the sense which they give is indeed almost all one: for they have in a manner
the same exposition that we have: but the manner of speech is very strange:
for it is not said of the creatures that they are life, but that is attributed
unto God, as Saint Paul says in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8.10,
that the Spirit is life, by reason of the freedom that has been bestowed
upon us by Jesus Christ. To be short, though we shall view all the holy
Scripture, yet we shall never find that it is said, that we are life in our
selves, There is a double life even in this life.
but that God only has life, and that not only the spiritual life, but even
that life, from which all things have their being, Act. 17.28.
and by which we live, and that we have life and breath in him, as I have
already alleged out of S. Paul's saying. And by this we see the truth of
this sentence, to wit, that nothing of all that which was made, was made
without that word of God. And this is the order of the readyng that has been
found and observed, in all the most old Greek Doctors, and other
expositors: neither was there any but one alone that has otherwise expounded
it. Furthermore we have to note, that the Manichees labored to pervert and
wrest this place, The Manichees and their opinion confuted.
(saying, All that was made in him was life) to prove their foolish opinions:
as that all creatures had life in the^ and were living, for example Stones,
Trees, Corn, Otes: All this in their fantasy was living, insomuche that they
durst not eat bread, unless they were sanctified of GOD before hand. And
wherefore? he must be good, that eats this, would they say. The Devil
certainly possessed them, and yet not withstanding they would allege places
of Scripture, and abuse them, The Devil and his instruments do continually
wrest the scriptures.
to prove their foolish speculations withal. Now I meant indeed to touch this
by the way, to declare that the Devil has always endeavored to pervert, wrest
and wring the holy Scripture: but whatsoever it be, if we search and seek
after Gods truth, we shall find it pure and simple as it is, and the Devil
shall not be able to devise or perform any thing against it or us, to turn
us away from it, because it is showed and set out unto us before our eyes, and
it shall appertain to none but to us, if we will behold it in his purity, and
keep it in such sort, as God has revealed the same unto us. Then let us
come to the natural meaning. After that Saint John had said that nothing was
made of that which was made without this word: He adds, that in it was
life. Now here he myndeth to set out two diverse things: that is too say,
that as all was once created by the power of that word of GOD: so all things
continue and are preserved by that power, and by the same mean. And these are
2. matters which it behooves us well to consider and way. Two things worthy
to be marked.
The one, that we have our beginning and life by this word: the other that we
are vpholden and mainteyned thereby, and that not we only, but all the world:
Also, that the world was not only created at the beginning by this word, but
also that it should be no more or continue any longer, unless it were
preserved in it own estate, by the same mean. And therefore as I have said,
let us mark and keep fast, these two things as they are in this place
pointed out unto us with the finger by S. John. Al things in the world are
vpheld by Christ.
In the first place then he declares unto us, that nothing of that which was
made, was made without this word. And how then? Minds he to accept I know
not what, that was not made? Seems it, that he would say, that the Angels
were not created? No, no, he means no such thing: but minds to declare that
we have nothing at al which depends not wholly of God, and has not it being
altogether in him. Touching Angels.
It is true that the Angels have a very noble and excellent nature, but yet
notwithstanding they subsist and have their being by this word, and are
founded in it: otherwise they could not continue and abide: As also there is
nothing in the world but it is preserved by this very word. Now here we are
taught and iustructed, how great our poverty and wretchedness would be,
unless that God vphelde us by his grace. And this is it that the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 104.29.
that so soon as God shall withdraw his spirit from us, behold we return to
powder and dust, and vanysh away altogether. It is true that he speaks in
that place of creatures and bodyly things: but so it is, that we see how all
the rest also is vpholden, by the virtue and power of this word. Now even as
we cannot subsist or be, but by that word of GOD: so we must likewise
mark, that it is by the means thereof, that we have begun to have life.
And who is he that declares the same unto us? The Evangelist. This is also
the self same which the Apostle says in the first Chap. to the Hebrews, Heb.
1.3.
that the son of God is the brightness of the glory, or the Image of his
substance and person of God his Father, and that he vpholdeth all things by
his word. He uses there the word, word, but yet in such a signification,
that he means not only the power of the son of god, but also a certain
wonderful disposition, and a very fit and seemly order, which he has set
in the things created, because he is the wisdom of God and we may behold him
in all the creatures because he vpholdeth all things by his virtue and power.
Mark the^ how we have life and moouyng, and after the first day of our life we
continue in the same, to wit, Man's life, and the continuance thereof is from
God alone.
because that God preserves us: for in respect of our selves we must needs
perysh every minute of an hour, if this were not that that word of GOD
mainteineth us. Behold the^ in what sense the Euangeliste says, that that
word was life: that is, that not only al things were made by it, but that
they must of necessity also be grounded thereuppon. and that it maintain
them in their being. Now he adds afterward, that that life was that light
of men And wherefore is it that he adds this? It is for 2. causes. The first
is, that after that we have known the might of God, and the power of that his
word, both on high, and beneath, and every where, we must then come to
ourselves: for this is good reason, that we should and that with a greater
diligence hehold that, which touches us very nigh. As how? I ought too know
Gods goodness in this, that he preserves, Horses, Oxen, Otes: Psalm. 36.6.
Psalm. 104.27. Genesis 1.11.
as David speaks to us thereof, saying that it is he that gives nourishment,
and food to every beast. I see on the other side the Earth, which by the
commandment and blessing of God brings forth her fruits. If I look then
upon beasts, I ought to know the goodness of GOD wc declares it self even
toward Asses, and Dogs, but much more toward me. God comes to me, that I
might inwardly feel his power: he gives me bread wherwt I am nourished, and
ought I not to be touched to the quick for so many benefits and blessings, It
is true that I should. Besides also when men set out Gods works, they speak
expressly of men, because that God does set out his most great and excellent
power rather in us then in other creatures. Gods power appears specially in
man.
God the^ will indeed be magnified, both in heaven and in earth, and in all his
works that we see: but yet much more in a man, because he has imprinted his
own Image in us, rather then in all the rest of his creatures. For he has not
said of the Sun, the Stars, Genesis 1.26.
or any other creature how excellent soever it be, I will make now a chief
work, which may be to mine own Image and likeness. So then the Evangelist
after that he had spoken of the power of that word of GOD, which spreads it
self to all creatures, he comes to men. And in this he shows unto us,
that if men behold the goodness of God in every place where they look, they
cannot but much more consider and behold the same, within their own persons.
And forasmuch as God has done us this honor, that we are magnified and made
excellent in our selves, insomuche that the very Pagans and Heathen have
called Man a little world, Man a little world, and why he is so called.
because we may see in him a principal work that surpasses all the rest,
good reason is it, that we should know and confess in it, the virtue and
power of God. It is true that we may behold God in all his creatures, but
when he manyfesteth him self in man, then we see him, as it were by face and
countenance: whereas looking upon him in other creatures, we see him darkely,
and as it were on the back parts. So then albeit that it be said, that God
is made visible unto us in his creatures, yet it so falls out, that in them
we see but as it were, his feet, his hundes, and his back: but in Man we see
as it were his face. God is visible in his creatures chiefly in man, but in
none can Gods majesty be perfectly set out.
Not that it is his face, so that we can behold him there in imperfection I
mean not so, for I speak not now of divine and heavenly things, but only of
this, that it has pleased God to be known in this world high and to low.
Behold then the sum of that which S. John says, to wit, that that life was
that light of men: as if he should say, It is true, that there is indeed a
certain life spread abroad over and in all creatures. And what manner a one is
that, even that all things are made and preserved by that word of GOD: Man's
soul a very excellent thing.
but yet there is a more excellent matter in man, to wit, the soul,
understanding and reason. For a man shall not be without sense and feeling, as
stones: he shall not be without understanding and reason as brute beasts:
but he has a more excellent life, yea even to behold the things which are
above and beyond the world. Now consequently he adds: that that light
shines in the darkness, and that the darkness comprehended it not. He
expressly puts down that, because that that light which God placed in man,
is as it were altogether put out: and indeed if we should judge according to
that which we now can see in mortal men, we shall not much regard and esteem
the grace of God. Sin defaced Gods image in man.
For albeit that man was created to the image of God, yet so it is, that
through sin he has bin disfigured and defamed. What is it then that we see
in men? We see there an image of GOD which is altogether defaced and marred,
because that the Devil has defiled it through sin. But albeit that men
following altogether that which Satan prompted them too, Satan neither by
force nor fraud, can hinder Christ the light.
have quenched and put out the light of God: yet so it is notwithstanding that
the Devil was not able by his subtlety to bring so much to pass, that this
light of God, should not yet shine forth in the midst of darkness. And
this is it that Saint John minded to declare, as if he should say, It is true
(my children) that if that which was first given unto men had continued and
abidde^ with the^, we should have seen nothing now, but the glory of God
shining in every place, in steed that now we behold his Image woonderfully
defaced: and yet notwithstanding all this, it so falls out that we may
perceive in Man some brightness that God has left him, Some sparks of light
remain notwithstanding man's foul fall.
and some little spark of that his light. And this is that which the
Evangelist meant to declare. I leave untouched other things because the time
suffers us not to speak any more thereof, and because I have already been
ouerlong.

Notwithstanding we are to mark that men have so much light of the knowledge
of God, as is sufficient to win them, and make them inexcuseable before him.
Men are not what they think of themselves, but what God pronounces of them.
Let us indeuer to make our selves believe of our selves what we will or can,
yet behold God, who pronounces, that we are all darkness. And how so? let
us not attribute that unto GOD, but to our own fault. Now then, either God
must inlighten us with his brightness, or else otherwise there shall be nothing
but darkness in us, and it cannot be avoided but we shall stumble and fall
down, if we will but once lift up our selves to go forward one step, without
his guiding and government. And yet so it is (as I have already said) that God
has not so destituted us, that we are altogether forsaken of him, so yt we
have nothing remaining of his gifts. And yt so it is, there is yet some seed
of religion in men, they have yet some remnauntes of their first creation: as
a man may see, that even in the most wicked and reprobate: there is some
impression and printe of the Image of God, and this is to make them so much
the more inexcusable: Man's light makes him without excuse before God, as Romans
1.20.
for so much as they have not profited thereby, their condemnation shall be
therefore so much the more grievous, and without doubt it shall be doubled upon
them. Behold then how notwithstanding that our nature was so corrupted we do
yet retain some little spark of that grace, which God put in our father Adam:
So that this sentence is very true, that that light shines in darkness.
Now further the Evangelist says, that the darkness comprehended it not.
Wherein he shows how great the unthankfulness of men is. Man's malice the
cause of his own blindness.
Behold God, who makes his brightness to shine in us, and his word to lighten
us, and yet notwithstanding we darke^ and dim the same through our malice. It
is true, that the Gospel it self, is a manifestation and declaration of this
light, but yet that malice and unthankfulness which is in us, puts it out,
as much as in us is, unless God remedied and redressed it, making a change
in us by his power and infinite goodness. And this is that which Saint John
meant to declare in this place: and with all he begins to prepare us to that,
which he will speak afterward, that is to say, to what end this word (which
is Jesus Christ) was sent us of God his Father: that is, to the end he might
be manifested in the flesh, for our salvation. The mystery of our redemption
very great and needful.
He meant then to declare how great the mystery of our redemption was, and
what need we had of it, in saying, that we have not comprehended the
brightness that was in us: as if he should say, It could nothing at all have
profited us, to have the light that shines in us, unless we had withal been
redeemed, and that this word had executed and performed the love of God
toward us, in repairing his image, which was defaced in us through our sin,
and wholly disfigured in the first man. Mark I say how Saint John minds to
prepare us to know the effect of our redemption: The sight of our own misery
is a good mean to make us feel the mystery of our redemption.
and besides he meant also to show unto us, how that the word of God
declares it self in his creatures, in as much as all things are preserved
by his strength and power. And with all he exhorts us to know and confess,
the graces that GOD has bestowed upon us, more excellent indeed than upon
other creatures, to the end we might magnify and praise him: moreover to
know, The ends of our light and knowledge.
that seeing he has from the beginning imprinted his own lively image in us,
and has made us feel his power, it is good reason we should learn, to
hold our selves fast to this word, and to confess both generally and
particularly, the good things that God has done for mankind, to the end
that the light which he has plentifully communicated unto us, of his grace
and goodness only, may not be quenched or put out through our malice, but
that Jesus Christ may in such sort dwell in the midst of us, that being
guided and governed by the holy Ghost, we may have such access to the
father, that he may at the length bring us into his heavenly glory. Thus I
have handled these things as shortly as was possible for me, What men should
look at in expounding the scripture.
respecting always to touch the mark, whereat the Evangelist in this place
aims: notwithstanding if there be any thing that has been omytted because
a man cannot remember all, let every one speak thereof that, which God shall
have given him in that behalf: and if there be any doubt, propound the
matters, to the end that putting them out, they may be made clear and
manifest, and that the Church of God may thereby be more and more edified,
when things shall not remain in doubt, but shall be understood according to
their true meaning, after that we shall have disputed and reasoned upon them,
as is seemly, and according to God and godliness.

The second Congregation or speech of Master John Calvin, propounded and
delivered out of the second Chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Galathians, verse the eleventh, and some other following.
11 And when Peter was come to Antiochia, I withstood him in the face, because
he was to be reproved.

12 For before that certain were come from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrewe him self from them, and
separated him self, fearing them which were of the Circumcision.

13 And the other Jews likewise Or used dissimulation.
played the hipocrites with him, in so much that Barnabas also, was led
away with them to their hypocrisy.

14 But when I saw, that they walked not the right way, to the truth of the
Gospel, I said unto Peter before all men* If thou which art a Jew, live as
the Gentiles, why constrainest thou the Gentiles, to do like the Jews?

15 We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,

16 Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, we also have believed in Jesus Christ, to the end that
we might be justified by the faith of of Christ, and not by the works of the
law, because that no flesh shall be justified by the works of the law.


SAint Paul pursuing that matter, which we have seen heretofore, declares,
that not only he was not some small and common Disciple amongst the other
Apostles, but that even in their presence he used a certain sovereign and
chief authority, yea such a one, as our Lord Jesus Christ had given unto the
twelve, which he had appointed to be as it were his Lieuetenauntes, to the
end to take and keep possession of his kingdom throughout all the world.
Here S. Paul declares, Apostles, and why they were ordained.
yt he was not in an inferior degree and state, in comparison of the other
Apostles, but showed him self to be of the same estimation, account and
degree. Now he proves that, because he feared not Peter, who was one of
the auncientest amongst the^, as we have heretofore seen. We may reprove one
an other, and the inferior the superior, as occasion is offered.
True it is, that we may reprove one another, and that he which shall be the
least, may indeed use reprehension toward him, which shall be the most high
and excellent. For God has not so shortened his spirit, that the great ones,
and those that have received more large graces, may not be humbled. He will
stir and raise up sometimes little children, to blame and reprove us. So the^
he that shall reprove an other that shall be advanced above him, shall not
exercise by that means an oversight or superiority over him: But that which
is rehearsed here tends to an other end: for Saint Paul declares that he
had such liberty and freedom, by reason of his office. And so it behooves
us to mark the quality, Our reproves shall be more gracious, when our duty
binds us to use them.
state and condition, when he speaks: for he does it not as a common
person, but as he that was called to maintain the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, and franckly reprooueth Peter, who was of great reputation in the
company of the Apostles, so that a man might think him to be chief or first:
yet Saint Paul sets him self against him: Behold then how his calling to
this is allowed. The Pope brazen faced and beastly.
And in this place we see, how the Pope was shameless: and with all we may
see to his beastliness, seeing he has exempted himself, from all
reprehension and reproof: for mark the words that he uses, Distinct. 4.
Cap. Si papa. Clemens. lib. 5. de Haeret.
that to him it belongs to reprove all the world, but that none may be
above him. Behold here a pride both deuilishe and full of sacrilege, when a
mortal creature will shake of every yoke, and say, I am more then others: for if
a holy reproof proceed from none but Gods spirit, it is as much as if the
Pope should lift up his horns and say, that he owes God nothing, and ought
not to confess him his superior, to do him any homage or service, after what
manner or fashion soever. What we may learn by the Popes blindness.
But seeing God has blinded him so far, it is to the end we should know,
that the devil has ouerflowed all, in that same seat of abomination.
Whatsoever it be, we see how the Apostles governed and behaved them selves,
that is, that every one yielded him self apt to be taught, and obedient, and
that he confessed his own fault, to the end he might be corrected
therefore. This is then the rule, To suffer the word of reproof patiently, is
a good token of true Christianity.
that it behooves us to hold, if we desire to be acknowledged for Gods
servant, and to be allowed as members of his Church. By what right or title
may the Pope say, that he is Saint Peter's successor, when he will not follow
him, nor confirm him self to his example, in any manner whatsoever it be? He
is vanquished by his own mouth. But on the one side, we are not only taught
(as I have already said) out of this place, to condemn him, and his doings:
but also to hold our selves in, and to keep our selves under, in such sort
that he which shall be the most excellent, cease not for all that to subject
him self with all humblenes: The greatest in the ministry must be subject to
admonition as well as the meanest.
and that when he shall have faulted, that he humble and cast down him
self, and suffer him self to be reproved. And moreover we have to see, what
manner of reprehension or reproof this was: For if Saint Paul, in general
should say, that he reproved Peter, it should be some what far off, and it
would seem, that he would exalt him self, under the shadow of these
controversies and disputations which he had with the false Apostles. But it is
apt and fit for the purpose, that he alleges such a rehearsal: for he
reprooueth not Saint Peter, because that either in his life, or in his doctrine
he had straied and wandered: When men's persons shall be touched, to Gods
dishonor, then it behooves them (if they be clear) to stand upon their
credit.
no that is not the argument and matter, whereof Saint Paul now treats or
speaks: but he shows, that that whereof the false Apostles accused him, as
though therein he had bent him self against the whole Church, that in that
respect he maintained every thing which he had taught the Gentiles, and that
before Peter and the whole Church. Wherefore we must conclude, that Saint
Paul having shut Saint Peter's mouth, in mainteinyng that doctrine, whereof
there was great question, removed all disputation about it, insomuche that it
might not afterward be lawful, for Saint Peter any more to dispute of it, or
to move any controversy about it. This then is that which we have to hold
and learn for the second point: for this cause he says, that Peter, before
that some came from James, was conversant with the Pagans or Gentiles (as some
call them:) and notwithstanding because that some were come from Jerusalem, he
withdrewe and separated him self from the company of the Gentiles, fearing
indeed to offend them that were of the Circumcision. The circumstance of the
time, well weighed.
But before we come to the matter, let us mark, when it is here said, that
Peter came with the others, that it was a long time after he came to Antiochia,
and yet notwithstanding it is easy to judge, that this was before Saint Paul
arrived or came thither, to determine and pronounce sentence touching this
very question. For Saint Luke recites, that because the Jews ceased not to
trouble the Church, (...)
and there to gather companies, that Saint Paul and Barnabas went up to
Jerusalem to understand of the Apostles, whether the Gentiles ought to be
subject to the ceremonies of the law: and they concluded no. If Saint Paul had
said and alleged, that he ought indeed to content him self with that, which
had been determined and resolved upon, then this great absurdity would
follow thereon, that Peter had feared to grieve and offend James, or else to
enter into disputation with him, and trouble him, and that James would have
taken the conclusion of that matter against him on his own side, as we see in
the Acts, that is to say, that the Gentiles ought to be in that liberty:
which could not be: for it is expressly said, that Peter came to Antiochia, a
long time after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and yet it was before this
conclusion was made, that the Gentiles should not be subject to the
ceremonies of the law. And whereto tends all this? The Romish Bishops
beastliness.
To declare the beastliness of the Bishops of Rome: who affirm that the seat
of Antiochia was the first, and Rome the second, Doctors agree not, about the
time of Peter's being at Antiochia.
because Saint Peter rested there and died there. Now some say he was there
seven years: and other some twenty and five years: but we see, that Saint
Paul was not converted so soon, after the resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ from the dead: besides, and that after his conversion, he was a long
while some times here, and some times there. So that a man may easily judge,
that Peter rested and remained not in Antiochia, as the Pope says: this is a
merry jest lately found out. So much also is there to be said, touching his
Bishoppricke of Rome. Thus we may see, The Pope alleges but bables for his
headship over the Church.
that all the goodly colors which the Pope pretends, and lays for him
self, that he should be head of the Church, are indeed over foolish, and
nothing else but little childrens bables. And moreover we see also, that S.
James was not only a Disciple, as some would make him, but that he was in the
degree, and of the company of the Apostles: for Saint Peter would not have so
much reuere^ced and feared him, if in degree he had been inferior to him
self. Peter, notwithstanding some have labored to cloak his sin, offended
greatly.
But let us now come to the principal matter. It is certain, that Saint
Peter committed a fault, because he distracted and withdrew him self from the
Gentiles. True it is, that men have sought diverse cloakes to cover and excuse
him withal, because he was most bound to his own creation. For as it has
been already said, Galat. 2.7.
even as Saint Paul was called to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, so was
Saint Peter the minister of circumcision: whereupon it seems to some, that he
ought to have more regard to his own nation, seeing he was bound thereto, and
that according to Gods own intent and purpose. 1. Cor. 12.12.
But in that God did so distribute and divide the offices, he meant not thereby
to break the unity of the Church: for there is no more but one body.
Wherefore needs must it be, that the Jews should be joined with the
Gentiles: so that it is a folly to say, that Saint Peter ought to maintain
the Jews part, because God has called him to be a minister amongst them:
for that was upon condition that they shall nourishe amity and friendship
amongst the members of the Church. Reasons, proouing that Peter offended.
Wherefore we can not otherwise say, but that he faulted and that fowly: Add
also that Saint Paul speaking in this place, as the instrument of the holy
Ghost condemns him. Behold a sentence that can not be called back, and
against the which it is not lawful to plead. It is also expressly said, that
Peter and those that joined with him, walked not the rightway into the truth
of the Gospel. This therefore must be concluded, that Peter committed a fault.
And indeed there might have followed a great offense of that which he did,
and that was, the alienating and estraunging of the Gentiles from the Jews.
Seeing then that he so much diminishes the number of the faithful, and
indeed teareth the Church, and renteth it in pieces, what may we judge of
that? And beside, it behooued, that this doctrine to wit, that ye ceremonies of
the law were abolished, should specially be maintained. A secret objection
sufficiently answered.
And albeit the Jews were permitted to use them, until such time, as that by
little and little, the liberty which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased for us, was
known, yet for all that, there should not have been any bondage therein to lay
that yoke upon the Gentiles neck, as though that the ceremonies had been
given them for ever. It behooved them that that should be indeed concluded and
resolved upon. But Peter begins to call it into doubt and question. Besides
he was variable and inconstant: and we see that for to please men, he declined
and went aside from the good and right way, which thing also is plainly and
expressly accursed. Sin is subtell, for men sometimes fall into it even then,
when they they think to do well.
Certain it is that S. Peter in so doing, sought not his own profit, for all
his whole study and endeavor was to serve God, yet so it is, that for all
that, he forgets him self, and turns aside from the good way. And why
so? fearing least he should offend the Jews: and herein he shows him self
over much affected toward men. Seeing that it fell out to him, to go aside
and straie, let us look to our selves, and let us remember the sentence which
was spoken before, that if we desire to serve men's appetites, Galat. 1.10.
we can not serve our Lord Jesus Christ. This is then that which we have to
note in this place, when it is said that Peter feared to offend the Jews.
True it is that we ought to fear offenses: but whatsoever it be, Offenses
must be avoided, but so must inconstancy also.
this means not that in respect of men and for their sakes, we must bow
every way, and that men shall turn us and wind us as a Rush, as we commonly
say. For it is not in our power, to diminish any thing of Gods right and
authority at our fantasy and pleasure, but that which he has pronounced,
must always abide firm and steadfast, and men must attempt nothing against it,
after what sort soever it be. Wherefore when the question is to nourish
concord and ^^itie among us, we must always have that which God allows,
that is, we must be humble, and learn to obey his word. And this ought
indeed to be well marked, because at this day we see that these which swim
between two waters, Mean men painted out and answered.
think it good to do both this and that, and enter in to disputations also
about the same: saying this is not of great importance and weight, we may
easily yield them and grant them that. And yet for all that, who sees not,
what great sacrilege is committed, if men go aside from this doctrine of S.
Paul? No color must cause us to run from the simplicity of the Gospel.
and therefore so much the more ought one heedily to mark this poinct, that is
to say, that it is not lawefull, under any shadow or color whatsoever, to
decline or starte away from Gods pure truth. And Behold wherefore S. Paul
makes mention of this truth. This means not that we should look to have
in or under the Gospel any fleshly liberty: but it teaches us that if men
will have a Gospel to the halfes, that then they do nothing else, but falsify
and corrupt the same: As do these that will say: Let us hold the principal:
and then for these small matters and circumstances it skilleth not: An obiction
answered.
we may diminish this, or take away that, because they are not of any great
importance or weight. Such men doubtless are falsifiers and corrupters of Gods
word. And why so? For we ought well to weigh this word, yt it is not enough to
have the Gospel in a hotch potch, 1. Cor. 5.6. Galat. 5.9. Mat. 16.6.
and in part, but we must have it sound and whole, or else it is corrupted.
Behold a little leaven, leueneth the whole lump of dough: and we are
commanded to beware of leaven: that is to say, from all mingle mangle, thereby
to disguise and disfigure in any manner whatsoever, the purity of the doctrine
of God. This word then ought to be as it were engraven in our hearts, The
doctrine of the Gospel must not be clipped.
more then if it were written in letters of gold: to wit, that there is a
certain purity in the Gospel, and that it is not lawful for us to turn from
that, but that we must have the doctrine pure and simple, insomuche that men
should not attempt to lessen the same any whit at all, or to diminishe any
thing therfrom. Now concerning that with S. Paul says: that he reprooueth Peter
because he was to be reproved: This meneth not that he was reproved in such
sort, as some have imagined. It is true that the word may import, that he was
reproved, but we know that Participles are sometimes taken for Nownes: and so
does S. Paul expound it, that Peter was culpable and faulty, and that his
offense was as if it were altogether known. Amongst the rest Ierom whereof you
may see large discourses, in the 2. Tome of Augustines works and namely,
Epist. 8.9.10.
But I speak this because this place has been much debated upon amongst
the ancient writers: and because some have sufficiently maintained it, that
Peter offended not, neither was so reproved, because they would not persuade
themselves, that S. Paul did so openly set him self against Peter, or that he
entered into controversy ordisputation with him about it. For it seems unto
them that if S. Paul should find any thing in Peter, to be spoken against,
that he should have told it him between themselves and secretly, Much a
do made to pervert the true meaning of the holy Scripture
least otherwise he might give offense, and stir up contention in the
Church, and kindle a fire, that would not be easily quenched. They have this
color, and thereupon they have thought, and this was done by agreement
between them, and that S. Paul and S. Peter were well agreed together: as
though Peter should have said when we shall be in company with the people,
thou shall reprove me, and I will make as though I were well pleased
therewith, and then afterward we shall not be troublesome or grievous one with
another, and I wylbe content to be vanquished and overcome, and that thou also
shall have the victory and glory. But who sees not that this is too to much
enforced, and is indeed nothing else, but the turning topsie turuie of S.
Paul's Text. Wherefore there is no doubt of this, but that S. Paul declares
in this place, yt Peter was to be condemned and blamed. S. Peter's proctors
answered. 1. Cor. 9.19.20 Act. 16.3. Act. 21.26.
And he adds afterward the reason of it: that he and all that followed him,
did not walk with an upright foot according to the truth of the gospel. Thus
much then for reason. Now they that thought that there was such an agreemente
between S. Peter and S. Paul, grounded them selves upon a frivolous and vain
reason, to wit, yt S. Paul confesses in another place, yea in sundry other
places that he was as a Jew amongst the Jews, and as a Gentyle among the
Gentyles: that is to say, that he conformed and fashioned himself to al men.
True it is: but this was done for the edification of the Church: and besides
this was not to annihilate and disanul the liberty of Christians, or else to
break the unity and concord of the Church. Whereas we see altogether the
contrary in S. Peter. First he made a division in the Church, as if he had
torn it in pieces as I have already said. He troad underfoot the liberty of
Christians, and endeavored to enforce eue^ the poor Gentiles to take the yoke
of the law upon them, and to bring the^ into subjection and bondage. There was
no edification in it, but rather that which had been builded up before, was as
it were pulled down. Let us conclude then, that in that behalf S. Peter had
no agreement at all with S. Paul's dooinges. And when S. Paul says that he
became a Jew amongst the Jews: How S. Paul's words 1. Cor. 9.20 are to be
understood.
he means not otherwise then thus, that he framed him self unto them in
these things where in he might, that he might by little and little draw
them too more great and large knowledge, as also he himself does afterward
declare. So then there is no doubt, but that this reproof was made in
roundnesse and truth, and that there was no disguising in it nor close,
complot, or secret agreement between the Apostles. And indeed Saint Paul
does sufficiently declare how that it could not so be, for he uses a
word when he says that Peter troubled the Church, by his feigning or
counterfeiting, that is too say, hypocrisy, S. Paul played not the hypocrite
in reproouing Peter.
which also is common enough amongst us. For now if Saint Peter was reproved of
his hypocrisy, S. Paul also himself should have been an hypocrite, seeing he
had couenaunted and had made as a man would say, a secret bargayne with him:
as to say, we will deceive the company: for it shall seem, that I am of one
opinion, and thou of an other, and let us reason upon this difficulty, and
dispute this hard question: and when they shall see that thou shall be
overcome, they shall have their mouths stopped up. If it had so been, we see
that their manner of proceeding had been indirect and overthwart, and there
should have been therein an occasion, rather to have turned them that were sound
in judgment from the purity of the Gospel, then to have builded the weak.
To be short it is a matter too to plain, that Saint Peter committed a fault,
and also that by good right and reason, the Apostle Saint Paul reproved him,
because he was culpable and faulty.

Now after that we have seen the fact or deed, let us come to the reason
whirh is added. He says: If thou which art a Jew, live as the Gentyles, and
not as the Jews, wherefore constrainest thou the Gentyles to do like the
Jews? S. Paul's reason for his reproof weighed.
Mark the^ Saint Peter's fault, that is, that he wrought thereby great hurt
against the Gentyles, when he withdrewe himself from them, for it was a
certain kind of inforcement or constraint. And why so? For if the Gentiles had
been moved to dispite or anger against him, behold the Church then should
have been assembled together in companies and set one against another. But we
have declared, that as our Lord Jesus Christ is the head of the Church, so it
behooves us to be joined together in him, as the members of one body. So that
now there remained nothing else, Christ as the head, and the faithful as the
members make but one body.
but that the Gentyles should either take and use the ceremonies of the law,
or else it must needs be, that there should be open war and contention,
between them and the Jews, and so they should be as it were two troops or
companies, one of them altogether against another. And this is that constraint
or inforcement whereof Saint Paul speaks here. This is a double kind of
inforcement.
Wherein we must mark that we do not only enforce people when we always take
them by the throat, but also when they are not able to escape, but that they
must of necessity submit them selves to that which is laid upon them: Behold
this is an enforced constraint, yea a certain kind of tyranny, which we use
and practice. Some will say S. Peter thought not upon that: But let it be
certain that he failed through ignorance: It is a good thing unfeignedly to
confess our faults.
yet he was reproved of his error, and indeed he hardened not himself in
his sin, neither made many replies against S. Paul, as though he would
resist him but confessed that he was blame worthy, whereupon we have to note
that we must not set a rule or law over our neighbor. For S. Paul in
another place (to wit, Romans 14.10. This must not be understood of lawful
magistracy, but of unjust and uncharitable condemning one another.
Romans 14.) testifies that we must all appear before the judgment seat of
our Lord Jesus Christ. It belongs not the^ to us to be judges: it belongs
not to us any more to use jurisdiction and government one over an other: but
let us in such sort govern our selves, that God may have al authority over us,
and yt none attempt to enforce his neighbors, seeing he has no such rule and
government, for that should be as much as in us lies to dimnish the
authority of God, when every one of us will be a judge. Faith in Christ by the
doctrine of the Gospel, freeth both Jews and Gentiles from all Jewish
Ceremonies.
And thus much shortly touching thus rehearsal or story. Hereupon S, Paul
takes occasion to enter into the matter, and largely to lay it out as we
shall see afterward: whereupon also he begins and says: we are Jews by
nature, and not sinners amongst the Gentiles, notwithstanding knowing that we
cannot be justified by the works of the law, we have believed in our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has been our only remedy, because that no flesh can be
justified by the works of the law. Wherefore seeing that it is so, so far of
is that the Gentiles ought to be constrained to keep and use the Ceremonies,
that even the Jews themselves are feared from them if so be it they come and
have recourse to our Lord Jesus Christ, and embrace the faith of the Gospel.
And Paul reasons in this place, from the greater to the less: for he
makes comparison between the Jews and the Gentiles. For God had set such a
distinction and difference that the Ceremonies were as it were, a wall between
them, Ephesians. 2.14.
as he speaks thereof in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians.
Behold then God, who distinguished his people from the Gentiles, and put the
Ceremonies. as it were a wall between them: as though he should say, you have
a sign and a mark, that you are not of their order and company, because they
know the service which he requires, and the way also which they ought too
keep. This ought to be marked in the first place, that the Ceremonies of the
law were ordained and set out for the Jews. And this is that which the
Apostle S. Paul says, we that are Jews by nature. What the Apostle means
by the word nature.
Now this word nature imports not the common creation of all men: for the
Jews came from Adam, and descended from Noah also after the flood. So that
there was in that respect a common nature between the Jews and the gentiles.
Moreover it is certain, that in Adam, all both Jews and Gentyles are accursed
and corrupted: Psalm. 51.5.
was not David a Jew? and yet notwithstanding he confesses, that from his
mothers womb he was a sinner, and conceived in iniquity. Wherefore when S.
Paul speaks thus of the Jews, and shows that they are Jews by nature, he
means that they are not perverse and corrupted, not considering them, There
is a double nature in men. Ephe. 2.3.
as descending from Adams line, or race, but as coming from Abraham's race.
Wherefore to make a short resolution, there is a double nature. The first is
common to all: the second is special or particular. For when S. Paul says in
another place to the Ephesians, that we are by nature the children of wrath,
then he does indifferently comprehend and mean, as well the Jews as the
Gentyles. Behold then, that as well Abraha^s race as others are subject to Gods
vengeance, and that of nature as S. Paul says. Rom, 11.16, 21
But in the xi. Chapter to the Romans he says that the Jews are the natural
branches of the holy root or stock: when he says natural branches of a holy
root, it is a special privilege that God gave, to that race of Abraham, when
he adopted and received the same to him self. And why so? For God has not
only declared that he will be the people of Isreal's Savior, but a Savior of
all that Line or Stock. And thus much concerning this word. Also this word
sinners, is not there to be taken, as we commonly understand it, What the
Apostle means by this word sinners. John. 9.31.
but it signifies in this place profane persons, and such as are altogether
defiled before God, as when it is said that he hears not sinners: and yet
we know indeed that he hears them. And indeed, the doctrine that our Lord
Jesus Christ has taught us, must needs be inviolable, and it behooves us to
have our mouths wide open to confess our sins, whatsoever come of it, for
otherwise we should be liars, as S. John says in his Canonical Epistle, to
wit, John 1.8.10.
that if we confess not that we are sinners the truth is not in us: yea and it
is of necessity required that God cover our sins. So then sins is often
times taken for a Profane man, and one that is rejected of GOD, as also in
this place. But now let us come to that which Saint Paul says: we are Jews
by nature, Deu. 32.8.9.
we have a special privilege: for in as much as GOD has chosen the raze of
Abraham, behold how we are placed in a degree of honor. God could have
done this to all the world, but as it is said in Moses song, God cast his
word, to separate his own inheritance from other nations. And this is it that
S. Paul means in this place, to wit, that the Jews had a certain special
dignity, and were not of that common sort or order that the Gentiles were,
who abode in their first nature, and were as it were, rejected and accursed.
This distinction is more plainly set out in the third Chapter of the Apostle
Saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans. For after that he has declared, that all
were condemned before God, and that there is neither Gentile nor Jew, but he
ought to confess that, he demands this question: Romans 3.12.
Shall not the Jew then have somewhat more preferment, yes they shall, says
he, for God has declared himself to the^. They have the law and that service
which was appointed them, they had also his promyses. Behold great honors that
God bestowed upon the^, when he declared unto them that they were his purchased
people, his inheritance, and as it were, Al both Jews and Gentiles have need
of Gods grace.
his treasure, that they were unto him a priestly kingdom, and that he
established his service in the midst of them. Mark how the Jews had great
pre-eminence above the Gentiles, and are they more excellent for that? He
adds afterward, No. For if we should be al examined, there should not be one
alone amongst us that should be found just before God. Behold then how they
are condemned with the Gentiles, and all are deeply plu^ged in ye curse. We
see then how the Jews are not polluted and profaned, as the Gentiles are. And
by what means is this? By the grace of God. This is without the men: and yet
they have all one and the self same beginning, and besides they are al
corrupted in their persons, because that they are sinners both the one and the
other. But whatsoever it be, Paul declares in this place, that if there be
any that ought to be partakers of this benefit of Gods mercy, that they are
the Jews. And why so? He says in another place, that is, Ephesians. 2.17.
Ephesians the second Chapter, that they were nigh to God, and the Gentiles
far of from him. When he speaks of our Lord Jesus Christ, he says that he
came and preached reconciliation, that we might have access unto the
father, and this (says he) was published as well too them that were nigh, as to
them that were a far of. He says that the Gentiles were far of, because God
had abandoned and forsaken them, as it were for a while: Behold then the Jews
who were nigh, None can com to God, but through the grace of Jesus christ.
and yet had not access to God through the law, but through the grace of
Jesus Christ, published by the doctrine of the Gospel. Wherefore we must know
that the works of the law are debated: For to the Jews it is that God spok,
and yet the Jews have not their salvation therein And what? Shall the Gentiles,
to whom God spoke not, and who had no promise, shall they (I say) have their
refuge and recourse to the law? We see then Saint Paul's purpose, which is to
show that none can be justified but by faith. He uses in this place these
words, to justify the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the makers of the
law: we must enlarge these points before we can comprehend and perceive
Saint Paul's purpose, and the substance of that which he speaks. This word
to justify, What the word justify, imports.
signifies as much as to be absolved before God. It is true, that if we would
heap up all the testimonies of the scripture, serving for this purpose, it
could never at al, or hardly be one, and besides we could not dispatch the
whole matter at this time. It is true that for this present time, if it be
possible, we will take and allege two places only, to show and set forth
that which we have said. Saint Paul, speaking in the eight Chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans: What? Romans 8.33.
may not we stand before God (says he) seeing he justifies us? and who
is it then that shall condemn us? Certain it is, that in that place, this
word to justify, imports not that God makes us just, but this it is, that
he receives us to mercy and in pardoning us our sins, he holds us and
accompteth us as just, albeit that we be not so indeed. The comparison set
against it, declares the same: God justifies us, who is it that shall condemn
us? If these two words be well weighed, to justify must needs be contrary
to condemn, and that is then to absolve. So to be justified before God, that
is the absolutio^ or losing, that he gives us, when it pleases him to receive
us to mercy, as is declared unto us in the Romans, Romans 3.28. Romans 4.5.6.
where Saint Paul alleges this place out of the two and thirty Psalm:
Blessed is the man, whose iniquities are pardoned, and whose sins are
covered: he says there that we are justified without the works of the
law. And why so? because our sins are pardoned us, and that through Gods
free goodness. The other place is declared, in the thirtenth Chapter of the
Acts, Acts. 13.38.39.
to wit, that we can not be justified by the works of the law, but by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Gentiles then are justified: and after
what sort? From all things from which the law of Moses could not justify
them, that is to say, could not absolve the^. For Moses law had many marks
and signs to testify their reconciliation to GOD. The ceremonies of the law,
could not justify.
There was washinges, sprincklings, satisfactions, and all the rest: But all
this was not or served not, to justify, that is to say, to acquit and
discharge men, in such sort that they should be accounted just. So when in
this place it is said, that the Jews found not any thing in the law, whereby
they might be justified, he means by justified, obteinyng of grace and favor
before God, and in sum, approbation and allowance before him. And thus much
concerning one word. What is meant, by the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now ye faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, is not that whereby Jesus Christ
believed, but that by which we believe in him. And how do we believe in our
Lord Jesus Christ? that is in receiving and applying him such a one unto our
selves, as he has been sent unto us from God his father. But he has sent
him, 1. Cor. 1.30.
as says Saint Paul, to be our righteousness, our wisdom and satisfaction.
When then we shall receive our Lord Jesus Christ for our righteousness, behold
how the faith that we have in him justifies us. And how is he our
righteousness? he declares it in an other place, in the second Epistle of the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 5.21.
where he says, that he that knew not what sin meant (that is to say, was
pure and innocent from it) was made as sin for us, to the end that we might
be justified in him. Mark then what this speech the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ imports: We ought to come to Christ, because he alone has all things
in him that we need.
that is to say, the assurance that we have through the faith, that we are
reconciled to God his father, and that we find in our Lord Jesus Christ,
every thing that we have need of: to be short, that God justifies us without
our selves, in that satisfaction and recompense, which he finds in the
sacrifice of his dear sons death and passion. And thus far concerning this
word. There remains yet this word, works of the law, whereby some have
understood barely, the ceremonies, as Circumcision, the washings, the
sacrifices, the sprinkeling of beast^^ blood, and such like things.

And there is some show thereof at the first sight, because that the founteine
of this question which Saint Paul handles, proceeded from this, These words,
works of the law, contain not only the ceremonies, but all that God
commands in the law.
that the Jews would be circumcised, and observe the ceremonies of the law.
Wherefore it should seem by this, that the works of the law, were nothing
else, but the ceremonies thereof. But they import (as we shall see in a more
large declaration thereof) somewhat more, to wit, that under that speech is
comprehended all that which God has commanded. True it is, that the first
occasion which Saint Paul had, to enter into disputation and question about
the matter, was to set out the abuses which were in these outward things:
Pilgrimages, feasts, observation of days, etc. wicked in a double respect.
as at this day wherein we are at controversy with the Papists, touching
pilgrimages, feasts, the observation of certain days, etc. We do not only
handle this question and point, whither that these three things and such like
be commanded of God yea or no, but we come somewhat further and say, that this
is not only not to serve God, but that it is blasphemy to say so. We see
then, that when men will speak of some ceremony, or some superstitious
observation, they shall come to the general rule, because they are things
joined together, yea things that can not be sundered: So much also is there to
be said concerning the works of the law. For when the Jews would that men
should observe Circumcision, and that it should continually abide whole and
sound, that proceeded from an error: for they supposed that Circumcision was
Gods service, and that it was a meritorious work to be justified by: and it
is likely, that they held so much also, concerning all the rest. But that is
contrary to truth, for Circumcision was a testimony of the grace of God, Romans
4.11.
and a sign of faith, as Saint Paul speaks thereof, in the fourth of the
Romans. Behold then how the Jews, were turned very far, from the true
institution of God, when they attributed such an use to the ceremonies of the
law. And this is the cause also, why Saint Paul stays so much upon this
word. Two sorts of Papists, or rather two judgments in Papists touching
merits.
And moreover it is not without cause, that he stands also upon the word
promise: For the Papists themselves confess indeed, that they merit nothing,
but by reason, and in the strength of the promise: When they say that they
deserve heaven through Gods grace, they mean thereby that they are not able to
do all, but yet sundry times, you shall have them speak thus proudly, that
they merit or deserve the whole. They say, that it is not by their works in
their own nature, but that God has framed first such a preparation or
disposition in them: and so there is nothing touching faith: and yet behold
wherefore S. Paul adds this word faith, because they establish and erect of
works, and Gods promises, their own merits. Gods promises, and men's merits,
cannot stand together. Romans 4.13.14.16.
Now needs must it fall out, that in the mean season this promise should be
disanulled, if men stay them selves upon works, as Saint Paul says in the
place already alleged out of the Romans. And yet for all this, he puts not
down without good cause and reason, this word, works of the law. Sometimes
when he esteems them not, he does it, to show, that he speaks generally
and without exception, as in the place erewhile alleged, he says, Romans 4.6.
that GOD justifies without works: he establishes not the works of the
law, but says without works. Leuitie. 18.5. Galat. 3.12.
But because he has to do with the Jews, who might always allege and say:
And what? Shall this promise that we have (too wit, he that shall live
according to the law, shall be justified, and this is our life) shall this I say
be unprofitable? shall all this be without cause and void? Mark how the Jews
might object. Saint Paul therefore uses a prevention here, and cutteth the
throat, (as a man would say) of all that they are able to object: as though
he should say: albeeit works are of the law, yet so it is, that they are
not able to justify. But now let us come to the principal point or matter.
Neither Jew nor Gentile can be justified by the law.
It is said, that the Jews, that had all the promises of God, and the outward
testimonies, that he had chosen the^ from amongst all the rest of the world,
were yet notwithstanding enforced too seek their justification and
righteousness in our Lord Jesus Christ. Which seeing that so it is, too whom
shall the Gentiles repair now, to obtain grace in? shall they go to seek it
in the law, from which they are further estraunged than the Jews? No.
Wherefore we must conclude, Assured persuasion of Gods mercy through Christ, is
the mean of justification.
that the Gentiles have no other mean, to obtain pardon before God by, and to
stand upright in his judgment, than to be apt to learn, and to humble
themselves, when the question is to appear before him, having true certainty
and assuredness of his mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And mark what
this speech means, but in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherein also
the error of the Papists is once again overthrown.

For when they say, that they are justified by faith, they confess themselves
sinners: but this is but in part, for they can not suffer or abide this
saying, through faith only. No not a whit, and therefore it is very likely
that we shall never agree in this point. A very fit similitude.
For they mean that our works are in part the cause of our salvation, and
so make thereof a hotchpotch and mingle mangle, that is neither flesh nor
fish, as men say: that is, that part of our works, and part of our faith,
are the things that justify us. And when S. Paul says, that it is not,
through the works of the law, but by the only faith of Jesus Christ, is not
this a doubt, that the Papists fly and shun very much? So then, Saint
Paul declares, that there is neither Jew nor Gentile, that can be found just
in Gods sight, but only in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our
righteousness, and that we are made partakers of this righteousness, even by the
doctrine of the Gospel: for as the Apostle S. Paul says, Romans 10.3.4.9.
in the tenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans: God accepts us not, for
the observation or keeping of his commandments, nor through the law, but in
and by our Lord Jesus Christ, who^ he has raised up from the dead to justify
us. I see, that I have been already over long, and therefore I will not go
any further at this time: Master Caluins wonderful humility.
the rest shall be expounded some other time: notwithstanding the brethren may
add hereunto, that which I have omitted, and also redress that which they
shall know to be more fit for the purpose, than I have already declared,
respecting and bearing with my infirmity and weakness, which thing also I
pray the^ to perform toward me. Now we will give thanks unto our good God,
for the favor he has showed us, when it pleased him to draw us to the
knowledge of his Gospel, beseeching him, that he would in such sort open the
eyes of our understanding, that we may know, An excellent prayer for true
humility and lowlines of heart.
what an excellent thing it is to humble our selves under the obedience of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the end that none of us lift up his horns, so much as
to will, to make him self free of him self, and by his own virtue and power,
but that he suffer himself to be vanquished and overcome, and that altogether
we may abide in such sort to be subjected and brought in obedience under Gods
word, that these which seem to be the most excellent and famous in the Church,
may not lift up, and glorify them selves, but that they may receive
correction, admonition, and reproof from ye least: and that all that may serve,
to the end we may atteine to this mark, that GOD may bear rule over us all,
as he that is our creator and has chief rule and government, both in heaven
and earth: and seeing we know that we can not here on earth, No perfection in
this world.
be like unto Angels of heaven, that we may learn unfeignedly to receive and
embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, wherein our salvation is included and
comprised: And seeing we know also, that there is nothing in our nature but
that which deserves a curse, that we may learn to seek our righteousness out
of our selves, which righteousness has been purchased for us, by our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that we may clearly behold the same in this holy Gospel,
through a lively faith.

The second Proposition or speech, of M.I. Call. upon the second to the Galat.
15 We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles:

16 Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith
in Jesus Christ, we also have believed in Jesus Christ: to the end that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law,
because that no flesh shall be justified by the works of the law.

17 Now if in seeking to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are
found to be sinners: is Christ therefore the minister of sin? Be it not so.

18 For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my self a
trangressour, or trespassour.

19 Verelie, I have been through the law, dead to the law, to the end that
I might live to God: because I am crucified with Jesus Christ, to the end I
might live to God.

20 So I live, and yet now not I, but Christ lives in me: and in that, that I
now live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God, who has loved
me, and has given him self for me.

21 I do not abolishe or take away, the grace of God: for if righteousness be
by the law, Christ then is dead in vain.


WE have seen and heard how this doctrine ought to be understood, to wit,
that we are justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. But now it remains to
handle the reason that S. Paul brings, to wit, that necessity inforceth us
to seek this righteousness which is given unto us, through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ: for if there were any other mean thereof, No righteousness
to be found in any, either in heaven or in earth, but in Jesus Christ alone.
men might receive and take it, but when we know, that after we have sought
above and beneath, and that we have made our circuites and iourneyes as it
were, both in heaven and in earth, and yet notwithstanding behold we are shut
up, and that there is no righteousness in any man living: thereupon we may very
well and safely conclude, that we must be saved through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or else yt we are all lost and condemned. This then is that
whereupon S. Paul stands at this time. So this saying ought well to be
weighed, that the Jews stood in need to obtain righteousness through faith:
because that no flesh shall be justified by the works of the law. And indeed
it is certain, No way of deliverance from Gods curse but Jesus Christ.
that we shall never come with a good affection to our Lord Jesus Christ, if
this be not rightly imprinted in our hearts: to wit, that the curse of God
holds us fast locked up and enclosed, and that we can not any manner of way
come out of it, but by this mean. Even as a sick party, when his disease
presses and wringeth him, and that he is not able any longer to endure it, A
fit similitude well pursued and applied.
he will submit him self to the Physician, and will bind and tie him self to
receive these things, which shall be sharp and bitter unto him. He that is merry
and makes good cheer, will not go to seek the Physician, when he is well
disposed to drink and to eat, and that he finds him self to have a good
appetite or stomach: even so is it with us: None can come rightly to Christ,
but such as are wounded with Gods judgments.
for until such time as Gods judgment have in such sort wounded us, that we
be as it were poor scattered and lost people, and to be short, that we be as
it were drowned or swalowed up in death, we will never come in good earnest to
our Lord Jesus Christ. It is true that this doctrine may well be received, and
that they which shall hear thereof, will bow their ears and hearken, when
some shall say to them, that there is no other righteousness, but the grace of
God. There are very many scoffers and iesters that allow this, but it shall
not be in truth, for there is nothing but hypocrisy and dissimulation
amongst them. Let us then hold this fast, that we must begin at this end,
when we would know wherein our salvation stands: and how so? For we must
of necessity strive to atteine that: Feeling of death in our selves, brings
us to life before God.
we must I say, begin at death, to the end that that may lead us to life.
And this is the cause wherefore Saint Paul largely laying out the matter which
we have to handle in this place, summoneth and proceeds against all
mankind. On the one side he shows, that though the Gentiles had not the law
written, yet that their conscience did suffice to condemn them, and that God
exercised in the same his judgment, to their condemnation, Romans 2.12.14.15.
and that their own very thoughts were so many Summons, to bring them before
the heavenly judgment seat, to declare unto them that they were altogether
accursed. On the otherside, concerning the Jews, if they would glory and
boast in the law, Romans 2.1.2.
that is it that does condemn them, as S. Paul says. Thereupon he
concludes, that it behooves every mouth to be stopped and shut up, and that
we should confess, that there is nothing in us but confusion and shame of
face, and that if we should yield up an accounte before God, They that
flatter them selves in their sins, had need to be rowsed up.
we should be so much the more drowned in despair. And indeed because that
men rock them selves a sleep as it were in their own hypocrisy, S. Paul
does in a manner thunder against them, that justify themselves and flatter
themselves, saying: Think thou that God accepts men's persons? Thou
presumest indeed to condemn others: and who or what art thou? Verily, dust:
and yet thou take upon thee the office of judging, and wilt needs have this
authority, when thou thy self can not be exempted from the judgment of
God. Mark then how it behooves us to be awaked and stirred up, that we seek
not our righteousness any where else, nor by any other mean, but only by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that we learn rightly to examime our life, and not
only to go beyond, a certain free and willing condemnation of our selves,
as transgressors of the law, and blame worthy before God, Before Gods mercy
can be sweet unto us we must be wonderfully cast down in our selves.
but to be altogether confounded and moved with such an astonishme^t that we
should not know on which side to turn. Behold I say, how we may give
opening and entertainment to the doctrine, which is handled in this place by
S. Paul. And so let us well and rightly weigh these words, That no flesh
shall be justified by the works of the law: and also let us mark, that this is
it that ought to bring us too our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the faith of the
Gospel, to the end that through the grace of GOD we may at the last be saved.
And moreover that which some stand so much upon, touching these words, The
works of the law, as though S. Paul spoke of nothing but the Ceremonies, that
I say has bin in part reproved and handled, and we have declared, that so to
take the word is an ouerfoule folly. And indeed Paul meneth no other thing
in this place, then that which is said in the hundred forty and third Psalm,
Psalm. 143.2.
when David beseeches GOD that he would not enter into judgment and
accounte with him: (for he adds the reason) that no man living shall be
justified in his sight. David speaks not in that place of the works of the
law, but it is to show that if GOD would exercise the office of a Judge,
that then our life ought to be aunswearable thereto: And to know wheather we
should be acceptable before him or no, what should be done in that
behalf? Should we not be past hope? Yes indeed, and why so? For there shall
not be found any living creature, that can be justified. And what means
that word? that is to say, that any man can be found so just in Gods
sight, None is of him self just before God.
that thereby he can be absolved and discharged before him. So then when Paul
speaks here of the works of the law, it is not to this end that the
discourse wc he makes should be restrained to the ceremonies only: but he
speaks expressly (as we have already declared) of the works of the law,
because that the deceivers which at time meant to corrupt the purity of the
Gospel, did always allege and set out ye Ceremonies. Now Paul speaks here
as of the only remedy that serves to draw men from condemnation, as also
mention is made thereof in the fifteenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
Act. 15.10.11
and in that place it is said, that we cannot be justified by all that which
is contained in the law of Moses, but that we must come unto the faith of
Jesus Christ. In the law of Moses there were washings, sacrifices, and to be
short many means to be reconciled to God by. He that has Christ and his
merits has al.
But what? all that was but a figure and shadow, to bring the people to Jesus
Christ. It follows then that when we have the satisfaction that is
purchased unto us by Jesus Christ his death, we have all: neither need we the
law to supply any thing whatsoever: A shifting and vain objection answered.
and though we had all, that it were possible to find out of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we should have nothing at all: And yet notwtsta^ding it should seem,
yt this argument or reason is not sufficient and strong enough: for albeit that
we be not fully justified by the works of the law, yet a man might say, that
we are in part justified thereby: which if it be true, we are not altogether
justified by faith, for there is in it, but one part of our righteousness.
Behold how the Papists are abused and deceived: for they will not say, that
we are able, without the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to obtain
salvation, that we are able to glory and boast before God of our selves, as
though we had in our selves all that which is requisite, to obtain
everlasting life by, Papists shifts and subtilties.
they will not speak so: but they will say, that we are sinners, that there
are infirmities and weaknesses in us, and that we have in our selves manyfolde
imperfections, and that our Lord Jesus Christ must of necessity remedy and
redress them, and that in the virtue of his death and passion our sins are
pardoned: but yet for all that they say, that we may have a portion of
righteousness in us, which righteousness they call partial, or parted,
because it is as it were parted between god and man: and moreover they say,
that the remission and forgiveness which is bestowed upon us, when we are to
obtain pardon of our sins, A most horrible blasphemy.
is not free, but that satisfactions on our behalf must be added thereto. And
this is that which has caused them to devise their Mass, Trentals, Diriges,
Pilgrimages and such like. Behold also the fundations whereupon they builded
their Purgatory. Mass, Pilgrimage, Purgatory, and such baggage, upon what
ground the stand.
To be short we see, how the Papists will indeed confess, that our Lord
Jesus Christ is necessary for them, but they mean only in part, and to
supply that, with they themselves want. And yet they attribute to them selves
thus much, that they are able to purchase favor before GOD, that they are able
to merit and deserve at the least some part and portion of their salvation,
and that when they shall have offended, that they are able to amend and
repair the fault, and that by their satisfactions and works as they call them
of supererrogation. Now it should seem that this argument did fight against S.
Paul. Mark his sentence: we are not justified but by faith, for also a man is
not justified by the works of the law. Some might reply after this manner.
Let us put the case, that though we be not wholly justified by the works of
the law, A popish and peevish reply.
yet this means not but that we may have some part and portion of
righteousness therein. It follows then, that we are not altogether saved by
our Lord Jesus Christ, but that this is a supply or an addition. But Saint
Paul supposes that which is true, that for as much as GOD in forbidding to
commit whoredom has also forbidden, to rob, to lie, and to blaspheme, and
all the rest, that he that fails in one point is culpable and guilty of the
whole, as S. James says in the second Chapter. James. 2.10.
And the better to perceive and understand this, we must come to the promises,
and to the threats of the law.

Concerning the promises: Promises.
It is not said, He that shall do some part of these things shall live in them,
Leuit. 18.5. Rom 10.5
but it is said he that shall do these things. God then requires a sound
and full accomplishment of the law: otherwise there is no righteousness. And
who is he that fulfilleth the same? Truly there has not been yet any such
found. It follows then that this promise is indeed of no force, seeing that
men fail in the performance of points put down with the same.

Threats.
Now let us come to the threats which shall be declared more largely here after:
but yet now we may in one word see that which God pronou^ceth: Deu. 27.26.
Galat. 3.10.
Cursed be he, that shall not perform all these things. When he says, that
we are cursed if we accomplish not all the whole law, and do not satisfy
the least point or title, and the vttermoste farthing, as men say, behold how
Saint Paul's argument is forcible and strong, that is, that there is no
partial righteousness as the Papists imagine and affirm, because God will
not have his righteousness cut and hewn in pieces and morcels, but declares
unto us, that we are al debtors and faulty, because we fail and fall before
him. Mark then how we must come to our Lord Jesus christ. And moreover it is
certain that when a man shall take all that he has or is able to bring
before GOD, there is nothing in him but a curse. All that man has of himself
is accursed before God.
For all that which the Papists have imagined and forged touching their
freewyll, their meritorious works or works of supererrogation, all that I say,
is nothing else but vanity and illusions of Satan. So then in the first place
we cannot be justified, because we cannot have of our selves so much as one
good thought. And besides, although God should have renewed us by his spirit,
and albeit we should desire too obey him: yet so it is that as we travail
in our journey and way, we shall stumble much and take many falls, 2. Cor.
3.5.
yea there will be many cross ways, in such sort, that we shall
continually fail and fault in our duties. Seeing then it is so we must not
put our confidence and trust in the works of the law, neither in all that
which is contained therein. And behold how we shall have the perfect
accomplishment of all righteousness in the grace and favor of our Lord
Jesus: and mark withal, Perfection and fullness of righteousness is to be
found in Christ only.
how we ought to understand this sentence. Now thereupon Saint Paul makes
an objection because that this doctrine has always been subject, to many
slanders and blasphemies: For the Devil seeks nothing more tha^ to blind,
and to make bs believe that we are able to purchase and get eternal life
through our merits. And behold wherefore it is, when men preach, there is
nothing but the free goodness of God that saves us, that there are so many
replies made: The reason is, because it is contrary to our fleshly
understanding and reason: Man's nature excellently painted out.
for we are always in cumbred with vain fantasies, and indeed puffed up
with presumption and pride, and bring both that and many other faults from our
mothers womb with us, so that it is very hard utterly to root it out of our
hearts. We cannot then be persuaded that our salvation consists altogether
in the mercy of God, and indeed there was never yet any of the Philosophers
that knew it. The Gentiles verily and Pagans did understand, that they were
all sinners and that they had need of some remedy therefore. They had their
Sacrifices, their washinges and perfumes, as also had the Jews? But what? They
also stayed the^ selves upon their merits. Behold then why S. Paul now
brings this question and says, If we also, that is to say, the Jews: For
this word also weighs much in this place, as if he should say, not only
the Gentiles are known to be sinners, and their iniquity is laid open: But
also even we, who are the elect and chosen people of God, who has the promise
of adoption, who have this dignity more than all the world has, that God
acknowledges us for his inheritance, we, I say are so much the greater
sinners, by how much we believe in Jesus Christ. But he speaks this in the
person of these me^, All Expositers are not by and by to be admitted.
that were not able to understand this doctrine, neither yet would quietly
receive it. It is true yt this place is otherwise expounded by some others but
there is neither salt nor savor in it: and that is the cause why I busy not
my self there in. They suppose that S. Paul meant to say thus much, Men's mouths
accustomed to wicked speeches.
that if we be found sinners, when we believe in Jesus Christ, it follows
thereon that Jesus Christ has not brought righteousness too us, but this is
far from the purpose, as we may easily perceive, by the answer adjoined. To
be short, Saint Paul means too abate and beat down in this place, that
blasphemy, which was then in many men's mouths: that is to say, that our
Lord Jesus Christ should be the author of sin, if that the Jews
themselves, should be found sinners when they believe in him: For when the
Jews trusted in their Ceremonies, and satisfactions of the law, they supposed
indeed that they were discharged before God, and did sanctify themselves. As
we see also that Isaiah attributes that unto hypocrites, to boast themselves
in such sort to be holy, that they supposed al other to be profane,
polluted, and filthy people in respect of themselves. Behold then this
foolish presumption wherewith the Jews were, as a man would say, made
drunk: to wit, Some suppose them selves in good state when they are very evil.
that in not coming at all too our Lord Jesus Christ, they thought that they
were pure and clean from al sin. But when they come too believe in our Lord
Jesus Christ, then they unclothe themselves and spoil them selves of all
regard of that which they thought indeed to belong unto them, as good and
profitable. For they are cast down in them selves, and their iniquity was
made manifest, which before was hid and secret: So that it seems that this
promise of our Lord Jesus Christ should be vain, and that he should be
the author of sin. But Saint Paul answers: Be it never so, detesting as it
were such a blasphemy, as he has begun to speak. But before we come to
aunsweare this argument, that we may well absolve it, we must declare, that
this is repugnant and contrary too all the doctrine of the Gospel. For what is
that, The sum of the Gospel.
which is preached unto us thereby, but this, that we may in full trust
appear before God to call upon him, and to be heard of him. And this is
wrought by the mean of Christ's righteousness. It follows then, that the
doctrine of the Gospel shows us how we are justified before God, John
10.9.10.
so far of is it, that it establishes sin. And as it is said, that when the
holy Ghost shall come, it shall not be only to reprove the world of sin,
but of righteousness also, to the end that we should not seek it in any, but
in him, in who^ it is, that is to say, our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore this
solution is general when S. Paul says, that if he build that which he has
destroyed, he shall be a transgressour, that is to say, he shall do against
nature. But afterward he comes somewhat more nigh to the matter, showing
that it cannot so be, and that it is a false objection: For I am (says he)
dead unto the law through faith, and am raised up with Jesus Christ, to live
with God: He shows here, that when they that supposed for a season that they
were just, bewrayed them selves to be sinners, and were convicted thereof, and
that their iniquity in such sort appears, that they remain ashamed, True
fight of sin, and unfeigned humblinge for the same, proceeds not properly
from Christ, but from the law.
to the end they might be truly humbled and cast down, that this proceeds
not from Jesus Christ, but rather from the ministry of the law. Now true it
is, that Saint Paul is in this place brief and short, and this shortness
may happily make him seem dark. But we may take that, which is more fully
declared in the vii. Chapter to the Romans, and make it to stand us in steed
of a key, for the opening and understanding of this place. There Saint Paul
demands whether the law be the cause of sin. No, Romans 7.7.12.
says he, and rejects it as a blasphemy. The law is good, just and holy:
But this is it, sin is discovered by the law, and after that sort indeed
it kills us. The law brings and offers unto us a doctrine of life, as
Moses also protests and witnesses, saying, 2. Cor. 3.7.
Behold life: and yet Saint Paul says, that it brings nothing but death.
Yea indeed, but that is by reason of our fault. The Law then kills us, not
by it self but by circumstaunce, because it is unto us as a glass, to cause
us to behold our own condemnation. Now pursuing his purpose he says, that
when the law condemns us not, Romans 7.8.9.
it is as it were dead: For sin (says he) lives not when the law is dead. And
yet this should be dark, if it should not be opened and declared. When he
says that sin lives not, when the law is dead it is to show, that me^ are
negligent and careless, and that they rock themselves a sleep in vain
flatteries and deceipts, so long as they are not reproved by the law. The
preaching of the law most necessary, specially for these days wherein men are
grown to lewdness of conscience.
Behold then sin which is dead, when the law is blotted out or defaced, that
is to say, so long as men do not examine them selves by Gods law, and
according to that which he commands, and call not themselves to an account
to know, whether they dutifully behave themselves or no, they forget
themselves and enter not deeply into the^ selves: For this must stand true,
that so long as they are not careful and watchful, their conscience is
senseless and void of feeling. And after this manner is it the law being dead,
makes sin also to die. But does the law live? How the law is said to
live.
That is to say, has the law her force and power to summon us before God, to
cause us to seek what manner of men we are, to the end that we should not
flatter our selves: Then behold sin, which is as it were raised up again,
where as before we made no account of it, yea it makes war against us, and
persecuteth us so far, that we are brought to all extremity. But then we die
(says Saint Paul: Romans 7.9.
) for he adds, I was alive without the law. In saying that he was alive,
he means it not of a common life, but that he was saved: for this word
life, is put and used, for righteousness and salvation. I lived (says he) that
is, I thought my self to be justified, and to be accepted before God, and to
have obtained everlasting life. And why so? We are not in the best state when
we so think our selves: neither are we in the worst, when God makes us see
our vileness and iniquity.
because he had cast the law very far away. But when the law once had her
course, and I thought well upon it, I said, alas: am I not convicted and
vanquished? Do I not now know what manner of man I am? Can I now esteem my
self innocent? No verily: for so far off is it, that I can do so, that I
find within my self a bottomless depth of sin: So then when I knew the
law, the law slew me. And this is that, which the Apostle now means when he
says, that it is by the law that he is dead. Now to dye to the law may be
taken after two sorts: as sometimes it is taken for judgment, because that
then we can perceive nothing but damnation. And also we may take these words
to dye to the law, in this sense, as not to come nigh to it, nor to have any
thing to do therewith: A good lesson for ministers, to teach them to have care
both what they speak, and how they speak.
for S. Paul absteined as much as was possible for him, from making his
doctrine odious and hateful among the Jews. If he had said: I am dead: it had
not been right. But when he says, I am dead to the law, that imports, that
we are no more any thing at all, and that we find not in it any matter of joy.
Now he says, that this is, by the law, and not by Christ: we see how he
turns away this slander: Ho, our iniquity is uncovered, it follows then,
that Christ brings and manifests sin.

Many men say, that this comes from Jesus Christ and not from the law, but
we may see the contrary: for if the law be dead, it follows that we also die
with it, because we are condemned in Gods sight: we see that all the promises
that are contained therein, cannot make us glad and rejoice: we see, that in
stead of being accepted of God, we are accursed and altogether confounded.
Seeing then that so it is, that the law, The law, and not the Gospel,
condemns.
when Christ appears not, kills us and inforceth us to dye with it: we will
not, nor we cannot impute that to the grace of God, and to the faith of the
Gospel, but we will rather impute it to that which ye law says unto us, we
shall be justified, and we shall obtain salvation, when we shall have
accomplished all that, which it shows us and teaches us. For look how much
more high the law lifts us up, so much the more shall we fall, into most
deep pittes and whirlepooles: wherefore we are far removed from this
righteousness of faith by the law: we died then to the law, The promises of
the law have a condition adjoined.
in as much as God adioyneth this condition, to all the promises thereof: to
wit, that if we keep it, and do according to that which he says unto us
therein, we shall be recompensed. Now behold all we are dead and lost. And why
so? for this is not sufficient that God speak, but we must look to the
conditions, as whether we be answerable to that which he commands us, and
then we shall find, that we go altogether a contrary course or backward, as
it were. It follows then, that when he shall have showed us the way, we shall
behold our selves accursed, condemned, and plunged in the bottomless pit of
hell. Now we have the true sense and understanding of this place. But he
adds afterward the mean, that is, that he has been dead with Christ:
but with all, he immediately gives unto us the doctrine, that was, to the end
he might live to God. He shows then, This is a living death, and a dead life.
that there is a living death, as there is also a dead life. The life that he
calls dead, is that false presumption with which men deceive them selves,
when they imagine that they are just and righteous before God. They live, but
it is in their own fantasy, and that life is nothing else but dead: for
because they seek not the mercy of God, that is the reason, why they suffer
them selves, to go wholly to destruction. To know that God knows our sins,
and to have a sensible feeling of his judgments for them, is the ready way to
come to the apprehension of the grace of Christ.
Now there is also a quickening, or a living death, when we dye, being
confounded in our selves, because God knows our iniquity and transgression,
and that we are scattered to be in that life, as it were condemned creatures.
And this is that, that brings us to life. And this is that also, which I have
said heretofore, that we shall never seek after the grace and favor of our
Lord Jesus Christ, till such time as we be wounded with the judgments of
God, and that so deeply, that we are not able to endure any longer, neither
know on which side to turn us. We have then yet now at the length, the
understanding of this place: that is, that Saint Paul declares, Three
especial points of doctrine.
that our Lord Jesus Christ places us not in condemnation, but that it is the
law which does that: and besides we learn, that albeit we dye to the law,
when we are dead with Christ, yet that notwithstanding we obtain a new life,
and moreover, he declares, that this new life of ours, is without our selves.
And in that he fayeth, In that that I now live, I live not any more (says
he) my self, but Jesus Christ lives in me, he sets out and declares this
matter, which we ought well to mark, and hold fast: for without this saying,
we shall never purely and simply perceive, what this means, to be
justified, by or through faith. For diverse have deceived them selves, when they
have found these words, that we are justified, by the doctrine of the law: A
double error.
for they mean when we are justified, that our Lord draws us out of the
corruption in which we are, and that he renews us by his spirit, to the
end that we should serve him: and also they declare, that the good works
which the Christians do, are no more from the law but from them selves. And
so that indeed, which seems to have established and strengthened Saint
Paul's doctrine, does nothing else, but corrupt, pervert, and mar the same:
for they make this distinction, A doltishe distinction.
that there are certain works of the law, which are the works that men do
of their free will, and of their own motion and accord, as where they suppose
to merit and deserve. And they say that men are not justified by such
works, that is to say, by moral works and duties, as men call them: but
yet notwithstanding they would be justified by spiritual works, that is to
say, that we know, that God guides us by his spirit. But if it were so, all
Saint Paul's doctrine should be overthrown: let us then hold fast the word,
which is here to be expounded, that is, that we live not in our selves, but in
Jesus Christ: that is to say, that our salvation is without our selves. Not
that we have not the assurance thereof in our selves, for the spirit, is a
pledge unto us thereof, as S. Peter says, 2. Cor. 1.22. 2. Cor. 5.5. Ephesians.
1.13.14. Romans 8.16.
and we have the seal of our adoption through the same spirit, in as much as
the certainty of Gods grace is sealed unto us thereby. And moreover, Jesus
Christ dwells in us, who is also the matter of our salvation: but the
question is not in this place, touching men, and what they can do: wherefore let
us mark well, that ye matter of our salvation is not in our selves, but in Jesus
Christ. And that is the cause why Saint Paul says, that we live not any more
in our selves but in Christ: A good difference between the hypocrites, and the
true faithful.
for he makes here an indirect comparison, between the hypocrites, who
deceive them selves in a vain ouerweening of them selves, and the faithful,
who are altogether beaten down, and spoiled of all presumption: for they that
think they have some dignity, and glory and boast them selves in their
merits, or meritorious works as they call them, such are they that live in
them selves. And why so? they suppose to bring somewhat to God that may make
them acceptable before him. They go not out of them selves I warraunt you, A
place full of great profit and comfort.
when they will warraunt them selves against the judgment of God. But the
faithful, who are instructed to know what manner of men they are, they
condemn them selves, and confess that they are void of all hope and trust,
as it were in them selves, and being so famished and starued as it were, they
come to our Lord Jesus Christ, and know that the matter and substance of
their salvation is in him. Behold then, how and after what sort, we live no
more in our selves, but in Jesus Christ, that is to say, that we should know
and confess, seeing that our Lord Jesus Christ brings us salvation, that we
must hold it of him alone, and fetch it from none other. And indeed if the
death of Jesus Christ be the satisfaction of our sins, it follows
thereupon that we are debtters to God. A most strong reason.
Now seeing that so it is, behold our own righteousness taken from us, and we
spoiled of it, I mean thereby, the grief and vexation that we might conceive
by it. To be short, Mark these points well.
whosoever shall know and feel what is the good will of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and wherefore he was sent unto us from God the Father, and also the
graces that he makes us partakers of by the Gospel: such a one assuredly
shall know, that his life is not in him self, but rather that he has
nothing in him indeed, save the matter of death and damnation. Hereupon Saint
Paul passes further and says: In that that I now live in the flesh, I live in
the faith of the son of God. This is to overthrow yet another replye, that
men might make: for upon that which has been handled, A question.
a man might bring in and move a question, thus: what is this life, you speak
of? and what is our salvation, seeing that we are poor miserable sinners,
compassed about with so many infirmities, yea and that we live in the flesh,
that is to say, we are in this world, with brute beasts, and are nourished
and sustained with corruptible food, and yet you say still our life is in
Christ? An answer to the question. Ephesians. 2.6.
Saint Paul handles this in an other place, when he says, that we are
already set in heaven, and that we are entered into the possession of that
inheritance, which is promised us. And yet it seems to some, that all this
should be but forged and deceit. Mark then, how under the shadow and
color, that we are now far removed from God, we are polluted and defiled,
as Saint Peter also speaks thereof. ^. Pet. 3.1.2.
It should seem, that this should be nothing but shadows of that, which is
set out unto us in the Gospel, to wit, that our life is in Jesus Christ, and
that we are partakers of all his graces, and so by consequent of his
righteousness. Now Saint Paul shows, that this temporal life hinders not,
but that we may always live, that is to say, may always have full assurance,
in our Lord Jesus Christ. And why so? He brings us here, the word of faith:
which is a word, very worthy to be well weighed, for he means and shows
by the word faith in this place, that self same thing, which is described and
set out at large unto us in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is said,
Hebr. 11.1.
that faith is the evidence of things that are not seen, and the substance or
ground of things that appear not, and yet are hoped for. Wherefore seeing that
faith respects that which is invisible, and cannot be seen, let us not
dismaie our selves, or wonder at this, that we live in death, and that we are
in heaven, and be citizens of the kingdom of God, although we should dwell in
this world, and should walk and creep upon the earth with bruit beasts. And
this also is that which S. Paul speaks well of, Romans 8.24.
in the eight of the Romans, for that which he speaks there of hope, may also
be understood and that rightly of faith, because they are things that cannot
be sundred: for he says, that we hope not for those things which we see:
for I ought not to hope for that, which I hold in my hand and have in
possession, because that I behold, see, and enjoy the same: but I hope for
that which is held from me. Wherefore our salvation must needs be hid,
otherwise we should have neither faith nor hope, Our mortality and weak
state here, hinders us not, from the enjoying and possessing of eternal life.
which is also declared unto us in this place. Albeit, then that we be in the
flesh, that is to say, that we have a mortal life, subject to so many
infirmities, as nothing more can be, yea such a life, as is but a shadow, and
which passes into smoke, yet for all that, we cease not to have an abiding
and eternal life, which is grounded and settled on Gods righteousness: and
therefore it behooves us to repair to faith, that is to say, to that
apprehension or taking hold which we have, Gods word reuealeth matters beyond
the reach of our reason.
of things which appear not, and to that certeintie and sight that we have,
of things which are not seen: for we behold in the word of GOD, as it were
in a glass, that which is hyd from our wit, and can not be atteined unto, by
our understanding. Behold then how this place of Saint Paul must be understood.
Now presently he adds, who has loved me, and given him self for me. Here
Saint Paul yet better declares, and more fully, how it is that we live by
faith, and out of our selves, that is, because Jesus Christ our Lord has
given him self for us. Now by this word, he brings us back, to the death
and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, Our prayers are not profitable, till we
be washed in Christ's blood, from our transgressions.
whereof he concludes, that when we will call upon God and present our selves
before him, we must be plunged (as it were over head and ears) in the blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be washed from our spots, and that we
must fetch from thence our cleansing, that we may be absolved and losed from
the condemnation wherein we are. And as he says, that our Lord Jesus Christ
gave him self for him, so he declares the cause, for he comes to his
founteine of the free love of God. John. 3.16. Romans 8.32. Romans 5.6.7.8.9.10.
True it is, that in other places this love is ascribed to the father: as God
has not spared his son: yet that hinders not, but that Jesus Christ loves
us also, as it is said in the eight Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.
Mark then what we have to learn and bear away, when it is said that our life
is out of our selves: that is, that we shall find the matter of life in Jesus
Christ, who has suffered, to the end that we might be discharged before
him. And after we have known this, Christ's free love the fountain of all
goodness to us ward.
to wit, that the satisfaction which our Lord Jesus Christ has made, is our
righteousness, we must come also to the fountain, from whence all proceeds,
that is to say, to that free love of his, in as much as he has loved us. And
yet further this was not done, because he was moved thertoo, by any thing that
he knew to be in us: but it was his only mercy, by which we have been
redeemed: yea it behooves us, to be in such sort void of all righteousness in
our selves, that we must not so much as presume or think, that he had respect
to our persons, or that he found so much as one drop of goodness in it. Not
one drop of goodness in man, till Christ bestow it upon him.
Behold how we are made partakers, of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. I
perceive that I have already ben over long: but I will go no further, And
because this place deserves to be better handled, I will pray my brethren, to
speak thereof every one of them, that which he shall know to be meet for the
edification of the Church. An effectual prayer for increase of knowledge, and
true feeling of our own wretchedness and misery.
Now we will tha^k this our good God, for the knowledge which he has given us
of his holy word, praying him, that he would more and more increase us in it,
and make us profit in this doctrine: and that we may be taught in such sort to
be cast down, that we may not only confess, that we are poor faulty
persons before him, and that we bring nothing but condemnation with us, but
that we may also learn to detest and hate our sins, and to be in such sort
afraid of his judgment, that being paste hope in our selves, we may confess
and that earnestly the miseries and corruptions that are in us, to the end we
may embrace our Lord Jesus Christ, and altogether stick fast unto him, and not
to mingle our filthiness with his purity and holiness: but that we may know that
he is the root, Christ the root and fountain of all righteousness.
and the fountain of all righteousness, and that there is in him such
perfection, as nothing can be said against it, neither added thereto. And
that with all, we may beat back and overthrow, the false opinions of these, The
holy Ghost knitteth Christ, and his people together.
that slander the Gospel, in such sort that we may approve to our selves and
show forth to others, that we are united and knitte to our Lord Jesus Christ
by his spirit, and that we may more and more profit and proceed in his
fear, until such time, as we have well learned to renounce our selves, and
be brought into the right and good way, that we may at the length be made
partakers of ye heavenly grace, Prayer for the inlightening of the ignorant.
which is purchased for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Also that it would
please this good God, to show the same grace to all these, which are yet far
sundred from this food and pasture of life, to the end that they may with us,
glorify his name, and sing forth his praises. That he would cast his eye, and
look upon the troubles which are at this day in the poor kingdom of France,
and that it would please him to redress the same, in such sort, that we may
know and feel, that he works therein, by his inestimable power, and that he
would restore and set up these things that are now broken down, and to
declare by effect, that it belongs to him, to gather together the
dissipations and scatteringes which are in his Church, and to restore that
which has been altogether paste hope, and that by that means, we may have
matter and occasion to yield him perpetual thanks therefore, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

An exposition of that part of the Catechism, which is appointed for the three
and fortieth Sunday.
We have now to expound and open the last petition, The sum of fourth and
fifth petitions.
that is contained in that prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ has given and
taught us. Heretofore it has been declared, how and after what sort we ought
to pray for all that which concerns this our life. And besides (because
forgiveness of sins, is the key that opens to us, and gives us entrance,
when we are to come unto him) that we ought to ask pardon of him, and to
call upon him, which petition also has been opened.

But now it remains, that God in pardoning us our sins, do keep us also in
time to come, for these 2. petitions are not divided, as things contrary one
of them from an other, because that in asking pardon and forgeuenes of God, we
do it for the faults that we have committed against him, Gods mercy is a cloak
for our mischief and sin.
for we must not under the shadow of Gods mercy, take an occasion to do evil,
nor yet take liberty under that color, to dispense with our selves, and too
continue always in our wretchedness and sin: but when every one of us,
shall look into him self, and shall find him self to be culpable and blame
worthy before God, it behooves us then to sigh and mourn, and to ask pardon
and forgiveness. Now when God has so received us into favor, and buried our
faults, yet this we are to do, to pray him, in time to come, to restrain us,
and keep us from evil, that we may be wholly strengthened by his power, The
sum of the sixth and last petition.
to the end that we fall not any more. And this is that which we have now to
entreat of.

The Minister. Now we demand what follows.


The Child. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.


The Minister. Do you make but one petition or request of this?


The Child. No, for the second part or member, is but an exposition of the
first.


The Minister. What is the substance and meaning of this petition?


The Child. We desire that God leave us not to our selves, to fall into
wickedness, neither suffer us to be overcome of the Devil, and the wicked
lusts of our own flesh, which continually fight against us: but that he would
give us power to withstand them, holding us up with his hand, and keeping us
always in his sauegard, that he might protect, defend, and guide us.


The Minister. Forgeuenes of sins past, should not make us careless in time to
come.
As I have already said, after that we have cried and sighed for our sins
and obtained mercy for our fourmer iniquities and transgressions past, and that
we know that God has forgotten them and calls not them any more to account,
we must then respect and consider the time too come. For we know that we
may fall every minute of an hour, considering the frailty and weakness
which is in us. Behold the^ a petition wc is worthy to be esteemed. Some
therehaue bin heretofore yt would divide it in to two, thus, Lead us not into
temptation, One: But deliver us from evil, an other. But this is unadvisedly
done: The meaning of this, Lead us not into temptation.
For in saying, But deliver us, we mean more fully to express, that which we
had already declared before. We pray then in the first place, that GOD would
not lead us into temptation. And what is the meaning thereof? That we be not
vanquished and overcome of temptation. And what remedy have we for that? that
is, that God should be with us therein, too maintain, uphold, and warraunte
us: For if he should not maintain us, all were done with us, and we should be
poor comfortless and hopeless creatures. So then this is but singly one
request or demand, consisting of these two parts that be therein contained.

Now we demand what is the substance and meaning thereof: the answer is,
that God would not suffer us to fall into wickedness, Man's weakness and his
infinite assaults ought to provoke him to earnest and hartye prayer.
and inconvenience. And so we confess, that we should not know how to go
forward one step without falling, and that even as there are infinite
temptations that do assault us, so we should be vanquished and overcome at
every stroke, unless God had pity of us, and strengthened us. Now that we
may the better perceive and understand this, we must know, that it
behooves us, to request of God, that he suffer us not to be surprised and
overtaken of the Devil, and of our own fleshly lusts. Behold the Devil who
is our enemy, he ceasseth not to make war against us, as it shall by and by be
declared more largely and fully: A fit similitude to set out man's frailty, and
Satan's strength.
We are not able to resist him: it is as if a flee, would take upon him too
fight with a Lion: yea we are less than a flee in comparison and respect of
the Devil: For what are we? What are our weapons and armor? and what is the
strength and power that we have? Now he is the prince of the world, John
16.11.
and so by consequent rules above us: so that we should be his pray, were
it not that God does maintain and warraunt us. And besides that, there are
the lusts of our flesh, which fight against us: we need not to go very far
too seek our enemies, they are within already: the City is taken, as men say.
So that you may see that we have very great need to come unto God, and to pray
him that he would not suffer us to be vanquished and overcome of temptation.
For if we were not strengthened from him, Death, yea eternal death, at every
of our steps, if God keep us not.
we should be more then miserable, and we could meet with no other thing
at every step but death, yea eternal and everlasting death. Wherefore so
often as we are too make this request, let us think what need we have to
do it: for we never pray to God, in good earnest and heartily, yea with such
an affection as is requisite and meet, unless we know what need we have
that God pardon us, and afterward that he take care of us. There are diverse
that are very well skilled to pray, but it shall be nothing else to them, but a
Ceremony. So then let us mark, that our prayers shall not be so steadfastly
and assuredly grounded as they ought to be, unless every one of us enter and
go down deeply intoo himself thus, Go to, who art thou? How many faults
have thou committed? Dilligent examination of our selves must go before prayer.
And what will thou demand of God now? That he would receive thee to mercy,
and after that thou know thy frailty, that thou be always watchful and
diligent in time to come, to prease unto him, that he lead thee not into
temptation. Mark then what great need we have of this petition, when we
shall have somewhat narrowly considered of our selves what manner of men we are,
and what our weakness is, and that we should be overcome a hundred times in a
day, of so many enemies as we have, if this were not, yt god comes between
them and us, God is our defender against al our enemies
and sets himself against them as our defendour. And why should we mark
this? Let us behold and consider the Devils might, power, and will. He is a
roaryng Lion, says Saint Peter, who desires nothing else, but wholly too
swallowe us up and devour us. And what are we? 1. Pet. 5.8.
even a Flee, as I have already said. Afterward when we shall consider, that
the Devil comes not to assault us a far, neither makes his preparation,
or lays his furniture against us, on the one side, or on the other, but
finds matter in our selves, wherewithal to vanquishe and overcome us, that
is to say, all our affections which are so many enimities and hatredes
against GOD, as Saint Paul says in the eight of the Romans. Romans 8.7.
When I say, we shall have thought upon this, we shall afterward with a
good zeal pray unto God, that he lead us not into temptation. And moreover
because we do not sufficiently perceive, how much we ought to suspect and
fear our own lusts, it is said that they fight against us, and would
overcome us indeed, were it not that GOD gave us strength to resist and
withstand the same and kept us always under his sauegarde and defense, How
dangerous our own lusts and affections are.
that we might be defended by him: For if he did not bear a strong hand over
us, and rain us hardly up, it is certain, that we could not tell how to go
one step without falling, and that into a mortal and deadly fall, as we have
already declared. Two good reasons, why we should wholly submit our selves to
Gods government and guiding.
So then let us learn to commit our selves wholly into the guiding, government,
and sauegarde of almighty God, because we are not able to govern our selves,
and that if we would take it upon us, our presumption should be a cause, to
make every one of us in so doing, to break our necks. And thus much concerning
the first answer. And now we demand further.


The Minister. By what means is this brought to pass?


The Child. When he does guide and govern us by his holy spirit, thereby
causing us, too love goodness and to hate evil, to follow righteousness, and to
the sin: for by the power of the holy spirit, we overcome the Devil sin,
and the flesh.


The Minister. What our nature leads us to.
We have said that besides that we are frail and weak, we are given to
evil. So long then as God shall leave us in our nature, we shall love sin and
hate goodness, we shall hate righteousness, and love evil. This prayer the^
shortly co^teineth thus much, that God would change us. For man, if he rightly
consider himself as he is, shall find that until such time, as God have taken
him into his defense, he is setteled, and that with delight and pleasure in
sin: for we bring such corruption with us from our mothers womb, that all our
senses, our thoughts, and our affections, are continually given to evil. Genesis
6.5.
Now if God did not strengthen us, and hold us as it were by the hand:
whither shall we come? We have not only this frailty to cause us to fall,
but we also have this inclination and readiness to evil. Behold then a poor
and miserable state. for ye Devil is a Tyrant: who has rule, and authority
over us, until such time as God deliver us and set us free, John. 8.16.
even as speech is had thereof in the viii. Chap. of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
according to S. John.

This petition then, contains in su^me, thus much in it self, that God would
in such sort chauge us, that whereas now we are inclined to evil, and given
thereto, yea that we run to it, and are settled in sin, that he would
renew us, and place in us such a print of his goodness, and of his fear, that
we may hate the evil, and love the good, which we ought to aspire and come
to. But how does he work this? Gods spirit an effectual instrument of our
new birth.
By the power of his Spirit. And this is the cause why these two words, the
Spirit and the Flesh are so often set one of them against another in the
Scripture. Now this word flesh, is not taken according too the common
speech, but it is taken for man, insomuch that all that we bring from our
mothers womb, Flesh and Spirit what they mean.
is called flesh. And what meneth this word Spirit? It is nothing of that
belongs unto us, that is to say, of that we have of our natural
inheritance: but it is the grace of God by the which we are renewed, Wherefore
it behooves, that God manifest his power over us and in us, in such sort,
that we be reformed from evil to good, The Spirit a pleadge of our electio.
and that he so take us to himself, that by this means he ratify and confirm
the adoption which he has made, in electing and chosing us for his children.
And the spirit of God woorketh with a certain power, which declares it self
in us. But here the question is of drawing us out of the Devils tyranny, and of
placing us in such liberty, that we should know, learn, and strive, freely
and with a good affection, to subdue our appetites and lusts. And now then we
have to mark that in praying God, not to lead us into temptation, we must come
to the mean whereby we may overcome it, that is that we may be renewed by his
spirit. Now we cannot be allowed for his children, except we have well
practiced this sentence of S. Paul, when he says: that if we will protest and
publish our selves to be Gods children, Romans 8.26.27.
we must believe also in the holy spirit, which cries in our mouth. By that
he declares, that when it pleases God too receive us to mercy, and when he
will take us for the members of his Church, that then he woorketh mightily in
us, for that purpose, by his spirit. Thus then we see, what is our defense,
by which God warraunteth us against all the assaults of the Devil and all the
corruptions which are in our selves. Now we demand again.


The Minister. Have all men need to pray thus, and to be guided so?


The Child. Yea, for the Devil watches continually for us, 1. Pet. 5.8.
even as a roaring Lion ready too devour us, and we on the other part be so
feeble and frail, that he would out of hand beat us down and overcome us,
if God did not strengthen us and give us the victory.


The Minister. Let us come now more largely to declare, that which has been
shortly touched: that is to say, that it is not in vain nor through a
Ceremony, that we make this request unto GOD, but that necessity ought to
enforce us thereto. Words in prayer without feeling and understanding, is but
hypocrisy before God.


And this is very requisite to be well understood, for there are diverse
Hypocrites that will easily enough pronounce and have it often in their mouths
saying, Lead us not into temptation: But yet they know not wherefore they
say so. Behold even the Papists themselves: it is not to be doubted, but
that al they that say their Pater Noster, as they call it, carry even their own
condemnation with them before GOD. It is true that they that speak Latin, and
were never at Schole, know not what they say, even as well men as women, but
what soever it be, yet so it is, that even that, shall be called to a reckoning
and account before God: For they make themselves believe that they have their
freewyll, to guide them selves either well or ill. True it is that they will not
deny but that the grace of GOD supplieth their want, and that they are weak of
themselves, and that GOD must stretch out his hand unto them. They will
confess so much: Papists say and unsay all with one breath.
yet for all that so it is, that they prefer and highly esteem their own
virtues, and have always in their mouth this word Freewyll: and we can do
good and evil, we can easily follow the good way, and govern our selves in
such sort, that when God shall help us but a little, we can of our selves
enforce our selves, and rydde our business: How true this is, See Philip.
2.13.
To be short, both the will and the deed is in man, at the least in part as
they suppose.

So then in praying it is certain that they know not too whom they direct
them selves and their prayers, and that so many times as they shall have mu^bled
up their Pater Noster, it is for nothing else but to make them without excuse
before GOD: For they show themselves to be liars in that, when they say,
Lead us not into temptation, and it seems them: that it is in their power
too escape and too dispense with themselves. Wherefore so much the more
diligently ought we to mark and weigh this point, All have need of the grace
and glory of God.
to wit, that all have need to be aided from GOD, and that not only in
some one respect or other, but also to be fully and wholly governed by him,
because they are able too do nothing of them selves, and they should every
minute of an hour be vanquished and overcome, unless that GOD did strengthen
them against assaults.

Let us take then the most valiant men in the world, The best are not able to
stand without God.
and those that seem to be the most hardy, bold, and courageous, and it is
certain, that even in the least of their combats and assaults, they should be
overwhelmed, unless God did reach out his hand to them, and that they were
vpholden by him. And indeed, they that have proceeded further, and have
atteyned more than others, ought always to consider how temptations do
overcome men's infirmity and weakness. When we shall see, that one is fallen
into theft, an other into whoredom, an other into coueteousnes, and other
faults and wicked deeds, they are so many glasses set before us, to make us
know and feel our own frailty. Gods children may take profit by the falls
of their fellows, and of other men.
And thus we ought to be moved, when some shall speak too us and say: Such a
matter is fallen out to such a part, and to such a one: and to pray, O
Lord, lead us not into temptation. And wherefore? our sluggishnes and sloth
is repressed thereby, and we are with all thereby provoked, to pray and beseech
him. Man's pride beaten down.
And we shall be altogether without excuse, if we think that we are not of the
same lump, and are subject in time to come, not only to fall so far, but
also to do worse, if we will of our selves go out and place our selves in
the fields, and that without trayning and government. Now the trayning and
government is, as I have already said, Gods holy spirit who is the true
guide, whereof we have need even as a little child, A fit similitude.
that is daded (as we say) guyded and lead of the Father, by the arm or hand.
Mark then for the conclusion of this point, that this request is necessary for
all: and that when we shall pray unto God in such sort, that we must have this
sentence well imprinted within us, that we can do nothing at all, and that
until such time, as God have manifested his strength and power, we should be
overcome at every blow: to be short, that the devil should bear rule over us
in all tyranny, and that we have no other remedy, but to say, O Lord
strengthen me, and afterward I may rejoice in my self, as Saint Paul
shows us an example thereof in himself, saying: I will rejoice my self in him
that strengthens me. Now Saint Paul uses an exception, that is to say in
God. He confesses that he is able to do nothing, as also we are admonished
and taught by the Prophet Jeremy, who says: Ier. 9.23.24. 2. Cor. 10.17.
Let not the strong man glory in his strength, the wise man, in his wisdom,
the rich man in his riches: but whosoever will glory, let him know that I am he
that makes strong, that gives wisdom, that inricheth, and who am indeed
the glory and rejoicing of men. 1. Cor. 1.31.
And this is that which we have to learn concerning this point. And moreover
to cause us the better to feel this, let us know what a one the devil is: he
is as I have said a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.6.
and who has power and will enough wholly to devour us, were it not that God
sets him self between us two: for our aid and defense shall never be
found in all that which we can bring of our own, whatsoever it be: wherefore
God alone must bring us, and give us the victory, or else otherwise, we shall be
torn all in pieces. But now tell me,


The Minister. What means this Word Temptation?


The Child. The wily guiles and subtle assaults of the devil, which he
uses to take us unawares, even as our natural understanding, is ready to be
deceived, and to deceive our selves, and our will, is rather ready, to give it
self over to evil, then to God.


The Minister. Thus because this word, Temptation is obscure and dark, we ask
what it means and signifies: for there are diverse, and it may be, even in
this company, that have prayed God not to lead them into temptation, and did
yet never know what they asked of God. But that is to profane and abuse the
prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ has given us. To pray and not to
understand, is to abuse prayer.
It is true, that men will easily and suddenly conceive, that Temptation comes
of Tempting, and every one will indeed say, I am tempted on this sort and on
that, but yet this is not all: behold therefore why we must have a short
declaration of the word.

Now temptation in sum imports all the will guiles that the Devil has
to deceive us by. What the word Temptation means.
And he finds us ready inclined thereto: for we are not only subject to
be deceived, but there is none of us all, that boweth and bends not himself
thereto. Though we see others to be deceived, yet we will not leave of to
follow their ways and steps: behold a marvelous blindness, and yet
notwithstanding this is ouercommon. So then, the more that the Devil finds us
apt and disposed to evil, the more does he therefore apply and use the
means, to provoke and stir us up thereto.

There are two sorts of temptations. Two sorts of Temptations, outward and
inward.
One sort may be called outward, and the other are within. The outward
temptations are thus, as when the Devil, under the shadow or color of
showing us a goodly and fair house, or a field, or some such like thing, We
must beware of wishing.
will come and give us a match, too kindle fire in us, thus I would indeed
that that were mine. The thing surely in it self, cannot be temptation, but
yet the Devil blinds us thereby, to deceive us, if it were possible. When a
man shall look upon a woman, he may indeed behold her, (how fair and
bewtifull so ever she be) with a chaste eye: but the devil will stir up
thereby a mean, to draw a man to lust, and whordome. To be short, the
creatures of God, how many so ever of them there be, both high and low, of
them selves cannot hurt us, nay they are profitable unto us: but the devil
makes us to stay and stand upon them, Men must be heedle, circumspect, and
reverent in the use of Gods creatures.
to the end we may abuse them: insomuch that these things which are
profitable for us, and which we ought to use, as the singular blessings of
God, are so many baits and snares to bring us to destruction: even as the
Sun was worshipped of the Pagans and Gentiles. It is certainly a very glorious
creature, and so profitable, as nothing more: for we know that the Sun gives
us light and has such force in it self, that it causes the earth to bring
forth all fruits for our sustenaunce and nourishment: and yet men have made
thereof an idol. Behold how the devil, by his subtleties and crafts,
draws men to destruction. Now the other temptations, Inward temptations.
of which mention is made in this place, are within, and they are these wicked
appetites and lusts, which the devil kindeleth in us: for man's heart is as it
were a furnace: Let men put coals into a furnace and afterward blow, behold
fire lighted and kindled. Even so much may be said of us, for we are ready
to receive all wicked affections, which are so many coals, How sin
begins and increases in man.
and then behold the devil he comes and blows thereupon, and then the
fire is in good earnest and thoroughly kindled. This concupiscence and lust then,
which the devil does in such sort put into us, when that it provoke us
and leads us to evil, these are I say, the temptations, spoken of in this
place. So then, when we pray unto God, that he lead us not into temptation,
let us well mark, that we have need to be warranted and defended from all
the deceiptes of the devil: The great blindness of man's heart to good things
before regeneration.
otherwise we shall be sodeinely caught, and deceived at every turn. It is so
indeed, for we are inclyned and ready too evil, and as for good, we know
not what it means, until such time as God have renewed us, and changed us,
as we have already declared. But now we demand and ask further?


The Minister. But wherefore ask thou of GOD that he lead thee not into
evil, seeing that that is an office belonging properly and peculiarly to the
Devil.


The Child. As God through his mercy preserves his faithful people, and
suffers not the Devil to lead them out of the way, nor sin to overcome
them: so these whom he will punish, he does not only cast of and withdraw
his grace from them, but also delivers them to the Devil, that they may be
subject to his tyranny, yea he strikes them with blindness, and gives them up
into a reprobate mind.


The Minister. Behold here a very hard question: for it seems that this
request or petition is not agreeable to reason: We demand of God, that he
place us not in temptation and do we pray him that he would not make us
murderers or whooremongers? and yet that belongs unto the Devil. John. 8.44.
It seems then that in this request there is manifest absurdity, and that
we attribute that unto God, which is rather proper unto the Devil: for he is
the father of lying the prince of iniquity, and the author of sin. But this
agrees not to God: and yet it seems that men impute even the very fault there
of unto him. Saint James says, Iam. 1.13.14.
that we need not to go seek that without us, which is within us: for no man
is tempted but by his own concupiscence and lust. To be short, A fit
comparison.
there is then the furnace, as I have said, and the fire: that is to say, that
we are the furnace: or concupiscences, and lusts are the walls, and the
Devil kindles them. And wherefore is it, that our Lord Jesus Christ
teaches us to pray on this fashion to God his father, Lead us not intoo
temptation? This altogether gainesayeth his righteousness. True it is, that at
the first show this manner of speech seems hard: but we must come too
Gods secret judgments, Gods secret judgments must be reverenced.
which (to be short and to conclude) we must adore and reverence, seeing we
can not atteyne to a full and perfect knowledge thereof: for this is
sufficient, that we know in part, that which belongs to our salvation, and
that God reserve with him self the rest until the last day, wherein we shall
behold him face to face. 1. Cor. 13.12.
Now we see, how God keeps his faithful people, and every one feels the
same, by his own experience. And wherefore is it, that we stand upright
against the devil and his assaults? It is, because that we are vpholden by
God, for our victory comes from thence, as I have already said. Behold
then it is God, that preserves us from the devils temptations. And on the
other side, How and whom God leads into temptation.
he leads them into temptation, whom he has rejected, and whom he will not
receive or take into his protection and sauegard. And this is the reason also,
Exodus 9.12. Romans 9.18.
wherefore it is often said, that God hardens a perverse, froward, and
obstinate heart. At the first blushe and appearaunce these matters seem
strange. And also there are at this day varlets and fantastical men, who
blaspheme, when such things are spoken, and would that all this were blotted
out of the holy scripture, and vex them selves when we read that God blinds
men, after that he sees that they are hardened. And is it so? yea indeed: but
that is attributed to God, as to a just Judge. As if a Judge sit in his seat,
and say: A familiar and plain example.
Tomorowe I will cause a whoremonger to be punished if he amend not: and yet
notwithstanding he lets him go on forewarde in his vilainie. If a Judge
say so, what reason is there against it? So then we see that there is good
reason, that God stryke them with blindness, that are reprobate and rejected
from him: wherefore let us not any longer think this petition strange, which
we make: to wit, that God lead us not into temptation.

It is true, that at the first show, this goes beyond our capacity and
reason as I have already said: but we must come thus far, that Gods
judgments are bottomless depthes, and so that God leads into temptation,
those whom it pleases him. Romans 11.33.
And after what sort does he perform this? not only because that evil
proceeds from us, but also because he condemns them, whom he has forsaken,
and rejects them, that they may be overcome of all temptations. He delivers
them to Satan, as the hangman appointed to put them to death, and the executor
of his justice. Even as a Judge having pronounced his sentence against an evil
doer, will deliver him afterward into the hands of the executioner: So does
God deal in this behalf. Behold then how he leads into temptation those,
that are not of the number of his children, and whom he has not in his
guiding and government. And therefore let us mark, that if it pleased God to
use rigor against us, it is certain, that after he has taken his power from
us, he should not only leave us for such as we are, but he should deliver
us into the hands and power of Satan. As it is said, that he will send
strength of error, and strong delusion. That word is very meet to be weighed,
2. These. 2.11.
for Saint Paul says not, that he will only give us over to the devil, that
he may abuse and deceive us, but he says, that he will send strength of
error, insomuch that he shall be able to execute his pleasure in us, by his
errors and illusions, so that we shall be, as it were brute beasts. The
corruption of man's nature, the beginning of evil.
And after that we shall be so blinded in our understandings, he will draw us
to unruly and disordered passions, and make us do this and that, yea we shall
run after it, and that so far, as we shall be cast down headlong. And how
does he this? It is true that the beginning hereof, comes from the
corruption of our nature, which we bring with us from our mothers womb. And
then there is the devil, who kindles the fire of our lusts: but whatsoever
it be, yet so it falls out, that God woorketh withal: How God works in the
deed of sin, and yet no sin to be imputed to him.
not that sin or evil should any manner of way be imputed unto him, but
because that by his incomprehensible judgments, he is able to blind these
men, that are not of the number of his people and of his Church: and therefore
it must needs be, that such men should be under the tyranny of the devil, that
he possess them, and pull them every way, on every side, and in every place,
where he shall think good him self. Now we demand further yet,


The Minister. What means this clause which follows: For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever?


The Child. To put us again in remembrance, that our prayers be rather
grounded upon God, and upon his almighty power and goodness, than upon our
selves, who indeed are not worthy to open our mouths to call upon him. And
also to teach us to conclude and shut up all our prayers, in the praising of
his power and goodness.


The Minister. When we have prayed unto God, that he lead us not into
temptation, the mean and way is added, as I have already touched: that is,
that he deliver us from evil, or from the evil one. For as we have alleged
out of the eight Chapter of the Gospel of Jesus Christ according to Saint
John, John. 8.44.
if he delivered us not, we should always remain in this miserable bondage
of his. Now this has been declared in the first place, that our Lord Jesus
Christ has acquyted and discharged us before God his father: and next, Romans
5.15. Romans 6.3.4.
that he died (says Saint Paul) to the end that we might live, that he was
buried and rose again, to the end that we might follow him to the grave,
that is in the death of sin in us, and lastly in a better life than
heretofore we have lead. But it behooves us daily and deeply to think upon
this lesson, and that our Lord Jesus Christ make us feel the fruit of his
death and resurrection, Our redemption must be continual.
and that he continue to redeem us still, to wit, out of the power of sin
and Satan. Now when we make this prayer, we say for conclusion, for thine is
the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever, and ever. Hereuppon we ask,
wherefore this conclusion is added. And there are two reasons or causes of it
put down in the answer.

The first is: that it is don, to protest and declare that all that we have
prayed for before, Our prayers ought to be grounded upon Gods glory, goodness,
and power.
is not grounded upon any thing but the glory of God, his justice, and his
goodness, and lastly upon his sovereign rule and authority. And now it
behooves us to declare this, as it were by piece meal and particularly, to the
end it may be better understood. Let us put the case that this were not added,
to this form of prayer, every man might doubt, saying, Alas: shall I be heard
of him, when I have asked of him mine ordinary and daily bread, the forgiveness
of my sins, and that he would guide me by his holy spirit? yea seeing that I
have craved more high and excellent things of him, to wit, that his name may
be glorified, that his kingdom may increase and multiply daily more and more,
till it come to the accomplishment, fulfilling, and perfection thereof: these
things surmount and exceed all that man has. And how may I be sure that I
shall be heard? Should we doubt of it. But our Lord declares unto us that our
requests and prayers are not grounded upon that which we bring with us: for
who or what are we? And what is it that we bring with us. And though that we
were the best disposed people in the world to pray, yet certain it is, that a
man may behold us continually altered and changed in a minute of an hour.
Two good similitudes to express how vneffectual prayers are, which are
grounded upon men.
So our request and prayer should be very weak, and indeed nothing else but
smoke, or as a wind that vanishes (as men say) if it had not an other more
strong and assured fundation. And this is the cause, wherefore we are sent
back, as it were, to Gods glory, to his infinite power to his might, and to
his everlasting rule and government. If then we would be well assured, that
our prayers have not been vain, and that we have not been frustrated of our
hope, but that we have obtained all that which we have demanded, let us come
hither. Now haste thou prayed to God? Prayers rightly made shall not want their
effect.
even thus, I confess that he is almighty, that all power belongs too him,
that my requests being grounded thereupon, shall not be without having their
effect and accomplishment. And thus much for the first reason which is alleged
in this place.

Now the second is, that we learn always to conclude and shut up our prayers
with thanksgeuings. Prayers made and not Gods glory only respected therein are
vain.
Wherefore when we have to pray unto God, let us make continually this final
conclusion, yt God may be glorified. For without that, all our prayers shall be
nothing but puffes of wind, neither shall there be any order therein, or mark
whereon a man ought to stay himself. There shall be nothing found therein, but a
light and flying affection, unless we pray to God, that it would please him,
always to show us this grace, that we may desire, that he may be honored,
and that such praises may be yielded unto him, The confession and feeling of
our sins should not hinder us from prayer, but rather provoke us thereto.
even as he deserves. And thus much concerning the second reason, which we
have to mark out of this speech, where it is said that the kingdom belongs
unto god, and the glory for evermore, to the end that in confessing always,
our pouerties and our faults, we leave not for all that, whatsoever fall out,
too pray unto him. And why so? because that if we enter into our selves, we
shall desire nothing but that Gods kingdom may increase, that his power may be
known, that his will may be done, that his glory may shine forth in the
midst of us, and we may comfort our selves in his goodness, in his
righteousness, and in his mercy. Otherwise there is no doubt, but that we
shall be worse then brute beasts, or like unto poor fearful and astonished
people, that is, nothing else but cry and houle, and yet know not wherefore:
but that we may thrust forward our prayers continually to this mark, that
God may be glorified, and praised: for when we shall seek the aduauncemente
of his kingdom, that is to say, that he may have rule and authority over
us, and that we may yield him the homage and service, How and when our prayers
be well ordered and framed.
that he deserves and requires, then shall our prayers be rightly ruled and
ordered.

Now we will fall down before the majesty of our good God, acknowledging the
infinite faults and offenses, for which we are blame worthy: praying him also
to make this doctrine so effectual and powerful in us, that it may make us
always to submit our selves too his service and obedience, Two general ends
of the doctrine of God.
and that it may stand us in steed to confirm in us the grace of his
adoption, which he has wrought in us, that so we call upon him, as our
father, in more greater boldness then heretofore, and show, that it is not in
vain, that we demand that he lead us not into temptation, neither give us
over to Satan: but that he would govern us by his spirit, and give us strength
and power to resist, yea to overcome the Devil, and the lusts of our own
flesh. And that he would not only show this grace and favor to us, but to
all the people and nations of the earth. etc.


God be praised now and ever, So be it.
I pray thee (gentle Reader) to have an eye to the Marginall notes, and refer
them to their right places: and also to correct thy book from these faults
following, and afterward to read with judgment too thy profit and comfort.
Follio 6. Page 2. Line 12. For abroad, read aboade. Fol. 9. b. line 22. For
we the^, read we must not then. Fol. 13. b in the margent, for de sacro
Basil, read de sacro Baptist. Fol. 18. b line 6. for it said, read it was
said. Fol. 20. b. line 22. for accept, read except. Fol. 23 a. line 19. for
imperfection, read perfection. Fol. 24. b. line 3 for win, read convince.
Fol. 29. b. line 18 for confirm, read conform. Fol. 31. b line 8 for
creation, read nation. Fol. 34. a last line, for sufficiently, read stiffly.
Fol. 39. a. line 25. for sins, read sinnner. Fol. 39. b. line 9. for word,
read, cord, Fol. 40. b line 19. for debated, read cast down. Fol. 41. a.
line 3. for makers, read works. Fol. 41. a. line 12. for one, ceade do one.
Fol. 42. b. line 24. for beastly, read beasts. Fol. 50. b. line 10. for at
time, at that time. Fol. 59. a line first, for dead, read death. Fol. 63. a.
lin 22. for his read this, and b. line 23. for in it, read in us.

Imprinted in London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
George Bishop, 1580.


