TWO AND TWENTY LECTVRES UPON THE FIVE FIRST CHAPTERS OF JEREMIAH.

WITH PRAYERS ANNEXED, AT the end of every Lecture: By Master JOHN CALVIN.

WHICH BEING FAITHFVLLY COLlected from him as he uttered them in Latin, in
the Schools of Geneua, were afterward translated into French: And now newly
turned out of French, into English, with a Table at the end, containing the
sum and scope of every Lecture.

MATTHEW. 24.15. Let him that reads, consider it. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston, for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at the sign of the Star,
under Saint Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Popes head Alley. 1620.

TO THE NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY LVCIE, COUNTESS of Bedford: And to
the Right Honorable and highly honored Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington,
Barrones: mercy and peace be multiplied.
RIght Honorable: The holy Prophet Jeremiah (according to the diverse subjects
he had to work upon in his ministerial function) is forced sometimes with
Isaiah, his forerunner, Isa. 58.1.
to lift up his voice like unto a Son of Thunder; and eftsoons, with the
same Prophet again, to altar and change the same, into the still, and soft
voice of a Son of Consolation: wherein, 1. King. 19.12.
as Gods faithful messenger, he carries himself faithfully. For as a Son
of Thunder, he sharply inueyes against the sins, and sinners of his time;
boldly denouncing Gods judgments against them: and as a Son of consolation,
(for their sakes whom the Lord had appointed to be heirs of salvation) he
sweetly preaches Christ: mixing often with the terrible threats of the Law,
the saving promises of the Gospel. That if any came by the ministry of the
one, Act. 2.37.
to be pricked in conscience, and humbled: he readily, like the good Samaritan,
powers in the mollifying and healing oil of the other, to cure and revive
them. And thus as a wise disposer, and dispenser of the manifold secrets of
God, Psalm. 101.1.
his song (in a manner) throughout his Prophecy (like Aarons Bells) sounds
forth judgment and mercy: Exodus 28.33.
preaching judgment to such as were, Isa. 33.14.
and would be sinners in Sion, and mercy to such as he saw to to be mourners in
Sio^. Isa. 61.3.
In which respects he may serve as a lively pattern for all Preachers to
follow, in their ordinary course of preaching. These Sermons of his (many of
them) do notably suit to our times; and therefore ought to be read, and read
again, of all estates, high and low.

But for as much as in reading the Prophets, sundry difficulties are met
withal, which every one has not the skill of himself to dissolve; it would
(as I think) be very beneficial for such, if they had an holy helper, such an
one as this, ready at hand: Job 33.23.
An interpreter: One (indeed) of a thousand; that might help to dissolve their
doubts, and unloose their hard knots for them: That so understanding what they
read, they might (by the blessing of God) with the more ease come to profit by
their reading. Act. 8.34.35
This has our Philip faithfully performed (according to that light of
understanding wherewith the Lord had extraordinarily endowed him) throughout
the Prophets: and pity it is, that so great light should after a sort lie
buried in darkness, from many well minded Christians; only because they are
not (as they might be) turned into our own native language.

Not many years since, a Lamp (if I may so speak) began to be kindled, for
giving them some insight into the harder passages of the Prophets; by
translating this Authors Commentaries upon the Prophecy of Isaiah into
English: but much more clear would the light have now shined, if thereunto had
been added the translation of all his Lectures upon the Prophecy of Jeremiah
also. For mine own part, seeing sufficiency of oil has failed me, to furnish
out this second Lamp unto the end; I have for the present proceeded only
through the five first Chapters.

The which (Right Honorable) as a testimony of that service and duty I owe
your Honors; I have presumed (as one overtaken with Ahimaaz his have, somewhat
abruptly I confess) to dedicate unto you. And if in token of your favorable
acceptance thereof, you shall be pleased to suffer the same to pass, under
your Honorable names, and patronage; many may be occasioned thereby to bless
God for you: and my self still to pray, that the blessing of him who was ready
to perish, may come upon you.

Your Honors humbly at commandment, CLEMENT COTTON.

TO THE READER.
GOod Christian Reader, if (as Solomon says) thou would be truly wise for
thy self, Prou. 9.12.
Prou. 11.17.
or have a purpose to show mercy to thine own soul, in any thing; then
manifest it in this one thing (absolutely needful for thee, Luke 10.42.
if hitherto thou have neglected it) viz. Be sure, before thou leave this thy
natural life; that God (by the ministry of his holy word) has breathed into
thy dead soul, Ioh. 5.25. Eccles. 9.10.
a supernatural and spiritual life. For in the grave whither thou go,
there will be neither time, nor place for thee, to have this work of works
effected, Ioh. 12.35. Psalm. 39.5.
Thy life is in length but like a span; and every step thou steppest, for ought
thou know; 1. Sam. 20.3.
there is but a step between thee and death. Heb. 9.27. Genesis 27.2.
Seeing therefore by Gods especial appointment, thou art once to step out of
this world (how soon thou know not) it being also thy last step: it
stands thee upon, whilst life and liberty lasts, wisely to foresee, that
then thou steppest surely, 2. Pet. 1.10. Prou. 22.3.
For if thou die, and after descendest into the grave, Prou. 11.7.
a natural man; so thou risest at the last day, and then woeful will thy
condition be: Heb. 12.14.
for thou shall never see the face of God to thy comfort. His wrath is now
revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness, Romans 1.18.
and unrighteousness of men: Alas! How much more then? Psa. 77.7 Needful
therefore it is for thee now; 2. Cor. 6.2.
even now whilst the day of salvation lasts, to lift up thy heart with thine
hands, Lam. 3.41.
with loud and strong cries, unto God in the heavens, that for the passion and
death of Christ, he will be pleased to grant thee grace, that his word may now
so sink into thine ears, Luke 9.44. Isa. 55.10.11. Joel 1.23.
that thence it may soake as the rain of righteousness, into the furrows of
thine heart; to Psalm. 19.8.
illuminate, to Iam. 1.21.
regenerate, to Mat. 13.33.
season, and Ioh. 17.17.
sanctify, thy whole man, soul and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. that thereby (as by
the Spirit of the Lord) thou being cast as into a Romans 6.17.
new mold, and 2. Cor. 3.18.
transformed into the same image, from glory to glory; thou may with
patience, Tit. 2.13. 1. Cor. 2.8.
comfort, and good conscience, wait till the last day; for the appearance of
the Lord of glory, thy Lord and thy God, the man Christ Jesus. For it is not
sufficient for thee only to know the word, to be the word of Gods grace; Act.
14.3. and 20.32.
unless by sound evidences, thou also discernest, that it has been a word of
grace unto thee: Romans 10.8.
nor barely affirm it to be the word of faith: but by good proof to find,
that it has been the means to breed a saving faith in thee. Nor yet only to
say, that it is able to save souls: Iam. 1.21.
but that it has been Gods powerful instrument to save thee. For the truth
is, the word of God was not 2. Tim. 3.16.
inspired from God, nor written by 2. Pet. 1.21.
holy men of God, to Hos. 8.12.
us, and Romans 15.4.
for us, to the end it should stand Hos. 8.12.
stranger-like, aloof off from us; but rather by admitting it to dwell and
inhabit richly, and plenteously in us, Colos. 3.16. it might at length impart
of that heavenly virtue that is in it, Iam. 1.21.
unto us. We commonly esteem men so far forth good, Romans 5.7.
as they have extended of their good things unto us: and those things good,
Ioh. ^.10.
that have communicated of their goodness unto us. Isa. 39.8. Romans 6.17. Heb.
6.5.
Now if there be any thing under heaven good, which also is able to make us
good, it is the good word of God. But we shall but coldly, and faintly commend
it for good; unless we know by good experience, that it has communicated of
its goodness unto us; what good (I pray you) does that meat or drink do us,
which we receive not into us? But where the stomach craves, and receives
these; the effects will soon be discerned. 1. Sam. 14.27.29. Judge. 15.19.
I tasted a little honey (says Jonathan) and mine eyes have been enlightened.
Sampson drinking (in his excessive thirst) of the water of Lehi; his spirit
revived. 1. Sam. 30.11.12.
The like befell the poor affamished Egyptian. Oh that we could come to the
good word of God, but with the one half of that hungry and thirsty appetite,
wherewith (for the most part) we come to these good creatures of God: we come
to these indeed; we take these; we receive these; Psalm. 104.15.
and the goodness that is in these, we make it our own. And if through any
defect in nature, we feel them any way defective in their nature and
properties to us; we are ready by and by to say, all is not as it should be
with us. Do we so strongly and mainly press toward these, whose virtue at
the best, being perishable, Ioh. 6.27. 1. Cor. 6.13.
can but sustain a perishable life: and can we not be at quiet with our
selves, unless we feel in our selves, that our natures are thereby cheered and
refreshed? Luke 5.1. and 12.1. Matthew. 11.12. 1. Pet. 2.2.
And shall we not much more press forwards, to take, and receive into us, as
with violence, the good word of God, which is fitted and framed by God
himself, to sustain us spiritually? Let us draw near unto it then, with
knowledge, desire, and faith, Heb 4.2.
as the poor woman in the Gospel, drew nigh to Christ. So shall we sensibly
feel the saving and sanctifying 2. Tim. 3.15.16.
virtue thereof to be infused into us to our everlasting consolation and
comfort. And then shall our hearts and mouths be enlarged to speak all the
good, Psalm. 138.2. Psalm. 19.7.8.9.10.
of this good word of God, that can be devised. Yea, we shall not only praise
it, but also with David, the man of God, we shall highly prize it; far above
all earthly profits, or delights, Psalm. 119.72.103. Then we shall be able with
him again and again, to profess how entirely we love it, verse. 97. yea, how
greatly we delight in it, verse. 174. yea, what joy and felicity we take in it,
verse. 14.162. yea, how incessantly our thoughts and meditations are taken up
about it: namely, before break of day, ver. 147 throughout the day, verse. 97.
in the night. verse. 55. yea, at midnight, verse. 62. Let us not then (as the
manner of some is) permit the word of God, barely to harbor in our houses: but
let us endeavor rather, to harbor it within the closet of our hearts. Psalm.
119.11. Luke 11.28.
And oh happy we! that ever it was our hap, to lodge within us so honorable
and gracious a guest; that will every way be so beneficial unto us, Psalm
119.24. Verse. 50.
as in our greatest distractions, to council us; in our deepest distresses, to
comfort us: and when we are to seek of our way; to direct us, directly to that
haven of happiness, 105.
where there shall be mirth without mourning; fellowship with God, and all his
saints, without parting; where we shall be ever pressed to do his will without
fainting; and that, time without ending. As for those that Heb. 2.3.
neglecte so great salvation, that have the word, 2. These 2.10.
but love it not: that read it, but will not be Psa. 50.16.17
reformed by it: that Prou. 13.13.
despise it, Ier. 6.10.
reject, and scorn it: To say no more, their damnation sleeps not: God
cannot, nor will not put up, such indignities at the hands of sinners, Isa.
5.24. Ier. 5.13.14. and 6.10.11 unless they meet him, and that speedily, Amos
4.12.
by true and unfeigned repentance. And if thou say, Oh that I could! I wish thee
often to read these holy Sermons of repentance, penned by the holy Prophet
Jeremiah, for that purpose. For if repentance be a wounding of the heart,
proceeding of faith, which seeks unto God for mercy: then has Jeremiah, like
a skillful master builder in these present Chapters, and those that follow,
laid the groundwork of such a repentance out for thee. And if thou say, how
shall I understand, unless I have a guide? Act. 8.31.
Accept (I pray thee, for the present) of this, which God of his goodness has
here sent unto thee, by giving him access into thy Chariot, closet, or other
retired places: and if thou entreat him friendly, and make thy gain by him
of this little; the Lord peradventure may hereafter trust thee with more.

But before I take my leave of thee, as the sum of all: let me entreat thee
(as thou tenderest thine own welfare) to lay up in thy heart, these six
lessons, which the word of God teaches thee, according as I find them laid
down by a learned Divine.

1 The word of God teaches thee, that thou being by creation made righteous,
art by the fall of Adam, and by thine own transgression, become sinful,
Eccles. 7, 31. Genesis 6.5.

2 The word of God teaches thee, that thou art by nature the child of Gods
wrath, and a firebrand of hell, Ephesians. 2.3.

3 The word of God teaches thee, that thou haste cause to be troubled for
this, more than for all worldly crosses, and to be humbled and cast down in
thy self before God for it, Act. 16.50.

4 The word of God teaches thee, that thou being laden with thy sins, and
weary of them, art not to sink down in despair of Gods goodness; but to
rely upon his mercy in Christ Jesus, Ezra. 10.2.

5 The word of God teaches thee, that thus relying upon God in Christ, he has
mercy in store for thee, Psalm. 130.7. Ioh. 3.16.

6 The word of God teaches thee, that all true believers have a constant care
and endeavor, both to learn and know the will of God, Ioh. 10.27.
and to obey it in all things, Luke 1.74.75. Tit. 2.11.12.

These points the word of God teaches: and these if we learn and believe, as
the word teaches them; we shall in the end be saved. And thus with my humble
prayers to God that it may be so,

I bid thee in Christ heartily farewell. C. C.

LECTVRES UPON THE FIVE FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE Prophecy of Jeremiah.
By Mr. JOHN CALVIN.
LECTVRE I.
The Prayer which Master Calvin was always wont to make at the beginning of
his Lectures. THe Lord enable us so to handle the secrets of his heavenly
wisdom, that we may truly profit in the fear of his holy name, to his glory
and our edification. So be it.

Having expounded the twelve lesser Prophets, and at length finished the
expositition of Daniels revelations: I have now begun, and purpose (the Lord
granting me life and leisure) to unfold unto you the book of Ieremiahs
Prophecy also: which if I attain unto, there will then remain no more of all
the Prophets, but only Ezechiel: for the exposition whereof I wish there may be
some other (and I hope my wish shall prevail) better fitted for that purpose
than my self.

What time Jeremiah began to prophecy.
As touching Jeremiah; note in the first place, that he began to execute his
prophetical office whilst Josias the King reigned; namely, in the thirteenth
year of his reign. For albeit that King was a sincere worshipper of God, yet
were things even then much out of frame, and confused: for the book of the Law
was lost; by means whereof it was easy for every one, at his pleasure, to
broach many wicked errors, quite contrary to true religion. Neither are we to
doubt, but in so great a liberty, many (who desired nothing more than to bring
in confusions) strove eagerly to pervert and overthrow the worship of God, and
the purity of doctrine: every one forging to himself many dotages and
impieties. For let it be granted that the Priests meant faithfully to teach the
people of God; yet did not their knowledge depend wholly upon the Law. Now
howsoever it be very likely, that the memory thereof was not utterly abolished;
yet questionless there only remained but some few relics of it, so as they
could not clearly gather thence what kind of government it was which God had
ordained to be in his Church. 2. Chro. 34.15.
For it is recorded in the holy History, that the book of the Law was found in
the eighteenth year of Josias his reign. Thus Jeremiah had begun even now to
prophecy, four, nay five years fully complete. This example then
sufficiently manifests what slothfulness and carelessness there is in men, in
endeavoring to advance the true worship of God. For he had given an express
charge by Moses, that a copy of the Law should not only be holily and
carefully kept in the Temple; but that the King himself also should have a
copy of it by him, Deuteronomy. 17.18. Besides, a commandment was added, that in all
their solemn feasts, the whole Law should be repeated in the ears of all the
people, Deuteronomy. 32.11. But after the Kings began once to revolt from Gods true
worship: the copy of the Law was no more entertained among them: and at length,
even the Law also it self was utterly lost. No doubt but this happened through
the tyranny of King Manasses, who exercised his cruelties no less upon the
Priests, than upon the rest of Gods servants. For no sooner brake any small
sparkle of light forth, but he made such a slaughter, that he caused blood to
run through all the streets of Jerusalem, as the sacred history testifies, 2.
King. 21.16. What marvel is it then, if he took and conveyed even out of the
Temple it self, all the written copies of the Law which were extant, that so
he might utterly extinguish all light of heavenly doctrine? Notwithstanding the
book which had bin hidden, was found again by Hilkiah the Priest, 2. Chro.
34.15.
as it is also recited in the chapter formerly alleged. This is it we have to
note then in the first place, from the circumstance of time, wherein Jeremiah
began to prophecy. For religion being thus corrupted, and every one taking
upon him to forge what errors soever him listed: the charge imposed upon the
Prophet, must of necessity be very irksome to him, or burdensome for him to
bear.

In the next place, we are also to note the end. He says, How long Jeremiah
prophesied.
that from this time he continued in executing his prophetical office until
the captivity of Babylon: he held on his course then for the space of 40.
years. Now in the progress of his book we shall better perceive, what and
how sharp the conflicts were, which he was feign to undergo. But put the case
the people had been much more teachable than they were, yet could not he
execute his charge enjoined him by God, without extreme grief, and also like
tediousness. For we shall see anon, what the sum of his message was with
which he was sent. Seeing then he continued these his painful labors,
Ieremiahs constancy and courage, noted.
forty years together: thence it is easy to judge with what an heroical
spirit he was endowed. Moreover, if we seriously consider, what, and how many
tempests were daily raised up against him, utterly to dis-hearten him, yea
wholly to turn him out of the right way: hereby also will his invincible
constancy, and ardent zeal, shine yet more clearly unto us, in that he yet
ceased not still to go on in those duties which he was to perform.
Therewithal also we are to note, that from the destruction of the City, after
which the inhabitants of Jerusalem were carried away captive into Babylon; that
even then Jeremiah desisted not. Jeremiah carried away into Egypt of the Jews
by force.
For he was led into Egypt, as it may easily be gathered out of the end of this
book; and especially from the 44. chapter: yea he was violently led thither,
albeit he had (from the mouth of the Lord) cursed all the Jews who sought
lurking holes in Egypt. Now when himself was thus constrained to go down
thither, this might much diminish his authority: for the wicked (as we know)
watch at every turn to epsy occasions how they may disgrace and slander the
servants of God. Neither might they seem to want some goodly pretext in this
behalf: Ho, this fellow has cursed all such as go down into Egypt. But (I
pray you) where dwelles he himself now? Even in Egypt, with the rest that are
fled thither. Neither is it to be doubted, but the faith of this holy man was
much assailed, by the breaking of these, and the like jests upon him; for as
much as impiety has evermore gone hand in hand with pride and arrogance: yet
there, Jeremiah constantly persisted in his course, yea even till the city was
rased. And it is like enough he continued his labors in teaching, more than
fifty years. Jeremiah stoned to death, as it is thought.
It is said by some, that he was stoned to death: and this is very likely; for
he ceased not still to enuay as vehemently against the Jews, which were fled
into Egypt, as he did during the time that the City was in safety. Now they
were at that time enraged with an extreme desperateness. Thence it came to
pass then that they slew the holy Prophet, which (in their conceit) they
thought they might lawfully do, in regard he insulted over them (as it were)
in their miseries: but he endeauored rather thereby to tame their pride and
rebellion, which was indeed now become incorrigible: but as for them they took
it not so.

I come now to the sum of the prophecy: The sum of Ieremiahs prophecy.
For Isaiah and the rest of the Prophets that lived in those times, had (for
the most part) lost their labor, and spent their strength in vain, what
remained unto Jeremiah then, but in few words to pronounce this sentence:
Hereafter expect no more grace nor pardon, for the time of the last vengeance
is at hand, in regard you have too long abused Gods patience, who hitherto has
forborne you, and with all mildness and long-suffering has exhorted you to
repentance, and has testified, that he would deal favorably and graciously
with you, if so be you would convert and turn into the right way

Thus then Gods mercy having by them been despised, it was requisite Jeremiah
should thus thunder against such kind of persons, who by their obstinacy (in
such a desperate rebellion) were grown incurable. Now ye see whereunto the
sum of this doctrine principally tends; namely to show, that the kingdom and
priesthood were at an end, because the Jews had so long a time together,
Isaiah had in like manner threatened them in his Isaiah, and by other of his
Prophets; by Jeremiah, and Ezechiel, he wholly convinced them as guilty, and
also pronounced sentence of condemnation upon them. This is the difference
which is to be noted, between the form of doctrine which Isaiah held, and
that which Jeremiah kept in his Sermons.

And yet to the end nothing might be wanting to his doctrine, it pleased God
that Jeremiah also should be an Herald and a publisher of his grace, and of
that salvation promised by Jesus Christ. But this exception must nevertheless
be retained; to wit, that he gives no hope of That is, in respect of being
freed from their 70. years captivity.
pardon or mercy, till after they should be chastised and corrected for their
offenses. Now then we see what Jeremiah principaly taught. But the whole, will
be better understood by the readers, and more distinctly perceived by the
continual progress of the Text. Neither is it my purpose now to show in
general what is to be sought in the Prophet (for this argument (as I take it)
is handled elsewhere) I only affirm then, See his preface before Isaiah.
that Jeremiah was sent of God to preach and publish to the people their last
ruin: and then, to declare the redemption to come: yet so, as that still he
places the captivity of 70. years between. I come now to the words.

Verse. 1. The words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, one of the Priests which were
at Anathoth in the land of Benjamin.

2 To wit the word of the Lord came unto him in the days of Josias, the son
of Amon, King of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.

3 And was, that is to say, he continued in his vocation, in the days of
Iehoiakim son of Josias King of Judah, until the end of the captivity of
Jerusalem, in the fifth month.


I Told you before, how it is not in vain, that the time is here prefixed
wherein Jeremiah began to execute his prophetical office in the Church of God;
namely, because the estate of the people was much corrupted; all religion
blemished, because the book of the Law was lost. Gods Law, the rule of Gods
worship.
For thither only must we go, to seek the rule of Gods worship; neither must
we pretend to fetch true understanding from any where else, but from this pure
fountain. Whilst impiety then had the swinge, and that it had already reigned
but too long by custom, among the Jews, Jeremiah steps suddenly forth: and
therefore it was a very heavy burden which God had imposed upon his sholders:
for it could not be avoided but many adversaries would rise up in opposition
against him, whilst he endeauored to bring the people back to the pure
doctrine of the Law, which at that time was proudly trampled under foot, of the
greater part of this people.

He calls himself the son of Hilkiah. The Jews think this is that
Hilkiah the Priest, which found the book of Moses, five years after: but this
is not likely, as I think. The conjecture of Saint Jerome Saint Jerome.
is altogether frivolous; in regard that from the words which the prophet adds
a little after, he gathers, Verse. 6.7.
that he was but a child when he began to prophecy: as if he gave not
himself this title by way of similitude. It is uncertain in what time of his
age he was called to his prophetical office: yet it is probable that he was
then come to man's estate, because it was needful he should be furnished with
more than ordinary authority. Moreover, had he been young, or a child,
undoubtedly he would not have concealed so great and excellent a miracle, but
would have showed how he was created a Prophet, before he attained to a
sufficient ripeness of years.

As touching his father, Of what stock Jeremiah came.
it is no marvel if the Jews transfer this name to the high Priest: for we
know how they are always rapt up (as it were) in their vain braggings. In as
much then as ambition possesses their hearts, hence it is they have affirmed,
that Jeremiah was the son of the high Priest, and all (forsooth) that they
might add the more pomp and glory to this estate. But what testifies the
Prophet himself? Truly he affirms he was the son of Hilkiah; but ye hear
him not say his father was the high Priest. Nay, he rather adds, of the
Priests which were at Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin. But we know that
Anathoth was a little village, Isa. 10.30.
of small esteem, not far off from the City of Jerusalem. Also Jeremiah
himself reports, that it was situate in the tribe of Benjamin. We may gather
from the words of Isaiah, that it was near to Jerusalem, when he says, that
poor Anathoth was afraid, Isa. 10.30. Isaiah there threatens Jerusalem, in
regard the enemy was near; saying, what is your confidence? For from your
gates you may hear the cry of the enemy, and the lamentations of your
brethren. For Anathoth is not very far from you, to wit, only three miles.
Seeing then Jeremiah says plainly he was borne in the village of Anathoth, why
should we imagine he was the son of the hie Priest? And as idle a conceit is
that which the Calde paraphrast adds; namely, The Calde paraphrast.
That the possession of Helkiah was in the town of Anathoth: as if (forsooth)
it had been permitted to the Priest to possess fields. God had only assigned
that which was sufficient to feed their cattle with, Numb. 35.2.3.4. Let us
then follow that which is certain, and that which is without controversy,
which also may well be collected from the words of the Prophet, namely, That
he was borne and bred in the poor village of Anathoth: and yet he affirms he
was of the stock and lineage of the Priests. His prophetical office then we
see might much better agree to his person, than to other of the Prophets; as to
Amos, or Isaiah, Isaiah was plucked from the Court, because he was of the
royal blood, and was ordained a Prophet. The same for diverse respects may be
said of Amos. For he was taken from the folds of beasts, being a shepherd, or
heard man, Amos 7.14. When God deputed such for Prophets in his Church, it is
most certain he meant thereby to reproach the Priests with their sloth and
carelessness. For albeit all the Priests were not Prophets, yet were they
thence to be taken: for the priestly state was (as it were) a seminary of the
Prophets. But there being in them a kind of brutishness, and as gross
ignorance as might be, God chose Prophets elsewhere, and thus discovered and
brought their shame to light. For it was their parts to have been the
messengers of the Lord of hosts: the custody of the Law ought to have been in
their lips, that at their mouth the people might go to seek the Law, Mal. 2.7.
In regard then that they were dumb dogs, God caused the honor of the
prophetical office to be transferred over unto others. But Jeremiah (as I have
already said) who was a Priest, was also therewithal a Prophet.

In the second verse, he begins to speak of his calling. Of Ieremiahs calling.
For it would have been too bare and naked, if only at the first entrance he
had affirmed that he came and brought a message: but in the second verse he
more fully shows he brought nothing but that which was given him in charge
from God: as if he should say, I have faithfully delivered that (as it were
from hand to hand) which God has enjoined me. For we know that God only has
all authority in himself, when the matter concerns the doctrine of piety and
religion; neither in deed appertains it to mortal men to forge this or that
according to their own appetites, thereby to subject the faithful under them.
Seeing then that God is the only master and teacher in his Church: God the
only master and teacher in his Church.
whosoever seeks or desires to be heard there, he must of necessity approve
himsele to be the minister and servant of God.

Which Jeremiah carefully here does, when he says in verse. 4. That the word of
the Lord was given him. He says before, The words of Jeremiah, the son of
Hilkiah. But some one might reply; yea it may be, the meanest of the people:
How have thou intruded thy self? Is it fit we should hear a mortal man?
Does not God reserve this prerogative to himself alone? Jeremiah therefore (as
it were by way of correction) adds here, that they are indeed his words: not
that he is the author of them; but the messenger, or ambassador only.
Jeremiah a Disciple, before he was a teacher.
He affirms then that he only executes that which God had enjoined him. Why
so? Because he was first Gods Disciple, before he took upon him the office of
teaching. As touching that which appertains to the beginning, and end of time:
the cause is briefly noted why he says, he was chosen to be a Prophet in the
thirteenth year of Josias, and that he continued this his function to the
eleventh year of Zedekias.

How Amon is said to be father to Josias.
Whereas Josias is called the son of Amon, some doubt whether truly and
properly Josias was the son of Amon. For in the year 22. Amon began to
reign, and reigned only two years. Josias succeeded in his place when he
was eight years of age. If we precisely count the years, and that Josias was
begotten in the sixteenth year, then it will seem absurd that Amon should be
a father before the sixteenth year: for it must needs be, that he was begotten
in the fifteenth year. Hence we probably gather, that Amon was his legal, but
not his natural father: as afterward, Zedechias is called the son of
Josias, because he was his successor; although he was his nephew by the
brothers side, as many think. But this is a thing usual every where, that
such are called the children, or sons of Kings, which have succeeded them;
and who were so legally, and not naturally, as I have said. Now it follows.

Verse. 4. And the word of the Lord was given me, saying:

5 Before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee; and before thou came out of
the womb I sanctified thee, and ordained thee to be a Prophet to the nations.


Jeremiah prosecutes that more at large here, which he touched erewhile;
namely, that he was called of God: for otherwise he had rashly thrust in
himself. We know that none takes this honor to himself (as the Apostle
says) but Gods calling only exalts men to the office of Prophets and
teachers. Heb. 5.4.
That Jeremiah then might procure diligent attention from his auditors, he
boldly auerres, that he had a calling to this prophetical function: yea, and
that immediately from Gods own voice. To this purpose it is he says, that the
word was given him. And, that before God formed him in the womb, he knew him.
He brings in God speaking then, that the word might have the greater emphasis;
that is, that it might have the greater weight and vehemence. For had he made a
bare narration in his own person, and told how he was ordained a Prophet by
the voice of God; this would not so much have affected the minds of his
hearers. But when he brings in God speaking, necessity requires, that there
should be greater weight and force in this manner of speech. I now omit the
full handling of this point, namely, that a calling is requisite to a Minister,
that he may be heard of Gods people: for, none ought to attribute to himself
authority to speak in the congregation; as if either it appertained to him by
inheritance, or as having ability of himself, as I have said; because God
reserues this as peculiar to himself alone. But I have else where entreated at
large of the calling of the Prophets; and therefore it suffices for the
present that I have poynted to the matter, or rather, to the sum of these
things as with the finger. Besides, these things may be found in other tracts,
or common places. For if I should stand to discuss every point to the full in
every chapter, The cause of Master Caluins breuity in his Commentaries and
lectures.
we should never make an end. I have therefore determined (according to my
ordinary custom) to run over this Prophet briefly.

Jeremiah declares then, that he was called of God, to the end the people might
yield him that attention which was meet. Now concerning the words, God
testifies, that he knew Jeremiah before he formed him in the womb. This is
not spoken so particularly of this Prophet, as if other men were therefore
unknown to God: but this is to be restrained to his office and charge imposed
upon him; as if he should say, Before I formed thee in the womb. I or-ordained
thee for thee for this purpose; namely, that the office of teaching my people
should be committed to thee.

In the second part of the verse there is a repetition, when he says, before
thou came forth of thy mothers womb, I sanctified thee. This sanctification
then, and knowledge of God are all one. Thus we see that by knowledge in this
place, is not only meant foreknowledge, but predestination, by which God
chooses men according to his good pleasure, and therewithal also ordains,
and afterward sanctifies them. For no man naturally is sufficient for these
things: as Paul cries out, in 2. Cor. 2.16. Seeing then this faculty depends
upon Gods free gift, what marvel is it if God affirms, that he sanctified
Jeremiah. As if he should say, I not only formed thee a man in the womb of
thy mother, but therewithal I set thee apart to a special use: and because
thou could not come furnished thence with such an excellency, as to be able
to exercise the office of a Prophet; therefore I also formed thee a Prophet;
and not a man simply and only. This is the sum.

Now those reason too subtly, who think that the Prophet was indeed
sanctified from the womb of his mother, Luke 1.15.
as John the Baptist was; for the words sound nothing alike: only Jeremiah
testifies that of himself, Galat. 1.15.
which Paul affirms of himself in the first of the Galatians; to wit, that
God knew him before he was borne. Jeremiah then was not in deed sanctified in
the womb, but in Gods predestination, and in his secret counsel: yea before
such time as God then chose him to be his Prophet. But some may ask here:
Jeremiah elect before the foundations of the world? The answer is easy. He
was (no doubt) known of God, before the creation of the world: but the
Scripture stoupes down to the reach of our understanding, when it speaks of
the forming of any one. It is as much then as if Jeremiah had said, that he was
created a man, upon condition that he should (in his time) be manifested a
Prophet. Neither is it to be doubted, but he adds that which follows for a
more full exposition, where it is said, I have ordained thee to be a Prophet
unto the nations. This then (as I have said) is no real sanctification, but
only in regard that Jeremiah was ordained a Prophet before he was borne. And
yet it seems strange, to the nations: for God meant he should be a Minister to
his Church. He went not to the Nineuites, as Jonah did, Jonas 3.3.
neither to other nations: he only employed his labors for the benefit of the
tribe of Judah. Why says he then, he was given for a Prophet to the nations? I
answer: nations bordering upon Iewry, who were therefore known to the Jews.
I grant this was accidental (as they say) but howsoever, he was especially
ordained a Prophet to his own people; yet did his authority also stretch it
self even to the profane nations. Yea doubtless he therefore speaks
honorably (as it were) of nations in the plural number, that the efficacy and
dignity of his doctrine might be the more fully established. It follows.

Verse. 6. Then said I, Oh Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a child.

7 And the Lord said unto me: say not, I am a child, for thou shall go to all
that I shall send thee; and whatsoever I command thee, shall thou speak.


THe Prophet having touched the doctrine of his calling, adds immediately his
refusal, at the very entrance into his office: which he does for two causes.
First, that he might free himself from all suspicion of James also speaks.
Many (says he) would feign be masters over others, Iam. 3.1. And who of us is
it that would not willingly be heard? Because the most part then are too swift
in taking upon them this office of teaching: (yea would to God many did not
violently snatch it unto them) therefore Jeremiah that he might escape the
imputation of one that ran before he was sent, affirms he was constrained to
take it of Secondly, therewithal also he gets to himself the more reverence,
and makes his scholars so much the more attentive. For why refuses he to obey
Gods calling, when he is called to his prophetical office? surely the
difficulties thereof, feared him. This very cause then ought to stir up in the
reader the greater attention now, by how much the more there was need then, to
waken up the hearers when Jeremiah himself preached.

Jeremiah to refuse the calling of God: The answer is ready; namely, that God
bare with his servant in this behalf. Why so? Because it was not his purpose
either to contemn his calling, Reasons why Jeremiah excused his not being
willing to follow Gods calling.
or to free himself from his obedience, nor to cast off the yoke, that he
might take his ease, or that he might win credit, or enjoy the present
commodities of this life: Jeremiah regarded none of these things; but looking
into himself, he concluded he was utterly unable to undergo so burdensome
and cumbersome a charge. This excuse then is added, only by way of a modest
excuse. And thence it was that God pardoned this fear of his; because (as we
have said heretofore) it proceeded from a sincere affection. We also know, that
often out of good principles there sprouts forth some vices: but this
notwithstanding, was praiseworthy in Jeremiah; namely, that he thought
himself unmeet to discharge the office of a Prophet; and therefore desired to
be spared, that choice might be made of some other who bad better abilities,
and larger gifts of the holy Ghost to discharge it withal. To morrow I will
finish the rest.

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly Father, seeing thou have not only provided for the
ancient Church of the Jews in times past, when thou made choice of thy
servant Jeremiah to exercise his prophetical office therein; but have also
been pleased that the fruits of his holy labors should reach even unto us:
grant we show not our selves unthankful unto thee for the same; but (enjoying
so great a benefit) let the fruit thereof appear in us, to the glory of thine
holy name; so as we may learn to give over our selves wholly to thine
obedience: and that every one of us may so labor in his vocation to serve and
honor thee, that our minds being all united together, we may endeavor to
spread abroad the greatness of thy name, as also the kingdom of thine only
Son in every place: till having finished our conflicting days here on
earth, we may at last attain to that heavenly rest purchased for us by the
blood of the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER.
WE showed you yesterday the cause why Jeremiah at the first refused the office
of a teacher; to wit, in regard he found himself insufficient for so high a
calling: for which cause he termed himself a child; not in years, but in
regard of his ignorance in matters thereunto appertaining.

This word child then, is taken here by way of similitude: for the Prophet
confesses he is neither expert enough, nor acquainted with such a charge. For
(as I have said) some too fondly restrain this to his age: albeit then her was
already of sufficient years for such a business: yet because he was neither
qualified with knowledge, nor other gifts necessary for so excellent a
function; he therefore says, I am a child.

Now follows the answer. Say not, I am a child, for thou shall go, etc. Here
the Lord not only foretells what the Prophet should do; but tells him his
errand, and what is required of him: as if he should have said, Thou must obey
my voice; for I have authority to command thee: go therefore thou must,
whithersoeuer I shall send thee: and publish thou must, all that I command
thee. In which words God aduertizeth his servant that the conceit of his own
inability must not astonish him: for it suffices him simply to yield his
obedience to this commandment. And as this doctrine is most profitable, so is
it worthy to be well known and understood: for as it is unlawful for any to
enterprise ought, before he has considered well of his own ability: so on the
other side, when God enioynes us any service; with closed eyes let us forthwith
obey his voice. Prudence is a virtue worthily commendable in all such as take
upon them to write any thing: which also may be extended generally to all
others, namely, what fitness every one has, or what his sholders are able to
bear, as they say. For whence comes so great audacity and foolehardinesse in
many, but from being puffed up with a fond ouerweening, which in the end proves
their own ruin? wherefore in all actions, Note.
the right and orderly beginning is, that every one take a survey of his own
abilities; and that he thenceforth carry himsele with a low sail, according to
the measure of his gifts and capacity. Thus should we have none that would
rashly intrude himself into callings, nor yet arrogate to himself more than
is meet. But when God calls us, what though we be utterly destitute of gifts?
we must (for all that) yield our obedience. Which doctrine is plainly gathered
from these words, where God says, Say not, I am a child: that is to say,
albeit thou feel thy self far short in gifts; albeit thou art well
acquainted with thine own insufficiencies: yet shall thou go notwithstanding
all this: that is, of necessity thou must dispatch the errand whereon I send
thee. For this is that honor which God simply requires of us; namely, that
howsoever we find our selves destitute of gifts to execute the thing given in
charge: yet that we may readily yield our obedience to his Commandments.

Verse. 8. Fear not for their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee.
FRom this verse we may gather, that Jeremiah was much perplexed, whilst he
saw himself called to so tedious and painful conflicts, in regard he had not
yet attained such power and magnanimity of mind, that without quailing he
durst constantly set upon so many and violent adversaries. For he saw well
enough that he had to deal with a degenerate people: and to say the truth,
all of them (in a manner) had swarued and declined from Gods Law: so as now
having a long time rejected that yoke, they began to insult with such fury and
rebellion, that they could very hardly be brought back to true obedience and
moderation. It appears then that the Prophet was thus withheld, by reason of
these difficulties; and therefore durst not undertake his prophetical office
For (no doubt) God here applies unto him a fit remedy against his
faint-heartednesse.

Now what says he? Fear not their faces. For when Jeremiah said he was a
child, he looked (as I noted erewhile) to this difficulty; namely, That he
was no way able to sustain those sharp conflicts which presented themselves
before him, if he once began to encounter with this rebellious people, who
were now grown altogether hardened in their bad and evil courses. See then
how he would feign have wound himself out, and discharged himself of this
burden imposed upon him; in regard he durst not frankly and freely (before
all men) in plain terms profess how all matters stood: but God who
searches into men's hearts, and finds out all the secret intentions thereof,
remedies his fear, when he says unto him, fear not their faces.

Besides, this place shows unto us, that even then, corruptions so reigned
among this elect people, that none of Gods servants might quietly execute their
office. For if the Prophets and teachers had had to deal with a teachable
people, there had needed no fear of quarrels, nor combats: but where the fear
and reverence of God is wanting; yea, when men are ouer-carried by the violence
of their passions and lusts, there can no faithful teacher duly discharge his
duty, unless he be armed aforehand to the fight. This is it then which God
signifies, when he wills his Prophet to be bold and fearlesse: to wit, in
regard he well foresaw there were as many enemies, as there were men, who
bragged they were the children of Abraham.

But the reason of this confident boldness is to be noted; which is added in
the next words, Because I am with thee (says he) to deliver thee. For by these
words the Lord aduertiseth him, that he has sufficient defense in his own
hand and power; lest the Prophet should fear the fury and rage of those of
his nation. I grant that from the very first entrance, Jeremiah had cause
enough to fear, in seeing that he had to strive, not with two or three, but
with the general state of the kingdom: but God opposes him self alone, to
all these mortal men, and says, I am with thee, and therefore fear not. By
this then it is plain, that we then render to God that honor which to him
appertains, How to yield God his due honor.
when (contenting our selves with his only protection, and safeguard) we boldly
despise all the men of this world; not fearing to fight against the whole
rabble of the wicked, albeit they band themselves against us by great troops:
yea, be their power and sorces never so terrible, let us notwithstanding assure
our selves, that the only protection of God is sufficient to maintain us
against the same. This is the sum and substance of this text. Now it follwes.

Verse. 9. And the Lord stretched out his hand, and touched my mouth; and the
Lord said unto me, Behold I have put my words into thy mouth.

10 Behold, this day I have set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms,
to pluck up, and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down, to build, and
to plant.


Jeremiah here comes again to speak of his vocation, Jeremiah mentions his
vocation the third time.
that his doctrine might not be contemned, as if it came from a private or
particular person. He protests once again then, that he came not of his own
proper moving; but that he was sent to teach, with authority from God. To which
purpose it is he says, that the words of God were put into his mouth. This
place ought diligently to be noted; because the Prophet in few words declares
whence the certainty of a lawful vocation is to be fetched, when any minds to
take upon him the office of teaching in the Church; namely, that he bring
nothing of his own: as Saint Peter also teaches in his Canonical Epistle.
4.11. Let him that speaks (says he) speak as the words of God; that is to
say, let him not speak doubtfully, as if he broached his own devices; but
that which he may boldly, and without wavering, deliver in the name of God.
Thus does Jeremiah in this place; for before he desires to be heard, he
affirms that the words of God were put into his mouth.

Let us assure our selves then, God only is to be heard in his Church.
that whatsoever proceeds from man's brain, may lawfully be rejected. Why so?
Because God has reserved this honor as peculiar to himself, to be heard in
his Church, as we said yesterday. Whence it follows, that none are to be
held for Gods servants, nor to be reputed faithful Prophets and teachers in
the Church, but those by whose mouth God speaks; that nothing be forged out of
the shop of their own brains, nor ought to be taught there according to their
carnal appetites; but that they faithfully bring and publish that which God
has delivered unto them.

The visible sign was added, the better to confirm the thing it self. True
it is, that this must not be drawn to a general rule; as if it were
necessary that God should still touch the lips and tongues of all Ministers
with his hand: the action, it is a law imposed upon all Gods servants, that
they bring not in their own inventions, but only deliver that from hand to
hand, which they have received of God.

But this was particular in Jeremiah, that God having stretched forth his
hand, touched his mouth: thereby plainly showing, that the Prophets mouth was
consecrated to his own use. It suffices the Ministers of the word then, that
their tongues be dedicated unto God; that they intermingle not their dreams
nor fancies with his pure truth. But in the person of Jeremiah, God meant also
to add the visible sign thereof; when he stretched out his hand to touch his
mouth. Now God having testified that tongue of Jeremiah was consecrated and
separated from common and profane uses, in the next words he Behold (says
he) this day I have set thee over nations, and over kingdoms. In which words,
God shows with what reverence he would have his word to be received; yea even
then, when it is preached unto us by mortal men. For where is the man that
will not brag of his obedience toward God? But in the mean while, scarce an
hundred for one, imbraceth his word. For he no sooner speaks, but all
generally (in a manner) murmr: or rather, if they dare not furiously oppose
against him as open enemies; yet we see notwithstanding, how some shift off
the matter by wranglings: others, howsoever they be silent peradventure in
words, yet resist him, and his word, in their practice. This authority then
which God attributes to his word, is to be marked, Behold (says he) I have set
thee over nations and kingdoms.

Moreover, when he says, Behold I have set thee, he therein exhorts the
Prophet to be of good courage, that he bethink himself well of his vocation,
that neither dastardly nor seruilely he seem to flatter men; nor yet to bear
with them in their lusts. See (says he): By this word, note, that Ministers
cannot execute their office as they ought, unless they set the Majesty of God
before their eyes; so as in respect of that, they scorn whatsoever glory,
power or pomp it be in men, that may seem to dazzle their sight. For
experience it self teaches, Note.
that we no sooner begin to have men's persons in estimation, but we are
forthwith surprised with a fearfulness to displease them. To what purpose are
Prophets and teachers sent then? Even to reduce the whole world into a right
order; that they spare not their auditors, but that they frankly and freely
reprove them as often as need requires; yea, menace and threaten them, as often as
they see them grow headstrong and obstinate. Let there be but some outward
show of excellency in men, and you shall see, that the teacher will not dare to
offend such; because he sees them to be endowed with power, riches, and
estimation for their wisdom; but especially if they be advanced to high
honors. What other remedy is left then, but that the teachers propose Gods
authority before their eyes; being also fully resolved that they speak in his
name? And thus (with an invincible magnanimity of mind) they shall despise
whatsoever loftiness or excellency appears in any mortal man. Now ye see the
scope and drift of this word See, or behold; which God uses, See (says he)
Behold, I have set thee over nations, and over kingdoms. Here God further
testifies, that there shines such authority in his word, that it brings all
loftiness and greatness down to the ground: yea, that Kings themselves are
not exempt out of the reach of it: what God has joined together then, let not
man separate, Matthew. 19.6. Mark. 10.9. True it is that God here extolles his
prophets, and exalts them above the whole world; yea, above the Kings of the
eatth: but he said but erewhile, See verse. 9.
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. It is necessary then, that if any
will challenge to himself power and greatness of authority above others, that
he have Gods word for his warrant, and that he manifest himself a Prophet by
some good effects; broaching none of his own devices nor imaginations. Here
then (I pray you) take a view of the Popes insolency, The Popes insolency noted.
and of the impudency of his Clergy; when so malipertly they dare snatch to
themselves that which is here said: We are (say they) set over Kings and
nations. By what law? God has so told us by his Prophet Jeremiah. But yet of
friendship take all I have put my words in thy mouth, and have set Now let the
Pope show his warrant from Gods word, usurping nothing to himself in
particular. In a word, let him bring in none of his dreams, and we will
willingly yield him this supremacy above all the world: for God and his word
must never be sundred. As Gods Majesty is eminent above the whole world, yea,
above the Angels of heaven; so is there the like sovereignty which always goes
with the word. But seeing these swine, and mastiffe curres, are void both of
all found doctrine, and piety: what shamelessness, or rather foolishness is it
in them, to brag of their sovereignty over Kings and nations? To be short;
this text teaches, that men are not advanced here, albeit they be the
Ministers of the word of life; but rather the word and doctrine it self. God
then (you see) attributes the sovereign authority to his word; howsoever the
Ministers thereof be poor, base, and contemptible; and albeit there appears
neither pomp nor glory in them. But I have told you before, why this clause is
added; namely, that the true Prophets and teachers may come furnished with
valor and courage: and thus may not fear boldly to set themselves both
against Kings, and nations; being armed and fortified with the power of the
heavenly doctrine.

In the next place he adds, To pluck up, to destroy, to break down, etc. It
seems here as if God of set purpose meant to make both his word, and the
ministry of his servant, odious at the very first entrance. For how could the
word of the Lord be amiable in the mouth of Jeremiah, unless the Jews
perceived that it was published for their salvation? But what speaks God of
here? Of plucking up, of rooting out, of destruction, of death, of perdition.

Yet afterward he adds, To build, and to plant. The ward has a double use.
God then attributes a double use unto his word. On the one side, it destroys,
roots up, etc. on the other side, it plants, and builds. And yet the question
may here be fitly asked, ruin and destruction? for the other order might have
seemed the better; I have ordained thee to build and to plant. For so Paul
speaks: We; that is, my self, and my fellow laborers, have vengeance ready
against all disobedience, and against all contemners and despisers: after
(says he) that your obedience is fulfilled. Saint Paul signifies then in this
place, that the doctrine of the Gospel is chiefly and properly dedicated to
this use; namely, to bring men to Gods obedience. But Jeremiah puts, ruin and
perdition, before the words, to build, and to plant. It seems then (as I have
said) that he deals preposterously: But we must always remember, what the
state and condition of this people was then. For impiety, rebellion, and
desperate obstinacy had already (for a long time) gotten such head, that it was
needful he should begin with ruin, destruction, and such like things.
Jeremiah then could not plant, nor build the temple of God, before he
overthrew, plucked up, and rooted out. Why so? Because the devil had erected
his throne, or palace there. For religion having been despised there, many
years together: then the devil (as if he had been enthronized into his
tribunal seat) reigned in Jerusalem, and in the whole land of Iudeah, without
resistance. How could Gods temple then be erected, in which he might be purely
served, unless these ruins preceded? Thus the devil had corrupted the whole
land. For (as we know) all sins and iniquities reigned therein so generally,
as if the land had been replenished with thorns and briars. Jeremiah therefore
could not plant, nor sow the doctrine of life, until the land was purged of
the varieties of so foul enormities. Thus you see the very cause and reason
why he begins with destruction, and rooting out: and afterward mentions
planting, and building.

Note.
This heaping up of so many words also shows, what deep rooting impiety and
the contempt of God had taken among them. God might as well in a word have
said, I have ordained thee to pluck up, and destroy; and so might have
contented himself with two words in this double similitude; as well as he
does afterward with those of planting, and building. But in regard the Jews
were rooted in their rebellion, and that their pride and headstrongness was
grown to such an height, that they could neither by and by, nor at the first
day, nor yet easily be corrected: therefore the Lord is constrained (as it
were) to heap up so many words one in the neck of another: by means whereof
he encourages his Prophet, that without ceasing he might labor to purge out
these filthinesses which had infected the whole land. Now we see the sum of
this place, and also the meaning of the words.

Again, he speaks of Kings, and nations; because howsoever Jeremiah was given
and dedicated properly to his own country; yet by accident (as they say) he
was also ordained a Prophet to profane nations, as afterward we shall
perceive. It also seems that God expressly mentions Kings, and nations here,
to beat down the fond ouerweening of this foolish people; who (forsooth) would
needs be exempt from all reprehensions. He says then, that he not only gave
his servant commission to deal with them of Iudeah, but set him (as it were)
over the whole world. As if he should say; Alas, you are but a poor handful;
will you offer to lift up your crests against my servant? and if you do, what
shall you get by it? For, he shall rule, not only in the land of Iudeah, but
also over all nations: yea, even over Kings themselves: that is to say, The
doctrine which I have committed (as it were) to his custody, has such power
and efficacy in it, that it has sovereign authority over all mortal men, and
not over one nation only.

And yet we see, that albeit the malice and wickedness of men constrain God
to use severity and rigor; yet he never so forgets his nature, but he sweetly
allures such as are not become altogether desperate, to repentance; setting the
hope of remission of finnes, and salvation before them: and this course the
doctrine of life always holds. For howsoever it be the savor of death unto
death, to all such as perish: yet is it the savor of life unto life, to the
elect of God, 2. Cor. 2.15.16. I grant it will often fall out, that the greater
part will convert the doctrine of life and salvation to their own ruin and
perdition. But God notwithstanding will never suffer all to perish. He then,
will cause his doctrine to be an incorruptible seed of life to his chosen: and
afterward he will build them up into an holy Temple to himself. This truth
we must hold. And thus the doctrine of God ought not to be odious unto us,
though it turn to the ruin of many. Why so? Because it brings salvation
always to the elect: for it so plants them, that they take root in the hope
of everlasting blessedness; and after, it makes them holy Temples, consecrated
unto God. Now it follows.

Verse. 11. And, that is to say, afterward, the word of the Lord came unto me,
saying; Jeremiah, what see thou And I said, The staff of a watchman; or, of
an Almond tree.

12 And the Lord said unto me, Thou have seen aright; because I will watch, or
hasten: word for word, I am watching upon my word: that is, to fulfill it.


GOd in this place confirms that which he said before, as touching the power
of his word. These two verses then must be taken here, as an exposition of the
former: for he teaches no new thing here, but only confirms the former
sentence; namely, that the Prophets neither speak in vain, nor fruitlesly, in
regard they are furnished with a celestial power: as on the one side to build
and plant; so on the other side, to destroy and pluck up, as we have alleged
the text out of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 2.15.16. where the true Teachers are armed
with the same power. As also in the other place: We have (says he) vengeance
ready against all unbelievers, 2. Cor. 10.5.6.
though they burst with pride; though by their loftiness they fray and scare
all the world, yet have we the sword of the spirit ready drawn in our hands,
to put them to flight, in regard the word of God has in it self sufficient
efficacy, to overthrow and bring to naught all rebels. God then continues on
this sentence, when he says, Jeremiah what see thou? God had presented
before him a staff, or a rod of an Almond tree (as some translate it) and the
word indeed signifies so much; but in regard it comes of a verb which
signifies To watch, or To hasten, we cannot properly translate it here an
Almond tree. And yet I deny not but the Hebrew word signifies so much: though
(as I have said) the word which signifies an Almond tree, comes of the verb
which signifies To watch; and they think that this tree is so called, in
regard it brings forth fruit sooner than all other trees. For the Almond trees
flourish (as it is well enough known) even in winter, and in the midst of
the greatest frosts. If we say then, I saw a rod, or a staff of an Almond
tree, and that God answers, Thou have seen aright, because I watch; then
there will be no likeness in the words, neither will there be that grace of
speech: besides, the sense also will be unapt. Of necessity therefore we must
translate thus: Unless we will corrupt the text, and wrap up the Prophets
meaning in ambiguities. I see a rod, or a staff, of a watchman. Put the case
that an Almond tree were here noted; yet must the tree properly be called
watching, if we respect the etymology of the word: and the thing it self also
requires it, as all may now well discern. God then sets this kind before his
servant, namely, that he saw a staff watching. But wherefore? Thou have (says
he) seen the staff of watching aright, because I watch upon my word, that I
may execute, or accomplish it.

It seems the expositors restrain these words amiss, to punishments, as we
shall see anon. For thus they expound, that the threatenings which the prophet
will use afterward, should not be without their effect, because God is
always pressed to send whatsoever he has denounced. But (as I think) this is
to shut up the sense of this text, into too narrow a room. For I make no doubt
but God does here in general, magnify his word, and sets forth the same in
regard of the efficacy thereof. As if he should say, I speak not to my
servants, as if all their doctrine should vanish into smoke, or that it should
fall to the ground; but that the efficacy thereof may forthwith be annexed: as
it is said in Isaiah, Isa. 55.11.
My word shall not return unto me void, but it shall prosper in every thing
whereto I send it: that is to say, I will cause the execution to go hand in
hand with the prophetical doctrine, that all the world may know I speak not
in vain: also, that in my word there is not an empty sound, which
incontinently passes away into the air; but a solid and certain efficacy,
which shall appear in time convenient. This is the cause why I said that these
two verses must be joined to the former sentence, where the Lord said, that
he sent his Prophet to pluck up, to plant, to destroy, and to build. He
proves it then by other words; to wit, because he watched upon his word, to
execute whatsoever he has pronounced by the mouth of his servants: as if he
should say, It is true that I give this commandment to my Prophets, that they
speak; but in regard they speak from my mouth, I am (says he) ready to
effect and accomplish whatsoever I have enjoined them. In a word, God here
signifies, that the might and power of his hand, goes with his word, whereof
the Prophets are the Ministers in respect of men. Thus it is a general
doctrine, belonging not only to the punishments, but also to the promises.
Thou have then (says he) seen aright, because I watch. You see then, that
God resignes not his office up to Jeremiah here, although he uses his
labors in teaching: but he shows that the power to effect and accomplish
whatsoever the Prophet should speak, remained entirely in himself.

We are also to observe that which he adds, Upon my word to accomplish it. For
God attributes nothing to Jeremiah, that was proper or peculiar to himself;
but he only magnifies the efficacy of his word: as if he should say, If thou
remain a faithful servant to me, I will neither disappoynt thee of thy hope,
nor those which shall obey thy doctrine: for I will accomplish whatsoever
either they or thou have expected. Moreover, whosoever has resisted thee,
shall not escape unpunished. Why so? Because I will bring their ways upon
their own heads in due season. To which purpose it is he uses the word To
watch, or hasten; thereby showing, Dan. 9.14.
that he is ready to put his word in execution in due time. I grant this
appears not so to us always; and therefore it is said by the Prophet
Habakkuk, If the prophecy tarry, wait,, because it will come, and will not
tarry, Habak. 2.3. God commands then, that we patiently wait for the
accomplishment of his word: but in the next place he adds (as it were) by way
of correction, that it will come: that is to say, I will perform, and indeed
accomplish whatsoever my Prophets have spoken by my commandment. And thus
there shall be no foreslowing of it; because the fit season for the execution,
depends upon the will of God, and not upon man's judgment. The rest should be
handled now; but because I see the time is past, I can pass no further at this
time.

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly Father, seeing it has pleased thee so graciously to
becken us unto thee, and that thou have consecrated thy word for our salvation;
give us grace that willingly and heartily we may yield our selves subject unto
thee: that these things which thou have ordained for our good and salvation,
may not turn to our ruin and destruction: but that this incorruptible seed
(by which thou begettest us again to a lively and heavenly hope) may take such
deep rooting in us, and may bring forth such fruit, that thy holy name may be
glorified. Grant also, we may in such wise be planted in the courts of thine
house, that we may flourish, and the fruit thereof may appear in the whole
course of our lives, till at the last we come to the enjoying of that blessed
life, which is prepared for us in heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE THIRD LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Verse. 13. And the word of the Lord came again unto me the second time,
saying: What see thou? And I said, I see a seething pot, looking out of the
North.

14 Then said the Lord unto me: Out of the North shall a plague be spread upon
all the inhabitants of the land.


NOw Jeremiah begins to direct his speech to the Jews, Jn the former verses,
Jeremiah handled the doctrine of his vocation: now he applies the same to the
Jews.
to whom he was ordained a Prophet. For hitherto he has disputed as touching
his vocation, that he might establish the authority of his doctrine; so that
hitherto he has spoken generally: but now he applies his doctrine to the
people in particular. He says then that a vision was presented unto him, of a
boiling pot, the face whereof looked toward the North. Whereas God asks the
question, and the Prophet answers; hereby he confirms his prophecy: for if
he had made a bare narration touching the sight of a boiling pot, and had
plainly showed why this figure was represented unto him; the words had not
carried such weight with them. But when God himself comes forth, and tells what
this seething pot signifies; the prophecy is so much the better confirmed.
Neither are we to doubt, but of set purpose the Prophet uses this manner of
speech, as if God himself being there present, showed, that himself was the
author of this prophecy.

The sum.
Now the sum is, that the Caldeans were coming to destroy the City of
Jerusalem; to take away and abolish the dignity both of the kingdom, and of
the Priesthood. This was foretold and threatened before, as well by Isaiah, as
others of the Prophets: but all the prophecies were contemned: for whilst
Isaiah lived, the King of Babell endeavored to curry-fauour with King
Hezekias: and the Jews imagined, that such a succor came in good season, to
aid them against the Assyrians: but they considered not that the hearts of
Kings are governed by the hand of God, and turned which way it pleases him:
neither did they once dream, that long ago, and for many years together,
they had (by their sins) provoked Gods wrath against them, and that he was
become their enemy. For as much then, as all his threatenings had been
despised, and (in a manner) derided; Jeremiah now comes (as it were) between,
and says, that the Northren people shall come; to wit, as well the Assyrians,
as the Caldeans. For we know, that one of the Monarchies devoured the other, in
regard the Caldeans domineered over the Assyrians: and thus it came to pass,
that almost all the Empire of the East, the Medes and Persians excepted; were
subjected under their dominion. Now they were Northward, in respect of Iudeah.
Therefore the Prophet says, he saw a seething pot.

Many by this pot, understand the King of Babylon: but it seems they mistake
the Prophets meaning: and I could easily refell their exposition, but that I
content my self with the naked and bare truth, which we shall better perceive
in the progress. This boiling pot then, is even the nation of the Jews; as
will plainly appear in the own place. For my purpose is not now to heap up
all that may be said, on either part. But the people are compared to a seething
pot, in regard the Lord had boiled them, till they were (in a manner) consumed
to nothing. Now it is said, that part of the pot looked toward the side of the
North; because thence the fire was kindled; as Jeremiah by and by expounds it:
and the similitude agrees very aptly. For when a pot is set on the fire, it
boyles on that side which is nearest the flame, and all the bublings pass over
to the other side. It is said then that the pot seethed, or boiled; but so,
that the mouth was toward the North. Why so? Because there was the fire; and
there was the bellows also. To be short, God meant to show to his Prophet,
that the people were like to flesh, which being put into the pot, seetheth, and
after burns, or (in process of time) consumes away to nothing. The Prophet
saw that the mouth of a seething pot, or, the face thereof, [that is, from the
side on which it boyled] looked toward the North: and therefore it is that the
Lord answers (who is the best expositor of this vision) that he had presented
to his servant, the plague coming from the side of the North, upon all the
inhabitants of the land: namely, upon Iudeah.

In which words God protests, that he had already kindled the fire amongst the
Caldeans, and Assyrians; by which he will sees his people as flesh, and in
the end will bring them to nothing: as it ordinarily falls out, when the flesh
continues long in the pot: for if the fire be kindled, and maintained, and be
still blowed; of necessity the flesh must utterly wast away, after it has been
thus sod, or boiled. So in like manner God testifies, that the fire is even now
kindled in Caldea, and in Assyria: which shall not only sees the Jews, but
also utterly consume them.

But he expresses the same thing in other words, namely, that the plague
shall come from the North, Verse. 14.
upon all the Jews. We shall also perceive by the progress of the text, that
the sum of doctrine which was given to Jeremiah, is here proposed in few
words. I grant this is but a part of it, as we have said: For indeed, God
minded to provide for his elect; and thus astonished them, only to tame, and
not to destroy them. And yet this is but the one half of the prophecy; to
wit, that they were no longer to expect any grace or favor, in regard the
Jews had too much provoked the Lord by their obstinacy; and had so abused his
patience, that their impiety was no way supportable. Jeremiah then confirms
his prophecy again more plainly, and points at that, as with the finger,
which the other Prophets had foretold. It follows.

Verse. 15. For lo, I will or, cry to.
call all the families of the kingdoms of the North, says the Lord; and they
shall come, and every one shall set his throne in the entering in of the or,
doors of.
gates of Jerusalem, and on the walls thereof round about, and in all the
Cities of Judah.
THis verse contains in it the exposition of the former: for God expresses
that more plainly and particularly, which he had but touched before: namely,
that the plague should come from toward the North. He tells how himself will
be the author of it; but he speaks of the calamity which he was to send:
Behold (says he) I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the North.
Neither should this prophecy have had such efficacy, unless this
advertisement had been in express words added; to wit, that the Caldeans
should come under the ensign and leading of God. For men are wont to attribute
whatsoever happens, to fortune: and we shall afterward see in the
Lamentations, how the Jews were so besotted, that in their miseries they
attributed the destruction of the City, Kingdom, yea even of the Temple it
self, to chance, or fortune, Lam. 3.37.38. For which cause the Lord rebukes
them sharply, for being so blind, in a thing so so evident and apparent; and
because they discerned not aright of his judgments. The Prophet then having
testified that the plague should come from the North, adds now in the second
place, that it shall not come by chance; but that God himself shall be the
General and chief leader of the army gathered by the Caldeans, who should
muster their soldiers from all parts, and prepare an host of men to destroy
and root out the Jews.

The Prophet uses the word To cry; Behold (says he) I will cry to all the
families of the North.

You see that God used sundry and diverse manners of speaking, when he meant to
show, that all nations are so under his power and command, Isa. 5.26. and 7.18.
that he raises up armies of soldiers as often as it pleases him. In Isaiah
he says, Behold, I will hiss to the Egyptians: and compares them sometimes
to Bees. But all these forms of speakings tend to show, that whilst men be
tumultuous, and trouble all the world; that God on the other side orders and
directs all things according to his sovereign power; so as nothing falls out,
but by his government and leading. We see then, that our Prophet speaks not
like an historiographer, neither foretells he simply what should come to pass;
but he forthwith adds doctrine thereunto. This prophecy then, A plague shall
come out of the North, had been bare and naked: but (as I have already said)
he now exercises the office of a Teacher, that his prophecy might become
profitable; in that he affirms, God shall be the General, and chief
Commander in this war.

Behold then, I will cry to all the families of the kingdoms of the North. I
grant this was not at that time the only Monarchy; but in regard the Jews
rested so securely upon it, coupled with so great a carelessness: they feared
no calamity. To awaken and to correct this benumbednesse, God says, that he
will cause all the families of the kingdoms to be gathered together. It is
certain there were then many kingdoms; which God caused violently and
suddenly to come and rush upon Iudeah: and it seems also he has respect to
that vain confidence, with which the Jews deluded themselves, thinking the
Egyptians should always be ready to yield them succor. Because then, they
were wont to oppose the Egyptians as a target or buckler; yea, as a mountain
or wall of brass. God derides their folly, in regard that whilst they relied
upon the Egyptians, they thought themselves sufficiently armed against all the
forces of the Caldean Monarchy. This is the reason then, why in the first place
he puts the families, and afterward, the kingdom of the North.

It follows; And they shall come, and set every one his throne in the doors
of the gates. Here the Prophet signifies, that the Caldeans shall have so
great a power, that they shall dare to camp and pitch their tents even before
their gates: and not only that, but they shall close up the wickets also. For
he says, the doors of the gates. And when he says every one, it is the
rather to gaul the Jews to the quick: For they resting upon the succors of
Egypt, thought themselves sufficient enough to resist; albeit the Caldeans were
in a manner invincible, after the Assyrians were vanquished and overcome. He
says then, that the army shall not only camp before the gates, but that
every one shall set his throne there; and shall erect it, as in a place of
quietness. In a word, God signifies that the Caldeans and Assyrians shall
conquer, to rule; and to set their thrones even in the fields, and before the
gates of the City of Jerusalem, as if it were in their own houses. These
things shall afterward be more fully explained, and many circumstances also
added to the same. But in the very entrance, God meant to pronounce this
sentence against the Jews, that in good earnest they might feel how their
estate was gone.

He says, And upon the walls thereof round about; and upon all the Cities of
Iudeah. Briefly, the Prophet here threatens the ruin of the whole country:
as if he should say, it is in vain, for the Jews trust in their own forces,
and in the help of strangers; for God will fight against them, because the
Chaldeans and Assyrians shall be armed by him: so as they shall overcome,
whatsoever the Jews shall plot to the contrary.

Verse. 16. And I will speak, or pronounce my judgments with them, touching
all the wickedness of them that have forsaken me, and have burnt incense unto
other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.
GOd here notes out the cause, why he determined to punish the Jews so
severely. For it was needful that as well the one as the other, should be
manifested: as first, that the Chaldeans should not break in upon because
light punishments had profited them nothing at all. After the Lord had
testified then, that he would be the chief Commander in this war: he
therewithal shows, what just causes he has, thus to chastize the Jews. It
cannot therefore be imputed unto his cruelty, in regard they had formerly
provoked him by their superstitions, full of impiety. He says then, I will
speak my judgments with them.

Many of the expositors refer this to the Chaldeans, and Assyrians; as if God
commanded them, as chief Judges are wont, to give that in charge to their
bailiffes and officers, which they have once decreed to be done and performed:
but this exposition suits not well: and besides, the prophet himself refutes
it sufficiently. For he conioynes this together, I will speak my judgments
with them, upon their malice. But what is it to speak, or pronounce
judgments? It is, when God cites the wicked before his judgment seat, and
exercises the office of a Judge. And this language is usual throughought the
Scriptures, as we shall see in the end of this book; where it is said, Chap.
52.9.
that the King of Babylon spoke judgments with King Zedekias: that is to say,
he carried himself toward him as a Judge; as we have it in our ordinary
speech. Thus then, God now testifies, that he will be the Judge of his people:
as if he should say, Hitherto I have been silent; not that the wicked among you
are unknown unto me, but it is because I have borne with those poor wretches,
to try if I might see any hope of repentance in them. But now (says he) I will
be a Judge unto them, in regard length of time has manifested, that they were
become utterly incurable. here is an opposition then, between Gods patience,
which he had long used toward them (when though he might, yet notwithstanding
he handled them not roughly, but deferred his vengeance) and this time of his
vengeance which was now at hand.

I will speak my judgments then, with the Jews: that is, I will speedily go
up to my judgment seat: hitherto I have forborne to do it, and have waited to
see whether they would return to me or no: but seeing they repent not, and
that I perceive well enough they are become graceless, and so perverse of
nature, that they always heap sin upon sin, I will now begin to execute
mine office; to wit, that of a Judge. But (as I have said) we must keep in
mind Gods intention in this place: for his meaning is, to discharge himself of
all blame and reproaches which men endeavor to lay upon him; because the worser
sort of them are wont to repine at his judgments, when he chastises them. He
sets his judgments then before their eyes; as if he should say, You cannot
charge me, neither can any object against me, that I have behaved my self
severely, or cruelly; for my judgments will be found just, though I judge you
in rigor: and therefore he adds, upon all their malice, or wickedness.

In the next place he notes out one kind; Because (says he) they have burnt
incense unto strange gods. No doubt the Jews had many ways provoked Gods
vengeance against them; but this one kind is here added, because the first
spring of all evil was, that they had forsaken the Law, together with Gods
pure worship and service: yet he names the general, in all their wickedness.
Neither is this clause upon all their wickedness, added without cause: For his
meaning is, that they were not wicked in some one respect alone; but that they
piled up diverse sins together, as upon an heap: now immediately after he
adds, because they have forsaken me: here God touches their revolt. For it
may happily fall out (whereof we have daily experience) that a man may fail in
some one thing, and another may be tainted with this or that natural vice and
corruption; and thus (for diverse respects) every one of us may be liable to
the just judgment of God: but the Lord here shows how the Jews were so
corrupted, that nothing remained sound amongst them: therefore it is, that he
puts all their malice; and afterward adds, their revolt..

They have forsaken me: as if he should say, they have utterly denied me: I say
not that one of them has played the thief, that another has committed
adultery, or, that the third has sinned in drunkenness: but they are all
become apostataes, all have denied me, and have broken their faith and loyalty:
I have been forsaken of them then, and they have wholly estranged themselves
from me. We see now then, how the Prophet sharply aggrauates the wickedness of
his nation: but in the end this is added as the pattern thereof; to wit, that
they had burnt incense to strange gods: that is, they had revolted from the
true God, to give themselves over to idolatry: to which he by and by adds, they
bowed down before the works of their hands. For as often as the Scripture uses
these words, it signifies, that there is too too great a rage and madness in
men; The reason why stocks and stones are worshipped as God.
who not only in stead of God, worship the Sun, the Moon, and other
creatures; but the very Idols which their own fingers have made. For whence
comes it that the superstitious and Infidels, worship stocks and stones; but
because themselves have framed unto them, noses, hands, and ears. No man is so
mad to adore a formelesse logge, or trunk of wood. Who is it that sets not
light by a confused lump of brass, and silver? Neither will any be so
senseless, as to imagine a stone to be God: but let there be but a little
engrauing, or some artificial shape of a man added thereto; and by and by,
poor, blind, and miserable Idolaters bow down before pillars, pictures, and
images. Ask the reason: truly because they have made them eyes, ears, etc.
they then have made gods. Therefore you now see the Prophets drift, when he
says, that the Jews worshipped the works of their own hands. But I do the
rather pass over these things lightly now, because it is a doctrine which ye
ought to be well exercised in. It follows.

Verse. 17. And thou, trusse up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all
that I command thee: be not afraid of their faces, or, lest I make thee to
fear before their face.
lest I destroy thee before them; or in their presence.
IN the first place God commands his Prophet to proclaim this heavy and
woeful judgment, whereof we have formerly heard. For his meaning was not to
speak to Jeremiah in a corner, or in hugger-mugger to himself alone; but he
puts him in trust with that which he meant should be published to the whole
body of the people: that is the cause why he adds, And thou. We see then
that the Prophet was instructed and taught of God, that he might be able
boldly and fearelesly to publish that message which hereafter he will deliver.
These things therefore must be read altogether; namely, that God will ascend
into his judgment seat, to execute that vengeance Jeremiah to be the preacher
thereof, which he is now about forthwith to execute. Thou then. This is added
by way of a conclusion: for the word And, must be thus resolved: Thou
therefore, that is, seeing thou have heard, that I will shortly bring my wrath
and vengeance upon this people for their wickedness, and that the period of
the time appointed is at hand: seeing also thou know that this has been
manifested unto thee, that thou admonishing of them, they may be so much the
more left without excuse: Thou then, trusse up thy loins. Thus then we see to
what purpose God speaks to his servant Jeremiah, in this particular manner;
namely, that in the presence of the people, he might execute the office of a
public Teacher.

And hence we gather, Paul says, that he was pure and clean from the blood
of all men; because he had taught from house to house, and published that
whole council of God which he had received, Act. 20.26.27. And in another
place he says, Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel, for this office is
committed unto me, 1. Cor. 9.16.

Whereas the Lord bids the Prophet to trusse up his loins, it must be referred
unto the garments which were then in use among them of the East; as they are
also yet unto this day, for they wear long garments: therefore as often as they
purposed to undertake any business, or journey, they were wont to trusse them
up about them. He says then, trusse up your loins; that is, enterprise and
dispatch this business which I have given thee in charge. In the mean while
he wills him to take courage and heart to him, that he may (without stop or
stay) go cheerfully and diligently about his calling.

Arise (says he) and speak unto them all that I command thee. To be short, in
these words God signifies, that he is not purposed to do his utmost against
them, till he has once more tried whether any hope of repentance be yet left
or no. I grant he knew well enough that they were utterly incurable: but his
meaning was by this, the better to discover or lay open their peruersity and
rebellion, whilst (in the last place) he commands the Prophet Jeremiah to
pronounce against them this last sentence of condemnation.

He again repeates that which he said before, Be not afraid of their faces.
And this exhortation was of great use: for Jeremiah took upon him a very
thanklesse office, in regard of men. Why so? Because it was all one as if he
had been an herald of arms, proclaiming open war against them, in the name of
the Lord of hosts. In as much then as Jeremiah brought an express message
touching the ruin of this people, because their rebellion had been so great,
that God testified he would no more hereafter show them any favor: Chap.
16.13.
this must needs be an hard saying for them to hear: but especially, if we
consider the pride wherewith the Jews were possessed. For they gloried in the
holiness of their race and stock: also, (as we shall see afterward) the
Temple (in their conceit) was an impugnable fortress (as it were) even against
God himself: Chap. 7.
Being then grown thus obstinate and rebellious, it was very requisite he
should be confirmed in his calling more than once, that he might (with the
greater courage) set upon his charge. This is the cause then why this
exhortation is redoubled, Fear not their faces.

In the next place he adds, Lest I make thee fear; or, lest I tread thee
under foot. The word signifies sometime to fear, it signifies also, tread
upon. Saint Jerome has corrupted the Prophets meaning, when he interprets, I
will never make thee afraid. I deny not but this is a good and holy doctrine;
namely, that God will furnish his Prophet with such force and power, that he
shall remain invincible against the rage of his enemies: yea, it is most
certain that God should in vain exhort us to quit our selves like men in this
race, were it not that himself did therewithal inwardly endow us both with
strength and constancy, by his holy spirit: this (I say) is most true; but the
word here used will not suffer us so to expound this place. What meant the Lord
to say then? (Be it that we translate, to tread upon, or, I will cause thee to
fear) the sense will suit very well. For as soon as God has exhorted his
Prophet to be valiant, and of an invincible courage: he now adds, Take heed;
for if thou quailest, I will make thee fear with a witness; or, I will indeed
trample thee to pieces under my feet, before their faces. His meaning then in
these words is, that the Prophet shall be sufficiently furnished, if he
acknowledge himself to be sent of God: and if in consideration thereof, he
carry himself according to that sovereign authority which is put into his
hands, not fearing the faces of mortal men.

Moreover, here is a secret threat included, thus, look to it; if thou
behauest thy self valiantly, I will be with thee: and albeit at the first
encounter, those that oppose against thee, have the faces of Bears, and Lions;
yet shall they gain nothing by it in the end. But if thou prove a milkesop,
or a white-liuered soldier, I will put thee to shame; that is to say, thou
shall not only be timorous and fearful, but I will also cause thee to be
despised of all: or, every one shall be ready to offer thee foul indignities,
in regard thou have made thy self unworthy that I should stand for thee, or
give thee strength and power to put thine enemies to flight. We see then
whereunto these words tend, Fear not, lest I make thee fear; that is to say,
be of good courage, lest worthily thou be put to shame, and lest thou fear
them, according as thou well deseruest: yea, not only that, but, lest they
bruise and break thee; yea, lest peradventure they presume to tread thee under
their feet; because thou (to whom I have given the power of my spirit) shall
thereby utterly disable thy self.

God will shame and disgrace them; so as they shall quake at the least puff of
wind, and shall be wholly dashed to pieces. Why so? Because they are unworthy
God should advance them, to whom he reaches out his hand; whom also he arms
with his armor; and (as has been said already) to whom he gives fortitude and
constancy, by which they might terrify, not only the whole world, but the
devil himself also.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, and heavenly Father, since thou did once in such wise
vouchsafe to arm thy servant. Jeremiah with the invincible power of thy holy
spirit, that at this day his doctrine humbles us: grant we may learn
willingly to subject our necks to thy yoke, and so to receive, yea and to
embrace whatsoever thou have taught us by this thine holy servant, that thou
raising us up by thine hand, and being underpropped by thy power and defense,
we may fight hand to hand against the world, and the prince thereof, Satan
himself: that in the mean while each of us in our places and callings may so
confidently rely upon thy power, that we may not doubt to expose our lives to
all dangers, as often as need shall require: and that we may valiantly fight, and
also persevere, till the last encounter be finished, when having run out our
race, we may in the end attain to that blessed rest which is reserved for us
in heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE FOVRTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Verse. 18. And I, behold I have set thee this day as a City of defense, or
defenced; for an iron pillar, or stay, and for a wall of brass, against the
whole land; against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes, against the
Priests, and against the people of the land.
HEre God furnishes his servant with boldness: for it was necessary he
should be endowed with courage, in respect of that fear whereof we spoke in
the former verse. For Jeremiah thought himself neither apt nor sufficient to
undergo so heavy a burden: also, he had to deal with a perverse and
rebellious generation; neither were they a few of them, for the whole multitude
were already confirmed in the contempt of God, through an obstinate
wickedness, full of impiety. In as much then as all care of true religion was
gone, and that there was no reverence of the heavenly doctrine left among this
people: Jeremiah distrusting his own strength, durst never have taken upon him
a burden of such weight, had he not been sustained by the help and assistance
of God. For this cause God now testifies, that he shall be as a City well
fortified, and as an iron pillar: albeit the word stay, and bearing up, will be
apt, and will also agree well enough, in regard it comes of another root, which
signinifies, to bear up, or stay: as also, because according to this sense the
Prophet means, he shall be a pillar, not only to be set up in some void
place, but which shall bear up the wall or building. The sense is clear
enough: for the Lord signifies, that his servant shall be invincible; so as
whatsoever his enemies devised or plotted to the contrary, yet they should
never prevail against him: as it is in the next verse.

Jeremiah, yet not for him only; for by good right, all faithful Teachers
ought to apply it to themselves, if so be they be well assured that their
calling is of God, and that they be also persuaded (upon good grounds) that
they attempt nothing rashly, but in obedience to Gods Commandment. Whosoever
is thus stablished in a lawful calling from God, may well apply this promise
to his own use; namely, that he shall remain unvanquishable against all the
rabble of the wicked, and despisers of God.

We are also to note the circumstances: it might have seemed sufficient that
God called his servant a defenced City; but he also compares him to an iron
pillar, and to a wall of brass: for this repetition confirms that which we
touched in a word before; namely, that Jeremiah should overcome, so as albeit
Satan should raise up against him many storms, yet the issue notwithstanding
should always be happy and prosperous, because he fought under Gods ensign:
but he adds forthwith against all the land. It is evident that God speaks
not here of the whole world in general, but of the land of Judah in
particular: for Jeremiah was therefore selected out, that he should bestow his
labors for the good of Gods chosen: therefore he says, he shall prevail over
all the land of Iudeah.

Kings.
It follows in the next place, against the Kings of Judah. We know there was
but one King at once in Iudeah: but the Lord exhorts his Prophet to
perseverance: as if he should say, The course of thy warfare shall be of long
continuance; but though it be tedious, yet faint not. The meaning is then, that
the Prophet shall not only wage battle (as it were) against one King alone;
but when that King shall be taken away by death, there shall still be new
combat^s prepared and made ready. Why so? Because he should not so much as
dream of any truce, until he had finished that race which God had appointed
him to run. For we know that such, who otherwise are resolved frankly and
willingly to obey, desire notwithstanding to have a set time prefixed, that
afterward they may have leisure to repose themselves: as old soldiers are
wont to do, who commonly have liberty to tarry at home, after they have spent
their strength in service. But God tells his Prophet here, that after he has
valiantly carried himself in his calling till the death of one King: that his
condition shall be no whit the better for all that, because others shall
succeed in their rooms, against whom he must of necessity bend all his
forces; in regard he shall meet with the like peruersity and obstinacy even in
them also.

With Kings, he ioynes Priests and Princes: Princes.
and in conclusion, all the people. Though some one King (forgetting his duty)
becomes a tyrant, and makes his lust a law; yet it often falls out, that there
shall be some good rulers and Magistrates, who will be a means to moderate
his unbridled appetites, if they cannot wholly reform them. For we see that
even the most cruel tyrants are often brought to be calmed, and made
peaceable by good counselors. But God here aduertiseth, that things are now
become so desperate in Iudeah, that if the Kings be mischievous and wicked,
they shall also have p^ruerse counselors, who in every thing shall be just of
the same stamp that they are.

That which follows of the Priests, Priests.
might yet seem much more prodigious, but that the Scripture in every place
testifies, that the Leuiticall Priests were all (in a manner) degenerate, and
become Apostataes; so as scarcely one of an hundred was to be found, in whom
the least spark of Gods fear appeared. For as much then as this state was
thus corrupted, is it any marvel if Jeremiah be here commanded to proclaim
open wars against the Priests? But in the further progress of the text we
shall see then this come to pass.

People.
Now because it might seem the common people were somewhat more worthy of
excuse, there being often more simplicity to be found in them, than in Princes
and men of place (for such as bear rule, commonly fail, either through pride
or cruelty; or they give themselves the raines too much, trusting in their
greatness and dignities: but (as I have said) for the most part there is more
modesty in outward show in those of the common sort) yet God here witnesses,
that impiety had gotten such a head throughout all the land of Iudeah, that
from the very least to the greatest of them, all were become notoriously wicked.

It was needful then, that the Prophet should be thoroughly armed as I said
erewhile. For what thoughts would have invaded him, had he not at the first
received this advertisement: when afterward he found (by woeful experience)
such pride, yea rage and fury, to possess the hearts both of great and small,
that as an adversary, he was to encounter against Gods chosen people, no less
than if he had had to deal against so many devils. It follows.

Verse. 19. They shall indeed fight against thee, but they shall not prevail
against thee; for I am with thee to deliver thee, says the Lord.
IN this verse God in a word admonishes his Prophet, that howsoever he should
be fortified with invincible power, yet there were many bickerings prepared
for him; lest peradventure he might think to pass over his charge in sport (as
they say) Here then he shows wherefore he was likened to a brazen wall, to an
iron pillar, and to a City vnexpugnable: Verse. 18.
namely, that he might buckle himself manfully to the fight, and not to cast
far from him the fears of all dangers, combats, or whatsoever might annoy or
be tedious to his flesh. To be short, we see whereunto the use of this
promise tends, to wit, that Jeremiah being vpheld by the aid and power of the
Almighty, should not fear to oppose himself against the Jews: for what rage
or fury soever it were that possessed them, yet he should not need to be out of
heart for all that.

Hence we may gather a very fruitful doctrine; he will deliver him; manfully
to sustain

He says then, They shall fight against the, but they shall not overcome thee,
because I am with thee to deliver thee. Hence we learn, that Jeremiah was in
such wise armed, that he needed not to fear, like a wall, as if therefore he
should be free from all assaults: but he says, to deliver thee. As if he
should say: Be prepared to meet with encounters, for if I should not deliver
thee, thy life were gone, and thou should perish an hundredth times: but in
the midst of a thousand deaths thou need fear no danger, seeing I am
ever at hand to deliver thee. It follows.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And the word of the Lord came unto me saying,

2 Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says the Lord, I
remember thee according to the compassion of thy youth, and for the love I bare
thee, when thou followedst me in the desert, when thou came after me, in a
land that was not sowed.


See Verse. 18.
NOw God gives unto his servant that commission which he was to make report of,
to the Kings, Princes, Priests; and to all the people of the land. For by the
ears of Jerusalem, he means, all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: But God here
closely intimates, that the Jews were unworthy he should any longer be
careful of their estate. What then? There was some other consideration which
moved him not utterly to reject them, that is, he waited to see whether they
were become wholly incurable as touching their wickedness or no. Thus he
begins then: I remembered thee with the kindness, or, for the compassion of thy
youth, and with the love of thy espousals. By these words he signifies, that he
did not much regard what the Jews deserved at his hands: nay, he professes,
that he saw no worthiness at all in them, which might provoke him in any sort
to care for them, or to labor their conversion by the ministry of his
Prophet: but what he did, was in respect of his former benefits bestowed upon
them.

Some translate, I called to mind the piety or mercy of thy youth; and this
word Lak, that is, thee, may be so resolved, as in many other places. Others
omit this word Lak: some add a copulative, And I have remembered thee, and thy
mercy. But none of these (as I think) have attained the Prophets meaning:
although to say the truth, there is no obscurity in the words, if we here
only supply a particle, to wit, that God remembered his people, in respect of
that mercy and compassion which he had on them, and for that loves sake which
he bare unto them from the beginning. This (as I take it) is the Prophets true
and natural meaning; namely, that God here takes away from the Jews all
matter of pride and boasting: as if he should say, They deserve not that I
should so much as look toward them; only my meaning is, to show my self a
father to them; not for their sakes, but that the benefits which I have
heretofore bestowed upon them may not vanish away. In a word, he here renders a
reason wherefore he now sends Jeremiah after the rest of the Prophets whom he
had sent before: as if he should say, I think this may serve as a sufficient
testimony to confirm you in the assurance of that fatherly care and respect I
have of you, in that I here send you another of my Prophets, to offer you hope
of pardon; if you will come home into the right way, and seek reconciliation
with me. But if you would know the cause why I thus remember you: whence is it,
I pray you, seeing you have forgotten me, and cast my Law altogether behind
your backs? Even because I mean yet to continue on my bounty toward you.

He names the mercy of youth in the passive signification. For by these words
his meaning is not, that the Jews were in times past merciful, but that they
had tasted of Gods mercy to them: yet the similitude which he uses is worth
the observing. For God here compares himself to a young bridegroom, that has
married a fair young damsel in the flower of her youth: which similitude is
very frequent among the Prophets. But I mean not to travel any further in the
exposition of the words now, because we shall have occasion to handle them
more fully in another place. In as much then as God had married the people of
Israel, by redeeming of them, and in bringing them out of Egypt; that is the
reason why he says, he remembered the people, in respect of such a mercy, and
of such a love.

He puts mercy, or liberality, before love. For the Hebrew word signifies, that
free favor, courtesy, or liberality which is showed to them which are in
misery. By this word love, God also in many places of the Scriptures signifies
that free choice, by which he had received the whole body of this people. But
the proper signification is here more clearly expressed, when mercy, or free
favor is put in the first place, and that this love follows after. I grant
he adds nothing new to the former: but only the Prophet in more plain
terms shows, that this people was loved of God, for none other cause, but in
respect of his mercy.

Here is a text then very remarkable: for God testifies, that his covenant
shall continue stable and inviolable, notwithstanding the Jews had perfidiously
violated it. For howsoever all those that descended of Abraham according to the
flesh, were not true and legitimate children of Abraham, according to the
promise: yet God ceased not to continue true, as on his behalf, so as his
gifts and calling were without repepentance, as Saint Paul testifies, in Romans
11.29. From these words of the Prophet, Paul speaks in another place; namely,
that though all men should prove liars, and disloyal, yet will not God
therefore become unfaithful, but will remain steadfast in his covenant, Romans
3.4. This is it which we gather from the Prophets words, when in the beginning
he says, God remembered his people in regard of the mercy of their youth.

Whereas he speaks of youth, and of the espousals: Abraham? What were all his
posterity? God therefore here signifies, that the fountain of all these
benefits proceeded hence, that he vouchsafed to choose the people as peculiar to
himself.

Which he yet better confirms in the rest of the words saying, when thou
followedst me in the desert, in a land that was not sown. We know the people
behaved not themselves so obediently to God as was meet, no not after their
redemption. It cannot be affirmed here then, that God any way magnifies their
deserts, but (as I have said) he confirms his former speech; namely, that he
could not cast off his care of them, whom he had once adopted for his own:
whom also he had drawn into the wilderness after him, as separating them
thereby from all the rest of the world besides: and yet by way of yielding them
so much, according to his indulge^ce, he attributes this service which the
people did him, in following him through such craggie paths, to their praise
and commendation: as if a young damsel refusing no labor nor travel, should
for the love she bears to her husband, follow him through thick and thin. In
the next words to these, he adds:

Verse. 3. Israel is the or, as a thing hallowed to the Lord.
holiness of the Lord, the first of of his fruits: all those that eat them,
shall find evil: others translate, shall sin; but I had rather understand it
of the punishment which shall come thereupon: evil shall come upon them: this
is put by way of exposition, says the Lord.
GOd does here more plainly tax the peoples ingratitude. And first, he
mentions the benefits bestowed that Israel was holy, he speaks not so, to
honor them. I grant this is an honorable title in it self: first, that God
had set them apart for his own; and esteemed them as the first fruits of his
reuenew. But the opposition which is closely here understood, must be
considered; to wit, between that so incomparable a grace of God, and the
peoples disloyalty; who (notwithstanding his bounty and liberality) did
afterward quite forsake him. It is in this sense then, that Jeremiah says,
Israel was the holiness of the Lord: that is, as one separated from all other
nations, that Gods glory might shine there especially.

He consequently adds, that he is the first of the fruits. For albeit all the
benefits the earth brings forth, are consecrated unto God, from whose power it
is that they wholly proceed: yet we know the first fruits were selected out,
that being presented upon the Altar, they might be (as it were) an holy and
consecrated meat. Seeing God then in the Law, had commanded the first fruits to
be offered unto him, and afterward to be given to the Priests, for this cause
alluding to the ordinary custom, he calls the people of Israel the first of
his fruits. For the nations which were scattered here and there, were not
exempt from under his dominion (in regard he is the Creator of the whole
world; and besides, has always manifested himself to be the foster Father
thereof) but he passed by all other nations, to choose and reserve to himself
the stock of Abraham, upon condition to be the guardian thereof, by his power
and assistance. Seeing God then, by these favors, had in this sort obliged
this people particularly to himself; with what a strait and sacred bond, ought
they for their parts to have been obliged and bound unto him? Their disloyalty
therefore was so much the greater, and the more odious, in that they lightly
esteemed such rare and undeserved favors, as God had showed them. We see now
then wherefore it is the Prophet says, that the people of Israel were
hallowed to the Lord, and were the first of his fruits: but withal he gives
them to understand, that a time will come wherein God will also gather other
nations into his Church. For the Jews dedicated and offered unto God, the
revenue of the whole year, by the first fruits. Thus Israel was like to the
first fruits: in regard God afterward also received strangers: who for a long
time had been held and reputed for profane and unholy. But the Prophets chief
drift notwithstanding is to show how great the people, fault was, in not
acknowledging the benefits and privileges which they had received of God.

In the next place he adds, whosoever shall eat thereof, shall be liable to
punishment. I told you before, that this sense likes me best, because the
exposition by and by follows, evil shall come upon them. And thus the meaning
is, that such shall not only be guilty before God, that shall eat of his
first fruits, as having offended: but he referres this to the punishment: as
if he should say, If the profane nations presume to eat of these my first
fruits, which are consecrated unto me; they shall not escape unpunished. For
whosoever durst be so bold rashly to seize upon those first fruits which were
once dedicated unto God; God punished such an one as a sacrilegious thief. But
if any had, rather understand it otherwise; namely, that it was not lawful to
offend Israel, or to offer him any violence, because he was under Gods
protection, I will not greatly gainsay it. Yet the phrase of this tongue leads
us notwithstanding to follow the other exposition; to wit, that such as shall
offend Israel, shall not only be guilty; but (which is more) they cannot
escape Gods correcting and punishing hand. Why so? For, evil shall fall upon
them, says the Lord. In the verses following, he will touch the use of this
doctrine more at large.

Verse. 4. Hear the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the kindreds,
or, families, of the house of Israel.

5 Thus says the Lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they
have estranged themselves from me, and have walked, or, have been, after
vanity, and are become vain? or, vanish away.


GOd here gives a reason why he had bestowed those favors upon the Jews,
Verse. 3.
of which we heard before; to wit, wherefore he made choice of Israel, to be a
people consecrated peculiarly to himself, and to be as his first fruits. God
often times remembers his benefits formerly bestowed upon us; either to give us
hope for the time to come, or that he might always give us assurance
(whatsoever should fall out to the contrary) of our salvation; in regard he
has not only vouchsafed once to elect and choose us, but to be our protection
and defense. Yet in this, and in many other places, God shows how many ways
the Israelites were indebted unto him, that their ingratitude might be so much
the more apparent. He says then, Hear the word of the Lord.

The Preface.
He uses this preface to procure attention: signifying, that he is not to
speak of some common or ordinary matter. Hear then (says he) O house of
Jacob; give ear all the families of the house of Israel. As if Jeremiah
should have said, I come boldly on my message, even in the name of the Lord; so
as I am not much afraid of your defenses by which you will labor to repulse
the reprehensions of God: I therefore securely stand before you to hear your
replies; but I am well assured that you shall be enforced to lay your hand upon
your mouth: wherefore I fear not to cry shrilly in your ears like a trumpet;
that I come to proclaim your judgment and condemnation: if you have ought to
reply, I am ready to hear it; but the truth I know will constrain you to be
silent, in regard your offenses are too manifest and abominable. This is the
scope of this exhortation, when he calls thus for audience to all the families
of Israel.

Now follows the accusation: The accusation.
what iniquities have your fathers found in me, etc. Jeremiah here charge
the people with two crimes: first, for departing away from that they vanished
away in their inventions; namely, for that they played the Apostataes without
cause. For the fault is aggrauated, in that they had no cause given them so to
forsake or estrange themselves from God. Seeing God For (says he) you have
followed vanity, and vanity only is it, that has caused you to forsake me.

I should have proceeded further, but some other business calls me away; for
I was sent for, before the Lecture began.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing thou ceasest not still to call us to thee, and that both
early and late; and continually exhorts us to repentance: seeing thou also art
pleased to promise us mercy, when we shall seek unto thee for the same: let us
never stop our ears against so gracious a benefit; but let us always remember
thy free election, the fountain of all thy graces, proceeding from thy free
love to us; that we may endeavor so to give up our selves to thy service, that
thou may have glory by our life and conversation. And though it so fall out,
that we now and then go astray from thee, yet give us grace speedily to
return into the right way: and let us evermore be ready to receive thy
warnings and corrections, that it may appear we have been in such wise called
and chosen of thee, that we may desire to continue in the hope of our
salvation, to which thou daily inuitest us, and which thou have prepared for us
in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE FIFTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIRST UPON THE second Chapter.
WE heard yesterday the complaint that God took up against his people. The
sum was, That if he were to make his defense before any Judge, it would be
found that he had just cause to condemn their ingratitude: and as for them,
they had no color or show of reason that might cause them to wander after
vanity; but they were become vain: that is, they had abandoned him without any
cause at all, and suffered themselves to be transported and carried away by
their own dreams and forgeries.

Verse. 6. And they said not, that is, it came not into their minds to say,
where is the Lord that has brought us out of the land of Egypt, and caused us
to walk through the desert, by a solitary or, empty land, and vaste, in a
terrible land, by the shadow of death, by a land that no man passed through, and
where no man dwelt.

7 And I brought you into a or, Hacarmel
plentiful land, to eat the fruits thereof, and the abundance thereof, word
for word it is: To his good: and you entered into it, and have polluted my land,
and have made mine heritage an abomination.


THe Prophet prosecutes the same point of doctrine still: for God here blames
the people for no small fault, seeing they had forgotten his benefits: and yet
had he redeemed them after such an admirable manner, that it worthily deserved
to be celebrated, not of one nation only, but of all the nations of the world
besides. See then how justly he taxes the Jews for their hateful
ingratitude, for forgetting the memory of so famous and incomparable a
deliverance. Had they not at all felt Gods bounty and liberality toward them;
nay, or rather, had they had but some little semblance thereof, then their
fault peradventure might have been somewhat the more excusable: but God having
not after an ordinary manner discovered his power from heaven, and having
openly manifested his majesty and glory, even in the very eye of the people;
what a barbarity was it in them after all these things, to forget God who had
so plainly declared himself to them by such notable experiments? Thus we have
the Prophets meaning then, when he says, they said not. See chap. 5.24.
For God here taxes the sloth of the Jews, for not considering in themselves
how they were perpetually bound with strict bands to the majesty of God for
those great favors he had showed them in delivering them so miraculously out
of the land of Egypt.

When he says, they said not, where is the Lord? He gives them to understand,
that he was always present before them, or nigh unto them: but they were
blind, and therefore had no pretext for their ignorance: for they needed not to
have sought him far off, nor have fetched many long circuits about. Had they
only then but thought thus with themselves, Has not God once redeemed us? had
they (I say) but thought thus in themselves, they would never have followed
their vanities. Verse. 5.
Whence proceeded such a fault then, or rather such a frenzy, in pursuing
Idols? Even from this, They would not vouchsafe to apply their minds and hearts
to seek after the Lord. Thus then the Prophet here preuents the replies of
hypocrites, who would be ready to allege that they were deceived, and that
they faulted rather of ignorance, than otherwise. For it is always the manner
of those that are found guilty, to seek euasions and starting holes, as soon
as they be called to an account. That the Jews then might not be able to bring
in their excuses, the Prophet tells them here in plain words, that they
erred not of ignorance, but of malice, through which they were carried away
after their vanities and lies; in regard they had wittingly despised the Lord,
and would not so much as ask after him, though he was near enough unto them.

This place is worthy to be noted: for nothing is more usual with the wicked,
after they be once convinced, than to seek this refuge; namely, that the
giving of themselves to all superstitions, proceeds forsooth, from their good
intentions. The Prophet therefore meets with this wile, and shows, that where
the knowledge of God has been once entertained among men, there his name and
glory cannot be blotted out, unless it be of set malice, when they wittingly
and willingly estrange themselves from him. And thus this one clause so
condemns all Apostataes, that they have nothing to answer, when they object,
We were overtaken through ignorance. For a man shall no sooner bring them forth
to the trial, but their malice and ingratitude shall forthwith be discovered,
in regard they vouchsafed not to ask, Where is the Lord?

He by and by adds that which is the exposition of this sentence. For I told
you, that the question is not here of sentencing babes in understanding, but of
the Jews; who by sure and certain proofs knew that God was their Father.
Seeing then, God had manifested himself unto them by so many infallible
testimonies, they had not to allege for themselves so much as any show of
ignorance. That is the cause then why the Prophet says, It came not into their
thoughts to ask; Where is the Lord, that has brought us out of the land of
Egypt? etc. This could not be said generally of all nations; therefore I told
you before, that this speech is directed particularly to the Jews, who had
tasted and felt the power of God by evident testimonies; so as they could not
offend, but of set purpose, that is, in quenching (by their frowardness) the
clear light that shined before them. Also the Prophet yet further aggrauates
their offense, by certain circumstances: for he says not only that they
were brought out of Egypt, but that God was always to them in stead of a
Captain and leader, and that for forty years together: for under this word
desert, he notes the time. Now because the history thereof was fresh in memory;
that is the cause why he thinks it enough to touch it only in a word. And
yet even therein he notably sets forth Gods glory, in mentioning the desert.
But in the first place observe, that the Jews were altogether inexcusable, in
that they remembered not how their fathers had been miraculously preserved for
the space of forty years, by Gods immediate hand, and not after an ordinary
manner. For they had no bread to nourish them, neither had they water: God
caused water to flow out of the rock, and afterward he filled them with
bread, which fell from heaven: neither did their garments wax old by length of
time. We see then, that their fault is here augmented by the circumstance of
time: now follow the things which I spoke of. For the Prophet calls the
desert, a dry, or vast land, a terrible land, an hidious, or horrible land, a
land of deadly darkness. As if he should say, you were preserved in the midst
of many deaths: for none ever passed through this land, neither did any (says
the Lord) ever inhabit there. Whence appeared your safety then, or from what
fountain? Truly even from death it self, says he. For, as for the desert,
what was it but an hideous spectacle, in which you might from all parts be
viewed, to be not only compassed about with one, but with an hundred deaths?
Seeing God then (beyond the order of nature) brought you by a stretched out
arm, from out of Egypt, and sustained you forty years long in the desert: what
show or color of reason have you to excuse such a folly, or rather madness,
that are now so far estranged from me?



He goes on in the next words, And I have caused you to enter. Jeremiah brings
in God himself speaking here; namely, how he stretched forth his hand (as it
were) to this poor offspring of Abraham; that he might put them in possession
of the land of promise: for as it is said in the 44. Psalm. 44.3.
Psalm, It was neither by their arm nor sword that they obtained this
possession: for albeit they had to fight indeed against many enemies; yet in
all their battails notwithstanding, the victory came of the Lord. And thus he
might truly and rightly affirm, that they entered no otherwise into this land,
than by his conduct and leading: to wit, in opening a way and passage unto
them, and in ouercomming and destroying their enemies, that they might enter
into, and enjoy the land which he had promised them. I have brought you then
(says he) into the land of Hacarmel. Some take this to be the proper name of
the place: and certainly mount Carmel is so called, in respect of the great
fruitfulness thereof. For as much then as this mountain took its name in
respect of the richness of the soil; what marvel is it, if Jeremiah compares
the land of Israel to mount Carmel? Others expound it, as if the particle,
which imports a similitude, should be here understood; I have caused you to
enter into a land which is like to Carmel: but what need we offer violence to
the Prophets words. I think then, that the noune is a noune appellatiue,
signifying fruitfulness; namely, that the Israelites were conducted by the
hand of God, into a plentiful and fruitful land: of the fruitfulness
whereof, mention is often made, as well in the Law, as in the Prophets.

To eat his fruit and his abundance: that is to say, The end why I brought you
in thither, was to enjoy the great abundance, and large revenue thereof. God by
these words then meant to make it known to the Israelites, that it was their
duties to have been provoked by such benefits, to serve him in uprightness; in
regard he had sought by such ientlenesse to draw them to himself, and had used
them after so gracious a manner. But so much the more as God had showed
himself liberal toward them, so much the less insupportable was their
unworthy revolt in forsaking God; and in contemning such abundance and variety
of all good things. For which cause he adds afterward: And you polluted my
land, and have made mine heritage an abomination: as if he should have said,
This is the recompense and the reward that I reaped from my bounty I used
toward you. Indeed I gave you this land; but upon condition, that you should
serve me in holiness and righteousness therein: but you (says he) have
polluted it.

Now he calls it his land, or heritage: God so gives us leave so to use his
benefits, that still he reserues the right and title of them to himself.
as if he should say, I so gave you this land, that in the mean while I never
meant to shut my self out of that right and interest which I have in it;
howsoever I was content you should reap the whole commodity of it. He shows
then, that they had wickedly abused his bounty, in polluting this land,
notwithstanding it was dedicated to his name and honor. He calls it his
heritage, in the same sense: as if he should say, You have in such wise
possessed this land by right of inheritance, that yet the heritage came to you,
from me your heavenly father. They were to consider then, that they therefore
entered into this land, because it was given for an heritage to Abraham and his
children. But by whose gift? Was not God the author of it? Their ingratitude
therefore was so much the more detestable, in that they had made such an
heritage to become an abomination. It follows.

Verse. 8. The Priests said not, Where is the Lord? and those which kept, or,
had kept, the Law, knew me not: and the Pastors behaved themselves disloyally
toward me, and the Prophets prophesied in Ball, that is to say, by Baal, and
have walked after things which did nothing profit them.
NOw God ioynes issue, especially with those that had the charge of teaching in
the Church, and with those For it may very often fall out, that the common
people will be irregular, whilst the heads and leaders notwithstanding shall
be careful to walk sincerely and in uprightness. But God here shows, that
this nation was become so degenerate, The faults of the Superiors excuses not
the sin of the Jnferiours.
that Priests, Prophets, Rulers; yea, the heads of the people and all, had
abandoned the true service of God, and all righteousness toward men. Now in
that Jeremiah thus sets upon the Priests, and Teachers, and the rest: he
therein excuses not the multitude, neither goes he about thereby to extenuate
or lessen those foul crimes and enormities which were rife in every place, as
we shall perceive hereafter in the process of the text: although we know
diverse there are, who think they may fence themselves against Gods
accusations, by alleging, We are not so well instructed, to discern between
truth and falsehood; is it not enough to do as our leaders will have us? The
Prophet then discharges not the people, so as to lay the whole fault upon the
Governors: but he rather aggrauates the greatness of their extreme impiety,
in regard all, even from the highest to the lowest, had renounced both God and
his Law. I think we have now, the Prophets meaning.

is an apparent proof that all things are grown past cure, when God gives
Princes and Priests over to a reprobate sense. Misorder in Church and
Commonwealth, a sign that the people by their sins have provoked God to
anger with them.
For when all order both in the Political and Ecclesiastical state is thus
adulterated; it is a sure sign, that the Commons have there provoked Gods
wrath and vengeance against them, It is a just recompense then, which God
renders into the bosom of such a people as have transgressed his covenants,
when he blindes the Priests, the Prophets, with the rest of their Superiors
and Statesmen. This is it which Jeremiah meant, when he here says, that the
Pri sts never thought of enquiring after the Lord.

He says afterward, those which kept the Low. The Hebrew word signifies, to
hold, and comprehend: it also signifies sometimes, to run. And thus it may
admit two expositions in this place: either that the Priests held; that to them
first, by way of concession or yielding so much unto them: but afterward he
also shows, even by this, that they were so much the more wicked, in that they
became utterly careless of their duties. He says then, Those which had the
custody of the Law: not that he meant they kept the Law of God in truth, nor
as if they kept it by them of any pure zeal; but only in regard of an outward
profession of it. For they would needs be held the keepers of the Law, as
having the heavenly doctrine thereof closed up within their breast, like unto
an hidden treasure; Hag. 2.12. Mal. 2.7.
in regard the people were to seek counsel at their lips, as being the organs
and instruments of the holy Ghost. Thus then, for as much as they bragged of
the knowledge of the Law, and that they were the keepers of it: therefore the
Prophet bitterly inuayes against them, because they knew not God. And it seems
that Saint Paul draws that which he says in Romans 2.20.21.22. from this
place, Thou which understand the form of the Law, Thou that preachest
another should not commit adultery, co^mittest thou adultery? condemnest thou
Idolatry, and yet co^mittest thou sacrilege? For thou obseruest the law, thou
approuest it, thou gloriest in God; thou have knowledge and understanding. In
which words St. Paul discouers the wickedness of hypocrites; for they are the
more worthy to be detested, by how much the more they are swollen with pride
and vainglory; and yet in the mean while profane the sacred name of God,
whilst they thus brag; we are preachers and teachers of it, and are (as it
were) his Prophets. We see now that this which he puts here in the second
place, belongs chiefly to the Priests; who are therefore called the guardians
of the Law, because it was committed unto them by right of their ordination,
Hag. 2.12.
as we may gather out of Mal. 2.7.

By way of consequence he adds, that the Pastors behaved themselves
perfidiousty, or disloyally toward God. This may be referred as well to the
Kings Council, as generally to all the Governors of Cities. And for my part,
I nothing doubt, but the Prophet meant to comprehend all such as had any charge
of government over the people of God. For Kings, and their Counselors, as also
the Prophets, are usually styled by this title of Pastor.

He says moreover, That the Prophets prophesied in Baal. The name of a Prophet
in it self is a sacred title: but Jeremiah (according to a common error)
calls them so in this place, who were naught else indeed, but mere deceivers
and couseners of the people. For God had deprived them of all light of true
knowledge. Notwithstanding, because they still retained a reputation among the
people, as if they had been true Prophets: therefore Jeremiah sticks not to
grant them this title; as well in regard of their duty, as of their vocation
and calling. Even as we at this day call them Bishops, Prelates, Primats, and
Fathers, who brag much of performing the duty and office of Pastors in the
Papacy; howsoever we know some of them are wolves, and others of them dumb
dogs; yet we yield them these titles, wherein they glory, because they deserve
double condemnation for usurping wickedly (and with an intolerable pride full
of sacrilege) these sacred titles; and for dispoyling the Lord of that honor
which by good right appertains unto him. So Jeremiah now whiles he calls them
Prophets, means those impostors who then wickedly seduced the people.

He says, they prophesied in or by Baal, that is to say, they reverenced idols
more than the true God. We know this name of Baal went then for current in
every ones mouth. The Prophets sometimes call all sorts of idols Baalims in the
plural number. But because Baal signifies a Patron; as often as the Prophets
mention either Baal in the singular number, or Baalims in the plural; they
mean thereby all those petty gods whom the Jews had gathered together: as if
God, not content with his sole and only power, needed some fellow-helpers to
be joined with him, as in the Papacy; where, at this day, they stick not to
confess that there is one sovereign Majesty; but in the mean while they make
none account of him, neither attribute they any more to him, than they do to
their stocks and stones which they forge at their pleasure. The same vice
reigned then among the Jews, yea among the Pagans. For both confessed freely
and simply that there was but one sovereign power; yet had they an infinite
troop of dunghill gods, who were so many Baalims. Therefore when the Prophet
says here that such as had the charge of teaching, ministered, or prophesied
in Baal: he therein opposes this name, to the true and only God: as if he
should say, The doctrine of the word was corrupted by them, because they passed
their limits, and continued not within those bounds of the true and sincere
doctrine contained in the Law; but mingled many abuses and corruptions
therewith, which they had gotten in together from all parts: to wit, those
troops of gods whom profane people had forged. And yet the Prophet insists not
upon the word, or name. For happily those great clerks pretended the name of the
eternal God, yet falsely: but God is no sophister. Neither are the Papists at
this day to imagine that they differ ought from these ancient seducers, because
they pretend the name of one God: for it has ever been so. It is not of
yesterday that Satan has begun to transform himself into an Angel of light;
but in every age these Doctors have on this manner reached forth their poison;
that is, all their errors and deceits, in this golden cup. Although the
Prophets then at that time boasted they were sent of God, and that with open
mouth they feared not to style themselves the servants of the God of Abraham:
yet all this was but wind: for they intermingled therewith the corruptions
which they had learned from the wicked superstitions of the Gentiles.

It follows: And they went after those that profited them nothing. He again
amplifies their fault by a close comparison, namely, that they had despised
him, whom by so many experiences they had known to be their father, and
author of their salvation; whose power (as you would say) they had felt with
their hands: all which notwithstanding, they ceased not still to follow their
own inventions; albeit they saw nothing in any of their idols, which might be
of worth to draw the affections of the Israelites to the liking of them. Seeing
therefore they followed their vain and fruitless deceiuings; thereby their
crime is made so much the more odious and detestable.

Verse. 9. Therefore will I yet contend, or plead with you says the Lord, and
will rebuke your childrens children.
THat which is here added, is not of small consequence: for the Prophet gives
them to understand, that if God in former times chastised the peoples
trecheries and treasons; that himself notwithstanding as on his behalf
remains just: as if he should say, Think not you are rid of all your
afflictions, albeit I have already severely scourged you and your fathers for
your offenses and rebellions. For you walking still in the same course, there
being neither end nor measure in your sins; you may well think I will not
depart from my right, but I will on the other side pursue you, your fathers,
and your whole race, to the utmost. We have now the Prophets meaning. For it is
an ordinary custom among hypocrites, shamelesly to shake of all fear, but
then especially when the Lord has once made them feel the rod. Why so?
Because they imagine he will content himself to have punished their
wickednesses once. But in the mean while they do not so much as dream that
he corrects the sins of men but lightly, The nature and practice of
hypocrites described.
but contrariwise they think God at the first blow displayeth his whole
indignation and rigor, so as by means hereof they promise to themselves
impunity for ever after. As for example, if God brings upon some country, or
city, be it war, plague, or famine; whilst the smart lasts you shall see
the^ terrified, and grieved: and the greater part who^ God handles in this
kind, will mourn, sigh, and lament: but God no sooner gives them any respite,
but they shake their ears (as they say) and with the dog return unto their
vomit; never calling to mind their faults formerly committed. Hypocrites
therefore must of necessity be brought to understand (as we see Jeremiah here
does) that God so corrects men's sins, that he cease not for all that to
hold on his authority and right even to future times, when he sees men so
refractary and headstrong, that they profit nothing by all the chastisements he
inflicts upon them.

Yet then (says he) I make no question but this threatening did much exasperate
the minds of this nation. For, not fearing so presumptuously to murmr against
God (as in many places we see they did) where they stick not to tell him to
his face that his ways were thornie, Ezech. 18.25. and 33.20.
and (as it were) full of briars: it is not hard to judge whether they spared
the Prophets or no, as we shall see in due place. For they imposed very odious
names upon the Prophets; what? These Prophets have nothing in their mouths but
Burdens, Burdens: as if (belike) God meant without ceasing to thunder against
us; better it were for us to shut our ears, than thus still to have them
beaten with such menaces, seeing they bring nothing with them but fear and
terror. Thus it is most certain that these things were very offensive to the
Jews, when the Prophets said, God will yet plead with you; but thus it was fit
it should be.

God will yet contend or plead with us.

Now this pleading is to be understood of the effect: for Jeremiah speaks not
here simply of doctrine; but his meaning is, that the Jews shall come to an
account before Gods judgment seat, in regard they ceased not to provoke his
wrath against them; and the same also he threatens against their children,
even to the third generatition. Now it follows.

Verse. 10. Truly, or, for, go to the isles of Chittim, of Greece, that is to
say, to all the regions beyond the sea, and see, and send to Kedar, that is to
say, to the opposite region, namely, toward Arabia, and consider diligently,
and behold if it has bin so done, that is, if such a thing has been done.

11 If any nation has changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods; and my people
have changed their glory for that which profits them nothing.


IN these words (by way of comparison) he amplifies both the lewdness and
unthankfulness of his countrymen the Jews, showing how they were become more
light and inconstant, than any of the profane nations. For he affirms, that
every nation cleaued so fast to that religion they had received from their
ancestors, that they never changed. How could it fall out then, that the God of
Israel should be thus contemned and rejected of his people? If such a
constancy were to be found in those that stood in a false religion, why was not
the truth kept inviolable of them, who were taught and instructed by Gods
immediate voice, as if they had been rapt up into the third heavens?

This then is the Prophets meaning when he says, The sum.
Go to the isles of Chittim and send to Kedar. On the one side he here
comprehends Greece; and on the other side the East: but it is by taking a part
for the whole. For the Hebrews (as we have seen in Daniell) call the Greeks
Chittim: although others are of opinion, that by this word the Macedonians are
understood. But without all controversy, under this word, he comprehends al
Greece; and not only the isles of the Mediterranium sea, but all Europe: so
that this word extends it self to all these parts, to wit, to all France, and
Spain. I grant that this word is sometime taken apart; but when it is taken
generally, the Hebrews (as I have said) have been wont to speak of the
French, Spaniards, Germans, and Grecians. Now in that they call the regions
far remote from the sea, isles; it is because they had not much traffic with
nations far off: so as they esteem all to be isles, which lie beyond the sea.
And the Prophets also follow that phrase of speech, which was usually received
of the vulgar sort. He commands them then to go to the isles, or to the
regions, as well Southward, as Northward. Secondly, he wills them on the
contrary to send toward the East, and to consider the state thereof, as well
into Arabia, as to India; to the Persians, and other regions. For under this
word Kedar, he comprehends all the nations of the East: but he chiefly mentions
Kedar, in regard they were a more barbarous people than any of the Medes or
Persians, or such as were most renowned: which he does of purpose to disgrace
the Jews. Go then, or send through all the parts of the world, and see and
consider diligently: see and send: as if he meant to say, The Jews are grown
so senseless, that it is impossible to recover them with one word, or a bare
admonition. This is the reason then why he exhorts them so carefully to
enquire; notwithstanding the thing were more than apparent already. But (as I
have said) this so diligent an enquiry, is not to be referred to the
difficulty of the fact; but it is to convince the Jews, who were become so
sottish and perverse, that albeit their own consciences convicted them of
impiety, yet they ceased not for all that, to sooth themselves up still in
their vices. He says then, Truly, Go to the isles, and after, see if the like
thing be done: that is to say, you shall not possibly meet with the like
fearful and prodigious thing.

The exposition follows, namely because no nation had changed their Gods,
which yet were no Gods: that is, religion is so settled and established amongst
all other nations, that they will not by and by change their Gods, but they
will worship those whom they have received by tradition from their fathers: and
yet (says he) they were no Gods. If he had only said, There is no nation that
has changed their Gods, it had not gauled the impiety of the Jews so much to
the quick. But the Prophet takes this for granted, that whatsoever inventions
and superstitions reigned amongst the Gentiles, proceeded from no other
fountain, than merely from ignorance; and yet notwithstanding they claue
steadfastly and constantly to their inventions: neither does the Lord say this,
as if he praised them for it: his meaning is not that this obstinacy of the
Gentiles deserved any such things at his hands, because they never shranke from
their superstitions: but in regard of his own people, this constancy might
seem (after a sort) praiseworthy. We see then how these members should be
read all with a breath, thus: Although there be no nation under heaven but you,
that worshippeth the true God; yet their religion (such as it is) they
constantly hold; but you have disloyally forsaken me, (me, I say) who am not
some fained thing, but your glory. The words next inserted here, are set as
opposite to these vain fallacies of the Heathen Gods, when he says, my people
have changed their glory. For they knew right well, and that not only as they
were taught in the Law, but by most infallible experiences also, that God was
their glory: yet could not this withold them from forsaking him. It is as
much then as if Jeremiah had said, All nations at the last day shall rise up in
judgment against Israel. Why so? Because such an obstinate persisting in so
foul an error, will manifest, that the Jews are therefore the only
Apostataes, in that they have forsaken the true God: yea, even that God, who
had openly declared his power and magnificence in their sight. See to this
purpose Valerius maximus, lib. 1.
To which purpose it is that Zenophon so highly magnifies that oracle of
Apollo, who answered, that those Gods were of right to be worshipped, which
had been received successively from their elders. The devil also had thus
bewitched all nations; namely, with this maxim, God will never like of
nouelty, therefore satisfy your selves with the customs and traditions which
have been left you from hand to hand by your ancestors. This principle then
remained sure, as well among the Grecians, as among them of Asia and Europe:
therefore that which the Prophet here says (for the most part) holds always
Aristotle says, That which is most received by continual use and custom.
Thus we see then, that Jeremiah does not unaptly reproach the Jews with their
lightness, in saying, That no nation had changed the gods which it had forged:
but that this people had denied that God, who had been their glory: that is,
who had given them sufficient matter to glory in.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing thou have been pleased so familiarly to manifest thine
own self unto us, not only by thy Law and Prophets, but also by thine only
Son; so as the knowledge of thy truth ought now to take deep rooting in us:
grant we may continue steadfast and Immovable in this thine holy calling,
profiting therein daily more and more, and always hastening to arrive at our
desired haven: and so humble us also under thy mighty hand, that we may know
thou have chastised us with thy fatherly rods: moreover, that we may from day
to day have such a sanctified use of these thy corrections, till being at the
length purged from all our vices, we may atttaine that glory wherein being
possessed of life and immortality, which has been once manifested to us in thy
Son Jesus Christ, we may perfectly magnify thy high and excellent name. Amen.

THE SIXTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE SECOND UPON THE second Chapter.
Verse. 12. O ye heavens, be astonished at this, and tremble for fear; and be
utterly confounded, or, dried up, says Jehovah.
AFter the Prophet saw he had to deal with men that were grown utterly
senseless and past feeling: he now directs his speech to the heavens. Which
kind of speech is very usual with the Prophets, namely, to call heaven and
earth to be witnesses of their words, albeit they be utterly void of
understanding: and to turn their speech from men, whom they see to be
destitute of reason and judgment. And this they were wont to do, when they
perceived that things grew desperate; to wit, when men refused to be taught.
This is the reason then, why the Prophet now commands the heavens to tremble,
and to be astonished, and to be brought (as it were) to nothing: as if he should
say, This is so prodigious a thing, that (in a manner) it ouerturnes the whole
order of nature; even as if heaven and earth were mingled together. Now we
have the Prophets meaning: for by this manner of speech he meant to show how
odious the impiety of the people was, when the heavens which have no
understanding, ought justly to blush at such an horrible disorder. As touching
the words: some translate. O ye heavens be desolate; and afterward reiterate
the same signification. But because the Hebrew word signifies to be astonished:
the reading which I have followed, agrees best to this place, to wit, O ye
heavens be astonished: and then, tremble at this, and be dried up, For the Hebrew
word signifies, to become dry; and it also signifies to be brought to a
wilderness, or desolation.

Verse. 13. Certainly, or, for, my people have committed two evils; they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and have dug pits, or cesternes,
yea leaking, or broken cesternes, that can hold no water.
IF any think the Prophet renders a reason here, why he would have the
heavens astonished and tremble, it must be turned, for, my people have
committed two evils: but for mine own part I think the verse which
immediately before I expounded, See Verse. 10.11.
depends upon the former sentences. The Prophet had said, Go to foreign
countries; and see if any nation have changed their Gods, which yet are no
Gods, but mere fictions and lies. And therefore to conclude this matter
withal, the Prophet (as I take it) adds this exclamation, saying, O ye
heavens be astonished. See Verse. 12.


Verse. 13.
Now it follows, Certainly my people have committed two evils; first, in that
they have forsaken me: and secondly, in that they have forged false Gods. If
any man should cast off an ancient friend, Simile.
to fall in league with a new; this were both unreasonable and dishonest: but to
do this where no benefits were to be obtained; then, it would savor not
only of lightness, but of folly joined with a kind of frenzy. Thus then if I
reject that which I know will yield me profit, to choose that which will be
hurtful unto me: shall not such a choice manifest to all, that I am out of my
wits? You see what the Prophet means then in this place, when he says, This
people not only failed in forsaking the true God, but that without any reward
at all, they ran after idols, which could do them no good.

they committed two evils: first, in forsaking God; secondly, in following
false gods, such as men's the fountain of living waters: and compares the idols
to leaking and broken cesternes, which can hold no water. If any man should
leave a living fountain, to get unto himself a cesterne; were it not a great
folly? For cesterns are always subject to leake, and to be drawn dry,
unless they be supplied with water by some other means: but a fountain has
the spring in it self. Moreover, look, where there is a vain of living
waters, (that always runs and never fails) there the water is best and
wholsomest. Rain waters which fall from the clouds into a cesterne are never so
wholesome as those which flow naturally from a living vain. But what say you
then, when the vessel shall not be fitting to retain the water, but shall
still be leaking and running out, because of the diverse creuises which are
thetein? You see then how God by this similitude taxes the folly of the
people, for forsaking him, albeit he was a fountain; yea, a fountain of
living waters. And secondly, that the people also desired to choose things of no
worth, when they gave themselves to dote upon idols. For what good is to be
found in them? truly a shape and resemblance only. For the superstitious sort
think they loose not their labor, whilst they honor those gods which
themselves have devised, but look for some recompense at their hands. There
are some forms then you see in false religions: and therefore the Prophet
compares these false gods to pits, in regard of their depth and hollownesse:
but in the mean while not a drop of water to be found in them. Why so? Because
they are cracked and broken cesternes. Now we have the Prophets meaning, to wit,
we can no way excuse our selves from being found worthy of condemnation, when
we forsake the true and only God. Why so? Because in him we have the
fountain and wellspring of all benefits, whereout we may draw our fill. Shall
we then despise Gods liberality; which is able perfectly and fully to make us
happy? Oh, how great is such an unthankfulness and peruersity! and yet shall
God notwithstanding be always unchangeable like himself. Wherefore if he be
justly styled the fountain of living waters; such an one will he be unto us at
this day, if we hinder him not by our, own malice. In the mean while the
Prophet adds another crime to the former: for we no sooner turn our backs
upon God, but our hopes will forthwith fail us. And howsoever for a time we
may imagine we have pits, or rather fountains; yet come we once to stand in
need of them, we shall not find so much as one drop of water in all our fond
imaginations, but cesterns, merely dry and void of liquor. It follows.

Verse. 14. Is Israel a servant, or is he borne in the house? why is he made a
prey?

15 The Lions shall roar, or, yell upon him: some translate Lions whelps; and
the word here used, often times signifies, young Lions; but then especially, when
it is joined with other words of the same kind: otherwise being used by it
self, I always interpret it generally, for Lions; they made their voice to be
heard: they brought his land to desolation, his cities are burned, or,
destroyed, without an inhabitant.

16 The sons of Neph also, that is to say, of Memphis: for the Hebrews call
the chief City of Egypt, Memphis, and Thaphnes; or, according to the Greeks,
Thapis, shall break thine head.

17 or, has not this been done unto thee.
Have thou not procured these things unto thy self, because thou have forsaken
the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way?


WE must read all these four verses together, because the Prophet in the
first of them shows, that the Jews were not thus miserable, in their first
estate, but it proceeded from a new cause: and in the latter verse he sets
down the cause it self. In the fourteenth verse therefore he asks, saying,
Is Israel a servant? or, a servant borne in the house? God had adopted this
people to himself, and had promised he would show himself in such wise
bountiful unto them, that they should be every way happy and blessed; yea a
mirror of happiness. In thee (says he) shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed, Genes. 12.3. and 22.18. and 26.4. and 28.14. We see then what
Isreal's condition was at the first; truly, most excellent, as having the
pre-eminence above all other nations, admiring Isreal's estate now, and asking
as of a thing strange and unwonted, Is Israel a servant? Surely he was once
free above all other nations: for he was Gods eldest son. There must needs be
some cause sought out then, how he is become thus miserable. For afterward he
says, the Lions roared and yelled upon him: his

Lastly, he adds in verse. 17. Is not this done unto thee? Again, this
interrogation, is as much as a double affirmation; for it puts the thing out of
question (as we use to speak.) as if he should say, What cause can thou
allege that thou art in this woeful taking, and that every one has set
himself against thee, so as thou art made a prey to the whole world? Whence (I
pray thee) have these things come unto thee? Have they not proceeded from thine
own wickedness? We now see the Prophets meaning. But that we may yet
understand him more thoroughly, it is to be noted, that God here calls the
benefits which he had bestowed upon the Jews to mind, to shame them withal.
In regard the children of Abraham then, had received so many singular gifts and
graces from God, that they were esteemed before all the world besides: this
their dignity is set before them, but to their disgrace. As if he should say,
God has not deceived thee in promising to deal liberally with thee: his
adopting of thee to be his son, was no fabulous nor vain thing. Thou then
should certainly have been the most happy nation in the world, had not thine
own wickedness procured unto thee the contrary. Now ye see the reason of the
Prophets demand, Is Israel a servant? or, borne in the house? By nature indeed
they were no whit better than any other nation: but in regard God had chosen
them to be his peculiar inheritance, and had given them so excellent a
prerogative; therefore the Prophet now asks whether they be servants or no. As
if he should say, Whence is it, that we see not that happiness and
blessedness shine in thee now, which God once promised unto thee? For this is
certain, God for his part deceiues none. It must needs follow then, that thou
have by thine own deserts procured unto thy self these miseries.

And when he says, why then is he spoiled? He shows that if he had not been
deprived of Gods protection, he should not in such sort have bin made a prey
to the lust of his enemies. He was laid open to the spoil then, only because
God had forsaken him: Deuteronomy. 32.30.
as it is written in the song of Moses, How should one of you chase a thousand:
and two of you put ten thousand to flight, except our strong God had sold us,
and that the Lord had shut us up? For Moses there closely puts the people in
mind, of what, and how many noble and admirable victories they had obtained
over their enemies: and by means thereof he left it to the consideration of
the successors that should be afflicted, whence this change came; namely, that
there needed but one enemy to chase a thousand: that is, notwithstanding they
should be the greater part, Psalm. 44.5.6.9.
yet their enemies should put them to flight. But what was the cause of this?
For in former times they were not wont to turn their backs upon their enemies,
but contrariwise to drive them before them: it follows then that they were
thus captiuated not of men, that pursued them; but of God. Also the Prophet in
this place shows, that Israel was not made a prey; but in regard that God had
left them succourlesse.

In the next place he adds, The Lions roared upon him. It seems the Prophet
compares not Isreal's enemies to Lions simply, in respect of their cruelty; but
rather by way of contempt: as if he should say, Israel not only feels men
his adversaries, but even wild and savage beasts. Now this is a greater
reproach, when God suffers us to be torn in pieces by wild beasts. It is as
much then as if he had said, Israel is thus miserably handled, that he is not
only exposed to the power and will of man to be put to death, that is, by the
hands of his enemies, but is even made a prey to bruit beasts. And he adds
here, that they yelled, as if he should say, Israel who was wont to be
protected by Gods powerful hand, is now become the food of cruel and ravenous
beasts: so as the Lions with envy roar (as it were) upon him. Then without
any metaphor he adds, that his land is laid wast, and his Cities burnt without
an inhabitant: neither indeed does this suit either to Lions, or to other
cruel beasts: but what he spoke before figuratively, he here expounds
himself plainly; Thy land is wasted, thy Cities are burned, or, rased to the
ground. This (as I have said) could not have fallen out, unless Israel had
been forsaken of God, and consequently deprived also of his succor and
protection.

To amplify this discourse, he adds, Also the children of Noph and Taphnos
shall break thine head. We shall see hereafter that the Israelites were wont
to seek for help from the Egyptians: and this particle yea, or, also, may be
thus expounded: not only shall those who have hitherto showed themselves thy
open and deadly foes make war against thee, but even thy confederates; upon
whose power thou reliedst? even these shall turn their forces against thee,
and shall break thine head; or the crown of thy head. Some are of opinion
that this is spoken by way of reproach; and to shame them, in regard the
Egyptians were cowards: ancient histories also testify that in Egypt, men
dealt in those affairs, which properly belong to women. But because the
Scripture is not wont to testify thus much, nor to speak in this sense of the
Egyptians; I had rather follow that which is most received, to wit, that the
Egyptians (who notwithstanding they were Isreal's confederates) should become
their enemies: yea that they were their enemies already. By the top, or crown,
some understand the Princes and heads of Israel: but we may expound it
according to our usual manner of speaking, They shall break, or they shall
rub, or chafe thine head: and this sense in my judgment suits best.

Now the reason follows, why this came to pass: Has not this been done unto
thee? (says he) Others translate, Have not thou done this? in the second
person. Howsoever, the sense is all one. And yet it seems the opinion of
others is better, Has not this been done unto thee, because thou have forsaken
the Lord thy God? In a word, Jeremiah shows, that the falling away of the
people, was the cause of all their chastisements. As if he should have said,
Such broth as you have made, even such sup you off; and know that thou can
not any way charge the Lord as being blameworthy; for he is ready to perform
that which he has promised, did not thine own impiety hinder him. Neither
has God indeed chosen thee in vain; neither has he without cause preferred
thee before all other nations; only thou have rejected and put back his
benefits and liberality from thee. Thus then thy condition had never been as
now it is, if thy self had not procured these evils to thy self. And how is
that? Because (says he) thou have forsaken thy God. And he does again
aggrauate the fault in saying, In the time when he led thee by the way.

To lead by the way, is as much as to govern rightly and happily. Thus the
Prophet shows that their disloyalty and backsliding was utterly inexcusable,
in that they had rejected the worship and service of God: for then things went
prosperously forwards. Had they been pressed with many tentations, they might
thus have made their excuse, we thought our expectations should have failed
us, whilst we waited for deliverance from the true God. Why so? Because he
withheld the signs of his presence from us; therefore necessity constrained
us: at the least, that which we have done inconsiderately ought to be pardoned.
For what could we think else, but that God had forsaken us? This objection our
Prophet here preuents, as in the fifth verse of this chapter; What iniquity
have your fathers found in me? And in another place, O my people, what have I
done unto thee, testify against me? Mich. 6.3. For God in that place is ready
to justify his cause, and to clear himself of whatsoever accusations the
people could charge him with. So here, I have lead thee by the way: that is to
say, thou were in good case, being under my leading and government; and yet
could neither my goodness, nor loving kindness keep thee in awe, though I
dealt graciously with thee: no though thou knew thou could no way better
thine estate, then to be under my custody; yet thou louedst rather to follow
after idols. What excuse therefore have thou now? or what show of excuse can
thou allege for thy self? We see then how the fault of the people is so much
the more aggrauated, because they then forsook their God, when they were no
way forced thereunto by any tentation; but being grown merely disloyal, they
voluntarily gave themselves to the service of idols. Now this is confirmed in
the verse following.

Verse. 18. And what have thou now to do in the way of Egypt? to drink the
water of Nilus? or what make thou in the way of Ashur? to drink the water of
the river?
THe Prophet (as I touched before) confirms that which I have said; namely,
that the people could not challenge the Lord, as being the author of their
evils, seeing the whole cause thereof, rested in themselves. And yet the fault
is redoubled, in regard they sought here and there after such remedies which
profited them nothing at all: by means whereof also they always heaped new
judgments upon their own heads. For we must understand that their only
remedy in afflictions was to seek reconciliation with God. Simile.
For example, if a sick man knows whence the cause of his sickness comes,
and afterward (in stead of seeking fit remedies) he betakes himself to some
medecin which shall do him no good, but will rather be a means to increase
the malady; will we not judge such an one worthy to perish, seeing he
wittingly and willingly rejected those remedies which would have done him good,
to run after vain and deceivable medecines, thinking to find comfort by
them? This is the very thing which Jeremiah here reprooues in the Israelites:
If thou carefully inquire (says he) whence so many afflictions proceed, thou
shall find me guiltless, and thine own iniquities to be the cause. But what
is now to be done? what course art thou now to take? even this: bethink thy
self well how thou may be reconciled with me, and how thou may obtain
pardon: endeavor to be revenged on thy self for thy wickedness. Thus shall
thy plagues be soon removed, and by experience thou shall find me the best
physicion, God the best physicion.
if thou thus address thy self unto me.

But what do thou now? Thou trottest up and down, hunting after vain and
deceivable comforts. Now thou fleest to Egypt; and by and by to Assyria: but
by none of these means can thou procure unto thy self any benefit. Now we
have the Prophets meaning: for having convinced the Jews of their impiety, and
having so caused them to understand that they could neither ascribe the evils
which they endured, to God, nor to Fortune, no nor yet to any other causes: he
now shows, that the only remedy, and the best way to attain salvation, is to
return into favor with God. But to run hither and thither; now into Egypt,
now into Assyria; they therein discovered an evident sign of desperate folly.
Now this reprehension depends upon the holy history. For this people had one
while the Assyrians their enemies, an other while the Egyptians, in regard
there still happened great mutations and changes: and God also laid diverse
troubles and afflictions upon them, the better to awaken them out of their
drowsinesse and security. Sometimes he hissed for the Egyptians, as we shall
see afterward: then he caused his trumpet to sound into Assyria: and all to
certify the Israelites that no peace was ever to be looked for, till they
quietly submitted themselves under Gods government. And yet the people
rejecting this counsel, were so blinded, that when the Assyrians assailed
them, then they fled to Egypt, that is to say, they sought for succor of the
Egyptians, and made a league with them. But if any change happened, then they
sought and desired to be confederates with the Assyrians, yea and often to
purchase their friendship at a very dear rate.

This is that frenzy then, wherewith the Prophet here taxes them, when he
says, What have thou to do in the way of Egypt? that is to say, I pray thee
what good gettest thou by it? what madness is it in thee, when thou manifestly
feel that God is against thee, that thou then think not of the right
means whereby thou might procure thine own welfare; namely, by seeking
reconciliation with thy God? All thy health consists in fleeing to God, in
seeking to get his favor, and in suing for mercy at his hands. But what course
take thou? Thou runnest to Egypt, thou runnest to Ashur. Bring thou not
thy self thus into a woeful plight? What childishness is it in thee, thus to
vex thy self to no purpose?

From this place let us learn, last incurable and deadly. What is to be done
then? As soon as we feel the smart of Gods rods,

To drink the waters of Nilus, and the waters of Euphrates: is nothing else,
but suing for help here and there. I grant he alludes to the Ambassadors
which were sent: because in their travel, some drank of the waters of Nilus,
and others of the waters of Euphrates: and yet notwithstanding he speaks by
way of allegory; as if he should say, God was ready to succor thee, had thou
but resorted to his mercy, as to a city of refuge: but thou thoughtest it
better to neglect him, that thou might have help from the Egyptians, and
Assyrians: Thou seek then to drink the waters of far countries; whilst
God supplies thy necessities with sufficiency of waters at home. It may be
also, he alludes to that similitude he used in ver. 13. he there called God
the fountain of living waters: as if he should have said; God would be to
thee an euer-springing fountain, that can never be drawn dry: neither
should thou ever perish for thirst, if thou would content thy self with
him alone: but thou thirstest after the waters of Nilus and Euphrates. Thus we
have now attained the Prophets meaning. Neither is it to be doubted, but he
speaks of the waters of Nilus and Euphrates; because both these nations in
outward appearance abounded in all sorts of riches, and in multitudes of men.
Seeing Israel then relied upon such defenses, the Prophet here blames their
ingratitude, in that they satisfied not themselves with those succors which
God affoorded them; albeit the same appeared not unto them in so manifest and
visible a sort as the others did. An excellent and fruitful instruction.
For in God we have all sufficiency: and if himself alone could content us,
certanly he would give us more than we could wish; and would ever supply all
our needs. For himself being never weary of well doing, he would bestow upon
us whatsoever our hearts could desire. But because we cannot perceive this
bounty and liberality toward us with our outward senses: that makes us run
so greedily after the worlds enticements. to lust after the waters of Nilus,
nor Euphrates: that is to say, after the deceivable allurements of this
present evil world, which carry in them a fair gloss in outward show: but
let us rather thirst after this secret and hidden fountain, which is therefore
kept close from our bodily eyes, that we might seek it by faith. Now it
follows.

Verse. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy turnings back,
or treasons, shall ask vengeance of thee, and thou shall know and understand
that it is an evil and a bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts.
THe Prophet here again confirms that which I have said before, namely, that
the people, will they, nill they, shall in the end feel what it is to revolt
from God: as if he should say, If hitherto by so many chastisements, The sum.
thou have not learned that thy treasons and trecheries are the cause of all
these miseries, God will yet add judgment upon judgment, till at the last
thou be enforced, whether thou will or no, to confess, that thou receiuest
the just reward of thine iniquities: this is the sum of the verse. But he
says in the first place, Thy wickedness shall correct thee: as if he should
say, Albeit God neither ascends into his judgment seat, nor stretches forth
his hand to correct thee; yet shall thine iniquities testify thy just
condemnation, even in the sight of the Sun. And this manner of speaking is
more forcible, and has greater vehemence in it, then if the Prophet had only
said, that God would afflict his people justly. Thy wickedness then (says he)
shall chastise thee. The like speech there is also (in a manner) in Isaiah,
Isa. 3.9. and 59.12.
The trial of their countenance testifies against them: as if the Lord should
say, Though I should sit still, and not take upon me the office of a Judge;
though no man should give in evidence against thee; though none should commence
any action at all against thee: yet would the guilt of thine own conscience
rise up against thee, and would put thee to shame and rebuke. So in this place,
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee.

Now we are to see the reason why the Prophet says this: for it is most
certain, that hitherto many of the^ still repined with open mouth against God,
as if he had dealt too sharply and severely with them. In regard therefore of
these murmurings which every one was ready ever and anon to utter forth against
God; the Prophet repels such slanders, in telling of them, that their own
wickednesses were sufficient to correct them. Thy own wickedness (says he)
shall execute against thee the office of a Judge in condemning thee,

Verse. 13. and 17.
He says the same of their turnings back: but he here better expresses that
which he had said before in general, of their revolt from Gods service and
obedience: therefore here he specifies one kind of wickedness; as if he had said,
We need not now call for thine accuser, or for witnesses; or for a Judge to
pronounce sentence: thy only turnings back will suffice (in stead of all
these) as sufficient to condemn thee.

He adds in the next words, Thou shall know and prove how evil and bitter a
thing it is, to have forsaken the Lord thy God. These phrases of speech are
somewhat sharp; but we told you before what they signify; namely, thy
reuolting, or forsaking, that is to say, thy treacherous disloyalties; to wit,
in that thou have forsaken thy God.

And that my fear was not upon, or, in thee. The Prophet once again points
out here the iniquities of this people, as with the finger: for he has spoken
of their strayings, or of their turnings back: but now he mentions their
falling away; namely, that the people openly and plainly forsook the true God.
I grant they always retained some form of religion in the Temple; but all
their worship Exodus 20.5. and 34.14.
who (as it is said in the Law) is jealous of his honor; and will admit none
to be his companions, or equals. We have the Prophets meaning then. It
follows.

Thou shall know how bitter and evil a thing it is: This must be referred to
the chastisements: yet he goes on still with that which he said before; namely,
that the calamities which the people then endured, came not upon them by
chance, so as being now pressed with so bitter and sharp afflictions, they
were to seek any cause thereof from far, in regard all these tedious
anguishes, and all the smart which they felt, proceeded merely from their own
impiety. By the recompense then (says he) thou shall know, and thine own
woeful experience shall convince thee to thy face, that it is an evil and
bitter thing, that thou have revolted from thy God: he says, from the Lord thy
God, or, To forsake the Lord thy God: for if God had not manifested his favors
to the Israelites, their iniquity had not been so odious: but they having
proved God to be their Father; and seeing he had dealt so lovingly with them,
and had done them that honor to establish his covenant with them; therefore
their wickedness was inexcusable.

Afterward he changes the person, And that my fear was not in thee. Here
the prophet at length concludes, that the people were grown past feeling, in
respect of God, or godliness. For by this clause of the fear of God; he notes
reverence. We know men often fall through error and ignorance, and
otherwhiles are overtaken through the subtilties of Satan, so as their misery
is to be pitied. But the Prophet here shows how this people is so
inexcusable, that they are unworthy any pity or mercy should be extended to
them. Why so? Because (says he) there is no fear of God at all left in thee:
that is to say, thou can not allege thou were suddenly overtaken; neither
have thou any pretext by which thou may cover thy impiety: thy impudency and
shameless behavior is grown notorious and too apparent; for thou show
that there is no fear of God in thee.

In the end he adds, says the Lord of hosts: by which words the Prophet adds
the greater authority to his doctrine. For we must needs think that this so
sharp a censure was very ill taken of the people: and many shook their heads
at it, as their manner was. For we know what an obstinacy the most part were
grown to. This is the cause then, why the Prophet here plainly affirms that
this sentence proceeded not from himself; he was only charged to publish it:
and forthwith shows, how God is the author of it, so as he vtters nothing but
what the Lord of hosts had enjoined him to speak.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing it has pleased thee heretofore to bestow so many
benefits upon us, having once done us this honor, as to receive us into thy
favor: grant we may never so forget thy great bounty, that we should be
carried away by the allurements of the devil to seek out forgeries, by which
at length we should be brought to ruin and destruction: but that we may
continue steadfast and constant unto the end, that we may daily call upon thy
name, and drink so large a draught of the fullness of thy liberality, that in
the mean while we may study from the heart to serve thee, and to glorify thy
holy name: and by means hereof may be able to give some good testimony that we
have wholly devoted our selves to thy service, unto which thou have also most
strictly bound us, when it pleased thee to adopt us in Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE SEVENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE THIRD UPON THE second Chapter.
Verse. 20. For I have of old time broken thy yoke, and burst thy bonds, and
thou said, I will no more serve, or, I will no more transgress; for there is
a double reading: but like an harlot as thou art, thou runnest about upon all
high hills, and under all green trees.
FOr as much as the Hebrew text admits a double reading (because of the
affinity which is here between two letters, it causes some to take it for
one verb, and others for another) which is the reason that this place may be
expounded two ways. For if we read, I will not pass, or, I will not
transgress, the sense will be, when I brake thy yoke; that is to say, when I
delivered thee from the bondage of Egypt, then thou did promise me loyalty:
for then there was a mutual contract between God and the Israelites: for I
will not serve; and yet I approve not of the interpretation which the
expositors bring; neither doubt I but this place has been corrupted, in regard
they usually allow this interpretation, I will not serve idols: and those that
have any mean judgment will easily consider, that this sense agrees not, but
is constrained; and therefore it may be (and I think it very likely) that the
text by this means has been mis-interpreted. For generally all the expositors
interpret thus, Thou have said, I will not serve idols: but this is too
constrained. And for my part, I rather think that God here complains that
the people turned that liberty which he gave them, into licentiousness: which
also agrees very well, as we may easily judge by the scope of the text.
Because of long time (says he) I have broken thy yoke, I have broken thy
bands; therefore thou have said: (for vau, which is here in the Hebrew, should
be resolved into a particle illatiue, Therefore thou said) I will not serve,
that is to say, in stead of giving thy self to me who had redeemed thee; thou
thoughtest thou might take liberty to do what thou would: and the reason
which he yields of his speech suits very well; For thou ranst upon every high
mountain, and under every green tree; harlot that thou art. God shows then,
that he has ill bestowed the grace and benefit of redemption upon such
graceless ones, who thus abused their liberty. For they took occasion hereby
to ouerflow in all lasciviousness. But if any had rather follow the other
reading, I will not gainsay him: and then the sense will be, It is long ago
since I disburthened thee of thy yoke, and brake thy bands: but thou have said,
that is, thou did promise me (for he speaks of this people as of a woman)
which is the cause that it is put here in the feminine gender; as also in
regard that God held the place of an husband toward his people; therefore he
no sooeer accuses them of disloyalty, but he by and by speaks unto them as an
husband does to a shameless woman, who has given over her self to the
committing of adultery. Thou therefore have said unto me, that is to say, thou
did promise me, that thou would not pass, that is, that thou would
assuredly keep thy self chaste, and loyal to me alone. And thus in stead of
the particle ki, which among the Hebrews is a note of rendering the cause, we
may put in the place of it an aduersatiue, to wit, Notwithstanding, it being so
taken in other places of the Scriptures. But, or, Notwithstanding then, thou
have run upon every high mountain, etc. as harlots are wont to do, in
seeking their maintenance. But (as I have said) I rather think that God
complains here of his people, in that by the favor he showed them touching
their deliverance, and freeing them from the yoke, they thereby took occasion
to give over themselves to all dissolute behavior. For thus the text runs
very well; and all the parts and members thereof concur very fitly one with
another.

Whereas the Lord puts them in mind of breaking their bands; and bursting their
yoke: some refer this only to the first redemption. But I mislike not of
their opinion, who think the Prophet speaks of many deliverances. For we know
the Israelites were not for once only delivered out of the land of Egypt, but
that God ever and anon stretched forth his hand, as soon as they were afflicted
and oppressed. He had long since then taken the peoples yoke from of their
necks: but it was at sundry times, as we may perceive by the history of the
Judges. See Nehem. 9.28
Seeing the peoples liberty then proceeded merely from Gods free bounty, who
had for the sames sake redeemed them; ought they not to have yielded themselves
obedient to their Redeemer? For the people were therefore set at liberty, The
end why God redeemes us.
that they should wholly dedicate themselves to his service.

Thus then God here accuses the ingratitude of this people, because they
imagined he thus delivered them, Paul says, in Romans 6. namely, that whilst
we serve sin, we are freed from Gods righteousness. for then we run after
our lusts, and have no bridle left, to keep us in. But after God has once set
us free from this woeful servitude under sin; then we begin to be servants
unto him and his righteousness. And thus being freed and delivered from sin,
we become servants of righteousness: this is the end of our redemption. But
many abuse this grace of God, taking occasion thereby to break forth into all
intemperancy; But thou said, I will not serve: for it is too gross an
ingratitude; yea it is too much that thou have done already, to dream that I
have not redeemed thee: as also not to understand that my meaning, in using
thee with such respect, was to teach thee that thou were wholly mine. For he
that is redeemed by another, is no more his own: 1. Cor. 6.19.20 What
Condition redemption contains in it.
God had redeemed this people; and therefore the redemption contained in it an
obligation, binding the people over, to yield voluntary obedience unto God, and
to be governed by him. Thou have said then, I will not serve. Thus God
complains that he has ill employed the benefits and graces which he bestowed
upon the people: in regard they abused the liberty he gave them, to all
excess of riot.

And the reason which follows, manifests it yet better; For thou runnest as an
harlot (says he) upon every high mountain, and under every green tree. For
we know that the Israelites no sooner revolted from Gods true worship, but they
chose them places here and there; as if the tops of the mountains, and
shadowie places under green trees, had had more holiness in the^ than any
other. And even thus it fares with the Papists at this day: for their devotion,
that is to say, that devilish fury which transports them from place to place,
is the very same. Oh (say they) such a place is holier, and better than that.
So did the Israelites; for they thought themselves nearer heaven, when they
were mounted aloft upon the tops of the hills: likewise they thought they they
had more familiar access to God, when they were below under the thick shade.
And we see also how every profane man almost, is bewitched after the same
manner. For when they are on the mountains, they think that makes them nearer
to God: they also imagine that some divinity is secretly included, as well by
the rivers sides, as under green trees. For as much then as this superstition
had long continued among the Israelites, God here thus reprocheth them, for
their running and wandering to and fro.

But the similitude which he uses must be observed. For he compares them to
harlots, who having cast off all shamefastness, trudge hither and thither, not
only to satisfy their base and filthy lusts; but also their insatiable
covetousness, whlch sets them so on gog. He says then, Thou rannest about
upon every mountain, and under every leaued tree, like an harlot; or, harlot
that thou art: as if he should say, See the reward thou gave me for my mercy
in redeeming thee: thou think thou have obtained leave now to ouerflow now
in all impiety. Think well then what has occasioned thee thus to prostitute
thy self to all villainy and wickedness. It follows.

Verse. 21. And I planted thee as a vine of choice; noble, or exquisite: for so
much, the Hebrew word signifies, wholly of faithful plants, or approved seed;
and how art thou then turned unto me, into the plants of a strange, or wild
vine.
GOd here co^firmes that he said in the former sentence: for there he condemned
the Israelites, because they ran riot after their superstitions,
notwithstanding God had redeemed them to another end; namely, that they should
suffer themselves to be governed by his hand. I (says he then) have planted
thee a choice vine: that is to say, when I redeemed thee from out of thine
enemies hands, I licensed thee not to prostitute and give over thy self to all
abominations. For I planted the as a vine of choice. This similitude is well
enough known, and we often meet with it: for God in many places compares his
Church to a vine: generally he terms it his heritage, or possession: but in
regard the vine is more excellent than all other possessions (for they have
been wont to prefer it before meadow ground, or that which is tilled) So then
because the vine is the most noble and choice inheritance; therefore God, to
show how greatly he esteemed his Church; when he mentions it, he gives it
rather the name of a vine, than of a meadow or field. So in this place, I have
not redeemed thee out of Egypt, ever after to become careless of thee: but my
meaning was that thou should take root and that thou should be to me as
a precious inheritance; even as a vine whose branches are all natural. I
planted thee then for an excellent vine, to bring me forth fruit: yea (says
he) for a whole faithful seed: that is to say, for this purpose I planted
thee, that thou should bring forth acceptable and pleasant fruit. Yet note
by the way, that God has here respect, not to the nature of the people of
whom he thus speaks; but to his free grace. For the people naturally were
never true and faithful plants, See Romans 3.10.11.12. etc.
as it is well enough known: but God shows, upon what condition he redeemed
his people; namely, that they should resemble a vine of choice. How then? God
speaks here by way of admiration, or as one amazed, to see how corrupt they
were; for the indignity of the fact was such, as might have astonished the
whole world.

How is it then, that thou art turned unto me into the plants of a strange or
wild vine? Others turn, into unprofitable branches: but I know not whence they
have fetched it; and therefore I rest in that which is the most proper, namely,
that the vine which should have been noble and exquisite, was become so
degenerate, that it brought forth nothing but wild grapes; as we shall also see
in another place. Now he says that it is grown wild, and turned into a
strange vine: that is, it was no more noble, or of choice; but that it brought
forth naught else but sour fruit: seeing therefore it was profitable for
nothing, it is not without cause that God styles it a strange vine. It lollowes.

Verse. 22. Though thou should wash thee with niter, or allom, as some
translate it, and that thou should gather together all the grass of the
fuller, as some expound it; others translate it soap: as touching the
substance, the matter is not great, because God meant to give them to
understand, that no art, nor any other means at all, nor that any grass or
herbs were able to cleanse out the filthinesses of the people: thine iniquity
is marked, graued, or printed; or as some translate, sealed, before my face,
says the Lord God.
WE have seen already (and the Prophet will also often mention the same) how
the people were become so rebellious, that they would receive no correction.
For the greater part were grown audacious, and become so hardened in their
sins, that they made no bones at all, scornfully to make their replies
against the Prophets, when they pressed them home indeed. What? Are not we Gods
holy people? Has he not chosen and adopted us? Are not we the sacred offspring
of Abraham? For this cause the Prophets were feign to carry themselves on this
nanner toward them: for (as we have it in our common proverb) to a rough
horse belongs a rough rider: the Israelites therefore being like to tough and
knobby timber, needed to be laid upon with maine strokes, to master their tough
and crabbed nature. According to which Jeremiah now says, Though thou wash
thee with soap, and though thou gettest to thee all store of fullers grass;
yet is thine iniquity sealed before me: that is to say, thou shall get nothing
by coloring over thy wickednesses by goodly pretenses: wash thee as much as
thou will, yet thine iniquity remains sealed up in my sight. Now the Prophet
speaks in the person of God, that the sentence of condemnation, which he
pronounces upon the Israelites, by which also he brings all their goodly
flatteries and fair pretexts to nothing, might have the more weight and
efficacy, as has been said. They used allom, and fullers grass, to cleanse
and take out spots in clothes: and that is the reason why the Hebrew word
Borith, here used, is often attributed to fullers. But there is no great
necessity for us to dispute whether it were an herb, or powder, or some such
like thing: for as touching the substance, it agrees very well. The Prophet
under a similitude meant to show, that hypocrites gain nothing by alleging
their smooth excuses for their defenses, when God reprooues them. He says
then, that all their labor will be utterly lost. And why so? Because their
iniquity was sealed: that is, in regard they could never so wash themselves,
that that which was sealed, or had received a stamp upon it, could be defaced.
Spots indeed may be gotten out by soap, or some other herbs; but after the
spots be once soaked in, or that the stamp has entered within the thing
stamped or sealed, all the washings in the world will profit nothing; because
such marks are so engraven, that a more extraordinary remedy must be used, to
effect the same withal. So the Prophet here says, that the spots are
engraven; and therefore cannot be gotten out, nor abolished, neithey by soap,
nor any other herb.

And he says that these spots are sealed, in Gods presence, or, before his
face; in regard it was a very easy matter for the Israelites to make their
excuses, and to lay all the blame upon some other: yea they were grown to such
an impudency, that they durst openly resist the Prophets; as if they had
offered them great wrong: also they stuck not to term the Prophets, railers,
and slanderers. This is the reason why he says, thine iniquity is marked
before me: that is to say, albeit thou deceiuest thine own soul with
flatteries, and hidest thine iniquities from men; yet that shall nothing profit
thee. Why so? Because the same rests sealed before me. It follows.

Verse. 23. How will thou say, that is, How say thou: for the Hebrews often
use the future tence, to signify a continual action; How say thou then, I
am not polluted, I have not walked after Baalims? Behold thy ways in the
valley, acknowledge that thou have been a swift Dromedarie, which runs by
his ways.
Jeremiah here prosecutes his former sharp reprehension of the Israelites, and
discouers all the close conueyances of hypocrites, under which they think to
steal away in the dark. For after hypocrites have alleged their false and
fained pretexts, they think the Lord is so hoodwinked, that he can no more
epsy ought in them, and that none can ever reprove or judge them again.
Therefore the Prophet thus severely reprehends this so sottish a security,
saying, How dare thou boast thou art not polluted? How dare thou affirm,
See verse. 8.
thou have not followed Baalims? that is to say, after strange gods. For as
touching this word Baalims, I told you it signifies, petty, or little Gods. The
Jews knew well enough indeed, that there was but one high and sovereign God;
and yet notwithstanding that, they sought out advocates: and hence has sprung
those multitudes of gods which they have been wont to forge. For men (as yet)
never fell so foully into such a folly, but they always confessed there was a
supreme majesty, or rather a divine nature: but therewith they mingled petty
gods; so as the Baalims were (after a sort) their advocates, as the Papists
call their saints, in regard they dare not attribute the names of Gods to the
idols which they have framed: and such cauils (for all the world) used the
Jews. He says therefore, What excuse can thou make, that thou have not
followed after Baalims?

Behold (says he) thy ways; consider what thou have done in the valleys; and
at length acknowledge that thou have behaved thy self like a swift Dromedarie.
For the Prophet seems to want words enough to set forth such violent furies,
as at that time reigned among the people, unless he compared them to
Dromedaries. But for as much as he speaks unto them in the feminine gender, as
unto a woman; therefore he puts the female Dromedary here. Now I think he
calls her swift, not only because she ran swiftly; but because she is
violently carried with heat of lust, as we shall see afterward. This place
then gives us to understand, that the people were so hardened in their evil
courses, that they impudently rejected the reprehensions of the Prophets. Their
impiety was apparent enough: yet were they not ashamed to make their defenses,
as if the Prophets had wronged them overmuch, in condemning their follies:
neither are we greatly to marvel at such an obstinacy in the ancient Jews;
seeing the Papists are no less headstrong at this day, in contradicting the
known and manifest truth. For albeit children are now able to discern of their
gross and shameless idolatries; yet they think with one word to excuse all,
when they answer us, that pictures and images are no idols: the Israelites
indeed (say they) were condemned for forging images and puppets; but that was
in regard they were inclined to superstition. And thereupon they cry out
against us with open mouth, that we wickedly slander this way of serving God,
which has been received and used of them. We see, and little babes also (after
a sort) may perceive, that there is no kind of superstition, which is not
received, and which has not full sway in the papacy; and yet will they needs
be held sincere and innocent, as if in nothing they were blameworthy. And thus
were they wont to do in times past. Now because the Temple then stood, where
also they offered sacrifices (and therefore had some show of religion) as often
as the Prophets reproved their wicked corruptions which were mingled therewith
(which also marred the worship of God, and were (as they ordinarily speak) so
many whored o^hes and adulteries) they would object. What? Do we not worship
God? This rebellion then is it which the Prophet here goes about to subdue, How
dare thou affirm, or say, I am not polluted? As the papists yet speak,
Believe we not in the true God? Feign we multiplicities of gods? But in the
mean while they rob God of his whole power, and rend it into I know not how
many pieces: and yet they blush not with their more than harlots brazen and
shameless foreheads, to affirm, that they worship but one God. Even so did
the Jews. But our Prophet here conuinceth their sottish and vain brags.
Consider (says he) thy ways in the valley; see what thou have done, thou
swift Dromedary. For in regard they were grown so obstinate, that they would
not be over come with reason; therefore he compares them to bruit beasts. You
are (says he) grown like the lustful Dromedaries, who are so violently
carried away therewith, that they loose the remembrance of all things, after
they are once bent to follow their ways.

Verse. 24. The wild Ass which is used to the wilderness, who according to the
appetite of her soul, snuffeth up the wind by occasion, who can keep her
back? All they that seek her will not weary themselves, they will find her
in her month.
AS Jeremiah likened the people before to a Dromedary; so here he compares
them to a wild Ass. Thou art (says he) a Dromedarie, and a wild Ass. For if
the wild Ass gathers in, or snuffeth up the wind, according to the desire of
her soul: that is to say, if with full breath she desires, and gathers in
the wind by her occasion, or by her meeting at a venture (for hereby he meant
to let us know, that in such kind of beasts there is neither discretion, nor
any moderation at all.) after then they have gotten the wind in their snout, on
which side soever they meet therewith; none can stay them, nor keep them
back from pursuing their violent course. For whosoever would bestow his labor
to that end, should but labor in vain; until the time come in which he may
find her in her month. By these words then, the Prophet gives us to
understand, that the peoples fury was become altogether untameable, so as it
was not possible to hold them in, by any means whatsoever; no more than the
wild Ass can be restrained, or forget that natural restlesnesse which is in
her; but especially after she has once sented the wind. Indeed if she were
shut up, peradventure the crib might somewhat prevail with her, from flinging
thus furiously over the fields: but if she may freely take her course, over
mountains, and through thickets, where she may gather and take in the wind,
according to her souls desire; that is to say, after she may fetch her frisks
to and fro, without any hinderance: this is the wind of occasion. For the
Prophet calls that the wind of occasion, which falls out by chance: as if he
should say, such beasts are ruled by no reason, neither keep they any measure.
If any one of us would undertake a journey, he with wild beasts, when they
take their course: for after they have once set upon it, they neither direct
their race toward Lions, Cities in France.
nor Lawsan, but fling up and down according as the toy takes them in the
head: and their strength being well spent, yet cease they not still to hold on
their course: for they take their lust for a law. Now we have the Prophets
meaning.

He says, Who can stay her? As if he should say, the people cannot be
restrained, nor brought back to any mean. Why so? because all their senses are
fore-stalled with this fury, or rage rather.

It follows, No man will weary himself; she will at the last be found in
her month. All the expositors agree in this, that her month is here taken
for the time in which she is ready to foale; as if he should say, After the
wild Asses be once big, and that their foaling time approaches, then are they
constrained to be quiet, by reason of their heavy burden; and then it is no
masterie to take them, because they want that agility of body which they had at
the first, for they carry their young ones in their belly. And thus the Prophet
shows how the people resembles wild Asses, in regard no instruction whatsoever
could either keep them in, or moderate their intemperancie: only the time of
their bringing forth must be observed. Application of this similitude to the
Jews. Two parts of this verse.
Now we are to see how this similitude is to be applied to this people. This
verse contains two parts: the first whereof (as I have said) shows, that the
people could not possibly be bowed by any wholesome admonitions, neither would
with enraged lust, as with the wind of occasion, or as with the wind which is
first met withal. Now there being such an obstinacy in them, God here
threatens the hypocrites to come in such a time wherein they shall be tame
enough: and that he will still these their violent courses. How? The that is to
say, when at the length you shall have conceived many iniquities, the burden
thereof will stop you. Now he signifies the time of his judgment: as if he
should say, You must not be handled like men that are in their wits, or of
sound judgment; for you are wild beasts, that cannot be tamed. What remains
then? Even as the wild Ass is burdened with the weight which she bears in
her belly, when the time of her foaling comes: so in the end (says he) will I
cause you to feel the weight of your iniquities, which will prove too heavy
for you to bear; and indeed will ouerwhelme you. And yet if so be your
obstinacy be such, that it can no way be reclaimed; my hand notwithstandihg
shall be sufficient to curb you. For seeing you will not bow, nor submit your
selves to my doctrine, I will crush you to pieces. Now then, we have the scope
of this similitude, as also how it ought to be applied to this people: and
lastly, what profit we may make of it, that live in these times. We will
reserve the rest for to morrow.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing it has pleased thee to deliver us from under the tyranny
and power of Satan, to subject us under thy yoke; govern us also we pray thee,
by the spirit of teachablenesse, obedience, and meekness, so as we may
willingly submit our selves, all our lives long, unto thee; and that from us
thou may reap that fruit which we have received from thee by our
redemption; and in such wise may renounce our sins, that notwithstanding the
same; we may wholly apply our minds to serve and please thee, as servants of
righteousness; till at the length having finished the good fight of faith, we
may be gathered into that happy rest, which is purchased for us by the blood
of thy only Son. Amen.

THE EIGHTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FOVRTH UPON THE second Chapter.
Verse. 25. Keep thy foot from being unshod, that is, put not off thy shoes,
and thy throat from thirst; but thou said desperately, no: I have loved
strangers, and them will I follow.
THis sentence of the Prophet is so concise and short, that the breuity of it,
at the first blush, makes it seem difficult: but observe in a word, that he
meant to say, it was impossible in any sort to correct this wild people, albeit
God used all the means he could, by his servants the Prophets, to appease
such a furious rage wherewith they were carried away after their superstitions,
and idols. God therefore in this first member shows what course he took with
them: for all the exhortations and sermons of the Prophets, tended to no other
end, but to keep the people quiet under Gods gracious protection. But he uses
other terms: Keep back thy foot (says he) from being unshod, and thy throat
from thirst. For as soon as they perceived any danger toward, they ran now
into Egypt, then into Assyria, as we have seen before. See Verse. 18.
God here complains of this folly, in that they obeyed not the counsel he
gave them, which was for their benefit and salvation. For if God had commanded
them to have fled toward the East, or West: their replies would have been
ready, The way is too long and tedious for us: but God only willed them to
keep them quiet and still at home: what a fury was it then in them not to wait
patiently for his succor, but to vex themselves, and that for nothing? Isaiah
says in a manner as much; but not in the very same words. For he expostulates
the matter with them, Isa. 30.5.7.
that they refused no travel, albeit they might have been sustained by Gods
immediate hand, without fetching such vagaries. We now have the Prophets
meaning. For in the first place he shows, that the people were timely
admonished; in that they would not stay at home quietly, but rather chose to
take any pains whatsoever, though it were utterly fruitless, This is your
rest (says Isa. 30.15.) but you would not. Who desires not peace, and to be at
rest? All men will confess, it is one of the greatest benefits that can
naturally be wished or desired: and yet the Prophet here affirms, the people
esteemed it not. It must needs thereupon follow then, that they were become
utterly senseless, in neglecting that, which every man naturally desires;
which also is engraven (as it were) in every man's breast. But the Prophet not
only thus teaches the people, but he (after a sort) puts them also in mind
of that which was spoken before, by Isaiah, Micah, and the rest of the
Prophets. to be still: and therefore the Prophet now enueyes against their
ingratitude, in that they suffered themselves to be so transported and carried
away by their unruly passions: which was the cause they rejected so singular a
favor and benefit, as God then offered them. Let us observe then, that the
Prophet repeats that, which the other Prophets had taught before.

Keep back thy foot (says he) from being unshod: that is, put not off thy
shoes. Others translate, from nakedness, because in long iourneys they wore
out their shoes. But for mine own part, I rather think it ought to be
referred to their ordinary custom, because they were wont to walk barefoot.
Keep thy foot then from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: we all know
that drought is a thing which molests men much. Thus then the Prophet here
corrects the peoples folly, for suffering themselves to be so violently
ouercarried with their wicked lusts, that they procured thirst to themselves by
their long iourneys. In regard then, that God required nothing of them but to
spare their pains, their fault is redoubled, in that they refused to follow
such wholesome counsel and advice. For (as I said before) if God had required
ought of them that might hardly have been performed, they might have had some
show of excuse: but seeing he demanded nothing of them, but to rest patiently
and meekly in tranquillity at home, they were able to say nothing for
themselves; and therefore he says, thou said desperately, no. Here the
Prophet shows how the people on the contrary were rebellious and headstrong,
in that they proudly scorned such sweet and amiable admonitions. In the first
place, they say, there is no hope: the verb in Hebrew signifies to be
desperate; and thereupon they say, It is a thing desperate; unless any had
rather translate, It is a wearisome thing: which sense agrees not ill: as if
they should say, I am but too much vexed in vain, so as my weariness
aduertiseth me to sit still.

No. The Prophet speaks concisely, the better to express the stubborn
behavior of this people; in saying, the thing is desperate: it is all one as
if they had cast all admonitions and exhortations far away from them: he
afterward adds; he will do nothing. There is no verb in the Hebrew: but this
cutted manner of speech has more efficacy in it (as I have said) and does more
fully set forth the peoples pride and rebellion. Isaiah on the contrary
complains of them, in chap. 57.10. for not saying, It is done, there is no
more hope: and thus it seems that Isaiah and Jeremiah should contradict one
another: for Jeremiah here reprooues the people for saying, there is no hope;
Isaiab, because they said it not. How Jeremiah and Jsaiah may be reconciled
touching their diverse manner of speaking.
the thing is desperate, shows what a desperate rebellion there was in the
people: for they give us to understand, that they could never be reclaimed; and
therefore plainly, and without many circumlocutions avouch, The thing is
desperate. But Isaiah reprooues the people, because they said not, There is no
hope: that is, in regard that by long experience, their folly was not
convinced. For having often trotted down into Egypt, and then into Assyria,
God gave them to understand, by their own experience, how unadvised they were.
They might well have concluded then by the things they had seen, that God
disappointed them of their hope, to bring them to a change of their purposes.
Isaiah therefore rightly says, that the Jews were grown too sottish, because
they never ceased to follow their blind obstinacy; and yet perceived not that
God (as you would say) had set bars and obstacles in their way, thereby
causing them to change their course, to recoyle back, and to forsake those
vain hopes wherewith they had been seduced. Now we see then what a good
agreement there is between these two Prophets; albeit their manners of
speaking be diverse. Jeremiah brings in the Jews here speaking thus cuttedly,
to set forth their obstinacy; There is no hope: that is to say, O ye Prophets,
ye cease not still to dull our ears with your admonitions, but it is to no
purpose: for we are resolved what to do, neither can any ever be able to
reclaim us. Isaiah, he accuses the peoples madness; in that albeit they had
often been deceived, both by the Assyrians, and Egyptians; yet they knew not that
such experiences were to bring them home into the right way, and that they were
too headstrong in following their wicked enterprises.

As touching this place which now we handle, we see what the Prophet meant to
say; to wit, that God loving- and graciously exhorted the Jews, with quiet
minds to rest themselves content with his succor: and yet they were not only
stubbornly rebellious, but with haughty and proud spirits rejected this favor,
which God vouchsafed to tender unto them.

Now it follows: For I have loved strangers, and them will I follow. He
amplifies the peoples fault, in regard they were given to follow strange gods.
He also still continues on the same similitude which we mentioned before. For
as God on his part, had taken this people into his safeguard; so were they also
bound in such sort unto him, that it was now become an holy and sacred band and
union between God and them: even like to that wherewith the wife is bound to
her husband, by the band of marriage. Jeremiah then in this place prosecutes
this similitude, and says, the Church was become like a shameless and wicked
strumpet, in regard she would not vouchsafe to give ear to her husbands
admonitions, albeit he endeavored thereby to seek reconciliation with her.
But if a wife should deal thus with her husband, in rejecting his counsel,
being ready to return into favor with her, and to pass by all her former
offenses; were she not become utterly desperate? Thus the Prophet then shows
how this people were grown to such a woeful and incurable impiety, that they
stopped their ears, whilst God so graciously and gently called them to
repentance: and withal, having brows of brass, proudly vaunted, that as they
had loved idols, so them would they follow: albeit therein they rejected the
only true God. It follows.

Verse. 26. As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Ifrael
made ashamed: their Kings, their Princes, their Priests, and their Prophets.
OThers translate it, in the future tence, so shall they be confounded: and
their opinion is, that the Prophet here mentions the punishment which was now
at hand to be inflicted upon the people. But I rather expound the words simply
as they sound; namely, their impiety is now become so odious, that there needs
not much rhetoric to discipher it out; because it was already grown so
palpable, that a man might feel it (as it were) with his finger. See chap.
5.26.
The Prophet then compares the Jews to thieves which are taken with the
manner: as if he should say, the hypocrites that are mingled amongst this
people, gain little by their cauils and euasions. Why so? Because their
impiety is apparent to all the world: even as a thief who being taken with the
manner, can neither deny, nor cover the fact. His meaning is then, The Jews
compared to thieves surprised with the deed doing.
that they are so surprised (as it were) with the deed doing; that is, their
wickednesses are so notorious, that whatsoever they allege to the contrary,
they shall never be able to excuse themselves, but their villainy will manifest
it self to the sight of all men. We have now the Prophets meaning then.
Before we have seen how the people by many frivolous euasions have sought to
excuse themselves: but here Ieremmiah shows, that all their pretexts are so
far off from procuring them any excuse, that on the contrary, their impudency
is thereby so much the more discovered, whilst all the world evidently
perceiues their wickedness; which is so manifest, that they can by no devices
so color it, but it will clearly be viewed of all men.

Neither speaks he here of the common sort only, but he accuses the Kings,
Princes, Priest and Prophets: as if he should say, even all, from the highest
to the lowest of them, are so corrupted, that without any blushing at all, they
declared and showed themselves wicked and open contemners of God, in following
their inventions, and superstitions. And yet notwithstanding the Jews no doubt
labored by all means to uphold their own credits: but God here discouers
all their iuglings and deceits, whereunder they thought to cover and hide their
impieties. For in plain English, he says, they are very thieves, and such as
are even taken with the manner, as they say. And yet there is no contrariety as
touching the sense, though the Prophet says, that the Jews before spoke
otherwise; and now deciphers out, and blazeth their impudency. The Jews denied
they were either Apostataes or disloyal: no, they had not so much as forsaken
the worship of God; this they denied in words: but when the Prophet now brings
their villainy to light, their replies are well qualified: for they had their
fallacies, as we said before. But the Prophet has already been so plain with
them, in telling them they have wickedly and with a high hand resisted God,
that now their desperate malice and obstinacy is discovered to the full. Now it
follows.

Verse. 27. Saying to a tree, thou art my father, and to a stone thou have
begotten me, or, as it is diversely written, Thou have begotten us: for they
have turned away the neck: or as others turn it, the back, or the back
parts, and not the face; yet in the time of affliction, they will say, that is,
they say, Arise, and help us.

28 And where are thy gods whom thou have made: let them arise, and see whether
they can save thee in the day of thy distress: for according to the number of
thy Cities, so are thy gods.


HEre the Prophet confirms that which he said before, touching the obstinacy
of the people in their wicked courses. He shows then it is not without cause,
he affirmed that their sins were grown too apparent, and that it was
impossible for them to excuse themselves by any of their euasions. For to a
tree they said (says he) thou art my father, etc. By these words the Prophet
would give them to understand, that idolatry was so rooted in their hearts,
that they stuck not to give that honor which belongs to the living God, to
their puppets, whether of wood, or stone. But the Prophet in the mean while
notes that here, which is the most detestable in idolatry; namely, when that
honor which is due to God, is given to images; not only touching that which
appears in outward show, to wit, in kneeling or bowing before them, but when
they call upon them, and that, to obtain help and deliverance from them. This
then is diligently to be observed: for the Papists when they bow before their
images and pictures, if you press them thoroughly with it, they will
notwithstanding never yield that there is any idolatry in this. For in their
language they have gotten a distinction, The Papists distinction of Latria and
Doulia.
namely, that they worship not their images with the honor of Latria, but
only with that of Doulia; which signifies servitude, or service. And thus they
think they have very well quit themselves. See Calu. Jnstit. lib. 1. cap. 11.
sect. 11.
But albeit we should grant them all they say, yet can they not for all that
deny, but they both pray, and direct their vows unto their images. Seeing then
they seek deliverance at their hands, whatsoever they cavil to the contrary,
it is merely vain and frivolous. For the Prophets condemn not these outward
gestures: as the bowing of the knee, or other kinds of ceremonies and rites,
when they accuse idolaters in their sermons. What then? namely, because they
say to the Images, Thou art my father: that is to say, they fix the power of
God, to images of wood and stone. It is very sure the Jews never became so
brutish, as to say in express terms, that gods of wood and stone were their
fathers: neither did they ever utter any such words: and yet our Prophet belies
them not, although he attributes this language unto them. The Prophets often in
their sermons aim not so much at the speeches of idolaters, as at their intent.
But as it is evident from other places, the Prophets note not the speech, but
the intention. For when the Jews bowed before images, they did (for all the
world) as we see the Papists do at this day. They affirmed indeed that they
worshipped one God only, and it was to him they came for deliverance: but in
the mean while (by your leave) they thought Gods power was included in those
images. And this is the reason why they say, Thou art my father, thou have
begotten me. So our Papists likewise, if any of them fall down before the
image of Saint Katharine, Saint Christopher, he will say, Our father; but to
excuse the matter, Oh (says he) it is in the honor of God: and yet like a
fool thou trottest first to this image, and then to that, and wilt patter over
thy Pater noster. Neither is it to be doubted, but the idolatry now used in
the Papacy, is more gross, and less excusable, than that which was then among
the Jews. But although we should speak nothing of the Papists pattering over
their Pater noster thus, before the first image they meet withal: yet it is a
thing without question, that in offering their vows and prayers to their
images, they enclose Gods power within them, as if it were fixed thereunto. We
must therefore observe, that the Jews are not only condemned for censing or
sacrificing to their idols; but for attributing the glory of God to senseless
stocks, and in seeking for deliverance from them. Now because this was not
done in express words, the Prophet notes here their perverse affections; in
regard they raised not up their minds and senses on high unto God; but thus
doted upon their images. It follows.

They turned their or, back.
neck unto me, and not the face. God here again by these words, confirms
that which he said before; namely, that their Apostasy and disloyalty was so
manifest and notorious, that it could not be covered by any of their
disguisings. In the next words he adds, nevertheless (for the copulative
vau, ought to be resolved into an aduersatiue notwithstanding) in the day of
their distress they will say, Arise and save us. Here God complains that the
Jews do too maliciously abuse his bounty, to wit, that in the time of their
greatest distress, they ran to him. But (says he) what have I to do with
you? you are wholly addicted to your idols, you call them your fathers; and to
them you attribute the praise and glory of your deliverance; which you do
indeed, whilst your affairs prosper well: but if your idols once fail you at
your need, then you turn to me saying, Arise thou and save us. But your idols
are your fathers, and from them you expect your safety: therefore now I have
naught to do with you: even satisfy your selves with your idols still, and
trouble me no more, seeing you have rejected me. This is the reason why in the
next verse he adds, Where are thy gods? Verse. 18.
God here scorns that vain confidence which deceived the Jews: Where are
thy gods whom thou have forged? Let them arise, and let us see what help they
will afford thee, in the time of thy affliction. We have now the Prophets
meaning. For he shows how the people took a wrong course, in seeking to
their idols in prosperity; and in the mean while would have God tied to them,
who yet forsook the true God, in cleaving to those idols. Therefore he says,
they were to look for no help from the true God, because they had robbed him
of his power, by framing idols to themselves. For we must still remember what
he said before; namely, that the people held the false gods for their fathers,
Verse. 27.
and that they were the cause of their deliverance. And it is certain, that
our Papists at this day tread even in the very same steps. For they have their
patrons and advocates: but when they see all their fond superstitions to profit
them nothing, then they would have God at their beck: then he must help at a
pinch. But in the mean while, what reserve they unto him? For after they have
deprived him of all the parts of his honor and glory, to divide it as a prey
among the Saints; yet then would they have God to arise and help them. But we
see what answer God makes to such, Where are thy gods?

It is always best in our greatest straits, to sue unto God for his help
first.
but rather let us know, that it is our duties to come directly unto God, at
the very first encounter, that so in our greatest needs and necessities we may
indeed find him ready to help and assist us. God yet further amplifies this
gauling of them; that is, that taunting manner of speech which he used before
saying, Where are thy gods? Let them now arise and help thee: as if he should
say, let them prove if they can yield thee any succor.

When he says, Thou have as many gods as Cities: the meaning is, because the
people contented not themselves with one God; every City chose unto it self a
several god. Seeing the case so stands then, that infinite gods are called
upon among you; wherefore come they not now to your succor? We see then that
God here bitterly taunts the diffidence of this people, for not resting
satisfied with one God, but that they would needs seek out other gods, and
that without number, verse. 32. There were many Cities in Iudeah, and yet had so
many patrons and advocates. One God might well have sufficed, One God is
sufficient to save all that trust in him.
and would have manifested his help in saving them, as often as they needed. But
this one God they despised; and every City framed unto it self sundry gods.
Let them come then (says he) and seeing you trust in this multitude; let them
rise now and help you: for I that am but one, you contemn, because I am
alone. We see then what the Prophet meant further to say. Now it follows.

Verse. 29. Wherefore plead you with me? you have all rebelled against me says
the Lord.
Jeremiah here concludes the former doctrine: for he says, the Jews shall
gain nothing by alleging their innocence against God; as if by this their
tattle they could escape his judgment: neither yet did this satisfy them, but
they were grown to such impudency, so to challenge God himself, as if he were
blameworthy. But God in one word answers, You are treacherous and disloyal.
The sum then is, that the Jews are not well advised, in hardening their
hearts thus in an obstinate course. Why so? Because God holds them already
convicted, so as they shall but loose their labors, in alleging this or that
for their excuse. This place then is worthy our observation: for we know how
all of us naturally are inclined unto hypocrisy; and that God no sooner calls
us to an account, but scarce the hundredth man will acknowledge his fault in
humbling himself, and in suing for pardon: but the greater part will storm;
yea all (in a manner will not stick even to rise up against God himself. And
more than that, they will set up their bristles, not fearing to provoke God to
his face, even with an high hand. Since hypocrisy then thus bears sway in us,
and that it is so deeply rooted in our hearts: seeing also this hypocrisy
begets impudency and rebellion against God; let us carefully remember what the
Prophet here says; namely, that all such as plead against him, shall profit
nothing by all their excuses: for in the end he will lay their disloyalty and
treachery open. It follows.

Verse. 30. I have smitten your children in vain, they received no correction;
your sword has devoured your Prophets, like a destroying Lion.
SOme expound the beginning of this verse, as if God chastised the Jews for
their vanity, in regard they were all accustomed to lying: but the second part
of the verse answers not to this. Wherefore it is certain, that God
complains here of the Jews, because that whilst he labored to bring them
into the right way, they grew altogether incorrigible: and we also have the
like sentence in the first chapter of Isaiah, verse. 6. I have lost all my
labor (says the Lord there) in chastening you; no part in you is free, no not
from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot. In which place God
testifies that he tried all the remedies he could: but he found the Jews of
such a stubborn and rebellious nature, that they were utterly incurable.
Jeremiah here handles the same argument: and God by this means so much the
more aggrauates the peoples untowardness and stubbornness: thereby giving
them to understand, that he not only labored words, to see whether the Jews
would receive any admonition: but also by chastisements and corrections: and
yet in both these, that he spent his labor in vain. Before, he spoke
concerning instruction, when he said, keep thy foot from being unshod, Se
verse. 25. Jsa. 30.7. to. 15.
and thy throat from thirst. Thus then the Prophet by Gods commandment had
advertised them, that they should be still: but all these admonitions A
desperate case is that people come unto, when neither words nor blows will
amend them.
that he yet tried a second means, to see if corrections would make them wise;
but they also profited by them as little, as by the former. I have chastised
you then in vain (says he) because you have received no correction. But he
speaks of children, to show that the whole body of the people was corrupt. For
albeit lusts are more hot and boiling in youth, than in aged persons, yet is
there not such a rebellion and stif-neckednesse in them, as in those that are
stricken in years. Hardly is that disease cured that is rooted in the bones.
When one has been accustomed all his life to despise God, it is a thing almost
impossible ever to cure such an one of that sickness, especially if he be once
hardened in it: for then a man has made himself unfit to receive either
admonition, or correction. For age of it self is very wayward and testie; yea,
they think great wrong is offered them, if they be reproved. But where there
is such audaciousnesse and stubbornness in youth, that they will no more be
corrected, nor receive any reprehension; that is more prodigious and strange.
The Prophet then shows that there was no sincerity nor uprightness at all in
this people, seeing their children rejected all discipline. Now we have the
Prophets meaning; to wit, that God had sent his Prophets in vain; and
therefore he now shows that the people not only wanted ears to hear, those
holy doctrines which were delivered unto them; but had also stiff necks which
would not bow, although he corrected them severely: so as that way also he
gained nothing at their hands. It follows. Your sword has devoured your
Prophets. But I cannot finish this now. Let us pray.

Almighty God, seeing it pleases thee by thy fatherly bounty to call us daily
unto thee, give us grace we may not harden our hearts against thy holy and
wholesome admonitions: moreover, when it pleases thee also to chastise us with
thy rods, let us not show our selves stif-necked against thee: but let us
learn quietly to submit our selves to thy good word: also as often as thou
smitest us, grant we may receive thy corrections, that thus we may profit our
selves by both these means: lest otherwise we bring down upon our own heads
the extremity of thy judgments, which thou threatenest all hard-hearted
persons withal: but rather give us passage into thy sweet and fatherly
kindness: yea deal (O Lord) thus favorably and graciously with us, until
thou have gathered us into that blessed rest which is prepared for us in
heaven, and that through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE NINTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIFTH UPON THE second Chapter.
Part of the 30. verse.
Your sword has devoured your Prophets, like a destroying Lion.
IN the former lecture, God complained that he had spent his labor in vain in
chastising the children of Israel, in regard they were of so rebellious and
stubborn a nature, that they could not be tamed by any discipline or
correction. I have lost my time (says he) in endeavoring by chastisements
and corrections, to bring you home: but now he aggrauates this crime of
stubbornness and wilfulness, because they not only rejected all wholesome
admonitions, but shead innocent blood? Why so? Because they persecuted and
pursued the Prophets, no less than if they had been their open enemies, who
yet notwithstanding were sent unto them from God, to procure their salvation.
For this cause God here not only accuses them of rebellion, but of cruelty
also: for he says, he attained not his desire; namely, their conversion.
Besides, they were not only obstinate and untamed, but also behaved themselves
both currishly and cruelly even toward their own Prophets. Mat. 23.37. Luke
13.34.
For we know that Jerusalem was become a shambles, or butchery, wherein many of
Gods true Prophets were slain and murdered. Some expound this place of false
teachers: as if the Prophet had said, the sins of the people were the cause
why the Prophets were punished according to their deserts; in regard they were
liars and deceivers: and those who thus expound it, insist upon this word,
your: your sword has devoured your Prophets: which is the cause why Saint
Jerome says, your, and not my Prophets: as if God denied that he gave them any
commission: but this is a forced sense, and too much constrained. We are
therefore to retain that sense which I have given; to wit, that whilst God
labored to reform the vices which then reigned amongst this people, the
Prophets being the Ministers of this gracious message, even the people
themselves put them cruelly to death. And the similitude which immediately
follows, agrees very well with this exposition: as a Lion devouring. For God
shows that the Jews carried themselves as cruelly and sauagely toward the
Prophets: as if the Prophets had been in some forest full of Lions. Now it
follows.

Verse. 31. O generation, take ye your selves heed to the word of the Lord: Have
I been a desert to Israel? Have I been as a land of karknesse? Wherefore then
says my people, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee?
NO doubt but the Prophet speaks here as a man astonished, that he might make
the fault of this people the more odious and detestable. For as one amazed, he
says, O generation: the Hebrew word (as it is well known) signifies an age.
Thus it is as much as if he had said, Lord into what times are we fallen! or
in what an age or world live we in now! We have the propriety of the word then.
The Prophet adds, look to the word of the Lord. It seems he speaks
improperly: for he should rather have said, Understand, or hear the word of
the Lord: but he commands them to see, or look: and yet this phrase of speech
agrees very well, Why so? Because he bids them not hear; but rather he brings
them to their own knowledge: as if he should say, look you to it, see what it
is the Lord says. And where he says, even you, or, you your selves, it is to
add the greater emphasis and vehemence unto his speech: you, even you, says
he. For the Jews justly deserved to have been condemned by the whole world,
if God had called them before his judgment seat. But how blind soever they
were, the Prophet shows that themselves notwithstanding might discern, even
with their own eyes, what the Lord said. This belongs not to doctrine, but to
the act or thing it self: as if he should say, The Lord by me complains of
you: so as though there be no witnesses, nor any judge or arbitrator, yet ye
your selves can judge and perceive how things go, well enough. We see then
that the Prophet has spoken aptly, when he bids themselves to regard, or see,
the word of the Lord: for by and by he adds, Have I been a desert to Israel?
He appoints the Jews themselves then, to judge and determine this matter; to
wit, whether they had not tasted of Gods bounty and liberality by their own
experience, and whether they had not rejected and forsaken him, Se verse. 13.
as formerly he complained, albeit he was that fountain of living waters; and
whether they dug not unto themselves broken cesternes that could hold no
water. Now God says, Whence came this that you have thus bidden me farewell? Is
it in vain that I have promised to show my self gracious and bountiful unto
you? Have I therein abused or disappoynted you of your expectation, whilst you
served me? Seeing then I have not been unto you a barren land, or a land full
of obscurity and darkness, namely, wherein the Sun shines not: seeing (I
say) you have always found abundance and plenty of all good things in me; how
comes it to pass now that you are departed and gone away from me?

In the next place he adds yet another fault; Wherefore says my people, we
rule, or, are Lords? The Hebrew verb here used is diversely expounded; because
some derive it from one root, and others from another. Notwithstanding, among
them that derive it from one and the same root, they vary in their judgments:
for some refer it to those calamities and afflictions which the Jews
sustained: others, to their revolt. As touching the first, thus To descend; of
the peoples calamities: the latter sort take it for their revolt; to wit,
because they had once taken their leaves of God, and would have no more to do
with him. There is a third sort who come nearer to the Grammatical sense. to
rule: and thus I rather willingly incline to this exposition, we rule: I also
think, that it is an arrogant and swelling kind of speech; namely, that the
Jews thought themselves Kings, as Saint Paul in 1. Cor. 4.8. taunts the
Corinthians, ye are rich, and ye reign as kings (says he) without us: would
to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you. For the Corinthians
were swollen with pride, Corinth was famous in regard of her riches.
in regard of the wealth of their City, and so despised the Gospels simplicity:
they sought after subtelties, and gave themselves wholly to new devices. Saint
Paul therefore seeing they made no great reckoning of the favor which God had
vouchsafed them, tauntingly, he says Ye are full, ye are rich, and without him
y^^ ^^w reign as Kings, of whom notwithstanding ye^ (...) whatsoever good
thing ye have. Jeremiah here repro^cheth his people with the very same sin:
We rule; neither will we come any more unto thee. As if he should say, All
your happiness and the good things ye enjoy (I am sure) came from me: for all
ye enjoy, and whatsoever has been bestowed upon you, ought to be attributed to
me and to my liberality: and yet (forsooth) ye reign as Kings without me. For
it is God himself who speaks here: ye are now become Kings without me. But
which way I pray you? what have you, that is your own? Why then says my
people, we will come no more at thee? We have now the Prophets natural
meaning.

he stands as one amazed at the peoples malice, even as at some prodigious
thing: and therefore he cries out, O generation! as if he had said, That which
I now see, is incredible. look your selves to the word of the Lord: and this
was of greater importance, than if he had summoned them before the tribunal
seat of God: for thus he shows their malice is too too gross, in that without
any cause or pretext at all, they had shamelesly forsaken and renounced God,
albeit he had dealt so bountifully with them. In the mean while he privily
nippes them, because there was now no place any longer for instruction.
Therefore leaving that, he bids them look with their eyes, either because they
were deaf, or stopped their ears, and repulsed all sound admonitions. For as
we have said, leaving the word, he brings them back to the very fact; which
the expositors have not observed.

that God was not as a wilderness unto them: See verse 13.
but (as the Prophet showed heretofore) that out of him flowed abundance of all
good things wherewith they might have satisfied themselves. Seeing God then had
enriched them with his blessings, so much the more heinous was their fault, in
that they had lord. I grant they were a royal priesthood: but this came from
Gods grace. In that they reigned, they obtained it not by their own industry
or power: it was not from any right of theirs, neither yet by their power, or
good fortune, as they say. Whence then? Only by way of entreaty. Albeit they
were kings then, yet it was upon condition, that they yielded obedience to the
King of kings, and not otherwise: yet (forsooth) they would reign alone: that
is, as they listed: and thus they trampled the grace of God under foot. It is
this peruersity of theirs then, which the Prophet here reprooues. To the same
purpose also in the end of the verse he says, we will come no more unto thee:
as if they needed not Gods help and succor: for they thought themselves now
jolly fellows, as if they had been sufficiently furnished for the maintenance
of their estates. Being thus swolle^ with so perverse a pride, they contemned
Gods grace, as if they had been safe enough of themselves, without the stay of
a second.

Verse. 32. Can a maid forget her ornament, or a bride her head-band? as it is
word for word: others translate, trinkets: others, her chains: the word is
derived of a verb which signifies, to bind: In our French we may properly
turn it, Tressures: but my people have forgotten me, days without number:
word for word it is, without end.
GOd here confirms his former speech; and his meaning therein is, to shame
his people, in regard they less esteemed him, than virgins were wont to esteem
their toys and trifles. For all the chains and deckings are (in truth) but so
many fooles-bables: and yet we see notwithstanding, how maids are carried away
with such a fond affecting of them, that they love their tires and toys more
than their own lives. How can it be then (says the Lord) that my people have
forgotten me? Are any deckings to be compared with me? Among all the pearls,
and the most precious and exquisite stones, are any to be found that may be
valued with me?

By this similitude then, God declares how the Jews were naturally wicked and
perverse, in that they had thus forgotten so inestimable a benefit: to wit, in
enjoying God for their father; and under his rule and dominion, enjoying
whatsoever their hearts could wish. For he withheld no good thing from them,
that might any way serve to make them perfectly happy, whilst they were
capable of enjoying his fatherly love and liberality; so as God had manifested
the same unto them, and meant they should still so have found him, unto the
very end. Seeing then they had found God kind and gracious: must they not needs
be more then senseless, whilst they willingly rejected his grace? when as
virgins are so assectioned and wholly addicted to their toys (which albeit
they are of no worth) yet can they by no means forget them? But the Prophet
used this similitude of set purpose, to make way to that which follows. For
his meaning was to compare the Jews to adulterous women, who being set on fire
with their unbridled lusts and wicked affections, suffer themselves to be
carried away after their lovers. Purposing then to reproach the Jews with this
crime, he expressly mentioned neck-laces, and such toys belonging to young
damsels; and therefore it follows.

Verse. 33. Wherefore deckest or trimmest thou, that is, so finely, thy ways,
to seek for lovers? And therefore also thou have taught wickedness in thy
ways.
THis verse is diversely expounded. But the Prophet meant only to tell the
Jews that they were like wanton women, who not content to contemn their
husbands at home, gad hither and thither; and also use to trick and trim up
themselves, the better to allure many to commit wickedness with them. He says
then that the Jews resembled these: and this he calls, trimming of their
ways: for this verb has a diverse signification in the Hebrew. It is taken to
make ready, to deck, to get grace or favor: but in this place it signifies as
much as if the Prophet had said, Wherefore paintest thou thy self? why
disguisest thou thy self, as harlots use to do? who to entice foolish
springals to whoredom, devise many fashions and artificial trimmings: why
then labourest thou so earnestly to obtain the hire of an harlot? In the end
of the chapter we shall see to what purpose he says this: for the Prophet will
there reproach the Egyptians and Assyrians. But it is a doctrine which is every
where handled in the prophets; for ever and anon they compare the Jews to
courtizans, in regard they (who above all others) ought wholly to have cleaued
to their God: (even as an honest wife will not lightly suffer her eyes to
wander here and there, neither will she be straggling abroad, but set her
affections wholly upon her husband) yet they thought it was not only lawful,
but necessary also to procure their safety; first from the Assyrians, and then
to trot down into Egypt. It is this perverseness of theirs then, which the
Prophet here condemns in them: and therefore he speaks unto them under a
similitude, or borrowed speech: as of the person of an adulterous woman, who
setting light by her husband, runs after the first comers, seeks out to her
self adulterers, and unadvised youths, and prostitutes her self on every
side freely to all. Now we understand the Prophets meaning.

As touching the words here used by the Prophet, he says, wherefore
garnishest thou thy ways so trimly? But yet he continues still to compare such
a care as this, to the body of an harlot: as if he should say, Why trimmest
thou thy self up thus? What makes thee so industrious in studying how to deck
thy self with such diversities of trimmings and ornaments? Is it not, that by
such a decking thou may the better deceive the eyes of the simple? Out of
question the Jews might (if they would) have lived in great tranquillity and
ease, under Gods protection; and that without any molestation at all. For even
as the husband satisfies himself with that natural beauty which his wife
has, Note.
and cares not to have her paint her face, nor to disguise her self with
artificial dressings: so God likewise requires nothing of his people, but that
they keep their faith and loyalty to him: as the husband requires his wife to
keep her body and mind chaste to him. The sum.
The sum then is, that even as a wife which shall live peaceably and quietly
with her husband, has no need to break her brains (as they say) with much
carking, because she knows that natural beauty God has given her, contents
her husband; neither will she with other devices labor much to gain her
husbands love, knowing that her chastity to him is the best pledge: so also
might you (says the Lord) love without care or trouble, in yielding only unto
me that service which my Law requires, and in keeping your faith unviolated.
But what chastity call you this, when you imitate such women as are wholly
given over to harlotry, desiring nothing more, than that they may draw the
hearts of adulterers unto them? for as they burn and are inflamed with lust;
so is it their only care how they may find out new devices, and gauds, thinking
they have never enough; and all because they would bend and draw their lovers
to the liking of them. This (says God) is your very case; for you are never
weary in hunting up and down after your game: neither cease you to vex your
selves in seeking out strange lovers.

Now he adds, And therefore (says he) thou have taught wickedness. He alludes
to that word which he used before, Truly thou have trimmed thy ways: and
here, thou have also (says he) taught wickedness in thy ways. His meaning
is, that the Jews were worse than the Egyptians and Assyrians: as in truth a
wanton wife is much worse than any harlot, who takes her followers by her
flatteries and enticements. For if so be a young man be not deceived
elsewhere, and that the devil (as they say) puts not fire to the tow, he may
well continue his integrity and chastity: but if a lustful and impudent woman
come once to seduce him, he is by and by snared and undone. Therefore the
Prophet says, the Egyptians and Assyrians shall be found innocent, being
compared with the Jews. Why so? Because (says he) they have been seduced by
your allurements, even as young men are enticed and brought to ruin by the
cunning deceits, and the ornaments and attires of harlots. For it fares with
them as if unawares they had been caught in a net: therefore you have been the
authors of all the mischief, and the whole blame rests upon you. Thus we see
the Prophets meaning. For he accuses the Jews, for giving the Assyrians as
well as the Egyptians, occasion of offense by their ill example, whilst by
their practices they sought to win their favor.

Verse. 34. Also in thy wings is found the blood of the souls of poor
innocents; I have not found it in holes, but upon all these places: some turn
it, because in all these: for it is a particle that renders the cause; but
here it ought to be resolved into an aduersatiue, as in many places.
THe Prophet (as far as I can judge) repeates that which he said before;
namely, that those of his nation were become altogether desperately wicked, in
regard that what admonition soever was given them, yet could they never be
brought to acknowledge their faults: but on the contrary fared like poysonfull
and wild beasts, in murdering the Prophets, and holy men which were sent to
teach and admonish them. Those are mistaken, who think the Prophet here
condemns all the Jews in general, in respect of their cruelty: and yet all
follow this opinion. But questionless the Prophet rather amplifies the fault
of the Jews; not only in that they were hardened in their evil courses; but
also because they exercised their cruelties against the Prophets of God. And
thus he once again shows, that God used all means that could be, to cure the
Jews, by bringing them to repentance, but nothing would serve the turn. For
what better remedy could he procure for them, than the reprehensions of his
Prophets, who showed the people how they had loosely and wickedly turned away,
and estranged themselves from God. See the means then, by which God endeavored
to rebuke the vices which were in his people: but so far was he off from
prevailing thereby, that they murdered the Prophets, both in Jerusalem, and in
all the coasts of Iudeah; so as all the land was defiled, and replenished with
their blood. Therefore he says, The blood of the souls of poor Innocents
were found in thy wings.

He calls the hemme of their garments, wings: as if he meant to say, the
murders wherewith he charge them were not very secret or unknown; in regard
the blood which the Jews had spilt, was apparently found even upon the
uttermost parts of their garments. As if he should say, I need not now stand
upon points with you. for your filthiness is very manifest and apparent: for
you have not only resisted mine admonitions, but you have cruelly killed my
Prophets. And if you ask me, Where are these murders? I answer, in your
wings, and in the hemmes of your garments: that is to say, your offenses are
but too manifest. Now then we have the Prophets meaning. Also for this cause
the particle yea even, is to be noted diligently: for their cruelty was so much
the more insupportable and detestable, in regard they rose up against those
that were sent to cure their souls. For the Prophets were the ministers of
their salvation, as we have said. Seeing then they rushed thus violently
against that grace which God presented unto them, and therewithal slew his
Prophets: by this, one might the more easily judge, that they were become
utterly incurable.

That which is forthwith added, makes for the further confirmation of his
speech: they were not found in fraction, or breaking. Some expound this place
otherwise. But their opinion is probable who think the Prophet alludes to that
which is spoken by Moses, in Exodus 22.2. If any one were found making a breach,
he that slew him in doing the fact, should escape unpunished. For he that is
so bold as to break into another man's house, is like to him that robs by the
hie-way side: such an one therefore cannot be held for a petty thief, but
rather for a common cutthroat that lurkes in hie-wayes. God then says, that
his Prophets whom the Jews put to death, were not found forcibly breaking into
houses: that is to say, they were neither found guilty of felony, or murder
(for he puts one kind for the general) but they were upon all these things:
that is to say, in regard they boldly and freely reproved you of your faults,
because they sharply rebuked your wickednesses, and discovered your shame and
filthiness; and because they showed themselves enemies to all your iniquities,
trecheries, and loose behauiours. Thus then, because the Prophets being
provoked by divine inspiration, strove against your sins; therefore you put
them to death. We see the text runs well thus, if it be only understood of
the Prophets: and to say as the thing is, Jeremiah meant not only to reprove
the Jews for the murders they committed here and there, but to show how they
were the deadly enemies of the Prophets, in regard they hated all holy and
sound admonitions, and were incapable of any instruction. The error of the
other expositors is sufficiently refuted; because in the last member, they
neither touch heaven nor earth, as they say. It follows.

Verse. 35. And thou saidest, that is, Notwithstanding: for this word and, is
taken here for nevertheless: Surely, in the Hebrew it is For, but it notes
out a boasting, full of impudency; in regard the Jews were grown so ma^^pert,
and shameless withal, that they durst justify their innocence. Surely I am
clean: that is, I am innocent; only let his wrath be far from me. Behold, I
will judge thee, or enter into judgment with thee, because thou have said, I
have not sinned.
THe Prophet here shows how the Jews were grown so shameless, that it was
impossible, by any admonitions whatsoever, to bring them to any blushing or
moderate course. Albeit then they were like adulterous women, and ran like
harlots into every place, to get some reward: and although they also had slain
the Prophets, and holy servants of God; yet, as if they had been no way
culpable, they bragged (forsooth) of their innocence. Nevertheless then, you
have said, that is to say, How dare thou pretend thou art any way innocent,
seeing thou art convinced, not only by surmises or conjectures, but by so
manifest and apparent demonstrations? Moreover, the Prophet shows, that the
estate and condition of the Jews, was utterly desperate, seeing they would no
more be admonished: nay on the contrary, they were grown so obstinate, that
they durst vaunt of their innocence. Thou have said: (note that he still
speaks in the singular number, as to a wife) Thou have notwithstanding said,
Surely I am clean. See how hypocrites not only labor with diverse maskes, to
excuse themselves; but more than that, are so bold, as to advance themselves,
and houer in the air, as if by their confident pride they would scale even the
very heavens. As if they had said, Who dare challenge us? Lo how hypocrites come
in, loftily advancing themselves, in despiting and setting light by the
servants of God, thinking by their great crakes to put them to silence. Now he
condemns the Jews of the like arrogance; because albeit they were manifestly
convinced, yet they feared not to affirm that they were altogether innocent.

Only let him keep back his wrath from me. Behold yet another fault for
which the Prophet reprocheth the Jews; namely, because they complained that
God offered them wrong, whilst by his chastisements and reprehensions he
endeavored to bring them into the Surely I have no way offended him, but God
is displeased against me without cause: only let him withdraw his anger from
me. As if they had said, If so be God will not use his absolute power against
us, and will not deal rigorously with us, nor handle us severely; it will be
easy for us to prove our innocence. See how the wicked disgorge their
blasphemies against God, when they feel themselves thoroughly gauled with
sharp and severe admonitions, What should I do? I know I am not able to
resist: God fights but against a shadow, when he afflicts me on this manner. I
willingly bear, not only all the adversities he lays upon me, but wherewith
he presses and persecuteth me: yet therein he wrongs me. For if he would
proceed with me according to equity, I would be able to prove, that I have not
deserved all the evils which he has brought upon me. Thus the Jews dealt
with God. Only let him withdraw his anger from us, and then we shall make our
party good; or at the least we might be somewhat borne withal. Now we have the
Prophets meaning in this verse; namely, that the Jews were grown bold and
audacious, not only by their cursed pride, in making a show of their
innocence; but also in that they durst plead with God, as if by his prerogative
royal;

Behold (says he) I will judge thee, because thou have said, I have not
sinned. Some translate, I judge, or condemn. But questionless there is here
a close opposition between the wrath of God, and his judgment. For the people
complained, because God used them too severely: the question here then is,
touching his wrath. Now God, he opposes against that, his judgment. You need
not (says he) pretend this excuse; for in the end it will go all into smoke,
because I will proceed in justice against you: thar is, I will manifest it by
the effects, that I am a judge, and no tyrant, that I do execute such
chastisements as are due, and every way agreeable to law: you are therefore to
know, that I fare not like a furious man, who in his rage auengeth himself
upon his enemies; yea and proceeds with them according to his blind and
inordinate passions: but I will (says he) show my self a judge.

God cannot endure we should justify our selves before him, when we be guilty:
let us observe, that God abhorres nothing more, than this obstinacy, when we
will needs be reputed guiltless, albeit our own consciences condemn us. Let
us also in the second place note, that all such as advance For that is to rush
against God.
not sticking to uphold themselves in their sins; that they forthwith iustle
against God. For all the false pretenses which men allege, come always to
this issue, namely, that God must thereby be condemned, as one that deals
unjustly, and too severely. But will you see what such kind of persons get by
this? God will in the end make it appear to all the world, that he is judge:
and thereby also will manifest the course he holds, in discovering and bringing
to light, the wickedness of those, who think by shifts, cauils, and frivolous
excuses, to escape his judgment seat. It must needs be then, that whosoever
rebelliously uses these practices against God, must at length come to that
which the Prophet here mentions: to wit, they shall be enforced, will they,
nill they, to confess, that God never carried himself rigorously toward
them: neither that he used any unjust tyranny over them; but that they were
chastised according to their deserts.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing we are stuffed full with such variety of vices, and that
we so often, yea and so many ways provoke thee to wrath and indignation
against us; grant that at least we never harden our hearts against thy holy
admonitions, but may rather show our selves pliable and obedient, and at the
very first, may turn unto thee, lest our pride and rebellion force thee at
length to manifest thy mighty hand to our confusion: but rather for as much as
heretofore we have had experience of thy fatherly affection and liberality
toward us, so we also may yield willingly to learn our duties for the time to
come, that thus we accustoming our selves to bear thy yoke; at the last
attaining to the end of our race which thou have set before us, we may also
obtain that blessed rest which is prepared for us in heaven, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE TENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE SIXTH UPON THE second Chapter.
Verse. 36. To what purpose runnest thou about to change thy ways? Thou shall
be as well confounded of Egypt, as thou have been of Ashur.
THe Prophet goes on still with the same argument. For in verse. 33. he
affirmed that the people resembled a disloyal wife, who forsaking her husband,
gads hither and thither to satisfy her whorish lust. Now in this verse he
gives the reason of that which he he said there. For had he not now showed
what he taxed them there for, as with the finger, it might have seemed that he
had dealt too severely with this people. For this cause then he says, they
gadded, or ran; but not after a common manner: for it was in such sort as
their shameless and dishonest lightness might easily be espied, no less
than in harlots, who having cast off all modesty, stick not to seek after
whore-masters and ruffians. See verse. 18.25.
But I have already touched the Prophets meaning briefly. For the Jews no
sooner saw any danger approaching, but they ran for refuge one while to
Egypt, and another while to Assyria: and yet they knew that both the one, and
the other was forbidden them: Deuteronomy. 17.16.
not that it is unlawful in it self to seek for help at the hands of our
neighbors, in time of extremity; but God meant to reserve unto himself the
whole praise of maintaining and keeping this people, so as no hurt could befall
them, in regard he had taken the defense of the Jews into his own hands.
Seeing then that God had taken upon him the safeguard of them; it was good
reason they should rest themselves content with his succor? Whilst they gazed
here and there then, Genesis 12.3. and 15.14.
they showed a manifest sign of their distrust: and so much as they attributed
to the Egyptians, or to the Assyrians, so much they took from their God, who
by his promise had bound himself, that he would take the care of their
welfare and salvation. Thus then he compares such gaddings to the lightness of
an harlot, when she runs too and fro. Now it must needs be, that an whore is
grown past all shame, when she goes thus about seeking customers, and
entertaines him she first lights upon. For there are some harlots that tarry
whilst others seek to them: but such as offer themselves to all comers,
justly deserve to be detested of all. This is that which the Prophet meant
then, namely when he says, the Jews ran about, and that in such sort, as
they changed their ways: for even in some immodest women, a man shall perceive
some natural shamefastness to remain in them: but if a woman, as soon as she
has but cast the glaunce of her eye upon a man, does by and by run after
him: or if a man, as soon as he espies one but coming toward him, shall be
inflamed with lust; it is a sign of more than a shameless, brutish, yea a
monstrous filthiness. When one is grown to this pass then, it must needs
thereupon follow, that they have lost all shamefastness, and have put out in
them the very light of nature also. Therefore (as I have said) it is good
reason that such be held as monsters upon earth, when men or women are thus
carried away after whomsoever they set eye on. And yet with this the Prophet
taxes the Jews, whilst he tells them, they ran about to change their ways;
so as their restless lust never stayed long in any place whatsoever: but they
fell in love with the first comers, yea and ran from place to place to seek
them out. Ezechiel handles this matter much more largely in many places; we
shall also see the same similitude repeated again in this prophecy. But it
suffices that in few words I have comprehended the Prophets meaning. Now he
adds.

Thou shall be confounded of Egypt, as thou have been of Ashur. For before
Hezekias his time, the Jews (as it is well known) had made a league with the
Assyrians, against those of Syria, and the Israelites; and afterward against
the Egyptians. But after the Egyptians (who before had been their confederates)
began to make war against them, they changed their minds, and sought to the
Assyrians; and there they entered into a league with their ancient enemies: thus
this second covenant also stood them in no more stead than did the first: which
is the cause why the Prophet tells them they shall have the like success they
had before. For God corrects their treachery and disloyalty which they had
committed against him, in running to the Assyrians. Now he says unto them, thy
success shall be no better in waiting for help from Egypt, tha^ that which
thou had from Ashur, when he came to succor thee. For none can be ignorant,
that the Jews were still ever and anon, exposed as a prey to every one; so as
they received more loss by their very confederates, than by such as were their
open and professed enemies. And this was the just reward of their impiety and
treachery. God therefore threatens that he will be no less avenged of this
their second rebellion, than he was of the first. It follows.

Verse. 37. And even for this, that is to say, this thine iniquity, thou shall
go forth, and thy hands upon thine head, because the Lord abhorres thy
confidences, neither shall thou prosper in them.
HE here more plainly expresses that which he had said touching the reproach
of his nation; namely, that whilst the Jews thought to rest upon the aid of
the Egyptians, they thereby weaued the web of their own ruin. But this they
believed not: for the Egyptians being their next neighbors, and the Jews at
that time feared no enemies but the Assyrians and Caldeans, who were far
remote from them, they imagined that their matters would succeed well, and be
in great safety. How so? Our adversaries are twenty or thirty days journey
from us; and our friends who are ready to succor us, are here at our gates,
as soon as they shall have but the least warning. The Jews then (as I have
said) thought themselves very secure: but the Prophet tells them here, that
they are much deceived. For, for this iniquity, that is, because thou trustedst
in this so cursed a covenant, thereby promising safety to thy self, in regard
of thine enemies; or rather because thou imaginedst thou might with little
ado overcome them. For this cause (says he) thou shall go forth. And yet, was
any thing more unlikely, or incredible, than that which the Prophet here tells
them? For whilst the Egyptians opposed themselves against the Caldeans, they
were to the Jews, as a brazen wall set between, whereby they were (in a
manner) invincible: who would not have thought the Jews most safe in their
own country? Thou shall go forth then (says he) and thine hands upon thine
head.

By this gesture he meant to note out, an estate utterly desperate. 2. Sam.
13.19.
For it is the custom of women, either to lament, or to spread abroad their
arms, as they usually do amongst us, when they are pressed with any
extremity. For if some impatient woman have lost her husband; or, if she expect
some great evil, she beats on her breast, or spreads out her arms, as it is
here said. Jeremiah then puts this gesture for a sign of exceeding sorrow: as
if he should say, This covenant upon which the Jews rest with such an
insolent boldness, shall be so far off from bringing profit or ministering
comfort unto them, that it shall rather be the cause of extreme affliction and
reproach unto them.

But above all, Deuteronomy. 17.16.
the reason which follows is to be noted; Because the Lord abhorres thy
confidences, or prides. Because they were accursed of God. For had he
permitted them freely to have used them, then had they not been so sharply
reproved. But seeing God had forbidden them to go down into Egypt: this, in
the first place, was an abominable confidence: secondly, it was a means to
make them altogether careless of Gods assistance; and (as you would say) to
reject all his promises. For in as much as their affections were fast glued to
the Egyptians, they also imagined, that in them, their safety was secure. By
means whereof it came to pass, that their prayers were not only few, and
faint, but they scarcely so much as used any at all. Thus we see how the
Prophet passes not his bounds here in this his vehement reprehension uttered
against the Jews, in setting shame and ignominy before their eyes: namely,
because they gave that glory to the Egyptians, which appertained unto God;
making their account as if they had been the authors of their safety: and
thereby also they buried in oblivion, yea contemned all the promises of God,
and utterly neglected invocation upon his name. The Lord then (says he) abhors
thy confidences.

In the next place he says, Neither shall thou prosper thereby. No good can
come of that action, that God approoues not.
This must be diligently observed, namely, that when we take ought in hand
which God approoues not, that no good can come unto us thereby. Why so? Because
he will frustrate all our hopes. Let us know then that the Prophet sets a
punishment before all unbelievers, who not contenting themselves with Gods
protection, wander in their vain and idle confidences; and had rather enjoy
the favor and good liking of men, than the favor and love of God. Now it
follows.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. or, put the case
And saying, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become
another man's, shall he return again unto her? shall not this land hereby be
polluted? And thou; thou have played the harlot with many lovers:
notwithstanding, return unto me, says Jehovah.
MAny think this verse depends upon the former, so as they read it jointly
together; God has rejected thy crooked confidences, See chap. 2.37.
And saying, etc. But as I think, this agrees not: because Jeremiah here
begins a new speech, namely, God endeauours to reconcile this people; even as
if a husband should desire to receive an adulterous wife into his favor
again: meaning wholly to pass by her former faults, and hereafter to esteem
of her as a chaste and loyal wife. Thus you see this verse cannot agree with
that reproach which we saw before: but the Hebrew word which is put here in
the beginning of this verse, (as I think) signifies that which we have in our
usual speech: as you would say, or rather, put the case. For the Prophet
brings not in God speaking here; but he comes in with a common sentence: and
therefore he says, Put the case that a man put away his wife, and she become
another man's, shall she return again to the first? No; for this is not the
custom. I therefore will show my self more favorable than any man
whatsoever: for I will be most ready to take thee again: provided, thou
promise me for the time to come, to carry thy self as an honest woman ought to
do: to wit, loyally toward me, in renouncing all thy former loose and lewd
behavior. You see there is no great difficulty in that which the Prophet meant
to say, nor in the sum of his speech. For God here shows that his wrath
shall be appeased toward the Jews, if so be they proceed not on still in
their ungodliness, obstinately and rebelliously. And the better to express
this his clemency, he uses a similitude, which ought advisedly to be noted.
Before, he said, that he held the place Behold, if an husband put away for he
was forbidden so to do, by the Law. But see how ready I am notwithstanding, to
take thee again; albeit the divorce came not as in respect of my fault. For it
was the custom of the husbands then, to put away their wives, when there
appeared in them any cause of dislike. It is not a simple comparison, as many
think, (neither do I know whether all follow this opinion) for the expositors
do not so much as touch this exposition: because God does not simply here
compare himself with an husband that has put away his wife for her lewdness:
but as I have said, there are two distinct members, in regard the Jews were
wont to cashere their wives for very light causes; yea for such as were of no
moment at all. Now God speaks thus in Isaiah, Isa. 50.1.
Show me your bill of divorce: as if he should say, I have not put away your
mother. For at that time, when any purposed to put away his wife, he was liable
by the law, to the note of some fickleness. For what (I pray you) was that
bill of diuorcement, but a testimony of the wives chastity? otherwise, if the
woman had been taken in adultery, the husband needed not to send her away, for
she was to suffer death. Thus then, adulterous women used not to be divorced.
Leuit. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.21. Deuteronomy. 24.1.
But if a man's wife had lived honestly with her husband, and yet
notwithstanding he meant to put her away, he was bound by the law to give her
a bill of divorce, on this manner: I put away this woman, not for breaking or
violating the marriage band; but because her personage, or qualities are not to
my liking. Thus the husbands were obliged to incur some note of inconstancy;
and therefore it is that the Lord says in Isaiah, Show me the bill of your
mothers divorce: as if he should say, it is she her self that has cast me
off: it is she, who by her whoredoms has broken the sacred bond of marriage:
it is not I then, that am the cause of this alienation. God meant not here
then to signify that he divorced the people; for that was a thing worthy of
blame, and therefore could not agree with Gods nature: but (as I said) there is
a double similitude or comparison. Albeit an husband in his discontent had
rejected his wife; and that by means thereof (by his own fault) he occasions
her to marry another: notwithstanding, after a second has lien with her,
because he thinks he is now despised, he esteems it so great an indignity,
that he will never admit of any reconciliation. But I think you will not say
that I have sent you away: you rather have played the part of a disloyal wife,
having prostituted your selves to the first comers; yet am I ready
notwithstanding to receive you into favor, and to forget all your former slips
and falls. Now we have the sum of that which the Prophet meant to say here.
And in this second member there is a comparison from the less to the greater.
For the agreement would be more easily effected, if the wife having been
rejected by her husband, should afterward come to please him, and recover his
favor, albeit she had married another: but when an adulterous wife finds her
husband so willing and ready to pardon her; it is a very rare example, and
hardly shall it be discerned in any one. We see then, how our Lord magnifies
his mercy toward this people, by an argument taken from the less to the
greater: which he the rather does, that the Jews might be so much the more
without excuse, in that they had so obstinately rejected so great a favor
which God freely offered them.

But here a question may be asked, namely, That this land is polluted with
pollutions, or, in this? I will in the first place speak of the words, Has
not this land been polluted with pollution? But in reading this place thus, I
know not what sense to draw from it, unless peradventure God meant to compare
the wife divorced, to the land: or rather, that suddenly breaking off his
speech, he meant to transfer that which he had said touching the rejected
wife, to the land: or at least, that he now expounds the figure which he
formerly used. And yet we may take it in this sense, reading it apart thus, In
this, to wit, if it so fall out, that some one take her for his wife the second
time, who had married another. For (as we have showed) this was forbidden by
the law: neither could it be avoided, but the husband of such a wife must be
reputed an adulterer, if he took her again for his wife, whom he had once put
away. For by the bill of divorce, the woman was at liberty: not that God
permitted it so to be; but because the women were guiltless, they were borne
withal: for God laid all the fault upon the husbands. Now in this case, when
the wife who had been divorced from her first husband, joined her self in
marriage with another, this second marrying was lawful; so as if the first
husband would recover his wife whom he had forsaken, he therein violated and
brake the faith of the second marriage. And in this sense it is the Prophet
says, that in this, the land shall be polluted: as if he would have said, It
is not lawful for the husband to recall his wife to him, notwithstanding he be
most ready to entertain her into his favor and good liking: and yet do I
(says the Lord) expect nothing else, but that you should return unto me. As
touching these words, we have already seen how the Prophet says not without
cause, In this, that is to say, it would breed such confusion, if a woman
should be married now to this man, and then to another; and in conclusion,
should return again to the first: that by means hereof the band of humane
society and order would be broken. Moreover, by means hereof the sacred band
of matrimony would be violated, which notwithstanding is one of the most
principal bands that men have, to preserve and establish the right government
of the Commonwealth.

When he adds, but thou have played the harlot with many lovers, it is the
better to confirm that which we have seen before; namely, that the people
offended not in one thing alone, but were grown like common strumpets, who
indifferently, without any choice at all, prostitute themselves to the first
customer; which is signified by these words, many lovers; that is with many
whore-masters: for he calls them companions, or lovers, who seem to sue to
one woman.

Then he adds, yet turn again unto me, says the Lord: that is, I am most
ready to receive thee to mercy, if so be thou will confess thy fault. had this
liberty to put away their wives, it was not freely to be permitted without some
restraint, lest so it might seem that God meant to cherish and approve of
their lightness and inconstancy. It was very requisite then, that wayward and
peevish husbands should be thus chastised, that it might at no hand be lawful
for them to take again into their fellowship, the wife whom they had once put
away: otherwise every one would have been ready to have changed their minds
every third day, or at least, every year: and then would have been as ready
(the fit being over) to have demanded her again. God himself therefore
imposed this law upon divorces; that the man who had once put away his wife,
might not afterward receive her again. But the case is otherwise in respect of
God: therefore no wonder if he retain this right and power of receiving the
Jews again into favor, upon their amendment. It follows.

Verse. 2. Lift up thine eyes to the high places, that is, to the little hills or
mountains, and behold in what place, thou have not played the harlot: thou
have sitten waiting for them in the ways, namely to allure them, as the
Arabian in the wilderness, and thou have polluted the land with thy
whoredoms, and with thy malice.
FOr as much as the Prophet had taxed the Jews for such as were become common;
and that they made no choice at all who were one, so they might be the other:
even like loose strumpets, after they are grown past shame; lest they should
make their replies, and also lest at any time they should allege, that they
never so much as meant to commit such an offense: he makes them (as it were)
their own judges. Lift up (says he) thine eyes to the high places, and
behold: that is, I produce testimonies manifest enough, for there is not the
least mountain in the land, whereon thou have not played the harlot with thine
idols. For we have seen before, and shall have occasion often times in this
prophecy to repeat the same thing, that God in his sight esteemed
superstitions as so many adulteries. Now it was an usual thing with the Jews
to ascend up to the tops of mountains; as if there forsooth, they had been
nearer unto God. And this is the reason why the Prophet wills them to lift their
eyes unto the mountains. Behold (says he) if there be any hillocke which is
not infected with thy whoredoms. For even as lewd persons seek for places
that are close, to commit their filthiness in; so also the hills served the
Jews for their dens and brothell-houses. For which cause also their impiety
was so much the more execrable, in that they stuck not to proclaim to all the
world what they were: as if they meant to discover their villainies upon an open
theater: whereas harlots are wont to go into corners, when they have found
their companions. Thus then, the prophet takes from them here all occasions of
cauelling, when he bids them lift up their eyes to the high places: for in
bowing before their idols, it was all one as if an harlot had prostituted her
body to the accomplishment of her lust: and he adds, they sat waiting upon the
ways, as the Arabian in the wilderness. Here he repeates that which we have
seen before; namely, that the Jews were not suddenly overtaken by the
allurements and enticements of others, to falsify the faith of marriage which
they had vowed to God; but that they were pricked forward by their own
inordinate lusts, to seek out impudent and filthy lovers. And because he had
said, thou have corrupted others by thy malice; therefore now also he confirms
the same, Chap. 2.33.
Thou sit (says he) upon all ways. Which speech also agrees to filthy
harlots, who (as has been said) are past shame.

But the Prophet amplifies this fault by another similitude: even (says he) as
the Arabian waits for passengers in the wilderness, to rob and cut their
throats: so thou also seem in like manner to sit in all thy ways. We see
here harlots, long exercised in that trade, who seeing themselves neglected,
lurk in passages, and shamelesly insinuate themselves

Verse. 3. Therefore the showers have been restrained, and the latter rain came
not, and thou had a whores forehead: thou would not be ashamed.
Jeremiah goes on still with his sharp reprehension; namely, that the Jews
were grown desperate in their malice, by ouerflowing in all sorts of
superstitions, and in making unlawful covenants; and in both, showed their
contempt against God. Now he lets us see how far they were sunk in an
untamed rebellion. The showers have been restrained (says he) they have not
fallen in their latter season: and yet had thou for all that an whores
forehead; thou would not blush, nor be ashamed: as if he had said, there
was no judgment that could tame thee. The fault was too great already, whilst
the Prophets cried daily upon them, to bring them home into the right way, by
their holy admonitions: and yet they regarded not. In that they were become
such dullards then, as not to conceive ought that the Prophets uttered, it was
one sign of their wickedness. But besides this, God had endeavored to draw
them to him by severe chastisements which he inflicted upon them; he had
caused the earth (to punish their sins) to become unfruitful: neither is it
to be doubted, but this drought whereof the Prophet speaks, was so
extraordinary, that the Jews might well perceive (if there had been in them
but a dram of true wisdom) that they had provoked Gods wrath against them.
For sometimes it falls out, that not so much as a drop of rain shall fall
from the heavens: as we see many summers prove uery hot and dry: and then
(no question) God aduertizeth us of our sins; and thereby solicites us to
repentance. But because custom makes us easily set light by Gods judgments:
it therefore comes to pass, that he corrects us with rare and unwonted
judgments. When the Prophet then says, that the showers were restrained, I
doubt not but he meant to note out an extraordinary judgment of God; by which
(had not the Jews been altogether senseless) they might soon have espied
that God was bent against them, and sore offended with them. The sum is, that
the Jews ran riot with such fury, after their inordinate lusts, that God
himself could not stay nor hold them in, The sum.
by any of his judgments, were they never so manifest and apparent; no not
albeit from above, he plainly testified, that he meant to avenge and maintain
his own glory, when there was such a drought, as by which they might well
discern that the curses threatened in the Law, were powered out upon them: as
it is written, Leuit. 26.19. I will make your heaven over you as iron, Deuteronomy.
28.23.
and your earth as brass.

As touching the Hebrew word which we have translated rain of the latter
season: we have elsewhere showed, how it is often taken for the latter rain,
or for the rain that falls in the time of harvest. It is called late, in
regard of the harvest, for the Sun was excessiuely hot in those Eastern
parts: they there needed rain before the corn was reaped, for otherwise the
heat would consume the grain: for which cause they desire this latter rain
above all others, namely, that which is immediately before harvest. For as
touching the other rain which falls in September, and October, they call yt the
rain which comes in good season, in respect of the seed-time, because it wets
and supples the seed in the earth, that it may the sooner sprout forth, and
take the deeper and faster rooting in the earth. The sum is, that God from
heaven showed manifest signs of his displeasure against the Jews; and yet all
this was to no purpose, in regard they had whorish foreheads, that could not
blush at any thing: that is to say, they were not touched with remorse in
respect of any judgments; or they would not endure to be corrected.

The Ppayer.
Almighty God, seeing it has pleased thee once to show us this favor, not
only to adopt us for thy children, but also to bind us unto thee by the bond
of spiritual marriage, and have given us so good a pledge thereof in that holy
and sacred union which we have with thy only Son Jesus Christ: grant we may
hold fast the faith of the Gospel, and also with such fidelity and loyalty
keep that faith which we have plighted to thee, that on thy part thou may
show thy self an husband and a father, in such wise unto us even unto the end,
that we may find thy bounty so enlarged toward us, that by means thereof we
for our parts may also be held in the fear of thy holy name, till at the last
we come to enter into the possession of that holy covenant of thy heavenly
kingdom, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIRST UPON THE third Chapter.
Verse. 4. Will thou not hereafter cry unto me, My father, the captain and
guide of my youth?
GOd having manifested the iniquities and wickednesses of his people, and
having according to their demerits, sharply reproved them; yet he cease not
by sweet allurements to summon them to repentance. Will thou not (says he) say
unto me, My father? Some unadvisedly translate, Will thou say to me, my father?
as if God rejected this cry. Thus they expound it then, namely, that the Jews
are too impudent yet, to glory thus of Gods name, whilst in their affections
they were estranged from him. But the Prophets meaning is otherwise: for God
meant here to allay the tartness of the former reprehension; and shows that
he is willing, and most ready to be at one with them, upon condition of their
repentance: yea, he not only waits for their repentance; but by this gracious
speech to these Apostataes, he seeks to prevent them. As how? Shall there not
be once again a peace concluded between us? For God here manifests the
passion of a man sad and heavy, in seeing this people thus to perish: who if
possibly he could, would feign prevent the same. According to this sense he
demands, whether they will not yet once again call upon him, as their father,
and as the guide of their youth? Now by this manner of speech he signifies,
that he was married with this people. For the affection which the husband
bears to a young virgin, in the flower of her youth, is marvelous tender. And
this similitude God uses in this place, saying, I cannot yet forget that
exceeding love which I bare to this my Church and people. In a word, I am ready
to pardon them, if so be they seek peace and amity with me: which he confirms
in the next verse, saying:

Verse. 5. Will he keep this in mind for ever? will he always remember it?
Behold thou have spoken, and go on in thy wickedness, and thou have had
ability.
GOd here shows, that it is the Jews fault that he receives them not to
mercy: And this he does by an argument taken from his own nature. Now he
speaks of himself in the third person: and it is all one as if the Prophet
had reasoned thus: God is not such an one as cannot be entreated; for he is
always as ready to forgive, as he is patient and long-suffering: who lets you
then, that you live not happily under his rule and dominion? For he will spare
you, if so be he find you truly penitent. We see now what the Prophet meant
to say. For God having exhorted and allured them graciously to repentance; the
Prophet now in general sets forth the nature of God, namely, that he keeps
not his anger for ever, neither does he always nourish the memory of it. When
these words are put simply by themselves; they signify, to nourish vengeance
in the heart. In our tongue, we imitate this Hebrew phrase, He keeps it. When
this word, Illui guard.
To keep, is put simply, without an other word joined with it, it signifies
(as I have said) to nourish that vengeance which a man has in his heart. Now
there is nothing more repugnant to this, than Gods nature: whence it follows,
that nothing hinders the Jews from obtaining favor, but their own
backwardness and untowardness: and as they are maliciously bent to their
will, so will they not receive that pardon and grace which is freely offered
and presented before them.

As touching that which afterward follows, it may be expounded two ways: for
it may be taken thus, Albeit thou have spoken it, and done it: as if the Lord
should say, I cease not to show my self favorable and merciful unto you, be
the faults you have committed never so many and great. But there is another
exposition which seems to be more natural and agreeable; namely, that God
here takes up a lamentation, in respect he sees there is no hope to be
conceived of the Jews amendment, in regard they are grown hardened in their
evil ways. Thou have spoken it (says he) and done it, and have had ability
to do it.

And yet there are sundry opinions among the expositors as touching these
latter words. Some take this, And have had ability; for, according as thou have
had ability; or, according to the power thou have had: as if he should say, so
far forth as thy ability stretched, thou have committed all sorts of
wickednesses. Others take it more simply, and (as I think) their opinion is
the best: Thou have been powerful: that is thou have wholly given over thy
self to wickedness, even according to the uttermost Behold, this people are
become desperate and past hope of recovery: namely, because they boasted of
their wickedness. For, to speak, and do, is as much as if he had said, This
people are become so impudent, that they stick not to call darkness light: as
we know it is the manner of the superstitious to be so shameless, that they
fear not to brave God to his face. Now such was the quality and condition of
this people: that indeed which God principally condemned in them by the mouths
of his Prophets, was that they corrupted his pure worship commanded in his Law.
But they on the contrary (like brazen-faced strumpets) were so malepert, as
against that, to allege their own devotions and good intentions, as they
commonly called them. Seeing then they were grown so audacious, as to
maintain and defend their bad courses, God here complains, that there is no
hope of their amendment: and therefore gives them over as graceless and
desperate people. This is it which I conceive touching the true and natural
meaning of this place. And to the same purpose he also adds, thou (says he)
wast able: that is, thou ceasedst not to add sin to sin, but gave thy
self over to the committing of iniquity. Now it follows.

Verse. 6. And the Lord said to me in the days of King Josias, what has this
lewd, or disdainful Israel done? others translate, This rebel: she is gone
upon every high mountain, and under every green tree, and there has she
played the harlot.

7 And after she had done all these things, I said, Return unto me. Others
translate in the third person, She will return, and she returned not, as her
rebellious sister Judah saw.

8 And I saw that for all this, for all these occasions, or causes; to wit,
that rebellious Israel had played the harlot; I forsook her: I put her away,
and gave her the bill of ber divorce: and yet her disloyal sister Judah feared
not, but she went also and played the harlot.


HEre the Prophet begins a new speech: for he recites that which God had given
him in charge; and withal notes the time; to wit, whilst Josias reigned. Now
it is well known, that in his days the land was purged from all sorts of
superstitions. For this good King endeauored to restore Gods pure worship, and
to abolish all the filthy corruptions wherewith the Temple, and religion it
self had been wholly infected and defiled. He therefore manfully employed
himself in this business; neither is it to be doubted, but as touching the
outward face of things, religion and piety then seemed to flourish: yet shall
we see how in the greater part of the people, hypocrisy and counterfeit
holiness bear a great sway: which often falls out, when the heads and
governors of countries desire to maintain the purity of Gods worship, and to
purge out the corruptions that have crept in. For ye shall ever see some which
carry a fair show for a time; and yet in the mean while, will not stick to
continue still in their obstinacy against God. This was then the state of the
Commons. Which we are diligently to observe: because it might be thought that
Jeremiah carried himself somewhat too harshly toward his nation: for
reformation was in every man's mouth: as the greater part of those at this day,
who at the beginning of reformation, made goodly shows of their readiness to
embrace the doctrine of the Gospel: and yet after they had renounced all
popish superstitions, now willingly content themselves with a slight
reformation, wherein they glory. But in the mean while they shift off Christ's
yoke, and cannot endure to be subject to the discipline of the Church. In a
word, they could wish that all order and policy were overthrown. And yet for
all this, as often as they are taxed for their sins, they are ready to cover
themselves with this fair pretext of reformation. And doubtless Jeremiah had
even such in his time to deal withal. This is the cause why he expreslly
notes, that he had this commission in the days of Josias: to wit, even then
whilst the King bent himself to set up Gods worship in the purity of it; and
whilst none durst contradict it: for during this time we may perceive, that
God was called upon with one consent, without any outward superstitions.

But what is the sum of this message or embassage? Have thou not seen (says
he) what this disdainful Israel has done? God here compares the ten Tribes,
with the kingdom of Judah: to which (as we know) was added half the Tribe of
Benjamin: he compares Israel then with Judah, and says, See thou not what
this rebellious Israel has done? Now he brings in the kingdom of Israel and
Judah, under the person of a wife. For as we have seen heretofore, God takes
unto himself the person of an husband, in respect of the people. Chap. 3.1.
Thus then he says he has had two wives, to wit, Israel and Judah. I grant
God had married to himself in one marriage, the whole seed of Abraham. But
Jeremiah speaks here by way of granting them so much. For albeit the
Israelites had revolted from God, yet had he not utterly rejected them: so the
covenant held as yet in part. In this sense he acknowledges, as well Israel
as Judah, for his wives. He says then, Have thou not seen what this
disdainful Israel has done? This word, To disdain, or turn away, is
diversely taken by the expositors; but it may properly be translated, lewd, or
loose. Desbauchee.
See (says he) how she is gone upon every high mountain, and under every
green tree, etc. The sum of Gods complaint here is, That the ten tribes
have falsified the faith of this holy marriage. Why so? Because they bowed
before idols; and that upon every high mountain, and under every green tree.
For (as we have said) it was their custom to choose out those places, as if
there had been some holiness upon the tops of the mountains, or under the
shadow of the green trees.

He therewithal adds, Notwithstanding I said. Verse. 7.
Gods meaning in these words is, that he tarried long in suspending his
judgment, before he chastised the people of Israel. Here therefore we see
the praise of his patience, not only in not proceeding in his wrath against
the Israelites; but also in that he forbear them, and for a long time held his
peace, to see if they would come to amendment. I said then, after thou had
committed all these things, return to me. If we read this place in the third
person, the sense will be this: I always hoped well of their amendment, and
that they would at length return again into the right way, albeit they had
fallen so grossly; yea, notwithstanding they had so wickedly rejected me, in
reuolting from me, and in forsaking their faith, and and all piety. But I
rather incline to the contrary opinion: namely, that God here shows how his
purpose was to recall and bring back the ten Tribes, by his servants the
Prophets; notwithstanding they provoked him to wrath and jealousy. Thus then
God meant here to show how the Israelites were bent to obstinacy and
rebellion; for he did but loose his labor, though he took such pains by all
good means to bring them home to himself. I take this word said then, for the
Prophets doctrine; as if he should say, Although the Israelites were plunged
(as it were) over head and ears in their impieties; yet left I no means
unattempted for all that, to see if I could cause them to return unto me. In a
word, he shows how he resembled not those husbands which could never be
brought in any sort to be reconciled with their wives, after they have been
provoked to jealousy, by the disgraces, and wicked outrages which have been
offered them. God hereby shows then, that albeit the Israelites had forsaken
him, yet he sent them his Prophets; yea, and himself also sought which way he
might be at one with them: but they never returned.

In the next place he adds, And when she saw upon all this, to wit, for all
the whoredoms that rebellious Israel committed: that is to say, when the
kingdom of Judah saw all these things. We shall see the drift of this
comparison by and by. For he amplifies the wickedness of the kingdom of
Judah, because she might easily behold all that which has formerly been
recited; yea, and a great way off, as from an high turret discern it; and so
might have been brought to repentance: but she saw, howbeit without fruit. Thus
then God meant to show what obstinacy there was in the Jews, who had beheld
the revolt of the ten Tribes: neither were they ignorant how sharply they had
been reproved and threatened by the Prophets.

Verse. 8.
And in the next verse he adds, I have seen. As in the former verse he said,
Judah saw what Israel did: so now also he says, that he himself saw both the
one and the other. I have seen then But what is it which he faith he saw?
namely, that Judah also played the harlot (for I speak now of her, as of a
wife) God says then, that he was not ignorant of this. Whereof? That Judah
fell not by error or ignorance; but that of malice, and of set purpose she
exceeded the wickedness of her sister Israel. Yea, I have seen, for all these
things, when she played the harlot. He now sets that forth more at large, which
he delivered before in few words. He said, the Tribe of Judah saw: but this,
by reason of the breuity of it, might have seemed obscure. He explaines his
meaning further then, Judah (says he) saw that I gave her sister a bill of
divorce, because she had played the harlot; and yet this astonished her not:
that is, it never came into her thought to repent, though she saw so manifest
an example of my wrath and vengeance, even before her eyes. Isaiah, chap. 50.
verse. 1. he flatly denies it? But the Prophet speaks here in another sense,
Isaiah. For he mentions not here that bill of divorce which husbands were
wont to give their wives, when they meant to put them away; who in other
respects had carried themselves chastely and well: but he speaks of such a
divorce as was approved of by the Law; to wit, when the woman being convinced
of adultery was condemned to death. God therefore in Isaiah denies that he had
given any bill of divorce; and yet here he says he gave one: that is, because
he had put away a wife taken in adultery. I grant this was not ordinarily
practiced among the Jews at that time; namely, that a man being divorced
himself from an adulterous wife, she was by and by called to judgment. But
we have seen in the beginning of this Chapter, what difference there is
between God, and women's husbands. For as much then as God had not dealt
rigorously with the Israelites, neither had inflicted upon them those extreme
punishments which they had justly deserved, and also according to the custom
then in use; therefore he says, he gave her a bill of divorce; that is to
say, he separated himself from this people, and utterly forsook them. In the
mean while by the bill of divorce, he understands their banishment. What is
meant by divorce in this place.
For when the ten Tribes were led into captivity, it was all one as if God had
openly protested that he would no longer hold his covenant or conjunction at
all with this people. Truly, whilst they dwelt in the holy land, and in the
inheritance which he had promised them, there remained always some resemblance
of this holy wedlock: but after they were once scattered here and there, and
that Gods true worship had no more any place among them: in a word, after the
name of the kingdom of Israel was once abolished, then God made this divorce.

Her sister Judah then, saw, (says he) and yet she feared not. Now what an
exceeding great senselessness was this, not to become wise by the harms of
another? But this complaint is often met withal in the Prophets, namely, that
when God spared the Jews, they were never moved thereby to repentance, albeit
God set such examples before their eyes, as might have been sufficient to have
terrified them. For might they not well think (or at least they ought so to
have done) that God would certainly show himself their Judge, in punishing so
many crimes whereby they had provoked him, seeing he spared not (the
Israelites) their brethren? They saw that poor kingdom, rooted out and
abolished, before their eyes: and yet they came all out of one and the same
stock, to wit, Abraham, who was father to them both. How was it possible then,
that they should make so little reckoning of Gods judgments, which had so long
a time been exercised upon their brethren in their sight? He says then, that
they feared not. It follows.

Verse. 9. And by her hastiness it is come to pass: other of the expositors as
well as Saint Jerome, translate, Easiness. The Hebrew word whence it is
derived, sometimes signifies swiftness: but here it notes lightness, or
wantonness; which the Prophet reprooues. It came to pass then, by the
lightness, or wantonness of her whoredoms, that she polluted the land, or
defiled it: other translate, she made the land sin: but Saint Ierom almost
every where translates this word, To defile; neither suits it amiss here: and
she played the harlot with stocks and stones.
THe Prophet here (and in the two next verses) concludes his speech which he
began, in verse. 6. namely, it was so far off from striking a terror into
Judah, by the punishments which God had inflicted upon Israel, that rather by
her lightness and loose life, she surmounted all the whoredoms of her sister.
She has (says he) defiled the land; or, she has caused it to sin: that is
to say, she has made the land wicked. Now this serves to aggrauate the fault
much, when he says, that the land was made culpable; or, that it was defiled.
For we know that the earth of it self is pure and clean: neither is it apt to
draw into it any spot or vice from men's impiety. But to the end the impiety of
her inhabitants might be made so much the more odious and detestable: it is
said, the earth is defiled; therefore he says, the land is guilty. Wherefore?
The reason why the land is defiled, or is made wicked, or wrapped in their
sins is added, to wit, because she played the harlot with stocks and stones.
As touching this similitude of whoredom here mentioned, we need no more to
explain it: seeing from the beginning we have so often repeated it: for God
had entered into covenant with this people, and had united himself unto them by
the holy bond of marriage: therefore as often as they turned aside from his pure
worship, it is rightly said that they committed whoredom, because they
corrupted and violated their faith. For herein consists the true spiritual
chastity, The true spiritual chastity.
when we keep faith in all simplicity: as on the contrary, Apostasy is an
impudent disloyalty, when the wife deceiues her husband, in following
adulterers. It follows.

Verse. 10. And yet for all these things, this her disloyal, or deceitful,
sister Judah returned not unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly, says the
Lord.
HE goes on still with the same matter, to wit, that the Jews were not moved
at all with any fear, in beholding the horrible vengeance of God, which fell
upon their brethren. Her disloyal sister (says he) returned not unto me: that
is, after all those prophetical admonitions and warnings; nor yet after the
examples of so many of my judgments as happened in their sight.
Notwithstanding he adds a correction, that she returned not wholly, but
fainedly, or, lyingly. For the Prophet preuents some replies which the Jews
might make. See what was said verse. 6. of this Chap.
What? Dare thou affirm that we have not turned: has not the land been
purged from all idolatries? Is not God now served according to the prescript
form of his Law? See thou now any Altar, either upon the tops of the
mountains, or under the shadow of green trees? For as much then as they might
cavil thus cunningly, according to their ordinary custom, the Prophet
preuents them, and says, that notwithstanding all their goodly shows and
semblances of repentance, all was nothing but a mere counterfeiting, how to
lie and dissemble with God. Why so? There was no integrity in them. Now we see
more plainly why express mention has been made, in verse. 6. God looks not so
much to outward reformation of religion, as to the integrity and uprightness
of the heart.
of the days of Josias: namely, because then the Jews seemed to return unto
God, but it was only fainedly, and in dissimulation (the King, and a small
remnant which came thereunto with uprightness of heart exempted) for as
touching the multitude, they were rank hypocrites. Therefore the Lord in these
six verses shows, that he rested not in this reformation, which was so full
of fained holiness; but requires a sound and upright affection of the heart.
And therefore he concludes,

Verse. 11. And the Lord said unto me, this poor rebellious Israel has
justified her soul, in comparison of this deceitful, or disloyal Judah.
NOw (as I take it) we clearly understand wherefore Jeremiah compared the ten
Tribes, with the kingdoms of Judah; even that he might manifest to the Jews
(who notwithstanding would be held much more perfect and holy than others) that
they were much worse, and more disloyal; yea, and worthy of greater
punishments than others, in regard all the fair shows they made before God,
were nothing but mere deceit and lies. Why the Jews are taxed for greater
sinners than the Jsraelites.
because they ought to have been warned by other men's harms, and should have
kept their own steadfastness, by seeing their brethrens defection, in erring
(as they did) from Gods pure worship. They might easily then, have considered
of all these things with themselves on this wise. God therefore shows then,
yet she is more righteous than her sister Judah.

The manner of speech which he uses; has justified her soul, is improper.
For it is not Gods purpose to excuse the Israelites, neither is it his meaning
to justify or absolve them, (for believe me they were grievously punished) but
it is a phrase of speech usual with the Prophets, to say, that Sodom is just
in respect of Jerusalem: that Tire and Sydon are just in respect of the Jews,
Ezech. 16.37.38. This sinner then, or rebellious Israel has justified her
soul, in comparison of disloyal Judah: to wit, in regard of the cause which I
before recited: namely, in that the Jews were more obstinate, and less
excusable. The outward

The Prayer.
Lord God, and Almighty Father, seeing it has pleased thee to adopt us for thy
people, and to knit us to the person of thine only Son; grant we may
continue pure and sincere in the obedience of thy Gospel, and that we never
turn back again to those corruptions which may separate us from this so
sacred a conjunction, established and confirmed in us by no less price than
the blood of thine only Son: but grant we may so persist in thy service,
that our lives and conuersations may be witnesses to that holy vocation wherein
our hope rests satisfied that we have eternal salvation; till at the length
we come to the inheritance of that kingdom, which has been so dearly
purchased for us, therein to gather and reap the fruit of our faith,
integrity, and perseverance, in the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE TWELFTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE SECOND UPON THE third Chapter.
Verse. 12. Go, and cry, that is to say, with full mouth sound forth all these
words toward the North, and say: Thou disobedient Israel, says the Lord,
return unto me, I will not cause to rest, word for word it is, I will not let
fall, my wrath: others translate, my face; but by a similitude it signifies
wrath, upon you, because I am merciful, says the Lord, I will not always
retain it.
AFter the Prophet has showed how the Tribe of Judah deserved to be more
severely punished than the ten Tribes, and also added the reason of it; to wit,
because they saw before their eyes what chastisements had been inflicted upon
them; and yet without any remorse as on their parts: he now directs his speech
to the Israelites themselves, or to the ten Tribes; and promises that God will
now be merciful unto them, and bow his ears to their prayers. The kingdom of
Israel at this time was abolished, and the people thereof led captive; some of
them into Assyria, and some of them among those of the Medes and Persians; so
as they were in such wise dispersed, that no memory at all was left of that
kingdom. As touching the country, it had often been wasted before. For from
the beginning, there yet remained some part of the kingdom; in regard four
Tribes only were carried away into captivity: but in the end, the memory of
the kingdom was utterly abolished, and (as I have said) led into captivity.
See why the Prophet then is commanded to direct his speech toward the North.
For albeit the most of them were then in the East; yet God chiefly respects
that place which was the most eminent in all the Empire, in regard they had
been wasted by the Assyrians. This is the cause why the Lord bids his Prophet
cry these words to them whom the enemy had carried into the North parts.
Reasons why the Prophet was commanded to cry.
Cry then (says he) not only because the distance of but also in regard the
Israelites themselves, Moreover, the Prophet had not this charge given him
only in respect of the Israelites; but in that although the Israelites had
been rebellious, The sum. Verse. 7.
and had estranged themselves from God; yet they might now obtain pardon if
they would convert. We told you before (in a word) what the Prophet means by
this word conversion, or returning, and we shall also have occasion to mention
it again in another place. He would they should repent then, promising, that
if they so do, they shall find God favorable unto them.

In the next place he adds, I will not cause my face to fall, or my wrath, upon
you: and this latter exposition agrees best. God had severely chastised their
sins already: for what greater evil could befall them, than to be expulsed
the land of their nativity, and to be subject to such cruel tyrants? But that
which was worst of all, they were deprived of Gods pure worship, which himself
had ordained in his Law, they were rejected of God himself: they had lost that
glory and prerogative, whereby they esteemed themselves more excellent than any
people in the world besides. For they were chosen indeed to be his peculiar
people: but now all this was gone. How is it then, that God says, he will no
more let his wrath fall upon them? The Prophet simply means by this manner of
speech, that God will not be irreconcilable: as if he should say, My wrath
shall not continue; or, it shall not always fall heavy upon you; but I will
moderate the afflictions wherewith I have exercised you. I therefore mislike
not Saint Ieroms translation [I will not stay] albeit he uses this word, To
make; which yet (as I have said) does not sufficiently express the Prophets
meaning. But this will be a good exposition, if we read, I will not let my
wrath rest upon you: that is to say, My wrath shall not tarry or abide; or, it
shall not lie heavy upon your heads, utterly to ouerwhelme you. The wrath of
God I grant was already fallen upon them; yet so, that they were not left
hopeless of some relief. God then says, that the plagues which he had
brought upon them for their sins, should not be mortal. Why so? Because he
would withdraw his hand, and not prosecute them to the uttermost with
extremity. The sum is, That if the people shall return unto God, The sum.
they shall obtain favor, in regard God is moved of his own good pleasure
to call them to himself, and promises that the judgment he has sent upon
them shall last but for a while.

And God once again confirms this doctrine, from an argument taken from his
own nature: For I (says he) am merciful; neither will I retain my wrath for
ever. The promise was particular in respect of the peoples return out of
captivity: now that he might confirm the same, he adds a general doctrine,
namely, That he is inclined to mercy: and according as he is wholly bent
thereunto, so will he easily be drawn to forgive. Seeing God then is such an
one, and therefore cannot deny himself; what cause have sinners to despair,
thereby shutting up the gate (as it were) against themselves, from having any
access at all to Gods mercy? As often as we are solicited to despair, and are
not able to apply unto our selves Gods gracious promises; that we then ever
remember that God is merciful. Seeing God then is so gracious, Mich 7.18.
Psalm. 62 12.
that he retains not his wrath for ever; that is to say, it lasts but for a
moment: we ought always to nourish good hope in our breasts: as it is also
said in the 30. Psalm: He continues but a while in his anger; but in his
favor is life. As if he should say, Gods wrath forthwith vanishes, if we for
our parts repent: but he continues on his mercy and goodness to many ages: for
that is it which he means by this word life. Now it follows.

Verse. 13. Only, or, notwithstanding, know thine iniquity; for thou have
wickedly sinned against the Lord thy God, and have spread abroad, or scattered,
thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and have not harkened to my
voice, says the Lord.
GOd here adds to his promise a condition, lest hypocrites abusing his bounty,
should thereby grow more and more hardened; and yet in the mean while should
think he were much beholding to them. For see how they are wont usually to
reason, God is easily drawn to call us back again to himself: and more than
that, he preuents sinners: well, we doubt not, but we shall as easily make
fair weather with him. After this sort do hypocrites delude themselves with
these perverse imaginations, because they falsely suppose they can satisfy God
with any thing: for he looks for no more at the hands of poor sinners, than
that they come again unto him. It is necessary therefore that exhortations to
repentance be always coupled with the promises of grace. But know thine
iniquity. The particle used in the Hebrew, may signify, only; or but; or
notwithstanding. I willingly receive the second exposition, because there is an
exception here added, according as I have expounded it; namely, that the
Israelites should not lie snorting in their sins, as persuading themselves
that they had God in their sleeue (as they say) or as if he were at their beck
and command. Thus then we see the Prophet adds this exception here, by way of
a correction. But in the mean while (says he) know thine iniquity: for
otherwise thou have no reason to seek reconciliation with me.

It follows. For thou have carried thy self wickedly against the Lord thy
God. The Prophet by these words presses the Israelites home, lest they should
think to escape Gods wrath by their fair and colorable pretexts. For we
know, that even such as feel themselves inwardly convinced, are not easily
brought to confess their faults. And surely it is wonderful, men should be so
blockish, thus to plead always with God. Therefore when the Prophets go about
to exhort the Jews to repentance, they always set their sins before them.
Were there any shame, or good nature in men, they needed not to be thus
pressed: but in regard they are either impudent, and so will Thou have (says
he) carried thy self wickedly toward thy God: as if the Prophet should have
said, It is not without cause, that in this particular manner I admonish thee
to acknowledge thy faults: for it is God himself that condemns thee; think
not therefore that thy euasions can do thee any good.

In the next place (to press them yet nearer to the quick) he adds the kind
of fault wherein they failed, From the general, the Prophet proceds to charge
them with particulars.
Thou have (says he) scattered, or dispersed thy ways to strangers, under
every green tree. Again, he compares the Israelites to harlots, which are so
common to all, that they post from place to place to entertain the first
comers. See how the Prophet says, the Israelites had scattered their ways.
He speaks modestly of an immodest action, when he says, thou have scattered
thy ways: but by these words he signifies, that they satisfied not themselves
with one kind of superstition, or with one idol, but polluted themselves with
sundry superstitions; and that on every side they heaped together diverse
deceitful errors; even as a common harlot prostitutes her self to such as
she never knew before, without any choice at all.

Now all fained gods, he terms by the name of strangers; because (as I have
often said) they ought to have held God for their husband. Whilst the
Israelites then, wandered thus after strange gods, it was all one as if a wife,
forsaking the company of her husband, should prostrate, or prostitute her self
to the will of all adulterers. And we know nothing is more usual, than for
those that forsake the true service of God, to gather to themselves, from all
parts, sundry deceits and errors, so as they prostitute themselves without any
restraint, before all sorts of superstitions.

In the last place he adds, and thou have not heard my voice. By this
circumstance the Prophet amplifies their offense; namely, that having been
instructed by the doctrine of the Law, and therefore could not be ignorant of
the right way to salvation: how was it possible they should thus foully corrupt
themselves, by entertaining such variety of superstitions? They could not say,
ignorance was the cause of it: it was their open rebellion then against God.
Thus the Prophet shows they were disobedient, and had no stay of themselves at
all: and that hence came their falling away into idolatry and perverse errors;
The sum and scope of the whole 12. and 13. verses.
namely, they had shaken off Gods yoke, and would not endure to be governed by
his word. Now we have the sum and scope of all these words. In the first
place God to confess their sins: which if they what gain they shall get by
their conversion; Verse. 12.
which he mentioned erewhile. For, till the sinner acknowledge his faults, he
will never become a true convert, Note.
neither will he from his heart turn unto God. The beginning of repentance
therefore, is to acknowledge and confess our sins. Moreover, he conuinceth
them of their sins, that he might take from them all occasions of he names
the kind of sin, that he might hold them (as it were) at a bay: to wit, that
they were defiled with superstitions. And moreover he adds, but to the filthy
of-scums of the world, who post hither and thither, without respect either of
those they know, or know not. Lastly he shows, that merely by their own
rebellion; namely, because they had wholly shaken off all fear and reverence
of God, in regard he had committed to their custody the oracles of his Law:
besides, they had also the Prophets, They stopped their ears against that word
of God which was preached unto them, and would not endure to be guided and
governed by the same, but grew utterly unteachable. Let us proceed.

Verse. 14. Return ye disobedient children, says the Lord, for I am your
husband, or, I have ruled over you, as some translate: others, I have been
wearied by you: we will speak of the propriety of the word anon, and I will
gather you one out of a City, and two out of a family, or, out of a kindred, or
Tribe, and I will bring you to Sion.
Jeremiah reiterates the same sentence with that in verse. 12. yet in other
words. But by heaping up so many words to one purpose, God shows how ready he
is to be appeased, if so be the Israelites from their hearts, and without
faining will turn unto him. It sufficed to have assured them in one word, that
God testified his willingness to pardon them: But perceiving how slow and dull
of hearing they were, and how hardly drawn to yield themselves obedient; he
continues on his former exhortation. This favor of God is not to be a little
admired: who albeit his grace be (in a manner) neglected, yea rejected of men
by their slothfulness, yet cease he not; but once, No small favor of God,
when he offers us conditions of peace, again and again.
twice, yea the third time, he calls us to him. Is any man in the world able
to brook such an indignity, as to see his favor scorned? And yet we see God
flies not back at the first repulse, neither reiects he those by and by who
are thus dull and slow of hearing; but sets upon them afresh, to see if at
length he may prevail: and is not this more than necessary? the second and
third time, to repentance: which mercy (as we see) he daily exercises in the
Churches. This is the cause then, why the Prophet repeats the same words
again, Return now again, O ye disobedient children. He said before, Verse. 12.
Thou disobedient Israel return. Now here he adds, For I have been a husband
unto you.

Some think the word Baal, which is here used, signifies, to be sent; but
this signification in this place cannot agree: therefore where others
translate, I have had domination and lordship over you; it agrees better: but
this lordship must not be understood generally. For after the Latins, this
domination is referred to the husband, who is the wives head. Neither is it to
be doubted, but God still continues his former speech, See verse. 1.
and persists in the same similitude of marriage, often mentioned before. For
he accused the Israelites of adulteries, in regard they had forsaken him: which
is the cause he now adds, And yet I am your husband. He said before, that if
any man had put away his wife, and that she should marry another, the first
would never after be reconciled to her: but contrariwise, I willingly forgive
all your disloyalty and whoredoms; only hereafter carry your selves chastely
toward me, and you shall find that I also will keep my faith with you. In
like manner he says here, I am your husband: See verse. 8.
that is to say, Albeit I have put you away. For he told them before, that he
gave them a bill of divorce, that is, he had (as it were) by a public and
autenticke instrument testified, that he had cast them off, and that he never
meant afterward to be joined unto them again in any covenant: for their exile
was a kind of divorce. Now he says, I am your husband: for howsoever you have
by the breach of your faith, much offended me, yet do I still continue my
first plea, I am your husband. We now understand the Prophets drift and
meaning: otherwise the Israelites might have bin so forestalled with despair,
that they would utterly have distasted this favorable access, whereunto the
Prophet calls and exhorts them. To the end that slavish fear then should not
hinder their return, God here tells them, he will be their husband; neither
will he forget that first covenant and conjunction, which in former time he
vouchsafed to make with them. Thus you see the sum of his speech, I have once
loved you with an husband-like affection: true it is, The sum.
you have estranged your selves from me: yet return now again unto me, for I
am ready to pardon you; and I will receive you again (says he) as if you had
always kept your faith and loyalty with me.

But after he adds, one out of a City, two out of a family. This place is well
worthy our observation: for God therein shows, that they must not tarry one
for another: moreover, though all the body of the people generally should rot
in the filthiness of their sins, God has mercy in store, if only one will
accept thereof.
yet if there were but one that would return unto him, he would always be
ready to entertain that one into his favor. Now this point was of exceeding
great use. For Gods covenant was made to the whole seed of Abraham in general;
and therefore they might think with themselves, that this covenant was utterly
abolished, unless the whole people of God were again gathered together.
Neither had God indeed chosen to himself out of this race, one or two; no, not
an hundred, nor a thousand: for he had chosen the whole offspring of Abraham.
Now because this promise was common to them all generally without any
exception; every one might thus conceit in himself, But what have I to do
with God, further than as in respect that I am descended of the race of
Abraham? It is not I alone then, for we are all of us the children of Abraham.
And yet I see scarce one that returns to God: it is of necessity then, that I
must likewise perish with the rest of the people. Lest such a cogitation as
this then, should have any way hindered or kept back the godly; therefore he
says, I will take one out of a City, and two out of a family: that is to say,
albeit there comes to me but one only out of a City, yet that one shall find
the gate open: if only two out of a Tribe repair unto me, I will also
entertain them likewise. Now we understand the Prophets meaning.

I grant the expositors understand these words, one of a City, as if God would
not refuse to pardon three or four, although all the multitude besides
perished. But they touch not the maine matter which was chiefly intended; to
wit, that God restraines his speech to two or three, because (as has been
said) they might be in perplexity when they should think with themselves,
that all generally were chosen to be a people consecrated unto God.

but two or three that shall come to him out of a City, or out of the whole
people. He adds:

And I will bring you to Sion. This has been once spoken of before: thus God
would give them to understand, that their exile should last but for a while,
and that the Israelites should once again recover their inheritance, if he may
perceive in them a true and sound conversion.

Verse. 15. And I will give you pastors according to mine own heart, and they
shall feed you with knowledge and or wisdom.
understanding: that is, with knowledge and wisdom.
GOd here promises he will in such wise provide for the good and welfare of
the people after their return out of their banishment, that they shall not
thenceforth be in danger to fall into the like ruin. For the cause why God
executed this vengeance, is to be observed; Isa. 5.13.
which also is specified by Isaiah, in chap. 5. The reason (says he) why my
people are led captive, is only for want of knowledge: Therefore hell has
enlarged her soul, or throat. He says then, that the reason why the people
perished, was because knowledge perished, and that their pastors were become
dumb dogs, or else were like thieves and cutthroats. Isa. 56.10.11.
But here God on the contrary testifies, that he will give them good and
faithful shepherds, who shall discharge their functions diligently. I grant
that under this word Pastors, is also comprehended godly and faithful
Magistrates: but he especially notes the Prophets and Priests, whose office it
was to reform the false worship.

Whence we gather, that the state of the Church cannot long endure, where there
wants faithful pastors to teach the way of salvation. The Church cannot long
stand, where good teaching is wanting. Prou. 29.18.
See then wherein the salvation of the Church consists, even in this; when it
pleases God to raise up true pastors and teachers, to publish and set forth
the doctrine of life and salvation. But where people are destituted and
deprived of such as should teach them faithfully there they must needs go to
ruin. For questionless God by this promise meant to signify, that his people
should not only be freed by restoring them out of their captivity; but also
that they should be safely kept in a good estate after their reentrance into
their country. that the Church is not only begotten by means of holy and
sincere pastors, but that the life thereof For as it is not enough that the
political estate be once erected, Simile.
unless good Magistrates do successively second one another in the execution
of their office: so cannot a worse plague light upon the Church, A worse plague
cannot befall the Church, than to be destituted of faithful pastors.
than when God depriues her of her faithful pastors. It is true indeed, that
the people can never return unto God, unless he first of all send his
Prophets to teach: but God speaks here of that continued course, or tenor of
his doctrine, and of a government rightly composed: as if he should say, I
will not only give you Prophets, who shall reduce you from your errors, that
you may take the direct way to me, and so to salvation; but I will also
continually furnish you with faithful pastors, which shall lead you on
forward to the end. It is also to be observed, that none can execute the office
of teaching aright, unless therewithal they be endowed with wisdom. Now God
closely intimates his fatherly love, when he says, the pastors shall be
according to his heart. It follows.

Verse. 16. And after you shall be multiplied and increased, or augmented, in
the land, in those days says the Lord, they shall no more say, the Arc of
the Lords Covenant: neither shall it come any more to mind, or ascend into the
heart, neither shall it be remembered, neither shall they visit it any more,
neither shall that be done any more.
THe expositors are here grauelled, in regard scarcely any one of them has
attained the Prophets meaning. The greater part of the Jews forge I know not
how many fictions here, nothing to the purpose, and yet they labor to fetch
that far enough off too: namely, that they should no more carry with them the
Arc of the covenant into battle. Why so? Because no enemy should afterward
invade them. Their opinion then is, that there is promised to the people in
this place, a quiet and secure state, because they shall no more need to carry
the Arc of the Covenant hither and thither, to discomfit the assaults of the
enemy withal. But we may easily see, that these words will not at any hand
bear this sense. Others say, this must be referred to the time of the Messiah:
neither indeed does any one of the Jews deny this, in regard it follows
afterward, in verse. 18. that the Israelites shall return with the tribe of
Judah. Which hitherto was not accomplished: whence it follows, that the
Prophet here prophesies of the kingdom of Christ: and yet the Jews in
confessing this, think nothing at all here of the abrogation of ceremonies.
Notwithstanding, all the Christian expositors (in a manner) favor this
opinion: namely, that the Prophet meant to teach, that when Christ shall
appear, the shadows and ceremonies of the Law shall then in such wise cease,
that there shall be no more use of the Arc of the Covenant, in regard the
fullness of the Godhead should dwell in Christ. And who would not judge, but
that this exposition had some good likelihood of truth? But yet I think this
comes nothing near the Prophets meaning. For he speaks expressly here, of
that discord or divorce which had now a long time continued between the
kingdom of Judah, and the kingdom of Israel: for albeit the kingdom of
Whence that emulation sprang, which so long continued between these two
kingdoms.
which was a pledge of his presence. Hence grew the emulation and debate
between the kingdom of Judah, and the ten Tribes. The Israelites they swelled
in regard of their multitudes, both of men, and riches, with other carnal
respects: on the other side, the Jews gloried in their Temple, and in the Arc
of the Covenant. Now what says the Prophet to all this? He affirms, there
shall be such an agreement between the two kingdoms, The sum and natural
sense of this verse.
of Judah and Israel; that the Jews shall no more twit their brethren the
Israelites in the teeth with the Arc of the Covenant, and the Temple of the
Lord. Why so? Because God should be equally near, and alike favorable to
both. And this which I have said, the Prophet in the verses following does yet
more strongly confirm: necessarily therefore must the other two verses which
follow be joined with this. He says then,

Verse. 17. In that time they shall call Jerusalem the seat or throne of the
Lord; and all nations shall come unto it, unto the name of the Lord, which is
in Jerusalem: and afterward they shall no more follow after the hardness,
others translate, obstinacy; sometimes it also signifies thought, of their
wicked heart.

18. In those days the house of Judah shall go with the house of Israel, and
shall come together out of the land of the North, into the land which I have
given your fathers for an inheritance, or, which I gave your fathers to
possess by the right of inheritance.


HEre we see that more clearly confirmed, which I said ere while, to wit, that
the Prophet promises, there shall be a good harmony and agreement between the
two houses of Judah and Israel, after God shall be pleased to bring them home
both together out of their exile: as if he should say, their future estate
shall far exceed that which it was before. Why so? In regard the posterity of
Ahraham was (as it were) scattered and dispersed: for the people whom the Lord
meant to maintain in brotherly concord (with an holy and inviolable band) had
been notwithstanding woefully divided and rent in sunder one from another: for
we know there was a deadly fude between these two houses. In regard then,
there had been for a season such, and so shameful a rent, See verse. 16.
between the children of Abraham; the Prophet shows, what fruit shall ensue
upon their banishment and captivity: to wit, They having been chastised with a
temporary punishment by the Lord: they should return again into their
country, not to live there as in former time, in such discords and hatreds;
but to call upon one God together, with one mouth: that is to say, the Jews
carrying themselves as brethren to the Israelites, and the Israelites holding
brotherly amity and unity with the tribe of Judah.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing it pleases thee so graciously, daily to support us,
notwithstanding we have not ceased more and more, every manner of way to
provoke thee to displeasure against us; grant we may no longer harden our
hearts against thy chastisements; but whilst thou sparest us, let thy patience
provoke us to confess and acknowledge our sins, and let thy corrections also
become profitable unto us; that by means hereof we may without faining so
convert unto thee, that the whole course of our life may testify that our
hearts are indeed changed. Moreover, grant we may so draw on one another; so as
with one consent we may yield obedience to thy blessed word, and that every one
of us in particular may study to set forth thy glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

THE THIRTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE THIRD UPON THE third Chapter.
The exposition of the two former verses is still contsnued.
YEsterstay we began to show in what sense the Prophet says, that the Arc of
the Lords covenant should be no more mentioned, after the Israelites return
into their own country; and that they shall be there multiplied and
increased; namely, because that dissension which was once between them before
their captivity, should now utterly cease. For we know that the Israelites had
their manner of serving God apart by themselves, in regard they had forsaken
the pure and sound doctrine of the Law. The Prophet meant then to show, that
all of them should become the true servants of God, and that there should be
such unity of faith amongst them, that the Jews and Israelites should no more
serve God after diverse fashions. And that is the cause why he adds, it shall
no more come into their heart: that is to say, It shall no more be thought on.
Neither shall it be remembered: that is, there shall remain no more signs of
differences and discord, as in times past. Neither shall they visit it: that
is, those who heretofore desired to offer sacrifice to God, shall no more come
to Jerusalem by stealth. In a word, the case shall be quite and clean altered
from that it was before: for in that time Jerusalem shall be called the throne
of the Lord. But it seems the Prophet contradicts himself, where he says,
Jerusalem shall be the throne of the Lord; and yet no mention shall be made of
the Arc of the Covenant: or contradiction. Before the Israelites were led
captives, they bragged as having the true and sincere worship of God amongst
them, and that in great p^^^pe and outward ostentation; so as Jerusalem (in
comparison thereof) was in a manner nothing, as touching the outward
appearance. Now the Prophet says, there shall be no more this kind of
difference, neither shall the contention between the Jews and the Israelites
continue any longer. Why so? Because both of them should (without
contradiction) hold Jerusalem to be the Sanctuary of the Lord: as if he should
say, All without exception shall serve God purely; which in times past was
far otherwise. Which he yet better confirms by the words following.

All nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord: or, because of
the name of the Lord. Thus then all nations shall be gathered together unto
Jerusalem, for the love they bear to the name of the Lord. We see there is no
ambiguity in these words; for the Prophet plainly testifies, that the service
which God had ordained in his Law, should be in such estimation, that all
nations should be ready to embrace whatsoever should be taught them by the
Jews. And yet by all nations, it may be he meant the ten Tribes, who also in
many other places are called many nations. If any will extend the words
further, I gainsay him not: and (as yesterday I noted) the Jews are of
opinion, that the time of the Messiah is here described; in regard that which
Jeremiah here promises, was never fulfilled. For it is certain, that such a
concourse of all nations unto Jerusalem, after the Jews were returned home,
was never seen, but the Jews only returned. Wherefore hence they conclude,
that mention is here made of Christ his kingdom: which I also consent unto.
But in regard this return and restitutio^ of the people was (as it were) a
pledge and entrance unto the kingdom of Christ: Note.
therefore with must always begin to count from thence, as often as the Prophets
speak of the new Church. I grant indeed we are not to seek the universal
restoration of the whole world, any where else than in Christ's coming: but
the restoration of the Church began, when God first reached forth his hand to
the Jews, in the reedifying of the Temple, until the coming of Christ. As
touching all nations, we understand ten tribes; or both the kingdoms; or
generally, all the the matter is not great. The Prophets meaning is plain
enough; namely, that the Church shall grow greater than it was before, after
God shall have brought back his people from their captivity: as also, that he
will cause true religion to flourish, and that without any brawles or
contentions at all.

And yet that which follows confirms their opinion, who expound this place of
both kingdoms: they (says he) shall walk no more after the stubbornness of
their wicked heart: for this is not wont to be affirmed of such as are merely
profane, who have always been strangers from the doctrine of the Law. In
regard this then, appertains by a special right, to the Jews, and
Israelites; therefore it seems this exposition will suit best, to take all
nations here, for the ten tribes, or for the whole nation.

Verse. 18.
It follows in the next words, and according to the same sense: In those days,
the house of Judah shall come, with the house of Israel. Hereby it is easy to
judge, that the Prophet has rather spoken of Abraham's posterity, than of
strange nations: for this verse is added by way of exposition. Say that one
should have asked, what is meant by these words, Verse. 17.
All nations shall come? In this verse he answers, All nations shall come,
because the house of Israel shall be reunited with the house of Judah: that is
to say, there shall be no more any seed of dissensions sown between these two
houses; in regard they shall embrace each other with a brotherly affection, and
shall acknowledge, that they have in such wise issued from one and the same
fountain, that henceforth they ought to dwell together as one people. In a
word, this 18. verse is the exposition of that, which the Prophet spoke in the
former.

We are also to note that which is further added, They shall come together from
the land of the North, into the land which I gave their fathers to inherit. The
Jews at this time were not led captive. For the Prophet himself spoke unto
the^, being present in Jerusalem, and whiles they were quietly settled in their
country, as in their own nest: neither was it almost possible to persuade
them of that which afterward, to their great cost, they should have woeful
experience of; namely, that soon after, they should suffer the same exile
which they then saw their brethren the Israelites felt, and tasted of. But the
Prophet speaks to them, even as if they had been already banished their
country, and as if they had even now taken up their abode in the land of the
North, as well as the Israelites.

They (says he) shall come together from the land of the North. They might
have replied, from the land of the North, why? we are yet in possession of our
own land; neither is it possible any should dispossess us thereof; for God
cannot for his promise sake cast us out from his Temple; Psalm. 132.14.
he has chosen that to be his perpetual rest in the midst of us. Neither
need we doubt, but such and the like murmurings were heard among them. But the
Prophet beats back their replies, and vain confidence; and affirms, that the
only hope of their salvation depends now upon the expectation which they ought
to have of their restitution from the Lord, after they had been for a time
banished their own country. Wherein the Prophet commends unto them the fruit
which should redound unto them by their captivity, No affliction so sharp, in
which God gives not some hope of an happy issue. to the afflicted, in time
c^nu^nient,
that with the greater patience they might be able to bear the chastisements
which should be inflicted upon them. For an hundred desperate thoughts might
have invaded them, had not this hope been set before them; namely, that this
prison should contain them but for a time limited and prefixed; in regard God
meant yet once again to gather them home, together with their brethren the
Israelites. Now it follows.

And I said, Hew shall I give thee children, and how shall I give the a
desirable land, the heritage lusted after the armies of the Heathen? And I
said, Thou shall cry unto me, my father, and shall not estrange thy self from
me.
IT is not my meaning to recite the opinions of every one here: it shall
suffice to show the Prophets meaning. This I am constrained to do I confess,
when I am to touch the opinion of such as likes me not; for if there be any
appearance, the reader may easily be deceived: but whilst the truth is
manifest enough of it self; what need I spend time in refuting other men's
judgments. In a word then, this is the Prophets meaning. God here asks how
it is possible for Abraham's posterity to multiply again, A question and an
answer thereto.
after they have been in a manner utterly abolished? even thus; when (says he)
in calling me Father, thou shall no more estrange thy self from me. This
interrogation tends to none other end, but to gaul the Jews, as if they had
bin utterly lost, and as if no hope at all had been left. And to say the truth,
considering their obstinate malice, by which they had provoked God to wrath,
they could not be otherwise persuaded, but they should all perish. God
therefore speaks here as a man amazed: as if he should say, you indeed for
good cause, are hopeless, your salvation is at an end: but in regard I have
determined to restore you into your first estate, I will devise a way to
multiply your race again. But by what means? Truly he lays no greater a
burden upon them. Then to call him Father; not with mouth only, but with a
true and hearty affection. We see now what the Prophet meant to say: for in
bringing in God admiring (as it were) it is to humble the Israelites, as if the
thing had been hard to bring about. In the mean while he encourages them
notwithstanding, in that he shows their salvation is ready at hand, if so be
they shall call upon God, in the uprightness of their hearts, and acknowledge
him their father: provided also that they persevere therein, without ever
turning away from him. To be short, his meaning is, that the Israelites are but
as dead men, and that they are never to expect a better estate, unless they be
(as it were) raised again from the dead. And yet this he promises them upon
condition (as we have said) that they call upon him, not from the teeth
outward, or by starts; for that zeal soon vanishes away. Thou shall not then
(says he) turn away from me: that is, you shall always be subject to my
yoke: so will I make it manifest, that you have not called me Father, in vain.
It follows.

Verse. 20. Truly as a woman deals ill, and disloyally with her or husband.
companion: that is to say, when she carries her self perfidiously toward
her husband, in departing away from him, so have ye behaved your selves
disloyally toward me, O house of Israel, says the Lord.
HE confirms that which he said in the beginning of the former verse. For
there he showed, that it should be a very hard matter for the Jews to recover
that which they had lost, and to be created again, as if they had been a new
people: he adds the reason, to wit, because they resembled an adulterous woman,
as he spoke before, in verse. 13. And yet would he not leave them utterly
hopesse: he only insists upon these two points: first, that they acknowledge
To wit, those of Judah.
For (as has been often said) he principally respects the Jews, who yet were
so hardened in their vices, that they imagined their brethrens example,
belonged not at all unto them; albeit thereby God meant to bring their hard
hearts to repentance. This is the reason then why he so sharply reprooues the
Israelites; See verse. 11.
having before said, that the Jews were worse than they.

Verse. 21. A voice is heard upon the high places, the tears of the prayers of
the children of Israel; because they have perverted their way, and have
forgotten the Lord their God.
HEre we may more evidently perceive that which I touched erewhile; namely,
that the Israelites are set as a spectacle for the Jews; to the end these
perverse creatures whom God had so long spared, might know they should by no
means escape scot-free, unless they returned betimes to the Lord their God.
For the Prophet here shows how the Israelites lamented, and wept, in regard
they had severed themselves from their God, and had violated their faith which
once they plighted to him. But what of all this? Even that the Jews who
pleased themselves in their delights, might be awakened; and that they should
as verily keep their turn also in weeping and mourning; unless they betimes
prevented Gods just judgments. It is true that the tears and lamentations of
the Israelites were not yet such, that by them the signs of true repentance
might be discerned: neither is it the Prophets meaning here, highly to extol
their piety; he only meant to note, that they were thus sharply chastised,
because they had forsaken God.

There was a voice then heard in the high places (says he) that is, it was
manifest enough, that the Israelites were cruelly afflicted by the enemies. Now
then, they cry and weep; now they think themselves the only miserable people
in the world. But whence come these lamentations?

They had (says he) perverted their way: which is as much as if he had said,
what a prodigious thing is it to see the Jews thus sottish, as not to be a
whit touched with repentance, by the punishments which are inflicted upon their
brethren? For the afflictions which befell the the Israelites, astonished the
whole world; because that kingdom and country which had long flourished, was
now dispeopled; and in stead of them, wild beasts possessed the land, until
some were sent from persia, and others out of the Western parts, to inhabit
there. How was it possible then, that a country so rich and populous, should
lie wast? Even because God had so foretold it by Moses: You have (says he)
rejected my Sabbaths; Leuit. 26.34.35
therefore shall your land rest, and shall no more be disquieted by you. This
was a very horrible spectacle of Gods judgment; and the nations a far off
might well think with themselves, Surely this people has grievously offended
God, seeing he has so severely scourged them. Now the Jews which saw such a
wast made in this land before their eyes, and their brethren thus dispersed
here and there, must they not be more than senseless, when they took none of
these things to heart? We see then the Prophets meaning. A voice (says he)
was heard upon the high places: as if the Israelites had cried and wept upon
the tops of the mountains.

The tears (says he) of prayers: yet he means not those prayers which were
the testimonies of true faith and repentance. He only understands those
lamentations which testified their sorrow under their afflictions. The Prophet
meant not then to show here what confession the Israelites made; but rather to
note out the cause why they were brought thus pitifully to bewail their
calamities and miseries: namely, because they had perverted their ways, and
had forgotten the Lord their God. It follows.

Verse. 22: Return ye rebellious children, I will heal your transgressions:
behold, or, we will come.
we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

23. Truly the sides of the little hills, the multitude of mountains deceive:
certainly the salvation of Israel is in Jehovah our God.


NOw the Prophet exhorts the Israelites to repentance, that by their example he
might provoke the Jews to do the like. I grant the poor captives might
indeed gather some fruit from this doctrine: but in regard Jeremiah was after a
peculiar manner sent to the Jews, questionless he chiefly bent his endeauours
that way; as we said before. God here shows then, that he is ready to be
reconciled with the Israelites, Verse. 22.
albeit they have grievously offended: and afterward, he brings in the
Israelites themselves with their answer; Behold we come unto thee, etc. or,
we will come: For there is greater likelihood that the Prophet speaks here of
that conversion of the ten Tribes, which should afterward be effected. Here
is a kind of dialogue then, A dialogue between God and the Israelites.
between God, and the Israelites. God of his mere grace calls them to
repentance, saying, Return ye rebellious children. In the next place he
promises to play the part of a good physician, in healing all their diseases.
I (says he) will heal your transgressions: that is, I will blot out all your
sins, and will absolve you from all your offenses. See here what office
Behold we will come unto thee. Now in this place the Prophet taxes the
obstinacy of the Jews, when he says, the Israelites shall not harden their
necks, after God has once graciously called them home to himself, but will
rather show themselves flexible and ready to yield obedience to his voice. I
grant this was not accomplished in respect of the general, after they had
leave to return; only some few of them were thus affected; who preferred Gods
honor, before their own private commodities. I say there were very few, even
of these: neither is it any great marvel. For it is not without cause God said
before, that albeit there came but one out of a City, See verse. 14.
or but two out of a Tribe, yet for all that he would readily receive them;
although others in the mean while should remain hardened in their obstinate
courses. How ever it be, God here signifies, that the Israelites shall not be
so headstrong, but they shall yield to his admonitions, after he has given
them good hope of pardon, and of their redemption; which he the rather does,
that he might make the obstinacy of the Jews to become so much the more odious
and detestable.

Others think the Prophet here reprocheth the Israelites, in regard they
always pretended as if they sought the Lord. Thus they think then: You shall
say indeed, Behold we come unto thee, thou art our God: as if he condemned
their hypocrisy, because they always made fair shows in seeking God. But me
thinks they are far wide from the Prophets meaning. I make no doubt then, but
Jeremiah here sets that before the eyes of the Jews, as in a glass, which
should greatly affect them, so as they should be no more addicted to their
former vices and wickednesses. See Psalm. 27.8.
Behold (says he) God is ready pressed to receive your brethren to mercy; albeit
they be in a manner utterly forlorn and past recovery: and they again for
their parts shall no sooner hear and understand this voice of God in calling
and inuiting them thus graciously unto him, but they without let shall joyfully
return and be converted unto God. In the mean while what will you do? In the
next place he ads, in the same sense, Verse. 23.
Certainly deceit comes from the hills, and from the multitude of the
mountains. The Prophet does here in more words set forth the testimony of
their repentance: as if they should have said, The hills have deceived us, and
the multitude of mountains have beguiled us; that is, we have rather waited
for greater defense from a multitude of gods, than by giving our selves to rest
wholly upon one God. This deceit is it that has overthrown us: away therefore
with all such lying vanities. Henceforth we will content our selves to have the
Lord only for our God. In a word, by these words the Israelites gives us to
understand, and they also therein plainly confess, that they were undone by
these most bewitching errors, when they forged to themselves a multiplicity of
Gods, and rested not wholly upon the only true God.

Yet they further add, because in Jehovah our God, is salvation. Here they
oppose one God, against all fained gods, as if they had said: The cause of all
our miseries proceeded hence; namely, we neither rested nor contented our
selves with one God only, but ran hither and thither, after multitudes of
gods. We see then that these two things can by no means stand together, To
serve one God, and in the mean while to seek out diversities of Gods; and in
them to forge vain hopes, as those do, whom one God suffices not. It
follows.

Verse. 24. And shame, or reproach, has devoured our fathers labors from our
youth; their sheep, their cattle, their sons, and their daughters.
HE here confirms the same thing more at large, to wit, how God showed by
evident signs, that the people had much offended; because he consumed their
labors: that is to say; whatsoever they had gotten and gathered together by
their labor. For he ioynes sheep, and the rest of their cattle together: and
then their sons and their daughters. Now he attributes not this consumption
unto God; but it is a much more emphaticall manner of speech, when he faith,
shame has consumed our fathers labors from our youth. Shame taken for sin.
For by this word shame, he understands the wickednesses whereof they ought to
have been ashamed. The meaning then is, that the cause of all their evils which
they suffered, was not to be attributed to any thing else whatsoever; because
it was wholly to be imputed to their owns iniquities. Our shame then, that is
to say, our insupportable sins, have consumed our fathers labors.

Verse. 25. We have been dejected in our shame, and our ignominy has
overwhelmed us, because we have carried our selves wickedly against the Lord
our God, we and our fathers from our youth, even to this day; and we have not
harkened to the voice of the Lord our God.
BEcause the Israelites repeat no new thing here, but only continue on their
former speech, my purpose is briefly to pass over this whole verse, lest I
should fill this volume with needless repetitions. They say then, that they
were dejected in their miseries. Why so? Because they had behaved themselves
wickedly against the Lord their God. Here we see how that which they confessed
before, is now expounded; namely, that their fathers labors had been consumed
by their shame; that is to say, by their iniquities. Now they charge upon
themselves, the evils which might have been imputed to their fathers; because
they knew well enough they were the heirs of their fathers iniquities. We have
been dejected (say they) in our shame. So that here in one word they confess,
they are thus afflicted for just cause; neither can they accuse God of cruelty,
as if he had chastised them over severely. Why so? Because they are humbled in
their shame, and are covered over with their own ignominy: as if they should
say, the cause of all our miseries ought to be attributed to our sins:
neither ought the same to be sought elsewhere. For (say they) we have dealt
wickedly, we and our father (...) even from our youth. By which words they
signify, that they have provoked God to wrath, not only for one day, but that
they persisted in this their rebellion, and from their childhood ceased not to
nourish in them the iniquities of their fathers, adding sin unto sin. They
said before, Verse. 24.
that their fathers labors were consumed from their youth; by which words they
signified, that the misery had continued long. For God had not chastised them
for one day only, but had redoubled the same corrections, and yet without any
fruit.

Now they add further, Even as we have wickedly behaved our selves against the
Lord our God, from our youth; so also has he even from our youth admonished us
to return unto him; neither did he endeavor any thing more, than to effect
the same: for he called us. Seeing then we have been thus obstinate against
him, God has accordingly prosecuted us in his wrath, and that most justly.

After they say, to this day. By which words they confirm that which I said
before: to wit, they were so obstinate, that they never desisted from their
ungodly courses. And therewithal he notes out the cause of all this
mischief; namely, because they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord their
God. For had they erred, and God had not spoken unto them; their fault might
have been either some way excused, or lessened. But seeing God sent his
Prophets unto them daily, one after another, who ceased not to call them to
repentance; and yet they hearkened not at all; there was not so much as the
appearance of an excuse to be made in their behalf, who had thus hardened
their hearts in following their evil ways. Thus then we see how he amplifies
their fault yet further, by this circumstance, that they heard not the voice of
the Lord: as if he should say, God was not wanting to them on his part, to
withdraw them from perdition; but so far were they hardened in their
impieties, that they despised this mercy which God offered them. Just it is
with God then, not only to this day to punish these their impieties, but also
their ingratitude, and that which is worst, their malicious obstinacy.

The Ppayer.
Almighty God, seeing we carry about us such a corrupt nature, that all thy
graces and benefits cannot cause us to cease from provoking thee by our wicked
behavior, as if of set purpose we meant to proclaim open war against thee;
give us grace to make such good use of the examples thou set before us, to
call us to repentance; that thereby thou may cure in us this peruersity of
our nature, and that we may in due season turn unto thee: that by means
hereof we may in such sort give over our selves unto thy service, that thy name
may receive glory by us. Grant also that we may endeavor to bring those
likewise home with us into the way of salvation, which may seem to be utterly
lost; that so thy mercy may be extended unto all, and that the salvation
purchased by thine only Son Jesus Christ, may by this means have its effect
and power over all the kingdoms and nations of the earth. Amen.

THE FOVRTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIRST UPON THE fourth Chapter.
Verse. 1. Israel, if thou return, says the Lord, return unto me, or, repose
thy self in me: and if thou take away thine abominations from before my face,
and that thou wander no more: others, and thou shall not depart from thy place.
NO doubt but the Prophet here requires of the people a sound and sincere
conversion, in regard they seemed often to acknowledge their sins, Hos. 7.16.
Psalm. 78.34.35.36.37. and 57.
and to show great testimonies of their repentance; and yet for all that, dealt
deceitfully with God. Thus then, because they had often counterfeited both with
God and his Prophets: Jeremiah would now have them to return unto God in good
earnest, and without faining. This is the sum and scope of the Prophets
doctrine: but there is some difficulty in the words. For some read this place
thus, Israel if thou return to me, says the Lord: so they join these words,
to me, with the former member, and then read, thou shall have rest, apart; and
so they will have one and the same sentence twice repeated: for by and by it
follows, If thou take away thine abominations from before my face, thou shall
not depart from thy place: that is to say, I will not cast thee out, as I have
threatened thee. Others take the verb which is here twice repeated in the
Hebrew, in one and the same signification; Israel if thou convert, convert to
me. It is certain, that the Prophet exhorts the Israelites to return unto God
in sincerity, and not in hypocrisy, as they were wont to do. Now I have told
you what others think, but as I take it, the reading will agree better thus,
Israel, if thou convert, repose thy self in me, And then after, and if thou
take away thine abominations. I take this And, to signify as much as, To wit.
That is to wit then, if thou take away thine abominations from before my face,
and if thou trottest no more hither and thither. For where others expound it
(as I told you before) Israel, if thou return, thou shall have rest: it seems
to me unapt; yea, I utterly mislike this exposition: but if any will read,
Israel, if thou return, stay thy self in me, I leave it to his choice. Or
thus; Israel, if thou convert, convert unto me. For there is no great
difference; in regard the Prophet reprooues the Israelites for their hypocrisy
and dissimulation which they had formerly used, showing signs ever and anon as
if they had been ready to have obeyed God, and to frame themselves to his
service; and yet by and by after, manifested to all by the effects, that they
meant no such matter. In regard then they had so often proved themselves liars,
and full of deceit; therefore it is that the Prophet in the person of God
requires them to return unto God without faining. If we read, Israel,
return to me, the reason of it will be, because they always labored to make
long circuits, lest they should come directly unto God. For it is ordinary with
hypocrites, to make goodly shows of conversion: but in the mean while to get
themselves as far off from God as they can. This is the Prophets meaning
then, if we follow this reading: Israel, I wish thee to be wiser, than to
think thou shall gain ought by this deceitful course, when hereafter thou
shall feign a conversion. Return to me then, that is to say, know that thou
have to do with God, who will not be mocked nor deceived, no more than he
mockes or deceiues others. Return to me then, with thine whole heart, let
there now be no faining in thy conversion. But if we think it better to
expound the Hebrew word in the second place, in a diverse signification from the
former, there will be no great difference neither in that reading, as touching
the sense: Israel if thou return, rest thy self in me: that is to say, for
the time to come, renounce all thine idols, and all thy wicked and perverse
lusts. And thus the Prophet in brief shows, that there is no other means of
true conversion, but for Israel to repose himself quietly in God only; and
not to suffer himself to be transported hither and thither, as a vagabond
after his vain lusts, as often as he had done before.

And thus that which follows agrees very well, namely, if thou take away thine
abominations out of my sight: for (as I have said) this particle And, may be
taken by way of exposition thus, To wit, if thou take away, etc. For this is
the vice which Jeremiah meant principally to condemn; namely, that the
Israelites made outward shows of piety and religion, but were notwithstanding
ever wavering, and could not from the heart give over themselves unto God, but
always hung in suspense which way to take: neither is it without cause that
Jeremiah reprooues this vice in them; and therefore also do I willingly
receive this exposition, Israel, if thou return, stay thy self in me: that
is, abide firmly and constantly in me. But how may this be done? namely, if
thou take thine abominations out of my sight, and ceasest to trace up and down
like a vagabond, according to thy former lightness and inconstancy, See chap.
3.9. Doct.
which is but too well known already. How ever it be, the place is very
remarkable against all hypocrites, who though they dare not openly reject all
admonitions of the Prophets and holy men of God, yet under pretext of some
fair shows of repentance, they seek out all the starting holes they can
invent, to estrange themselves from God. No doubt but with their lips they will
pretend to seek God; but in the mean while they find euasions, that they may
not come near him: which is the reason why I said, that this is a very
excellent place, teaching us, that God contents not himself with nifles, which
consist in the inventions of hypocrites, but requires the uprightness and
sincerity of the heart, and utterly detests all dissimulation. For which cause
he expressly adds, If thou take away thine abominations from before mine eyes:
for hypocrites always love to be seen of men, and seek to be approved of
them; resting in that opinion which they conceive of them. But God in the mean
while calls them to himself: and we are also to note, that he can neither be
mocked nor deceived; because it is he who searches the heart and raynes.

Verse. 2. And thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness, and all nations shall be blessed in him, and shall glory in
him.
HEre the Prophet prosecutes the same matter: for he refels all these goodly
shows by which they thought God would be pacified. For whilst they had the
name of God in their mouths, they thought that sufficient Call we not upon the
For the Prophet takes one particular for the general; namely, swearing by Gods
name, for his whole worship. Because the Jews then pretended the name of God,
thinking they had so thoroughly purged themselves, that none could charge them
with any fault; therefore the Prophet says, thou shall swear the Lord lives
in truth: that is, you hold your selves safe and secure; in regard you imagine
that a bare show, and an outward appearance of godliness will serve the turn,
to procure your absolution from all your sins: and that God will be well
enough appeased, as often as you boast your selves to be the seed of Abraham, and
(in a word) as often as you swear the Lord lives. But in the mean while
perceive you not how sacrilegious you are in abusing the sacred name of God, in
this false manner. Swear then (says he) in truth. Now we see how the Prophets
words depend one upon another. In the former verse he affirmed that the people
lied unto God, Coherence.
in regard they never kept touch with him, but brake their promise. For they
always wandered from him. Now he adds, that the Israelites shall gain nothing
by calling upon God thus in this outward appearance, showing by their outward
gestures, that they were his people, and did him very good service: all this
(says he) is nothing, unless you serve God, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness.

No doubt but truth, is here taken for the uprightness and integrity of the
heart: Chap. 5.3.
as we shall see afterward in the fifth chapter. In regard he commands them
then, to swear by the name of God in truth: it is as much as if he had said,
that God is not duly served, according as of right he ought to be, unless the
heart be emptied and purged from all fraud and dissembling. In a word, he
shows, that where the sincerity and integrity of the heart is wanting, there
can no acceptable service be performed unto God. But this truth whereof the
Prophet speaks, is principally known by judgment and justice: namely, when
men converse one with another in uprightness, and when every one renders to
his neighbor that which to him appertains; also where none seeks his own
advantage, with the disadvantage of another. When this equity (I say) and
uprightness here mentioned is thus preserved and kept amongst men, then is
that accomplished which the Prophet in this place requires: because men honor
not God with shows, nor with vain and lying words, but where they show indeed
that they serve God without any vizard of holiness, and they yield him that
reverence which he deserves.

That which follows, and all nations shall be blessed, is also expounded
sundry ways by the expositors: yet I make no question, but the Prophet here
closely taxes the Israelites, in regard Gods name was exposed to many
reproaches, whilst they gave profane nations cause to say, that there was no
power nor strength in the God of Israel: yea and the Israelites themselves
often expostulated the matter with God, as if he had given them just cause so
to do. As how? God promised us that we should be made mirrours of his
blessing: and yet in the mean while we lie open here to all the injuries
profane people can lade us withal. How hangs these things together? Because
the Israelites then murmured thus in respect of their condition, and thus
wronged the Lord; the Prophet answers them, The nations shall be blessed in
God, and shall glory in him. Some refer this to the people of Israel, but
very unaptly. I grant he promised Abraham that all nations should be blessed,
or should bless themselves in his seed: but this blessing had not his
beginning in them, according as the Prophet here notes. For respect must be
had to the cause of this blessing. How could the nations bless themselves in
the seed or offspring of Abraham, unless God, who is the author of this
blessing, had manifested his grace toward the children of Abraham? The Prophet
then speaks very aptly here, when he says, Then shall all nations bless
themselves in God, and shall glory in him: that is to say, your selves are the
cause why Gods curse presses you thus, and that you are a reproach in the
sight of all the heathen: as also, why the name of God is blasphemed among the
nations. For your own impiety constraines God to handle you more severely than
otherwise he would: for according to his nature he is inclined to show
himself favorable and gracious unto you. What is the cause then, why all
nations bless not the Lord, and that they glory not in him? that is to say,
What hurt professors do themselves and others by their bad conversation.
that pure religion spreads not it self throughout the whole world, and that
the Gentiles join not with you in approouing the worship of the only true
God? Even your impiety and malicious obstinacy is it, which hinders Gods glory,
and that the whole world rings not of your happiness and felicity. We now then
have the Prophets meaning: namely, that the Jews did expostulate the matter
with God without cause, in respect of the miseries and calamities which they
endured; because themselves had sought out, and also heaped upon their own
heads all these evils, and had therewithal given the profane nations matter
and occasion thus wickedly to pollute and blaspheme the sacred name of God. Now
it follows.

Verse. 3. For the Lord says thus to to the man of Judah, that is, to the
Jews, and to Jerusalem, plow up your fallow ground, and sow not among
thorns.
THe Prophet still prosecutes the same doctrine: for he reprehends the
hypocrisy of the Israelites, because they would needs satisfy God withoutward
ceremonies only, albeit their hearts were full fraught with fraud, malice, and
all other impieties. Therefore he says, God wills the Jews to plow up their
fallow ground, and no more to sow among thorns: which is a very apt
similitude. For the Scripture is wont to compare us to a field, when it calls us
the Lords heritage. And therefore are we indeed chosen to be Gods peculiar
people, that he might reap some fruit of us; even as the husband man looks to
reap commodity of his fields and possessions. True it is that God reapes no
benefit by us: that which he requires of us is this, that our whole life may be
referred to his glory. How ever it be, yet God would not have us idle, nor
unfruitful, but that we should yield him some commodity. In the mean while
what do the hypocrites? They sow indeed: that is, they seem to have some
desire; nay more than that, they love to have it known, that they are
replenished with a wonderful deal of zeal, when God calls or exhorts them
to repentance. They keep a great blustering then, but they mar and corrupt
all by their mixtures: even as if one should sow his seed among thorns. Now
it is certain, that seed thus sown among thorns never comes to good, unless
the ground be first well husbanded and tilled. God then derides such a fond
diligence whereabouts hypocrites busy themselves so much, when he tells them
they do but labor in vain: because it is all one as if an husband man should
go cast his feed against the wind. For when the ground is once pestered with
briars and thorns, albeit the seed sown there should come up; yet would it
never bear any fruit. This is the reason why God would have the Israelites to
plow up their fallow ground: as if he should say, you resemble a field full of
thorns and briars, and therefore you have need to be plowed up, not after an
ordinary manner. For where a field is ouer-growne with these brambles, what
would it avail a man, if he should sow never so much grain there? neither
indeed would the plough be sufficient to till such a piece of ground to any
purpose; but of necessity some cost must first be bestowed upon the same by
some other means; namely, the thorns must be stubbed up. The Prophet
signifies then, that the people were grown hardened in their iniquities, so as
they were not only full of many vices, as if a piece of ground had lien some
two or three years fallow; but there were inward and more privy sins which
lurked in them, which the plough could not well get out, unless pains were
taken before in stubbing them up by the roots; even as when thorns, briars,
and brambles, have (for many years together) taken root in a field. We see now
then, how the Prophet not only meant to show that there harbored in this
people of Israel some impieties; as the contempt of God, and other enormities:
but they were grown obstinate therein; because for a long time they had taken
deep rooting in their sins, so as there was not only need of a plough, but
of other instruments and tools, to stubbe up these thorns, which had taken so
deep rooting in them. As before then he showed, See verse. 1.
that they lost their labor, unless with a sincere and pure affection of
heart they turned unto God, resting themselves in him alone: so he here
commands them to examine and sift their lives in good earnest, and not to sow
their seed at adventure, like the hypocrites, who make a slight confession of
their sins. He bids them then, carefully to search into their secret and
hidden sins, as if they were to root up thorns and briars out of a field,
which had long lien fallow and untilled. now it follows.

Verse. 4. Be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your
hearts, ye men of Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my wrath come
forth like fire, and it burn and none be able to quench it, because of the
wickedness of your works.
THe Prophet here more plainly expresses that which before he delivered under
a metaphor or borrowed speech. For he willed them to pluck up those vices which
had taken deep rooting: as men are wont to purge fields that have long lien
fallow, of thorns and brambles. But now without any figure, he tells them
plainly what they ought to do: though yet in this latter part of the sentence,
there wants not a figurative manner of speech also. He calls them back then to
circumcision, Circumcision a sign of renouation.
which was unto them as a sign of their renouation: as if he should say, you
know well enough what you ought to do, were it not you are grown so
unteachable, that it is impossible to make you understand any thing. For (says
he) why was circumcision ordained? meant not God by this sign to teach you,
that if a man bend himself to be truly religious, he must begin at the
meditation hereof; namely, that he abstain from all the sinful affections of
the flesh: What Circumcision imports.
that he renounce himself, and be dead (as it were) both to himself and to
the world: for thus much circumcision imports. The Prophet therefore shows,
that the Israelites were altogether inexcusable, in regard they failed neither
through error, nor ignorance; but carried themselves wickedly and fraudulently
toward God; because circumcision which was (as it were) their entrance into
Gods service, gave sufficient notice, that they yielded to God neither his due,
nor true service, unless they renounced themselves. We see now what the
Prophet meant to say, when he wills them to be circumcised to the Lord, etc. Be
circumcised (says he) to the Lord. Why so? Because circumcision was the thing
they then most gloried in; to wit, only before men. For albeit with full mouth
they bragged, and prided themselves much in this, that they were Gods peculiar
people, yet was this nothing else but mere vanity and ambition in them. The
Prophet therefore wills them to dispatch out of their hearts all these
triflings, and to be circumcised to the Lord; that is, not to stand musing how
to obtain the favor and praise of men; but rather wisely to consider how they
had to do with God. What God aimed at in commanding Circumcision in the
foreskin.
For which cause he adds, Take away the foreskin of your hearts: as if he
should say, when God commanded Abraham's breed to be circumcised, was it in
regard he delighted to have this little skin to be offered him as a sacrifice?
No, he aimed at a far other end; namely, the circumcision of the heart. In a
word, the Prophet teaches that here, which Paul has more clearly expounded
in Romans 2.29. to wit, that the letter is nothing before God; but he requires
the spirit. For by these words Paul means, that the outward sign is nothing,
unless the inward truth thereof be added thereunto: for the circumcision of
the letter with Saint Paul, signifies as much as the outward ceremony: as
amongst us we may call it the literal Baptism, Literal Baptism what.
when neither faith nor repentance goes with it. But the spirit, or spiritual
circumcision, is, when a man denies himself, and is renewed: in a word, that
true and unfeigned conversion of the heart unto God, Spiritual Circumcision
what.
whereof the Prophet here speaks. And Moses also touches the same, Deuteronomy.
10.16. for there he shows how the Jews much deceived themselves, if they
thought to satisfy God with the bare circumcision of the flesh: therefore
says he, circumcise the foreskin of your hearts. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
I grant in another place he shows, that this is Gods peculiar work: but
howsoever God circumciseth the heart, yet it is not in vain that men are
exhorted to circumcise themselves spiritually: which also we may now say of
Baptism. For when Saint Paul exhorts the faithful to the fear of God, Romans
6.4.
and to holiness of life, he brings in Baptism therewithal: and yet it is
certain that men attribute not that to themselves, which God signifies unto us
by the sign of Baptism. But his meaning is, God commands us that which we are
unable to do, that we might seek to him for ability to do it.
we should ask of God the grace of his holy spirit, that the outward sign
become not unprofitable unto us, by wanting the inward truth thereof. Thus then,
when the Prophet commands the Israelites to take away the foreskin of their
hearts; it is all one as if he had said unto them, I see you are but too
liberal in preferring ceremonies, and the outward service; but what auailes
all this, unless the integrity of the heart go before?

Now he speaks to the Jews, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in regard
they thought themselves more excellent than the Israelites, upon whom God had
inflicted so heavy chastisements. Thus then he shows that the Tribe of Judah;
yea even the inhabitants of Jerusalem, were no better than others; and that
they were no more privileged than their brethren; but they must be accountable
to God, as well as they, unless they returned in time, yea and that without
faining too.

After he adds, lest my wrath break forth like fire, etc. Here the Prophet
freely and plainly denounces, that the Jews must not differ their
repentance, till God declare himself their judge, Repentance must not be
differred, for fear of after-claps.
in executing his vengeance upon them; for then it will be too late. To be
short, he admonishes them to prevent Gods judgments betimes; for if Gods
wrath begin once to burn, it will utterly consume and destroy them, like a
fire. It will be no time then, to quench this fire. But on the contrary, if
they now repent, he sets before them some hope of pardon, in regard the wrath
of God was not as yet kindled.

In the nex place he adds, because of the wickedness of your actions: by which
words the Prophet gauls them yet further to the quick, and shows they shall
gain nothing by their cauils: for if God be once set upon his judgment seat,
and shall but begin to execute his judgments; there will then be no more place
for any of their vain replies or excuses: to wit, as if they deserved not to
be so severely dealt withal; and that the nature of their sins were not so
heinous. God (says he) will cause you to feel by woeful experience, how
odious your sins are before him: when he shall once stretch out his hand
against you, he will not then stand to answer your bablings. It follows.

Verse. 5. Declare it, or, publish it in Judah, and cause it to be known in
Jerusalem; and say, Sound the trumpet in the land, call, assemble and say,
Assemble your selves, and let us enter into the fortified Cities.

6 Lift up the standard, or, the banner in Sion; assemble you, or flee. Others
translate, be valiant: but others take it in a contrary sense, as if it were
said, that they should flee, or assemble together for fear: stay not, or, you
shall not stay, because I will cause evil to come from the North, and a great
ruin, or breaking.


THe Prophet here handles his nation somewhat severely, because he knew they
were rebellious, and grown so obstinate in their sins, that it was (in a
manner) impossible by fair means to bring them into the right way. He
therefore inueyes thus earnestly against them, as men past cure, and as against
them, in whom he knew his doctrine would become wholly unprofitable. Now albeit
he sounds the alarm, as the Prophets were wont to do, to strike the greater
terror into them; yet he seems to do it after a taunting manner, when he
bids them publish it in Iudeah, etc. as if he should say, when your necessity
shall pinch you a little nearer, then shall you learn by experience, that God
is offended with you. It may be, now you will set light by my admonitions:
neither will God then draw you to him by violence, because you seek euasions
and hiding places: you shall cry then at the sound of the trumpet, Behold the
enemies are come, and as many as will, be at our doors: Therefore let every one
of us retire into Jerusalem, enter into the City, and save our selves in Sion;
that is to say, though we cannot be safe in the City, yet at the least we
shall be safe within the fortress of Sion. And yet notwithstanding (says he)
God will cause this plague to come unto you out of the North: so as whatsoever
you imagine will be for your safety and profit, it shall utterly vanish away to
nothing. But it is especially to be noted, that the Prophet proclaims open
war against them as Gods herald: and albeit he insults over their obstinacy;
yet he tells them there shall be such a general terror, as they must be
forced to save themselves by flight.

Sing (says he) with a loud voice, in Judah, and publish it, or make it known
in Jerusalem. The Hebrew word signifies word for word, publish, or, cause to
hear. But he speaks not simply here as Joel does, when he calls, to have the
trumpet sounded, Joel 2, 1.15. for he exhorts the people there to repentance.
But Jeremiah (as I have said) frumps the Jews, in regard of their contumacy
and obstinacy: as if he should say, I see well enough what you will do, when
you shall be pressed with the stroke of Gods vengeance; truly you mean not
then to repent, but you will cause the trumpet to be sounded throughout the
land, that all may retire to Sion: as if thence you were able to beat back
your enemies, and save your lives. God then commands them not to sound the
trumpet, but rather shows what they will do. Some there are who quite and
clean from the purpose translate, Accomplish: but the most received opinion
is, Assemble. And yet me thinks the expositors have not sufficiently weighed
the etymology of this word: for in Hebrew it signifies as much as we say in
French, Amassez vous.
Gather you. Gather you then, and assemble you, and we will come into the
strong Cities. I see your meaning is to seek some sufficient place of refuge,
to secure you in respect of your enemies: be it so says God.

Verse. 6.
Lift up the standard in Sion, and flee thither for succor: but in the mean
while, I will bring a plague upon you from the North. For the meaning of this
word, North, see the 15. verse of this chapter.
The word which follows in the Hebrew, may be expounded two ways, stay not in
a place; that is, flee quickly; as they commonly do that are overtaken with
fear: or rather, you shall not stand; that is to say, albeit you think to
secure your selves very safely in this mountain of Sion, yet shall you not be
able to stand there: but the first exposition seems to suit best.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, for as much as we cease not daily to estrange our selves from
thee by our sins, and notwithstanding the same, thou ceasest not graoiously
to exhort us to repentance, promising to be favorable and merciful unto us;
grant we may not remain obstinately in them; neither let us show our selves
unthankful in respect of thy so great kindness toward us; but give us grace
so to convert and turn unto thee, that our lives may testify our repentance
to be unfeigned: also that we may so securely rest in thee, that the wicked
lusts of our flesh may not carry us hither and thither; but grant we may rather
continue settled and established in a right purpose of heart; whereby we may
endeavor so to obey thee in the whole course of our life, that at the length
we may receive the fruit of the same our obedience, in thy kingdom of glory,
and that through the merits of Jesus Christ thine only Son our Savior. Amen.

THE FIFTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE SECOND UPON THE fourth Chapter.
Verse. 7. The Lion is come forth of his fort, or den, and the destroyer of
nations is departed, he is gone out of his place, to make the land desolate:
thy Cities shall be so destroyed, that there shall remain none inhabitant
therein.
THe Prophet in more words here shows what this threatening means, which we
began to touch yesterday. For in verse. 6. God said he would cause a plague to
come from the North. The King of Babell called a Lion, and why.
Now here he shows what kind of plague it should be: and compares the King
of Babylon to a Lion: and afterward, without using any figure, he calls him
The destroyer of nations. By this similitude of a Lion, he gives the Israelites
to understand, that they shall be too weak to resist: and in adding, he shall
be a destroyer of nations, he signifies, they shall perish as well as the
rest. For if Nabuchadnezzar had sufficient power to destroy many nations, what
should let the Jews from passing that way, or how could they escape the same
calamity which others had tasted of before them? Therefore he says, the
destroyer shall come. But in all these words he uses to show the certainty of
his prophecy: them, they contemned his judgments, imagining they should never
be called to an account, or chastised for any of all their offenses. That the
Prophet then, might the better awaken them out of their drowsinesse, he sets
the thing (as it were) before their eyes, even as if Nabuchadnezzar had been
now ready with a mighty army, to sack and destroy the whole land and country
of Iudeah. Now he says, the Lion is gone out of his den: but the word he
uses, properly signifies, a thick twisting or intangling, where there are a
multitude of trees interlaced one within another; or where a place is
ouergrowne with briars and brambles. Now this similitude agrees very well; for
the Jews never dreamed that the King of Babell would come up from a place so
far remote from them, in regard the passages were very uneven to lead or
conduct an army through. And yet the Prophet says, the Lion shall come forth
of his thicket or burrow; and that nothing shall be able to hinder his passage,
nor entrance into the open field. In the end he concludes, that the Cities shall
be rased, so as no inhabitant shall remain there. Now it follows.

Verse. 8. Therefore gird you with sackcloth, mourn and howl; for the fury of
the Lords wrath is not turned back from us.
IT is not likely that the Prophet does here exhort his countrymen to
repentance: for there follows a more evident doctrine touching this point
hereafter. See verse. 14.
For the present, he only warnes them, that a great lamentation is approaching
them; in regard he saw the hypocrites so far plunged in their delights, that
it was impossible once to terrify them. Therefore he tells them they are much
deceived, if they think to be in any safety whilst God is their enemy.
Clothe you with sackcloth (says he) lament and howl. The reason follows,
because the wrath of the Lord is not yet turned away from us. For we know how
hypocrites are wont to weaken Gods power, as if by their obstinacy they were
able either to turn back his judgment, or else to hold his hands (as you
would say) from executing his will. Because hypocrites then show themselves
thus malepert against God, the Prophet expressly says, that Gods wrath is not
turned back. By which words he gives them to understand, that they shall be
always, and every way miserable, until they be reconciled unto God. We now
conceive the Prophets meaning. For he co^firmes that which he said before,
namely, that the Lion was come forth, and the destroyer was already in arms.
Se verse. 7.
I say, he now confirms those words, Such as with whom God is angry, are
exposed to all the miries that may be.
that he might bereave them of all hope, unless God showed them mercy. But he
tells them God is angry: therefore it must needs follow, that they lay open to
all the miseries that might be.

Verse. 9. And in that day says the Lord, it shall come to pass that the Kings
heart shall fail, and the heart of the Princes; and the Priests shall be
astonished, and the Prophets shall wonder.
IN regard the regal dignity as yet remained among the Jews, albeit their
power was much diminished: they trusting in their King, thought themselves in
regard thereof, in great safety: and this was the reason why they trembled at
no threatening. For this name of a Kingdom, though not altogether in its
perfection, yet in such a mean estate as it then was, served them as an anuill,
to beat back all the Prophets blows. Moreover, we know how pride always
possesses the hearts of courtiers. For as they highly magnify the greatness
of their Kings, so insult they, in regard of their wisdom and courage.
Because this fond conceit of their King the^, together with the great craks of
the chief courtiers, deceived the Jews: The Prophet says, In that day both
the heart of the King, and the heart of his great men, should fail. Neither is
it to be doubted, but by this word heart, he means the understanding: the word
being often so taken in many places: Heart taken for the understanding.
God (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.4.) has not hitherto given thee an heart: and the
Latins also call him Cordatus.
wise and discreet, who is of a quick understanding, and of a ripe wit. Thus
then, the Prophet shows, that whereas the people fondly esteemed their King as
a fortress of invincible defense; yet all would prove in the end but mere
froth and vanity. For then (says he) the King shall be deprived of all sense
and understanding: the Counselors also, who commonly showed themselves men of
great spirits, should then prove as witless as poor bruit beasts. Trust you
not therefore, if you be wise, in such deceitful helps. In a word, the
Prophet meant to reject that perverse confidence wherewith the Jews were
besotted, No privileges that people have, will serve to secure them, when God
has a purpose to punish them.
in reposing their safety upon the wisdom and discretion, as well of the
King, as of their governors, thinking thereby to be secured from all
inconveniences. As much he affirms, not only of them, but of the Priests and
Prophets also; because this order of Priesthood carried in it a great splendour
and outward pomp. For the Tribe of Leui assumed not this honor unto it self;
but God himself had given the government of his people to the Priests. For
which cause all were generally persuaded, Mal. 2.7.
that the Priests could not be destitute of counsel and understanding.

As touching the Prophets; no doubt but Jeremiah affoords this name to those
impostures, who falsely pretended the name of God: which manner of speech is
very usual with the Prophets. He speaks not then, of the true and faithful
servants of God, who endeavored to discharge their duty; but of those who then
bragged only of the title and place of Prophets.

He says, they shall be all astonished. In a word, he bereaues them of that
false persuasion wherewith they hardened their hearts, to become fearlesse in
respect of Gods judgment.

Obseru.
This place then is well worthy our observation: for it shows, that Gods grace
is tied neither to particular estates, nor to honorable titles. As touching
the title of Prophet, certainly it was always much esteemed. Moreover, the
office of the Priest must needs be very honourarable, in regard it was founded
upon the express commandment of God. And yet the Prophet shows that there
was no understanding, neither in the Priests, nor in the Prophets, because they
were become utterly senseless and besotted. Touching the person of the King,
we know and his counselors also; to wit,

Verse. 10. And I said, Ah, ah, Lord God! surely thou have deceived this people
of Jerusalem, in saying, you shall have peace, and the sword pierces to the
soul: that is, notwithstanding the sword, etc. for here the copulative, is
put for the aduersatiue.
Some expound this place, as if the Prophet here propounded the peoples words.
For it is the manner even of the most wicked, to charge God foolishly, when his
hand presses them; and to braule and contend with him. They think then that
the Prophet speaks not here in his own person, but in the person of the whole
people: as if they should say, Lord! what means this? surely thou have
deceived us. Others take it somewhat more strictly; namely, that the Prophet
here makes his complaint to God, in regard he suffered the false Prophets to
abuse the people by their flatteries, so as they had in a manner bewitched
their minds and understandings: but there is another sense, which I more
willingly approve of: for as I think, the Prophet tauntingly and ouerthwartly
touches the false and pernicious flatteries wherewith the false Prophets had
(in a manner) brought the poor Jews unto utter ruin; in making them believe
they should obtain mercy of God, and always preached to them pleasing things.
Neither are we to doubt, but God rendered unto the Jews their just teward,
when he permitted them to be thus deceived by these deceivers. For we know the
world has always been subject to such a sickness; Worldlings delight to be
soothed up in their sins.
namely, a desire it has to be delighted with sweet words, and vain
flatteries. As in Mich. 2.11. where God by his Prophet thus reprocheth the
Jews: You seek our Prophets (says he) that may make you large promises of
plentiful haruests, and vintages. By which you may perceive how well they
liked to be spared, and by no means to have their sins examined: also, that
they not only hated the true pastors, and those which sharply reproved their
vices; but utterly detested them. God then for this cause was as willing that
there should be many hirelings, which should assume unto themselves the name
and title of Prophets. And thus it came to pass, that the Jews always
dreamed of a peaceable estate: which (as I have said) is a thing very common
with hypocrites. Now the Prophet here by a uery tart and gauling manner of
speech, reprooues such deceits. Ah, ah, Lord! (says he) surely thou have
deceived this people. For the Prophet speaks not here, as in the person of
the people; neither complains he because God gave this liberty and license to
the false Prophets; but in taunting wise he insults as well over these
deceivers, as over the whole nation. Now in that he directs his speech to God,
it is in regard, none else would give him audience. He speaks to God then, as
if he should say, Behold, Lord, those who affect flatteries, and never had
ears to hearke^ to the holy admonitions of thy faithful servants; are well
worthy to be thus served. Seeing then they would at no hand endure any
correction; let them now learn that they have been deceived by others, rather
than by thee. We now perceive then, that the Prophet scorns such a dullness,
as had caused the Jews to become insensible so long a time together. And thus
the natural sense is, I said; that is, I turned me to God. I said then, Lord
God; surely thou have deceived this people. For this word surely, is put here
by way of derision; that is, it now appears they were deceived indeed. But by
whom? I grant they would gladly lay the blame thereof upon thee; but they all
well deserved that the false Prophets should thus beguile them, for being too
credulous.

You shall have peace. These words never came out of Gods mouth. For Jeremiah
thundered daily, and continually threatened their destruction. He was (as it
were) an Herald sent from heaven, to affright and terrify the whole world; but
none gave him audience: the Jews in the mean while applauded the false
Prophets, who flattered, and entertained them with sweet words, and fair
promises. We see then, that God never spoke of this, but the Jews on the
contrary, not only willingly suffered, but also much rejoiced to hear of
these goodly promises, which the false Prophets to gratify them withal, made
unto them. Jeremiah then attributes that to God, by way of derision, which he
knew well enough could agree to none but to those deceivers.

In the next place he adds, and the sword pierces to the soul, that is,
notwithstanding we are now wounded with mortal and deadly blows. Now here
the Prophet sets these dangerous and wicked flatteries before the eyes of the
Jews, which caused them to lift up their crests: showing, that in the end they
shall assuredly feel how falsely they pretended the name of God.

Verse. 11. At that time they shall say to this people, that is, of this people,
and of Jerusalem, the dry wind; others translate, a vehement wind, to the high
places of the desert, word for word it is, in the desert, toward the way of
the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse:

12 A wind more full than those, shall come unto me; and now also I will
pronounce judgments with them.


Jeremiah prosecutes his prophecy still, when he says, a turbulent wind shall
quickly come, which shall not only fan and cleanse, but shall also scatter
and overthrow all. He shows then how great and horrible the calamity shall be,
which he mentioned before: he compares it to a dry and sharp wind. The Hebrew
word has diverse significations; but doubtless he speaks here of such a
wind as comes rushing with great violence, and disturbs all the air;
especially when there is neither clouds, nor any trees to hinder the course
thereof: and that is the cause why he speaks of the high places, and deserts.
It is as much then as if he had said, God will execute such an horrible
judgment, and it shall come with such violence, as if a whirlewind passed
through high places, or through a dry land, or some desert.

He says, by the way of the daughter of my people: as if he should say, the
wind shall have such a passage as shall directly ceaze upon Iudeah. Now this is
a phrase of speech well enough known to them that have been but merely read in
the Prophets, when he puts the daughter of the people, Daughter of my people,
taken for the people themselves.
for the people themselus. This wind then, shall pass directly toward Iudeah.
Afterward he adds, neither to fan nor to cleanse: for it is the manner of
husbandmen to fan their corn in the air, so as you shall see the chafe
fly abroad, and be purged out by the wind. But the Prophet affirms, that this
wind shall neither fan nor cleanse. Why so? Because (says he) it shall be too
boisterous. In a word, his meaning is, that God shall be so displeased with
the Jews, that he will not chastise them with such gentleness and moderation
as in times past. For God had already corrected the Jews often, but he
hitherto carried himself in such wise, as he always performed (as it were)
the part of a good physician; God is desirous as a good Physician, to cure the
vices of people by sparing them, but when this lenity is abused, he will fall
to extremities.
in regard his meaning was, to procure the saluing and curing of the peoples
vices. But in as much as none of his corrections had done them any good,
therefore the Prophet now affirms, that God will come in wrath and
indignation, which shall not serve as before, to cleanse and purge them, by
sending away their of-scourings into the wind; but wholly to consume and
destroy whatsoever appertained to the people.

And therefore he adds (for these two verses depend one upon another) a wind
more full (says he) or more perfect than those, shall come. Others translate,
shall come from those places. But it is to be taken rather as we have turned
it; namely, that this wind shall be more terrible than other winds, which were
wont to winnow the corn, in separating it from the chafe, or to purge the
earth. The wind then shall be much more violent: and it (says he) shall come
to me. I doubt not but God himself speaks this. Others think the Prophet
here represents the whole body of the people; and expound it, that a wind
shall come rushing in upon them: but this exposition is unapt; and the text it
self confutes it. For that which follows next in the Prophet would not agree:
now will I pronounce judgments with them. It is God then, who in the person of
a judge, pronounces that a wind shall come up at his command, to scatter and
overthrow the whole land; but not to purge or cleanse it. And thus he shows
how the Caldeans shall not come up by their own proper moving, but shall be
ready to accomplish and put that in execution, which God himself shall enjoin
them: as if he should say, See Isa. 45.7. and Amos 3.6.
I my self am the author of all the evils which shall happen to the Jews. It
shall come to me then, that is, it shall be ready to obey my commandment.

Lastly, by way of exposition he adds, Then will I speak judgments with them.
To speak judgments, Chap. 52.9. See chap. 1.16.
is as much to say, as to perform the office of a judge, or to call to
judgment, or to summon and cite one to make his answer in the place of
justice: as it is also said, that Kings speak judgments, when they cause men
to yield an account. In a word, Gods meaning here is, that hitherto he has
forborne the Jews but too long: but in regard he sees the patience he has
used, is not only fruitless, but that they are become so much the more
stubborn and rebellious: he testifies he will now play the part of a judge
with them, to punish their ungodly courses. Now it follows.

Verse. 13. Behold, he shall come up as a cloud, and his chariot shall be as a
whirlwind: his horses are more swift than the Eagle: woe unto us for we are
destroyed.
HEre the Prophet in the shutting up of his prophecy, expresses the
greatness of Gods vengeance. Now he uses two similitudes to terrify and
awaken the Jews. Two similitudes
He says, the chariots of God shall come up as clouds, and as a whirlwind;
and then, that his horses shall be swifter than the Eagles. Touching the
clouds, and whirlwind, and likewise the Eagles (for there is one and the same
reason in the three similitudes) no doubt but the Prophet meant to signify,
that Gods vengeance should come speedily: and yet there is some difference. We
see how in less than the twinkling of an eye, the clouds are gathered
together, Now this falls out when some whirlwind arises and troubles the
air. Thus then, when he compares the chariots of God to clouds, and to a
whirlwind, it is as much as if he had said, that the beginning of the
calamity shall come suddenly, in regard God shall arise ere they be aware,
whilst it seems he has a long time slept.

swifter than Eagles; his meaning is, that God will not make much ado, neither
shall it be difficult for him to bring all to naught in a moment; or at the
least, in a very short space to destroy the whole country of Iudeah, after he
has once begun: for we know how swiftly and nimbly the Egle flies: and yet he
says, Gods horses shall be more swift and nimble than all the Eagles in the
world. Now we see the Prophets meaning. For the Jews did nothing else but
scorn the Prophets threatenings; and amongst other things, this was very rife
among them, These Prophets are so hot, that they will not give us an hours
respit. Well, yet at least let us be merry whilst we may, and never fill our
selves with melancholy muses: for we hope many years will pass over our heads
ere the evil come upon us. And are there not such profane ones even amongst us
at this day, who think they may toy with God, as with a little child? For
albeit they will not openly scorn the threatenings of the Lord, yet they
sholder off the time, and think they have gained much, if they can get the
judgment delayed for a season. This is the reason then, why the Prophet says,
the chariots of God shall now ascend and come up, even as the clouds, suddenly
meet. Moreover also, even as a whirlwind arises whilst the air is swifter
than the Eagles: namely, because they shall march on, without any stop or stay
at all.

Now in the end, the Prophet cries out, Woe unto us, for wear undone. He here
cuts off his speech; showing that the false Prophets, as well as the common
people, erred and went astray out of the right way to their own perdition,
whilst they continued snorting thus in their evil ways, persuading
themselves that God would not correct their carelessness. He cries out then,
that albeit all were besotted and grown past feeling, yet their ruin was
certain. Now it follows.

Verse. 14. Wash thine heart O Jerusalem from thy filthiness, lest thou perish.
How long shall thy vain thoughts remain in the midst of thine heart, Others
translate, thy dolorous thoughts: others, the thoughts of thy lusts: others, of
thine iniquity.
HEre indeed the Prophet begins in express terms, See verse. 8. of this
chapter.
to exhort the people to repentance. And when he says, let Jerusalem wash her
heart, to take away the wickedness which is therein, that she may be saved: he
shows, the Jews have none other remedy left them, but to make their peace
with God; which cannot be done, without amendment of life. He said before, that
they must certainly perish, See verse. 13.
seeing God was angry with them: now he confirms that speech, Purge thine
heart from all thine iniquity, that thou may be saved; as if he should have
said, The Jews are at wars with God: they cannot therefore escape, whilst
he is up in arms to destroy them, nor whilst he shows himself a severe
Judge, in chastising them for their iniquities: and therewithal also he shows
what course must be taken to come to true repentance: namely, The way to come
to true repentance.
if she wash her heart from her wickedness. For hypocrites take great pains
to appease God with outward ceremonies, and with bodily exercise: but the
Prophet shows that God regards none of these things, unless they turn unto
him in good earnest, and without faining. He signifies then, The beginning of
repentance has its seat in the heart.
that the beginning of repentance has his seat in the affection of the heart.
Now we have the Prophets meaning.

And yet it is ill argued of them which hence would infer, that repentance is
the cause of our salvation, because God bids Jerusalem to wash her heart from
her wickedness, that she may be saved. Repentance no cause of salvation.
The Papists I grant strengthen themselves with such places, to establish their
free will, and to show that our sins are abolished, and we redeemed from the
punishment of them, by our satisfactions. But this is but a brauado, without
any substance: for the Prophet disputes not here about the cause of our
salvation; but (as I have said) he only shows that men are grown too
senseless and careless, when they look to be in rest, Let him never dream
of rest to himself, that is at variance with God.
whilst they have war with God, he being armed to take vengeance on their
iniquities. The question here then is not, whether the sinner may redeem
himself out of Gods hands by repentance: The Prophet meant only to say, we
can look for no safety nor tranquillity unless God be appeased with us: and
therewithal also testifies, that God cannot show himself gracious, unless
we repent; yea and that in good earnest, and from the pure affection of the
heart.

Afterward he adds, how long shall thy wicked thought remain in the mids of
thee? Here he taxes the hypocrisy of the Jews, in saying, that whatsoever
excuses they pretend, yet they are convicted before God, and that all their
euasions should stand them in no stead, in regard God dives into the secretest
imagination of the heart. Now he speaks very pertinently, for he had to deal
with hypocrites, who thought God took pleasure in their ceremonies. Moreover,
by opposing their cauils, they thought to have been absolved, in regard they
could not be condemned before earthly Judges. The Prophet scorns all these
gauds, when he says, How long shall thy vain cogitations remain in thee?
that is to say, albeit the whole world should acquit and justify thee, what
benefit should thou reap by it? for thy vain thoughts remain still in the
midst of thee: that is, in the depth of thine heart. Now God sees and
discernes them, because nothing is hid from his eyes. Think not then, that you
shall gain ought by all your outward shows, neither by any of your vain
excuses, for God searches the hearts: Let not therefore thy wicked thoughts
abide in the midst of thee.

He calls them vain cogitations: The Hebrew word sometimes signifies a
substance, and sometimes virtue or power: also sometimes it signifies grief,
and sometimes vanity, or trouble. As touching this present place, I doubt not
but it signifies, molestation, or vanity. For to expound it concupiscense, as
some do, I see not how the word will bear it. But either of the two
expositions which I have set down, will agree very well: although the latter
agrees yet best of all. How long then shall thy vain thoughts remain in the
midst of thee; to wit, whereby thou deceiuest thy self. For in regard God
held his judgments in suspense, the Jews verily thought they should escape
his hands. Moreover, in regard of their effect; they were thoughts of
molestation, and trouble. For what other thing in the end could betide them,
but to feel and know, that those who thus abuse and deceive themselves, do
nothing else but provoke Gods wrath to wax so much the more hot against the^.
Whereas some expound it, Cogitations of grief, in the active signification, in
regard the Jews had done their neighbors many wrongs and outrages, it agrees
no more than the former, but it also is unapt. I nothing doubt than, but the
Prophet here mentions those false hopes which the Jews conceived in their
heads, which caused them to grow the more obstinate and rebellious against God,
in such sort as they abandoned all fear of punishment.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, since thou vouchsafest to call us, yea and daily to allure us to
repentance, and that therewithal we have also the testimony of our own
consciences to convince us, as having many ways provoked thy just vengeance
against us: suffer us not any longer to remain hardened in our vices, nor yet
that our hearts may grow obstinate through vain deceits: but Lord let us
suffer our selves to be subdued by thy word, and that we may give over our
selves to thee, with such purity and sincerity of heart, that for the whole
course of our lives we may mind nothing more, than to exercise our selves in
the meditation of that newness of life which thou requirest of us: that being
consecrated and set apart unto thee, both in heart and life, we may endeavor to
glorify thine holy name, until we be made partakers of that glory which thou
have purchased unto us by the blood of thine only Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

THE SIXTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE THIRD UPON THE fourth Chapter.
Verse. 15. For a voice declares unto Dan, and publishes calamity, or
punishment: others translate, iniquity from mount Ephraim.
THe Prophet repeats that which he said before; namely, that the Jews are
destinated to perdition by their obstinacy, in regard they had too often, and
sundry ways provoked God to wrath against them: neither would they give place
to his holy admonitions which he sent them by his servants the Prophets, in
offering them grace and forgiveness, upon their true repentance. But
whatsoever we read here in this verse, represents (as it were) to the life,
that calamity which was now at hand, in regard the Prophet sets that before
their eyes in figures, which could not be expressed in bare words. He says,
the voice declares unto Dan: See verse. 6.
now this was the utmost City bordering upon the North. And he said before,
that from this part a plague should come; that is to say, from the North,
because God had chosen the Chaldeans to be the executioners of his vengeance.
For that cause he now says, the voice may be heard from Dan: not that the
army was now ready to give the onset upon the Jews: but Jeremiah speaks
here by the spirit of prophecy, as if he represented the judgment before the
eyes of the Jews, which yet they thought would never have come to pass. For
we told you yesterday, that when God spares the hypocrites for a little space,
they become the more obstinate, and do the more boldly insult over the
Prophets. For this cause Jeremiah seeing he had to deal with blockish persons;
it was necessary for him to adorn his doctrine with such figures as might
evidently show, that the judgment of God was near; which yet little affected
the Jews. He says then, let the voice be heard from Dan, and let trouble, or
punishment, or calamity, be published: for that other reading whereof I
advertised you, is very harsh, in regard the Hebrew word properly signifies
Iniquity: but it is also fitly taken for punishment. Notwithstanding when the
Prophets use this word, they thereby mean, that God sends not affliction and
calamities upon men, without just cause: and therewithal they also show, that
the matter and cause thereof, is in the iniquities and sins of men. Calamity
then, comes from mount Ephraim, which quarter was nearest to the Tribe of
Judah, and to the City of Jerusalem. But this is all one as if Jeremiah had
said, God now thunders from heaven: you shall therefore gain nothing by
stopping your ears: for albeit you are now deaf, yet shall Gods vengeance
forthwith come to light, and that with the greater noise and astonishment. It
follows.

Verse. 16. Make ye mention thereof among the Gentiles, and publish it in
Jerusalem. Behold the or, those that besiege her.
scouts come from a far country, and send their cry upon the Cities of
Judah.
THe interpreters expound the beginning of this sentence diversely. Some
translate, Let the Gentiles come into your mind; thinking the Prophet says
this, because there were many among the Gentiles, which published Gods
vengeance. They take this place then, as if Jeremiah sent the Jews to the
Gentiles, saying, Ye are unworthy that God should send you ordinary teachers,
in regard you have esteemed whatsoever they have told you, but as mere tales
and fables. But because the verb is in the conjugation of Hiphil, it ought
rather to be read, Remember ye. And yet there are others, which expound thus,
Make mention of the Gentiles: that is to say, publish it; that the Chaldeans
are approaching with all diligence to lay the land wast; to ruinate the Cities
of Judah, and to bring the people to nothing. But there is a third exposition,
which (as I take it) agrees better: word for word it is, make ye mention of the
Gentiles: Behold, publish it upon Jerusalem. Why so? Truly the Prophet saw well
enough that he lost but his time, in speaking to so dull, and senseless a
people, and that the same their senselessness had brought them to such an
obstinacy, that they would neither hear, nor understand ought. He turns his
speech toward the Gentiles then, and says, Advertise ye the Gentiles. As if
he should say, it is a long while ago since I admonished this people: besides,
God has schooled them by other Teachers: but what has all this profited,
unless that they are become so much the more unteachable? Seeing the case
stands thus then, Cause (says he) the Gentiles now to know that which
concerns Jerusalem: that is to say, let the Jews hence-forward hear no more
of the calamity and ruin which must befall them; but let the Gentiles and
profane nations take knowledge of those judgments of God which are to light
upon their heads. This exposition is not any way against the scope of the text,
but is easy enough, and agrees very well with the Prophets manner of speaking.
He vouchsafes not then to direct his speech to those over whom God had placed
him; for it had bin to have cast holy things to dogs: but he rather directs his
speech to the Gentiles: as if he should say, The blind and poor ignorant
heathen have more sense and understanding, than the people whom God himself
has chosen. Neither does this hinder, but the Prophet notwithstanding still
continued to exercise his office and function among the Jews, and that for a
long season. For it is a thing usual and ordinary with the Prophets, being
once inflamed with the zeal of Gods glory, to threaten the people with
imminent destruction; and yet they cease not for all that, to go on constantly
in the discharge of their duties, proouing if by any means they might bring
them home into the right way, who seemed in a manner, to have been utterly past
recovery.

Those that besiege thee (says he) shall come from a far country: they
ordinarily turn it, the Keepers. Others thinking that Jeremiah alludes to
Nabuchadnezzars name; as if the guards of Nabuchadnezzar came forth to ruinate
and destroy Jerusalem, and ye Cities of Judah. But as I think, it is better
referred to besiegers: which will be yet better cleared by the verse following.
Neither see I any reason why some should translate Guards: albeit the most (in
a manner) are of this opinion. But I take it for those that besiege. The
besiegers then, shall come (says he) and that from far. This word far, is
expressly added, to assure the people that they should not escape, though God
had patiently expected their repentance so long a time, as before we noted.
For, because God deferred his judgments, they now thought themselves past all
fear of danger: and therefore now he says, that howsoever they saw not the
enemy approach with their eyes, nor heard not the noise of the army in their
ears; yet shall not Gods threatenings be in vain: for out of a far Country
can he cause such to come, as shall be the executioners of his vengeance.

And therefore he adds, They shall send forth their cry upon the Cities of
Judah. This also was added for good cause, that the Jews might thereby know,
that no impediment coming between, could stay the passage of the Chaldeans
from surprising the Cities suddenly, by the voice of their cry. His meaning is
indeed, of the cry which the soldiers make, the better to encourage one
another to the battle: but in regard this often falls out, after they have
gotten the victory, to testify their joy and rejoicing: he pronounces
definitive sentence upon the Jews, even as if the soldiers were now making
their cries of triumph. It follows.

Verse. 17. They shall be about her as the keepers of the field, because she
has provoked me to wrath, says the Lord.
HE here shows, that the Jews shall not be able to retire themselves into
any corner at all, after God shall cause the Caldeans to come forth; in regard
all the ways and passages shall be so shut up, that they shall not be able to
save themselves elsewhere. It is as much then, as if he had said, Such a
judgment will shortly befall you, which you can no way avoid, use all the
means you can. Doubtless it is a woeful thing, when men are driven to flee
all naked (as it were) to shift for their lives any where, and that they be
forced to seek their abode among strangers, to live there in much poverty and
distress. But the Prophet here testifies, that the judgment which should
overtake the Jews, shall be so horrible, that they should neither avoid it,
nor flee from it, no not by suffering and sustaining banishment from their
country, nor by flight: because God will compass them in on every side; as if
he had set watchmen to shut up all passages.

In the next place he adds the reason; Because they have provoked me to wrath.
The Prophet again shows, that the Lord deals not too severely with the
Jews, neither is it by chance that they are afflicted with so many and
grievous evils: but that they received the punishment which they justly
deserved, in regard they had provoked God to be displeased with them. For it
had not been a matter of so great moment, if the Jews had apprehended the
calamity which suddenly should have surprised them, unless therewithal they
had also known that God meant to call them to an account, and to chastise them
for their obstinacy. This is the reason then, why he adds, because she has
provoked me to anger: namely, to the end the Jews might know and understand,
that these chastisements and afflictions came merely from the immediate hand of
God. According to which he now says:

Verse. 18. Thy way, and thy works have brought this upon thee; such is thy
malice; therefore it is bitter, therefore it pierces to the heart: or,
although it be bitter, and although it has pierced thee to the heart.
THe Prophet (as I have already said) confirms his doctrine: to wit, that the
evils which befell the Jews, came not to pass by ill fortune, as they say;
but that it is God himself who calls them to an account; that being touched
with his true fear, they might at length return unto him: or, if they must
needs perish in regard of the outward man, yet at the least they might obtain
favor after their humiliation, and so be saved in respect of their souls and
inward man. See 1. Cor. 5.5.
He says then, their actions have procured them these things: as if he
should say, you are not to lay the fault upon God, nor yet upon your bad
fortune, as you usually have done, and as all profane persons commonly do.
Against such as cry out of their bad fortune.
For they are your works that have procured you these things. Thus God will
perform the office of a just Judge: therefore whatsoever befalles you, impute
it to your own iniquities. To which purpose in the next place he adds, such is
thy malice. In a word, he shows that the Jews do in vain impute their evils
either to this or that; for the blame lies wholly in themselves, as having
purchased and obtained this ruin to themselves by their own impiety and
wickedness.

In the second part of the verse where it is said, this pierces to the heart,
the Prophet thereby signifies, that albeit this be very bitter, and touches to
the quick, and to the depth of the heart, yet as all this proceeds from
themselves, so ought they wholly to ascribe it to to themselves, and to none
other. For hypocrites are wont to wail and lament, that they might bring some
imputation upon God, or at the least to blame Fortune. But the Prophet reiects
all these cauils; and shows that howsoever the affliction which the Jews
suffered, was as a bitter morsel unto them: yea, although God pierces, and
enters (as it were) into the very heart and bowels, yet have they
notwithstanding been the authors of all these evils. Now he adds,

Verse. 19. My bowels, my bowels, pain me, round about mine heart: mine heart
is troubled; that is, within me: I cannot hold my peace, because my soul has
heard the sound of the trumpet, or, my soul thou have heard, and the clamor of
the war is heard, or, my soul has heard the clamor of the war.
I Dare not say, that that which some interpreters suppose is certain or not;
namely, that the Prophet is here touched with humane passions, in regard he
saw ruin approach toward those of his nation. It is very true indeed, that as
often as the Prophets denounce the heavy judgments of God, and have showed
themselves to be severe therein, that they have not then cast off all humane
affections or compassion. For often they bewail even those calamities which
themselves threaten: which we shall also perceive more clearly in fit place.
Thus then the Prophets have had a twofold passion: for when they are to be Gods
heralds to proclaim his vengeance; they for it could not be avoided but their
bowels must needs yearne within them, in seeing their brethren who were of
their own flesh, to fall into such inevitable desolations. But in this place
it seems the Prophet laments, not so much in respect of the peoples calamity,
as that he meant to use certain figures, whereby he might rouse up and awaken
the peoples dullness, because he saw they were grown altogether so senseless,
as they were destitute of Gods true fear, neither could they be touched with
any shame or blushing. The people then being become thus perverse, Jeremiah,
and the rest of Gods servants, were constrained to use certain ornaments and
deckings of speech, and not to teach after an ordinary mannner, but with
violence and vehemence, that they might awaken the peoples drowzie consciences.

For this cause it is that he cries now, My belly, my belly pains me. For we
shall see in other places where the Prophet laments on this manner, when he
has to deal with Babylon, Edom, and others that were the Jews enemies. And
why? Sure it is the Prophet was not affected with any particular sorrow, when
he foresaw their destruction; neither when God himself had also showed and
assured him that the like should befall the profane nations, who had with a
deadly hatred persecuted the elect and holy people. But as I have said, in
regard men make small account of any of those threats which he thunders from
heaven; it is more than needful to use such forcible speeches to rouse them
withal. Thus I understand this place then, to wit, that the Prophet mournes
not here for the particular respect he had of the peoples calamity; but being
moved, yea and pricked forward by the spirit of prophecy; he now amplifies
that by way of figure, which he uttered before in plain terms; because he
saw they regarded that but a little, or at least it was insufficient to touch
them to the quick. My bowels (says he). I grant that sorrow might very well
have pierced even into his bowels, in regard he was a member of the same body:
but we are here to examine to what end this speech is thus uttered. It serves
not then, to manifest a particular affection, but rather to discover the
greatness of the punishment: that so the doctrine (as we have said) might
touch their hearts, who scorned the judgments of God.

He adds, troubled, or sounds. For the word he here uses, signifies to sound:
for which cause also, by way of similitude, it is taken to make a tumult. He
speaks then of the trembling or beating of his heart, which is wont to happen
by reason of some sudden fear. But he calls it a sound or tumult: as if he
should say, I am not master of my self, neither can I hold my self within
compass; for God has affrighted me, with an horrible astonishment.

Further he adds, I cannot be silent, because my soul has heard the sound of
the trumpet: or, because thou my soul have heard the sound of the trumpet, or,
the alarm of the battle. For the Hebrew word here used, signifies rather a
battle. He says then, he cannot be silent, because the cry sounds and rings
in his heart. Whence also we gather, that he is not touched with the sense of
humane affection; but rather does that which God had enjoined him. For he was
chosen as an herald of arms, to proclaim open wars as on Gods part, against
the Jews; whereof notwithstanding they made light account, though they heard
the sound of the alarm. Some think this word soul, is here taken for the
spirit of prophecy, in regard the trumpet now sounded not, neither was the
alarm of the battle as yet heard. Their opinion then is, that there is here
an antithesis, in that Jeremiah heard not the sound of the trumpet with his
ears, but only conceived the same in his heart, as being aduertized of Gods
secret judgment. But whether this subtilty will agree with the Prophets words
or no, I know not. Mine opinion therefore is, that Jeremiah meant, without all
peradventure, to let them understand, that he spoke seriously; in regard he
perceived Gods judgment and vengeance as certainly to seize upon them, as if
he had seen it before his eyes. Neither was this of small importance, to give
so much the greater authority to his doctrine: that so the Jews might know he
was not like those stage players, who are skillful enough in representing and
playing their part whilst they are upon the scaffold, or stage, as if he meant
only to act that which God had caused him to see and know; but that he was his
ambassador in such wise, that himself was seized with fear, hearing in his
spirit and heart the noise of the battle, and the sound of the trumpet. It
follows.

Verse. 20. There is affliction called upon affliction; for the whole land is
wasted: my tabernacles are suddenly destroyed, and my curtains in a moment.
HE prosecutes the same argument still; but he amplifies this terror by a new
circumstance; namely, God so heaps evil upon evil, that the Jews shall
wonderfully deceive themselves, if they hope that their calamities will sone be
at an end. When he says, affliction upon affliction, he signifies that the end
of one misery, shall be the beginning of another. Which also is a thing very
tedious and irksome to such poor wretches as are in distress: for they ever
think, Our calamities will not always endure. Why so? They imagine that God
will satisfy himself with inflicting some light punishment, like a storm or
tempest, that suddenly passes over, and vanishes away: and they no sooner
feel a little release, but they think all is hushed; and so by and by return
to their old byas again, playing mock-holy-day with God; as if now they were
quite and clean escaped his hands. This is the cause why the Prophet now says
that their calamities shall still be increased, The reason why God adds
affliction to affliction.
and that for a long time together, so as they are not to look for any end of
them till the Jews be utterly wasted.

But in saying the calamities are called, he gives them to understand, and that
in few words, that God is set upon his tribunal seat, who after he has
inflicted some light Affliction upon affliction is called. But how? Truly
because the whole land is destroyed. And then, my tents are suddenly destroyed:
Lastly, my courtaines in a moment are cast down. The most received opinion is,
that the Prophet here compares the strong and defenced Cities, to tents and
courtaines, yt he might take from the Jews that fond confidence which made
the^ to burst as it were with pride; thinking such Cities should serve them as
bulwarks and fortresses to repulse their enemies. And thus they think the
Prophet meant to deprive them of this vain hope, in calling their strong
cities by ye name of tents or tabernacles. There are others also who imagine,
that he alludes to the city of Anathoth, the place of the prophets birth, or to
the manner of life which me^ led there. And to say the truth, Jeremiah uses
often such phrases of speech as agrees to shepherds, and keepers of cattle:
that is to say, such a style as is somewhat rude and dis-ioynted: it shall not
be greatly amiss then, if we say he speaks here as in the person of a
shepherd, when he mentions these tents. Notwithstanding both may stand very
well; namely, that he speaks like unto shepherds, and keepers of beasts; and
yet in the mean while he meant to show, that the Jews did but dally, if they
thought to escape under color of those strong Cities which stood upon their
borders, as if thereby their enemies could be beaten back. But we may also
expound it very well thus: to wit, that not the least corner should escape, in
regard the enemy would enter into the deserts; yea, that he would wast and
break down even the poor cotages, which in all likelihood might well have
been spared, seeing they were remote from neighbors. Now he says, suddenly
and in a moment; that the Jews might promise to themselves no truce: as if it
might be delayed from day to day; or as if they had any respite given them to
make their peace with God. It follows.

Verse. 21. How long shall I see the standard? How long shall I hear the voice,
or the sound of the trumpet?
HEre he shuts up ye speech which we said, See Verse. 19.
he adorned and enriched with figures, that he might the better touch those to
the quick who were slow and dull of hearing. And yet he also confirms that
which he said in the beginning of the former verse: Affliction upon affliction
is called. By another phrase of speech then, he repeats that which he said
before, when he now adds, how long shall I see the standard, etc. as if he
should say, you greatly deceive your selves, if you think the enemy shall
retire himself home into his country, after he has remained a while in the
land, and spoiled some part thereof. For the war shall be of long durance,
and God shall still prolong the afflictions, so as the sound of the trumpet
shall continually ring in your ears, and your eyes shall daily see the banners
displayed, yea every moment. Now we have attained the Prophets meaning. Verse.
20.21.
that this also should be manifested to the Jews: namely, that as they had
walked on in their rebellion and contempt of God, in a continued course: so his
vengeance should not last for a day or two only, but it should press them in
such wise, that it should ever pursue them. And by the way let us note, that
the world at this day is no less dull of hearing, than were the Jews in their
time: it is not enough then, that we cite and summon the wicked and contemners
of God, before his judgment seat: but we ought also to use the like figures,
and phrases of speech which the Prophet here uses, to terrify; yea to force
and constrain them to come to some remorse, albeit they for their parts do
the utmost and that by all the means they can, to benumme their own
consciences, and to make themselves insensible, that they might the more easily
contemn God, and all godliness. Gods servants must press the hypocrites thus
continually, that both they, and the open wicked ones, may be awakened. It
follows.

Verse. 22. For my foolish people have not known me, they are children without
understanding, and have no knowledge. They are wise to do evil: but to do
well they have no knowledge.
THe Prophet again shows, See verse. 18.
that the cause of all their evils, proceeds from themselves; that they might
not foolishly impute the same unto any other. He says then, my people is
foolish. He speaks here in the person of God: for by and by it follows, they
have not known me; which can no way agree unto Jeremiah. God then complains
here, of the folly of his people; whom he calls his, not by way of honor,
but rather to redouble their reproach. For what was more unseemly, than for Gods
people, whom he has chosen as his own peculiar inheritance, to be void of
knowledge and understanding? What else was Gods purpose in choosing and adopting
the children of Abraham, but that they should be as burning lights, to manifest
the doctrine of salvation to all the world? What nation is there (says Moses)
so noble in all the world, to whom the gods come so near, and so familiarly,
as the Lord thy God does? Herein consists thy knowledge and wisdom, as it
follows in Deuteronomy. 4.6.7. Thus God here shows, that it is a thing most
prodigious, which all the world also ought to abhor, when he gives his people
here the title of a foolish people. As if he should say, Is it possible that
this people whom I have chosen to be a guardian of my covenant touching
everlasting salvation, to whom I have vouchsafed the honor to instruct them by
my word; is it possible I say, that this people should be so insensible, as
wilfully to cast themselves into perdition? It is a foolish people then, in
regard they have not known me.

Now here he shows what is the cause of this folly, to wit, they knew not
God. For our whole wisdom consists in the knowledge of God. But thus God lets
them know that their folly is no way excusable. Why so? He made himself so
familiarly known unto the Israelites, that as Moses says, they needed not to
ask, Who shall ascend for us into heaven? or who shall descend for us into the
depth? For they had the word fast by them, even in their mouth, and in their
heart, Deuteronomy. 30.12.13.14. In regard then, that God had in so gracious a manner,
manifested himself unto the Jews, he justly complains, that they knew him
not. We have two points to note here his people knew him not. Whence we have
to gather, that we are then said to be truly wise, when we render to God his
due honor; and are then justly esteemed fools and unwise, whilst we cease to
stay our selves in him. That is fools, and unwise, if we have not known him:
for this is our wisdom also, as I said erewhile. Moreover, here is no place
to bring in any pretext of ignorance; for God has not spoken to us in secret.
To be short, God conuinceth the Jews of ingratitude, and of wilful malice in
telling them they knew not. And we at this day deserve (as I have said) a much
greater condemnation, so as the punishment ought to be doubled, if we know him
not, to whom God has so familiarly revealed himself, and to whom in so
gracious a manner he represents himself.

Lastly he adds, that they are witless, and without any sense or
understanding. The oppositions which are here in the Hebrew text, have greater
weight than in the Greek or Latin. In Greek or Latin, this manner of speech
would have little grace, if one should say, This is a fool, The Hebrews have
their manner of speech proper to themselves.
and not wise. For it seems the latter member does somewhat diminish that
which was said in the first. But the Hebrews have their manners of speaking
proper to themselves: for thus they signify, that this people is so far
destitute of understanding, that there is not so much as a dram of sound
knowledge in them. Those who are fools and witless, will yet have some
sparks of understanding, though never so small: and thence came that proverb,
That fools often tell the truth. But Jeremiah on the contrary, means that the
Jews were not only fools and senseless, but so deprived of all judgment
and discretion, that they resembled even the insensible stones, or bruit
beasts: so as there remained neither wit, nor humane reason in them. We will
now defer the rest till some other time.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, for as much as thou have not for once only lighted up unto us
the lamp and light of thy heavenly doctrine, but daily call us to to that
salvation which thou have set before us: give us grace we neither shut our
eyes, nor stop our ears, nor yet lie snorting in our vices. But as it pleases
thee on thy part carefully to allure us to come unto thee; so grant we also may
hasten to thee with all our might, that from strength to strength we may
continue on our Christian race, approaching every day nearer and nearer to the
mark at which we aim, till at length we attain the possession of that
heavenly kingdom, which thou have purchased for us by the blood of thine only
begotten Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE SEVENTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FOVRTH UPON THE fourth Chapter.
Verse. 23. I beheld the earth, and lo it was desolate and deformed; and the
heavens, and they had no light in them.

24 I beheld the mountains, and lo they trembled, and all the his moved.

25 I beheld, and lo, there was no man; and all the birds of the heaven had
taken their flight.

26 I beheld, and lo, the fruitful region, or Carmel, was a desert, and all
her Cities destroyed, before the face of the Lord, and before the face of his
fierce anger.


THe Prophet here by sundry sorts of figures, amplifies the terror of Gods
vengeance, that he might awaken the Jews; who were become utterly senseless
and careless. For he makes no idle repetitions, when four times together he
says, he beheld. He might as well at once have mentioned, the earth, the
heavens, men, mountains, and fruitful places: but he says, that which way
soever he turned his eyes, as if he had viewed the four quarters of the
world; on every side there appeared horrible and fearful signs of Gods wrath
and displeasure, which threatened the Jews with an utter wast. Neither is it
any marvel that the Prophet uses such vehemence. For we know with what
contempt men are wont to entertain all Gods threatenings, unless they be
indeed soundly awakened. Which manner of teaching ought not to be strange unto
us. For he that is but meanly read in the Prophets, may easily observe, that
they insist much upon this point; to wit, in rouzing the hypocrites and
contemners of God: who as they have a stiff neck that will not bow; so
according to the hardness of their hearts, they will not be moved with any
punishment wherewith they be threatened. But yet this place, among many other,
is very notable: and therefore ought we so much the more diligently to ponder
that here, which the Prophets words import.

First he says, he beheld the earth. He uses the very same words which
Moses uses in the history of the worlds creation. For before the earth was
formed, he says, it was a thing that lay wast, and as a confused chaos,
Jeremiah alludes to the Chaos of the world, before God made a distinction of
things therein.
without any form or shape at all; as having no beauty in the face thereof, to
allure the eyes of the beholders to gaze upon it. It is as much then, as if he
had said, Gods wrath and vengeance has caused that distinct and comely order
so to vanish away; that nothing but an utter confusion remains. And thus he
amplifies the outrage and enormitie of their sins: as if he should say, They
had so far run riot, that thereby they had perverted all the whole frame of
the world, and (as it were) mingled heaven and earth together; so as nothing
but an utter vastation of all things appeared now every where.

Whereas he says, there was no light: he signifies, that the light of the
Sun and Moon was (in a manner) darkened and put out; in regard men were
unworthy to enjoy such a favor as that is from God: as if the Sun and Moon
had been ashamed, to be the witnesses of so many foul iniquities. We have now
the sum of the Prophets meaning as touching the first verse. I looked (says
he) upon the earth, and behold, I perceived nothing but an horrible wrack and
confusion: that is, there was no form nor distinction that might give the
beholders any contentment, because the Jews had ouerturned the creation of the
world (as it were) by their sins. I also beheld the heavens, and there
appeared no light in them: for the Jews by their sins deserved to be
deprived of that blessing which he has put in the Sun, and in the Moon. For
what a singular favor of God is it, that he has ordained so noble and
excellent creatures to do us service? In a word, the Prophet meant to say,
that there appeared signs of Gods wrath, both in the heavens, and in the
earth; thereby to terrify the world, as if he meant to make hauoke of all.
This manner of speech is also usual in the rest of the Prophets, but
especially in Joel 2.2. where there is a notable place to this purpose. And
albeit they are hyperbolicall speeches, yet do they not exceed measure, if we
consider well what a dullness and slothfulness there is in man's nature. For
unless God arm the heavens and earth against us; unless he manifest by some
evident signs, that he is about to withdraw all his favors from us; what do
we else but scorn all his threatenings, as we said erewhile?

Verse. 24.
From the heavens, Jeremiah descends to the mountains, and says, they
trembled, and that all the hills moved, or were shaken. Others translate,
destroyed; but I see no reason of it. For doubtless the Prophet confirms the
same thing still, by new phrases of speech. Now as he testified that the
mountains trembled; so he also adds, that the hills shook. Yea, and the proper
signification of the verb requires, that we so translate it. Now the reason
why he mentions the mountains and hills, is plain and evident: for in these
places there is a greater stability perceived, than in the plains, in regard
the mountain, for the most part, are replenished with quarries, and are
founded upon rocks. So as though all the world should fail and tumble on
heaps, yet it seems the mountains are so well founded, that there is no
appearance at all of any motion. And yet the Prophet says, that even these
trembled, and the little mountains shook.

Verse. 25.
In the third vision he speaks of a solitariness: for he says, he saw no
man; and all the birds of the heavens were flowen away. The worlds chief
ornament.
We know the first and chiefest ornament of this world consists in men, and
other living creatures. For to what end should the earth have such
fruitfulness bestowed upon it, as to bring forth such diversity, and such a
quantity of good things, but in regard of the use of man and beast? Although
then that trees, herbs, and an infinite variety of fruits, do give a
wonderful ornament and beauty to the earth, yet does her chiefest beauty
consist in being replenished with men and beasts.

Under this word birds, the Prophet also includes all the rest of the earthly
creatures, by the figure Synecdoche; under it comprehending one kind for the
whole. He says then, that the earth was emptied of her inhabitants.

The fourth vision contains yet another thing, namely, Verse. 26.
that the fruitful regions were converted into deserts: albeit I think he
speaks properly here of Carmel. For we know that this quarter of the holy
land was thus called, in regard of its fertility. I grant that Carmel of it
self signifies any fruitful or fat soil: but (as I have said) this region
was so called, because it abounded with all sorts of fruits. For there were
goodly pastures; the fields there also yielded great increase; so as this
quarter was every way replenished with all beauties above any of the rest. You
see the reason now why I willingly understand this place of Carmel it self:
yea and I have good warrant for it also: for in the next words it follows,
that all the Cities were destroyed, it is more likely then, that this should be
spoken of Carmel in particular, then generally of all the regions and fruitful
places. For mine own part, I think the Prophet speaks of Carmel, yet so, as
he therein alludes to the signification of the word Carmel. In this verse also
there is a Synecdoch, a part taken for the whole: as if he should say, Carmel,
which excelled in all fruitfulness and abundance, yet became like a wast
wilderness. When Isaiah speaks of the restoration of the Church, he says,
The desert shallbe as Carmel: as if he should say, Isa. 32.15.
Gods blessings shall be so generally and plentifully powered out upon the whole
world, that the deserts shall be no less fruitful than Carmel it self; or
the regions, which for their fatness of soil, excelled all others. But
Jeremiah speaking here of the curse, says, that Carmel shall be as a
wilderness; and that all the Cities shall be laid wast. Why so? Because of the
face of the Lord, and because of the kindling of his ire. Others translate, his
fury: which manner of speech has his weight also. For we said erewhile, that
if God thunder not, as you would say, to strike a terror into men's hearts,
they are all senseless, neither feel they his judgments: so as all the
threatenings in the world will profit them nothing at all. This is the cause why
the Scripture so often speaks of the fury or fierceness of Gods wrath, or of
the kindling of his ire. One of these might have sufficed. Why then puts he
both, to wit, the inflaming of his wrath? Even because (as I have said) our
obstinacy and hard-heartednesse may be won, and broken as with the great
blows of an hammer: otherwise God could not bow our hearts to his fear. This
repetition then, ought to serve as a means to correct that rebellion which is
in all of us naturally. Not as if God were subject to disordered passions, as
we know well enough: but in regard we cannot otherwise perceive how fearful
his vengeance is; this is the cause why it behooves him necessarily to present
himself before our eyes as one angry, and inflamed with wrath and indignation:
for which cause also we see that eternal death is represented out unto us
under the metaphor of fire. The sum of all.
As touching the sum and substance of this text, no doubt but the Jews at
this time enjoyed abundance of all sorts of good things, and were now plunged
in their delights. In a word, they enjoyed but what they would: and yet the
Prophet aduertiseth them he saw that a far off, which these poor pur-blind
Jews could not see: namely, that Gods wrath approached; that it was ready to
seize upon them to consume them, and all their riches and abundance; which
caused them (as it were) to burst with pride, and to bring upon them an utter
vastation; so as from above, and from beneath, there should no more be
perceived any appearance of beauty, but all deformity and confusion: even such
as was, before God had ordained that distinction, by separating light from
darkness; Genesis 1.2.
the firmament from the earth: whilst as yet nothing was to be seen but a
confused lump; in which was comprised the air, the earth, without any order
at all. Now it follows.

Verse. 27. For thus says the Lord, the whole land shall be desolate, and I
will not make an end: but then the copulative and, must be resolved into an
aduersatiue, notwithstanding, I will not make an end, or a consumption.
HEre the Prophet in sum, See verses 23.24.25.26.
explaines that which he meant to say, as touching those four visions which
we have formerly handled. He denounces then, as in the person of God, that
there shall be a marvelous, yea, a most horrible desolation, throughout the
whole land of Iudeah. The land (says he) shall be utterly desolate: or, there
shall be a desolation throughout the land. Some expound that which follows, as
if he somewhat allayed the tartness and sharpness of his speech. And
according to their opinion, there should be a correction here, which should
(as it were) give some relief unto the faithful, who hoped, and waited to
obtain some grace and mercy, that they might not be utterly out of heart. And
to say the truth, if God should only threaten, without adding some exception;
it were able to swallow up with fear and dread, an hundred worlds. That the
faithful then might not in such wise be ouer-whelmed with fear, as not to
have their recourse to Gods mercy; it is often added by way of correction, that
God will not utterly consume the earth. The word which the Prophet here uses
sometime signifies, perfection, but in many other places, it signifies
consumption: for the verb signifies, to perfect, and consume. And there is the
same reason for both: and yet it seems these words should be one contrary to
another. Notwithstanding that which is consumed, may properly be called
perfect, because it always brings to an end. If this exposition seem good,
then we now see why he says, That he will not make a consumption, albeit he
do severely chastise this people: to wit, that he might leave some hope for
the faithful, lest they should be discouraged: which would have fallen out,
had not God promised to be ready to succor them, and to be mindful of his
covenant: unless peradventure we will read it by way of an interrogation,
thereby to repress the pride and ouerweening of the wicked, that they might
the better feel, how none of their vain boastings should go unpunished. As
if he should say, And will ye yet say, that I will not make a full end? Now
howsoever the first exposition contains a doctrine much more ample: yet had I
rather take the Hebrew word here used, for End; as if he meant to show, that
he will not cease to pursue them with his vengeance even to the uttermost. We
also shall meet with the same phrase of speech in the chapter following. Chap.
5.27.
The natural sense then will be this, That God is purposed to wast and consume
all at once. I grant when the Prophets speak of Gods judgments, they speak
thereof diversely. Sometimes they will threaten that all shall go to wrack, so
as there shall be no appearance of salvation. And yet God in the mean while
always reserues some hidden seeds, Isa. 1.7.8.9.10. and 10.22.23.25.
as it is said in the first, and tenth of Isaiah. From which places it is easy
to judge what the Prophets meant to say, by this manner of speech, To make a
consumption. For in these places God threatens, that he will make a
consumption: and yet by and by after he adds, this consumption shall bring
forth some fruit: that is to say, a remnant shall be exempt out of this
consumption. For in other places the Prophets compare the Church to olives,
Isa. 17.6. and 24.13.
or olive trees, when they are beaten or shaken: or to vines, at the time of
vintage. For there will always remain one cluster or other which cannot be
espied, though all seem to be gathered: the like also falls out when the
olive trees are shaken; for it is impossible but some olives will always
remain in the upper part of the bows. And in the same manner God also says,
he will make such a consumption of his Church, as shall resemble the vintage,
or the gathering of olives, which yet are never so clean stripped (as it were)
of their fruit, but there will be some remainders, which shall not be espied.
We have now then (as I take it) attained the Prophets meaning: namely, that
such a ruin of the whole nation approaches, as no mention at all shall
afterward be made of it: there shall be seen neither form, nor beauty of it:
which also in effect fell out, when they were led captive into Babylon. For
then the people (at least in respect of the whole body) were brought (as it
were) to naught. And thus there was no end.

I willingly confess that Gods threatenings cannot be auailable to our
salvation, unless he forthwith sets before us the hope of mercy: that being
vpheld by this hope, we may have our recourse unto him. For whilst we think
God to be so angry against us, that he will not be appeased, we flee from him
as much as we can. And this is the cause why despair makes men fall into a
diabolical frenzy. Thence also it comes to pass that the reprobates not
only murmr and gnash their teeth against God, and storm and take on like
bedlems; but they would willingly also cast him down from his seat. It is
needful then, that hope of pardon be set before us, that so we may be
touched with true repentance. And therefore in regard this promise is
perpetual; come what come will, yea albeit to our thinking heaven and earth
will go together, See Psalm. 46.1.2
so as dangers of death shall seem to press us on every side: yet ought we
always to rest confident in this belief, that there shall always a residue
remain, Isa. 17.6. and 24.13.
according to that which we alleged out of Isaiah, 1. and 10. But in regard
this people was not as yet well prepared, nor fit to receive consolation; the
Prophet now mentions ons not this second point at all, but speaks only of the
punishment. Now he adds:

Verse. 28. Thereupon the earth shall mourn; the heavens shall be darkened on
high: for I have spoken, I have thought, and cannot repent me of it, neither
will I call back my word.
Jeremiah prosecutes his former speech, and always brings in God speaking;
that his words might be the more forcible. Thereupon (says he) the earth
shall mourn. He calls that destruction and deformity, the mourning of the
earth; as having respect to that which he spoke in verse. 23. etc. He speaks
not then, of the inhabitants of the earth. For those which so expound it, do
very much lessen the vehemence of the Prophets words. He rather attributes
terror and sorrow here, to the dumb and insensible elements; which is much
more passionate, than if he had plainly said, The inhabitants of the earth
should mourn and lament. The same may be said also of the heavens. And indeed
this latter member evidently shows that he speaks not of the inhabitants of
the earth, but of the earth it self; which albeit it is utterly without sense
or feeling, yet it seems it has a kind of fear and horror, in respect of
Gods vengeance. And thus the Prophet casts men's hard-heartednesse and
senselessness in their teeth, in that they were no whit moved nor smitten with
any dread, although they saw signs of Gods wrath manifested against them from
heaven. The earth then, shall mourn, and the heavens shall be darkened and
troubled: that is, howsoever men remain insensible, yet shall heaven and earth
feel the horriblenesse of Gods vengeance.

In the next place he adds, For I have said it. Some translate this, as if a
relative were to be supplied, between the two verbes: as if he had said, For I
have said, that which I thought, and I will not repent. But this same abrupt
manner of speech suits well enough. For in the first place God pronounces
sentence, which shall abide immutable and unchangeable. As if he should say, I
have once for all signified by my faithful servants the Prophets, what I meant
to do. For the Prophets (as we know) were Gods heralds, to declare and publish
his judgments. And for as much as men for the most part, set light by their
doctrine; for as the world at this day is grown to that pass, that it proudly
contemnes and scorns all the threatenings that are denounced against it, so fell
it out then. Jeremiah therefore brings in God himself speaking here, as if he
had said, You have despised my messengers, and yet have they told you nothing,
but what my felfe have enjoined them. From me then, has proceeded that
sentence which you for your parts ought to have trembled at. See now in what
sense it is that God says, I have spoken. For he attributes that to himself,
which the Jews thought came from the Prophets: and therefore they saw no
reason why they might not freely set light by whatsoever the Prophets
pronounced against them. It is I then, says God, that has spoken. And thus
there should be an antithesis between God, and the Prophets: as if he should
say, The Jews gain nothing at all by snorting thus in their evils, whilst
they think they have to do with mortal men: whereas God himself has
commanded and enjoined, his servants to denounce the judgment which they
scorn so much. And yet lest they should Imagine, God spoke only to affright
them with words full of wind (for hypocrites are wont to flatter themselves
under this pretext, that God speaks not in good earnest; but only frayes men,
as if he had to deal with little children) he says also, I have thought it.
He said before, he spoke, that is, as having respect to the Prophets; but now
in saying he thought it; he means, that the prophesies shall manifest their
power, wherein God had threatened the Jews with ruin, out of his own secret
counsel. This (says he) is decreed with me.

Afterward he adds, I repent not. In a word he shows, that the Jews are
destinated to destruction, lest they should persuade themselves that God could
be appeased, whilst they went on in their sins: because he was determined
to proceed in judgment against them, and not only signified the same by his
Prophets; but had also concluded thereof in his own breast. The word
repentance is taken here, for mutation or change. For God is not subject to
repenting, in regard all things are well enough known to him: but he speaks
after the manner of men, as I said erewhile. Repentance improperly attributed
to God.
And that which follows, remooues away all ambiguity or doubt: for he says, I
will not turn away from it: that is, I will not call back my sentence. It
follows.

Verse. 29. Every City shall flee for the voice of the horseman, and of the
archer: they shall dig into the thickness; according to others, into the
clouds. The Hebrew word signifies a very thick bush, or thicket: it also
signifies clouds: and as I take it, it may be accepted rather for clouds,
because forthwith it follows, they shall ascend into the rocks: and then,
every City shallbe forsaken, and no inhabitant shall remain therein.
WHen he speaks of the voice, or noise of the horsemen and archers, which shall
cause all to flee; he signifies that the enemy shall come with such boldness and
fury, that the Jews shall not dare to meet them, because they shall all be
scattered here and there before one stroke be stricken: for questionless he
here opposes the voice, to blows. We know with what pride the Jews were
possessed: therefore the Prophet scorns this their cursed confidence,
wherewith they were so bewitched, that they could no way apprehend Gods
judgments. The only noise (says he) of the enemy shall so terrify you, that
all the Cities shall be forsaken of their inhabitants, who shall voluntarily
yield themselves captive to the enemy: neither shall their walls defend them;
nay, the gates themselves shall be set wide open. All the Cities then shall
flee.

That which follows, they shall ascend into the clouds, or into the thickets,
may be expounded of the enemies: namely, they shall be so quick and nimble,
that they shall seem to scale the clouds, and to get up among the rocks: but I
had rather read it all with a breath thus, The Jews shall be so affrighted
and terrified in their flight, that no clouds shall be so high, to which they
will not attain, because the tops of the highest mountains are often so
covered over with groves and thickets, that they are always ouershadowed. This
place then may well be thus expounded; to wit, that they shall flee into groves
and thickets where much wood is. How ever it be, the Prophet no doubt speaks
here of places of great height: and thus this exposition will be the more
firm, if we retain the word clouds. As touching the sum, we see well enough
what his meaning is; namely, that the enemy shall be of such agility, that they
shall outstrip the Eagles by their nimblenesse, in coming to subdue and
overthrow the state of the Jews: or, according to that which others think,
which also is most received, The Jews shall be put to their shifts in such
wise, that they shall not only flee out of their Cities, but shall enter the
tops of the highest mountains, to hide themselves there among the trees and
bushes, as amongst the clouds. Also, they shall ascend up unto the rocks. Why
so? Because they shall not think themselves otherwise in safety, in regard of
the incursions and assaults of the enemy.

Finally he adds, That all the Cities shall be so forsaken, that not so much
as one inhabitant shall remain therein. Thus we see how the Prophet still
aims at the astonishing of the Jews, who had no ears to hear withal; whose
hearts were now hearts of stone: so that they were not only senseless of
their evils, but fell to scorning both God and his messengers, even as they had
made a covenant with death, and hell, as it is said in another place. Isa.
28.15.


Verse. 30. And thou wretched, or wasted, what will thou do? Although thou
clothest thee with scarlet, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of Gold; or
with neck-laces of gold, as some turn it: though thou paintest, or trimmest
thine eyes with colors; yet shall thou trim thy self in vain; thy lovers
shall abhor thee, they shall seek thy soul.
THe Prophet here insults over the Jews, only to tame their proud and high
conceits. For his whole drift is nothing else, but to take down that
ouer-weening of theirs, which made them exalt themselves against God: which he
could not possibly effect, unless he should advance his style somewhat more
than ordinary, by decking and adorning his speech with diversities of figures.
This is then (as it were) a witty and pleasant shutting up of his discourse,
when he cries, And thou wretched, what will thou do? For the Jews were yet
puffed up with the contempt of God, neither were their hearts as yet humbled.
In regard they yet persisted then, in their so undaunted a pride; that makes
the Prophet cry, Thou wretched, what do thou? As if he should say, Thou
flatterest thy self in vain, thou promisest thy self succors from other
parts: because thine own estate is desperate. And then he adds, Although: for
I interpret this verse with one context, or knitting together of the words; and
me thinks those which separate not the Prophets speech in this verse, are in
the right. For to expound it as some do, Thou deckest thee, thou trimmest thee
now, thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, thou paintest thine eyes with
colors, and it is in vain: this exposition I say, is without any grace:
besides, the Prophets scope and drift is by this means corrupted. All these
words then, have a dependence one upon another: there being one principal
verb, to wit, thou paintest thee to no purpose, And therefore the Hebrew
particle (...) ought to be resolved into an aduerbe, Although.

Now as touching those who refer all this to the ceremonies wherewith the
hypocrites think to defend themselves, as with bulwarks, against Gods
judgments, it is both unapt, and altogether from the purpose. I grant that
ceremonies always serve hypocrites as dens, for such thieves to lurk in, as
we shall see hereafter: but as touching this place, Chap. 7.11.
the Prophet respects the ornaments of harlots; because the people (as we have
often noted before) resembled an adulterous woman, Chapters 2. and 3.
who having forsaken her husband, gads up and down, and prostitutes her self
to all comers. For God had couenanted and contracted with the^ an holy
marriage, which they had falsified. And thus such a disloyalty well resembled a
wanton wife, that has broken the faith of wedlock. And because such kind of
light huswiues are wont to trim and paint themselves after an whorish manner;
the better to allure and draw lovers by such baits, unto them: therefore the
Prophet now again tells them, Thou shall get nothing by decking thy self,
albeit thou should clothe thee with scarlet; although thou should glister
all over with gold, even from the crown of the head, to the soles of thy feet;
all this shall benefit thee nothing at all. No, though thou should paint thy
self to the uttermost: this also shall serve thy turn no more than the
former. As touching her lovers, we know who they were: namely, the Egyptians,
and Assyrians. For the Jews, feeling themselves pressed by the Egyptians, were
wont to run for help to the Assyrians: and contrariwise, if the Assyrians
molested them, they went to require aid from the Egyptians. Which action of
theirs the Prophet compares to the cunning devices and shifts of harlots: for
in gadding thus to and fro, from one to another; what did they else but violate
that sacred band of marriage, which was contracted between God and them;
falsifying their faith which they had plighted unto him. Thus then the Prophet
says, Although the Egyptians promise thee mountains, as it falls out with
some lustful lover, that is entised by the beauty and painting of an harlot;
yet notwithstanding they shall deceive thine expectation. For howsoever the
Assyrians seem in outward show to be ready to succor thee, yet these shall
beguile thee also: so as thou shall be as an old forsaken harlot, when thou
art fallen into extreme necessity. The rest I will defer till to morrow.

The Translator.
But seeing there remains but one verse behind, to conclude this Chapter and
Lecture withal; I have rather joined, than separated them the one from the
other.
WE told you yesterday, what the Prophet meant by the garment of scarlet, by
the ornaments of gold, and by the painting: to wit, those alluring baits,
wherewith Princes, and the people also gratify one another, when they conclude
any league one with another. For whatsoever passes between such, for the most
part, it is nothing but mere treachery and deceit. But we further told you,
that the Prophet besides this, alludes also to that spiritual marriage, by
which God joined the people of Israel to himself. For it was a kind of
adultery, thus to affect leagues with strangers; in regard it was a means
whereby they renounced God himself, and contemned his protection. For as the
husbands protection ought to satisfy the wife; so also ought the Israelites to
have contented themselves, with fixing and staying of their eyes upon the Lords
help only. But in regard their vain lusts carried them hither and thither,
it is not for naught the Prophet compares them to adulterous women.

Now he says, their lovers shall abhor them: and not only that, but he
says further, the Egyptians and Assyrians, upon whom they had builded their
vain hopes should become their mortal foes. Thy lovers (says he) shall abhor
thee, and shall seek thy life: that is to say, All that power which thou
expectest, shall be employed, as on thy behalf: they shall turn it to thine
utter ruin. It follows.

Verse. 31. Certainly I have heard the voice of her which trauelleth:
affliction, or anguish of a traveling woman, or of her that trauelleth of her
first child; for so much the Hebrew word properly signifies, the voice of the
daughter of Sion: she sigheth, she shall break, spread, or smite her hands:
woe is me now, for my soul faints because of those which kill, or of the
murderers.
Jeremiah by these words yet further confirms that which we saw before: for he
incists not thus long upon the matter only for teaching sake; but because he
saw those of his nation grew obstinate, and had hearts as hard as the Adamant.
This is the cause why with so many words he inculcates, and with such
diversities of speech repeats, one and the same thing: which he could not have
delivered so well in plain terms, nor in a word or two. For often times the
doctrine will little avail, unless exhortations and threatenings be added
thereunto. You see now to what end, and for what cause he so often, and in so
many words repeates one and the same thing: also why he has expounded that at
large, which we saw before. I have (says he) heard a voice, as of her that
trauelleth. Doubtless this must be taken otherwise than the words sound: for
it is certain that Jeremiah was no quicker of hearing than the rest: unless
we would say, that being mounted upon an high turret, he saw Gods judgment
approaching a far off (whereof the people at that time made but slight
reckoning) that he might represent the same out unto others. He says then,
that he heard, and that no less plainly, than if the thing had been present
before him.

He further amplifies the matter, by a word which signifies anguish: and then
in stead of a woman that has had a child, he puts a woman that travels of her
first borne; where the sorrow is greater. Jeremiah shows then, that this
people which could not be reclaimed from their sins, should shortly fall
into an horrible and extreme misery. But withal he secretly intimates (as
also the holy Ghost speaks in other places) that the ruin which was to come,
should suddenly come: for when they should say, Peace and safety, then should
sudden destruction fall upon their heads, 1. These. 5.3. So likewise the Prophet
in this place shows, that the Jews shall get naught by standing in their
obstinate courses against God; as if therefore the judgment were the further
off from them: for sorrow should suddenly overtake them: as the labor comes
upon a woman that is iocund, who eats and drinks merrily; but yet the
sorrows of her travel will not cease for all that, to take her suddenly in
the neck. Even so our Prophet aduertiseth the Jews, that they should not
think to put back Gods vengeance by their fond confidence and ouer-weening:
because the plague should surprise them, and they should feel their ruin ere
they were aware.

And yet (as I have said) he expresses their calamity under similitudes, and
borrowed speeches. The voice (says he) of the daughter of Sion shall lament,
or bewail her case. Some translate in the second person, Thou shall lament,
and shall spread, or wring in pieces thine hands: but this cannot well agree,
because it by and by follows, her hands, in the third person. He says then,
that the voice of the daughter of Sion shall witness her great dolor and
affliction, because she shall lament. And forthwith adds, the smiting of the
hands: for the expositors translate the words diversely. But in regard the
Hebrew word signifies properly to rend and tear in pieces, or divide; I think
the Prophet meant to express the gestures of a woman that is in labor. For
they are wont thus to smite their hands one against another, and to divide and
intermingle their fingers one within another. Others translate, They spread, in
regard the hands are (as it were) cut or divided, when they are thus lifted or
holden up in the air. As touching the matter it self, the Prophets meanning
is not obscure: for he foreseeth that God will send an horrible judgment, so
as the Jews shall lament after an extraordinary manner, as women are wont to
do that are brought into some desperate extremity,

Lastly, he concludes his speech, saying, Woe is me now my soul faints, etc.
The Prophet meant here to advertise them, that howbeit they were all as blind
as bats at noone day, yet he apparently perceived Gods judgments, whereat they
fleered and laughed; or at least the wicked made but a sport of them. He says,
his soul faints, in regard of those which were slain; and yet none were
killed. But by this phrase of speech he testifies, that he already saw those
things which were secret and unknown (as it were) before his eyes, which made
them to be so little moved at them.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, seeing we are lulled so fast asleep in our sins; grant at
least that we may be attentive in hearkening to the examples of thy wrath,
which thou hasts been pleased to set before our eyes, that at other men's cost,
we may learn to fear thee. Let us also carefully consider what threatenings
thou use to draw us to thy self, because thou can not win us by
ientlenesse. Therewithal also cause us to feel that thou will always be
merciful and favorable to such poor sinners as unfeignedly seek thee, and
convert unto thee with their whole hearts. Give us likewise to be armed against
our sins and infirmities, that we may earnestly strive to dispatch our selves
out of Satan's nets, which at every turning he spreads for us: that giving over
our selves with full liberty to thy service, we may take such delight in an
holy course, that our chief end may be to please thee in the whole tenor of
our life, that so our service and obedience may be acceptable unto thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE EIGHTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIRST UPON THE fifth Chapter.
Verse. 1. Walk you, others translate, enquire, or espy, or seek, by the ways
of Jerusalem; and see I pray you, for the word (...) is put here to exhort: in
the former verse, we thought fit to translate it, Now: Woe is me now: and
know, and enquire through the streets, or in the cross ways where streets
meet, if there you can find a man; if there be any that executes judgment,
that is truly, that seeks the truth; and I will spare, or pardon it.
IN this verse, as also in the rest following, God shows he is not over severe
nor rigorous, albeit he denounces such extreme calamities against his
people. Because their wickedness was become utterly incurable, and therefore
he had no other means but this left. Isa. 65.2. Psalm. 81.13.
For we know what he often testifies in the Scripture, namely, that he is
patient, that he waits to see if sinners will come to repentance. Seeing God
then every where extols his clemency, promising that he will show mercy to ye
most wicked, if they repent: for as much also as he freely preuents sinners,
it should seem strange, that with so great severity he rises up in anger
against his Church. But we see what obstinacy and perverseness there is in
the minds of the wicked: and therefore they fear not to make their complaints
against God, and to call him to an account (as it were) before them: as if he
dealt too rigorously with them. For this cause then, God now shows, that it
was not his fault that the people were not pardoned: for as if he should have
said, though I would, yet they would not. I grant he speaks here after the
manner of men: Mat. 23.37.
but thus (as I have said) he shows how he used all means possible to
reclaim them, before he came to deal thus severely with them: And the words
themselves also do very well express as much. Go (says he) through the
ways of Jerusalem, and behold I beseech you, know, enquire, in all the corners
of the streets. Jeremiah might in one word have said, Find me but one man in
the City, and I will willingly spare it. But God here permits the whole world
(as it were with all possible care and diligence) to take a through view of of
this holy city (for so forsooth she styled her self) Now here, as also in the
verse following, he directs his speech against Jerusalem. He might as well have
named all the rest of the neighbor Cities: but in regard the sanctity of the
whole land seemed then to have its seat and residence in Jerusalem; therefore
God does of purpose turn his speech to this City, who yet retained some show
of holiness, and far excelled all the rest. He says then, enquire, view,
and mark diligently, if there be a man. He here permits mortal men to be
Judges: as if he should say, Come ye all hither. And if the Jews will make me
odious, and if they will complain of too much rigor, as if I had dealt
inhumanely with them: Let all that list, judge, come in, let them ask, let
them make a diligent search: and if after search made, there can not a just,
and upright man be found, what remains, but that this City must perish? For
what is to be done with the desperate, must not my judgments needs light upon
them? We have now the Prophets meaning then: for he purposed here to stop
the mouths of the Jews, and to refell their slanders, that they might no more
murmr against God, or find fault with his judgments, as if he exceeded
measure: showing, that albeit God be inclined to show them favor, yet should
there be no place left for pardon, for his clemency is by this so desperate an
obstinacy excluded, in regard there was not a man in Jerusalem that gave
himself to integrity and uprightness.

Jeremiah says, that a good man could not be found, seeing himself was then
in Jerusalem, who had also Baruch for his companion; and some others also, of
whom we shall hear afterward. There were some true and faithful servants of
God then, and some also who unfeignedly feared the Lord, albeit they were then
thin sown: this seems therefore an excessive manner of speech.

multitude, putting the faithful (as it were) apart by themselves. Which that
it may be made the more evident, Isa. 8.16.
that place of Isaiah is to be noted, seal up the Law, and bind up the
testimony among my Disciples. For God seeing that the sending of his Prophet
among the the people, had been to little purpose, and that his labor was spent
in vain among them that were past cure: bind up (says he) the Law among my
Disciples. We see here how God takes in, to himself, this small number, in
whom there yet remained some seeds of piety, to wit, in the hearts of such, as
in whom religion had been well grounded. So in like manner, Jeremiah respects
not Baruch, nor the rest that were mingled among this wretched multitude: but
he directs his speech (as has been said) to the whole body in general: the
rest were not only already separated in Gods secret counsel; but also by his
open and manifest sentence. He truly pronounces then, that there was not one.
For we ought to bethink us with what kind of people On the the one side he
had the King and his council, See verse. 5. sect. 4.
swollen and puffed up with the promises (which yet they falsely laid claim
unto) whereby they imagined it was impossible the royal seat of David should
ever be overthrown. This is my rest for ever, Psalm. 132.14. As long as the
Sun and Moon endures, they shall testify for me, that thy seed shall never
perish, Psalm. 89.37.38. With these and the like titles they armed themselves:
but as hypocrites falsely pretend Gods promises; so these naughty-packes bragged
that God was on their side. Secondly, Jeremiah (as we shall see afterward) had
many For there were great troops of them, with which for the most part, the
world is always pestered, the whole estate of the Priesthood was corrupted,
and waged battle of set purpose even against God himself. The commons were
little or nothing better, than the former. Jeremiah then encounters here with
the King, and his counselors, with the false Prophets, the wicked Priests, and
with the obstinate and rebellious multitude. And thus he says there was not so
much as one, that was able to appease Gods wrath.

To seek judgment, is as much as to give a man's self to uprightness. For
the word judgment, in the Hebrew, signifies uprightness, equity, or the rule
of well doing. He says then, that none exercised or executed judgment, nor
sought the truth. The word truth, as in the third verse following, is taken for
integrity. As if he should say, All are given to falsehood, fraud, and perverse
craftiness: and therefore he could by no means spare the City. For the
relative it, cannot be otherwise expounded, than of Jerusalem. God then says,
he will be merciful unto it, if there could a man be found among the Kings
council, among the Prophets, Priests, or people; but they had all of them with
one consent, conspired against all justice and uprightness.

Verse. 2. And, or although they say, the Lord lives, yet swear they in vain,
or falsely.
THis is added by way of anticipation; and (as you would say) to prevent the
Jews, because (as it is well known) they thought to have the name of God
(which went glib the^ in every ones mouth) as a sufficient covert for their
vices. For as much then, as they openly vaunted that they served the God of
Abraham; they thought all their wickednesses might well be winked at, in regard
of this pretext. Now the Prophet meets with this conceit, and shows that such
fig leaves are nothing worth, because they only profaned the name of God
with their abuses of it. Moreover, Jeremiah also aggrauates the fault of the
Jews: for he shows that they were utterly estranged from Gods true fear; not
only in their whole course of life; but albeit some kind of religion remained
amongst them, yet even that also was mere sacrilege. It is bad enough when
Gods name is buried in oblivion, and when wretched men give themselves the
raines to commit evil, as if they could escape away with it in the dark. But
how odious and detestable is such a wickedness, when they dare thus of set
purpose, provoke God even to his face? It is this then, which Jeremiah here
notes, Although they say, Jehovah lives, yet (says he) they swear Now we see
the Prophets meaning. For in the first place, he pluckes the vizard of this
vain confidence from off the faces of the hypocrites, in regard they thought
God would easily be entreated, if so be they only pretended his name. And yet
they considered not how precious the name of God was: and thus they cared not
lightly to take up the sacred name of God in vain. Now the Prophet not only
condemns the hypocrisy of the vain swearing.

When he says, Although they swear, etc. he uses here the same word which
the faithful use in their oaths: for when they call the living God to
witness, it is as much as if they presented themselves before his judgment
seat, as being well assured, that howsoever God may defer his vengeance for a
time, yet must they come to an account, in regard he always lives. Thus the
faithful acknowledge, that if they forswear themselves, they can gain
nothing by it, though God should suspend his judgment. But (as I have already
said) the Prophet referres this to the hypocrites, who seemed to honor God
much: for nothing has a goodlier show than their words. But gall is in their
hearts, whilst they have these sugared words in their lips. The Prophet then
derides this fained holiness, when he says; that in outward show they swear
very demurely, as though they affected nothing more than piety and religion;
yet for this they will swear. Others translate, truly, or certainly: but the
sense will be plainer, if we translate, for this, that is to say, for this
thing, or for this cause, they will swear falsely, or lyingly. It follows.

Verse. 3. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have smitten them,
and they have not sorrowed; thou have consumed them, and they have refused to
receive discipline, or correction, they have hardened their faces more than a
stone, or rock, they would not convert, or turn.
SOme expound, or rather draw in (as it were) against the hair, an unapt sense
from the beginning of this verse, as if the Prophet should say, God therefore
turns not his eyes upon the right, because he does so severely revenge
himself upon the sins and offenses of his people. But Jeremiah prosecutes
his former argument still. For the distinction of the verses is of no moment,
in this behalf. Whosoever has thus distinguished them, has often perverted
and corrupted the sentences: we must wink at this fault then: only for the
help of memory we are to retain the number. But as touching the scope of the
text, the observation thereof often hinders the readers: for things separated
one from another, are for the most part confused; yea, and that which was very
well knit together, shall we find dis-ioyned. I often think hereupon, and it is
also a profitable advertisement: as in this place, after the Prophet has
showed how the Jews were disloyal, and of a double heart, void of all
uprightness, he adds, yet do thine eyes O Lord, behold the right, or truth.
As if he should say, it is in vain for them to pretend the name of God, or to
shelter themselves under heaps of ceremonies, or outward appearances of
godliness, for God sounds the heart and reins; he stands not upon vizards
of holiness, wherewith men's eyes are blinded and bleared. Furthermore, the
Prophet thus suddenly directs his speech to God, the better thereby to show how
irksome his travels were unto him, when he saw his preaching did so little
good, among so headstrong a people. For had the Jews in any measure been
tractable or teachable, no doubt he would rather now (upon his reproof) have
exhorted them to integrity and vprightnes. He might very well have said thus,
Those were much deceived, who in swearing by the name of God, persuade
themselves that he will therefore be their father: Verse. 2.
for his eyes behold the truth, and the uprightness of the heart. This had
been (you see) to good purpose, and it had also been an apt manner of teaching:
but Jeremiah breaks off his speech, as it were abruptly, and leaving the
people, turns him to God: Lord (says he) are not thine eyes upon the truth?
As if he should have said, What do I any further trouble my self about this
desperate people? I speak, but it is as if it were to a rock; or to a stone
wall. Fare you well therefore, I have done with you: I will now another while
make my moan to God. Now we see that this A turning of ones speech from those
that are present, to some absent.
apostrophe, has much more vehemence in it, than if the Prophet had still
spoken to the Jews without intermission; performing the office of a teacher
unto them. For thus he shows, that his head and heart was broken with this
tedious course, seeing his words so little to prevail, and all of them
generally to whom he preached, to be stubborn and obstinate. Neither yet did
he cast forth this speech rashly into the air, as if it had been to no
purpose: but by this means he rather meant with the greater eagerness, to
prick forward these dull scholars of his, whom he saw thus to lagge behind;
for otherwise he was (as it were) hopeless, that he should ever procure their
good. We are to call to mind then, See for this matter, Master Caluins
preface before the prophecy of Isaiah, the latter end.
that which elsewhere I have touched, namely, that the Prophets preached not
word for word as they have written: but after they have stood long upon a point
before the people, they then gathered the sum afterward. And thence came the
books of the Prophets. Jeremiah therefore no question, had at large handled
the doctrine of repentance; had earnestly inueyed against the hypocrites; had
discovered the fraudulent courses of his nation; and had also sharply reproved
their obstinacy. But after all this, it was needful he should make a stop as
it were, in the midway, in regard he well foresaw that little fruit would
redound to him by his painful labors. And the Jews also being privy to
this, it stood him in hand to touch them so much the more, to the quick. For
do we not see how we at this day provoke the spirit of God by our rebellion,
in regard it is so horrible a monster? Nothing therefore ought more to wound us
to the heart, than the same. What a thing is it? God calls us familiarly to
him every day: but when he sees our hearts so hard, and that we hold up our
heads so high; there he leaves us, because we grieve his holy spirit, as he
says in Isa. 63.10. An ordinary or common course of teaching here then, would
not serve the turn: but there was need of more efficacy now to be added to his
teaching, when he saw the wickedness of his nation was become intolerable.
Lord (says he) are not thine eyes upon faith, or truth.

Now when he speaks thus to God, there is an antithesis between God and men.
For we know that the worst sort of people in the world are pleased well enough,
whilst they may have the good opinion and estimation of men like themselves.
Whilst they are so esteemed then, they lie snorting in their vices. The
Prophet derides this foolish confidence, and shows that God sees otherwise
than mortal man does. For man scarcely can look the length of three fingers
from him: but God diueth into the very bottom and depth of the heart. The
Prophet then so speaks of Gods eyes, that in respect thereof he shows men's
judgments are frivolous, in regard they seek after nothing but fair shows,
and vain appearances. By the word faith, as also in the first verse of this
chapter, the Prophet means the integrity of the heart. They err from the
mark then, who to show their wit, endeavor to prove, from this place, that
we are acceptable to God by faith only. For the Prophet speaks not here of
that faith by which we embrace free reconciliation with God; by which also we
are made the members of Jesus Christ. The sense then is plain enough of it
self, namely, that God esteems not outward shows, wherewith men are
delighted, as it is in 1. Sam. 16.7. Man looks to the outward appearance; but
God regards the heart. By the word heart there, the holy Ghost expresses the
same thing which Jeremiah means by faith, or truth here. For Samuel shows,
that David's father deceived himself in bringing forth those sons first,
which were of the most comely stature and personage. Man (says he) looks to
the outward form; but God sees the heart. Now we have the true and natural
sense of the Prophets words; to wit, after the hypocrites shall have flattered
themselves to the full, and that all the world should have applauded them
therein; yet all this shall serve them to no purpose: for in conclusion, they
must all be summoned before the bar of Gods judgment seat. Now in his
presence, nothing but truth has place, neither is any thing else precious in
his sight.

He adds, Thou have smitten them, but they have not sorrowed. Here the Prophet
reprooues the obstinacy of the people, in that being smitten of God, yet they
amended not. Proverbs,
For experience (as they say) is the mistrisse of fools. It is also a
proverb, as true as ancient, that fools become wise by their harms and
losses. The Heathen Poets, and Historiographers do often use these sentences.
Since then the Jews were of so stubborn and rebellious a nature, that they
gained nothing, no not by the smart of the stripes with which they were
smitten; it was a sign they were altogether incurable. The Prophet here then
subscribes unto the former sentence, where God said, he would spare this
people, if an honest and upright man could be found in the whole City. This the
Prophet confirms when he says, Thou have smitten them, but they have not
sorrowed. No doubt but the Jews sorrowed; yea and howled also, under the
blows, and were but too skillful in making their complaints. For we see with
what an height of pride they despited God himself. They sorrowed then: but
the word sorrow, They sorrowed, but it was not a sorrow according to God. 2.
Cor. 7.11.
is here taken strictly: as where Paul handles the doctrine of repentance, he
shows, that the beginning thereof consists in sorrow. So in this place the
Prophet denies, that those who had confused thoughts in their minds, did
therefore sorrow rightly: for they felt not that they had to deal with God. By
this word then, he signifies as much as another Prophet does, who says, they
looked not to the hand of him that smote them, Isa. 9.13. For his meaning is
not, that they were so brutish or blockish, as not sensibly to feel the
blows: but in the mean while, they neglected the hand of God, from whence
they came. Now this ought chiefly to be respected in our sorrow: for although
we howl with a blind outrage, proceeding from the sense of our miseries;
having this word Alas, never so much in our mouths, what of all this? These
are only the yellings and rorings of bruit beasts. But when we have regard to
the hand that smites; that is the true and right framed sorrow. In this sense
Jeremiah says, the Jews sorrowed not, because they felt not that God had
justly chastised them with his hand.

In the next words he amplifies this doctrine, Thou have consumed them (says
he) and they refused to receive correction. When he says, they were consumed,
it is a sign of a desperate rebellion. For if God touch us but lightly, no
marvel, if (according to our slownesse and carelessness) we be not forthwith
awakened. But if God redouble his blows; yea, that he not only scourges us
with his rods, but also draws forth his fiery sword, utterly to consume us:
when he deals thus with us, and executes his vengeance by horrible and
fearful judgments; When God doubles his chastisements, and we how not under
them, it is a sign that the devil has besotted us.
if then (I say) we be yet senseless, under such evils, and feel not how
hidious a thing it is to fall into his hands: it may well be concluded, that
the devil has blinded and bewitched us. This benummednesse that was in the
Jews, the Prophet now bewaileth, in regard they were not only void of feeling
the stripes whilst God smote them; but that they received no correction,
albeit he consumed them. In this second member he touches that which I
formerly told you; namely, that this sorrow whereof he spoke, must not be taken
generally, but for that true sorrow which sets Gods judgment in such wise
before us, that we learn to tremble thereat.

He adds, that they hardened their faces like a stone: in a word, that they
would not return. The Prophet signifies, that the Jews were not only
rebellious, but also grown shameless. And although they had showed all the
signs of shame that possibly they could; yet all had been nothing, unless the
integrity of the heart had gone before, as we have said. But it often falls
out, that even the most wicked being full of impiety; of the contempt of God,
and rebellion also: will yet be smitten with some shame and remorse. But the
Prophet (to show that the Jews were grown to the height of all impiety)
says, they hardened their faces: that is to say, they were utterly impudent,
in regard they had rejected all honesty, and difference between good and bad,
of justice and equity. Being destitute then, of all humane sense; he therefore
says, nothing now remains, but that God (according as he had foretold) must
of force execute his last judgment upon them. And he repeates that which he
said, when he says, they refused to return. For he signifies, that they
sinned not now through error or ignorance, neither were they gone astray
through weakness: but that voluntarily, and of set purpose, they cast off all
care of their salvation, and witttngly had forsaken the Lord, so as they would
suffer neither his word nor works to take any place in them.

The Prayer.
Almighty God, and heavenly Father, for as much as Satan cease not so to
allure us to himself by his enticements, that we become like those that are
senseless of thy judgments; grant us the grace, good Lord, that thy word may
shine into our minds and hearts, that we sleep not in darkness; and
therewithal so awaken us by thy holy spirit, that we may attentively hearken
to all the aduertisements of thy holy Prophets, by which thou call us into
the right way, that so we perish not: and grant that without ceasing we may
exercise our selves, the whole course of our lives, in the meditation of
repentance, that we may always be displeased in our selves for our sins,
that we be still judging of our selves, that thy wrath may be turned away
from us, till at the length, being come to the end of our warfare, which we are
to wage continually against our sins, we may attain that blessed rest,
which is prepared for us in the heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE NINTEENTH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE SECOND UPON THE fifth Chapter.
Verse. 4. And I said, certainly, others translate, peradventure; they are those
of the poorer sort, they have done foolishly, because they know not the way of
the Lord, the judgment of their God.

5 I will go to the great ones, and speak to them; for they know the way of
the Lord, the judgment of their God. but these also have broken the yoke, and
burst the bands.


WHereas some think the Prophet here excuses his nation, and as much as in
him is, lessens their fault; they are grossly deceived. For doubtless by this
comparison he makes it yet more evidently appear, that things at that time
were grown desperate. The sum is this; Corruptions reigned then, not only
amongst the common people, but even among the great ones also; so as from the
crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, nothing was sound amongst them, as
they say. There is a sentence somewhat like to this, in Isaiah, although in
other words, Chap. 28.7.8. For having there first inueyed against the whole
nation in general, he taxes the governors also: You (says he) are no less
drunk than the common people. I grant he affirms it is through wine and
strong drink: but the meaning is, that they were all become like drunkards, in
regard they were past shame; whilst (without any modesty at all) they gave
over themselves to the committing of all villainies and abominations. Jeremiah
has the same drift here, when he says, I thought, surely they are of the
poorer sort, and those of small reckoning, that have thus sinned; but I found
even the Governors also guilty as well as they. He might in a word have said,
Not only those of the common and baser condition are corrupt; but the chief
also, and those that should have given good example to the rest. But this
comparison has far greater weight, when he says, It may be those that have
thus failed are some of the poor ones, who are ignorant of the Law of God. And
what marvel? But out of doubt we shall find greater integrity in the
Governors. When the Prophet speaks thus then, he brings the readers to the
view of the present fact as it were, and shows that they were none of the
rascality that had sinned; but they were the Priests, the Prophets, and those
of the chiefest rank. The Prophets meaning is plain enough. I said (says
he) not that he thought thus: for he saw all things were out of square, and
that there was no more good to be hoped for of the Governors, than of the
governed. The Prophet knew all this full well: but (as I said before) he meant
to show, as in a lively image, how miserable the condition of the whole nation
was.

He says, certainly: the word here used in the Hebrew, serves either for an
affirmation, or for a particle aduersatiue, Although, as we saw in the third
verse. Some take it in this place for peradventure. It is put here by way of
yielding so much, Put the case (says he) that they are those of the baser and
beggerlier sort that have sinned thus: I wonder not that they have carried
themselves thus foolishly, for they have not known the way of the Lord, nor
the judgment of their God. The Law indeed was manifested to all indifferently,
so as the common sort were without excuse: but this sickness has reigned
almost in all ages, that few have been attentive to the law: for who is it that
does not willingly reject this yoke? Now those of the meaner sort think to be
somewhat excused, because they want leisure to study; neither are they borne to
any great matters. The Prophet then frames his style according to the manner of
men: and yet he lessens not the fault, if any would have pretended ignorance.
As, Oh sir, I was never at the schools. For as we have said, God published his
Law for the good of the whole nation in general.

By the way of the Lord, and by the judgment of God, the Prophet signifies one
and the same thing. It is a repetition then, a thing very usual with the
Hebrews. For when God prescribes us the rule of a good life, it is as much as
if he showed us the way. For our life resembles a race: now God would not have
us to run at random; but sets us up a certain mark. He also leads us by a
certain way; because it is the office of the Law to call us from wandering
astray, The office of the Law.
and to lead us to the mark that is set before us. For this cause the Law is
called the way of the Lord: but judgment, as we heard yesterday, signifies
uprightness, or a rule. He puts the way of the Lord in the first place; and
the judgment of God in the second. And thus he shows, Such as live under good
teaching, cannot pretend ignorance, he they never so mean or simple.
that such as esteem themselves poor idiots that know nothing, are yet
without excuse. For God meant no less to teach them, the right way, than the
most learned in the world.

Now he adds in verse. 5. I will go to the great ones. By the great, he
understands as well the Priests and Prophets, as the Kings council; yea, the
King himself. I will go then to the great ones, and speak to them: which is
as much as if he had said, I know I shall but loose my labor, which way soever
I go: for they are all not only deaf, if I direct my speech to the poor
commons; but even they among the governors also. I told you erewhile, that the
Prophet consults not in himself as of a thing doubtful; but as one meaning to
shame even the greatest. Which he also does, the better to confirm his former
speech; namely, That there was not an upright man to be found in all the City
of Jerusalem. Verse. 1.


For they have known, etc. He repeats the same words affirmatively: yet we
must always remember, that the Prophet was otherwise persuaded in his mind:
but he speaks as of a thing likely. For who would almost have imagined, that
at that time, there had been such brutishness in the heads and governors. For
I tell you they were wonderfully admired amongst the people. This conceit then
going for current, to wit, that all such as then had the command over the
people, were men well exercised in the Law of God: Jeremiah speaks now
according to this received opinion, doubtless they have known the way of the
Lord.

He adds, But they have broken the yoke, and burst the bands; that is, if any
supposes the heads and governors are any whit better than the commons, he
fails exceedingly: for I know well enough how the world goes with them. They
also, have as well broken Gods yoke, as the most ignorant among the rude
multitude. By this repetion, he yet better confirms the certainty of their
revolt; and withal shows how unworthy a thing it was that the Prophets,
Priests, and Judges, who had the command of all, were so dissolute and
unbridled in their lusts. It follows.

Verse. 6. And therefore a Lion out of the forest has smitten them, the wolf
of the deserts, others by the word here used, understand the nights, or
euenings, because they derive it from another word, which signifies the
evening, and translate, the wolf of the night, has destroyed them: the
Leopard, others translate, the Panther, watches over their Cities; whosoever
goes out thence shall be dismembered, or rent in pieces, for their iniquities
are many, and their transgressions, or reuolts, are increased.
Jeremiah now at length shows, that God keeps such measure in his judgments,
that the cast-awayes shall in vain accuse him of overmuch severity, though it
be usual with them so to do. Some translate these words as if that which is
here said, had been already effected; and think the sense to be this, namely,
that the Prophet reprocheth the Jews; showing it was not without cause they
had been chastised with so many calamities, in regard they had justly deserved
as many more. But the other sense suits also very well. For we know how the
Hebrews are wont to change the tenses of verbes: and for mine own part, I
willingly refer it to the time to come, because it seems the Prophet makes
not a narration of that which they had formerly suffered; but how sharp the
afflictions were, which immediately should befall them.

The Lion of the forest then, shall smite them. As touching the words, we told
you that the Wolf of the deserts, is as much as the wolf coming out of the
desert. Whereas others expound it the wolf of the night or evening, it may
also stand. For in other places we know that hunger-starued wolfes, are called
wolfes of the night; in regard they having sought their prey all the day long,
and not meeting therewith, are almost mad in the evening: thus hunger makes
them range here and there. This exposition then may pass: but having said
before, that the Lion came out of the forest, it is more likely he also
describes the wolf coming out of the desert. And as touching the sum, the
difference is not great.

He names three beasts here, A Lion, a Wolf, and a Leopard. No doubt but by
these beasts, under a metaphor, he means the enemies which should shortly
invade the land with great cruelty. True it is, that before Jeremiah made this
Sermon, the Jews had already suffered many calamities: for God revenged not
himself upon them, all on one day; but he often advertised them: and had there
been any hope of amendment left, he would yet have saved them, because their
condition had been to be pitied. But it seems Jeremiah prophesies here, of
judgments to come: and therefore he not only understands by these beasts,
the Assyrians, and the Egyptians; but all other enemies also. For we know that
this nation was hated mortally of all their neighbors, and cruelly vexed with
injuries, even by those of their Of the Edomites, Moabites, etc.
own blood. In regard then, so many nations hated the poor Jews, it is no
marvel if the Prophet numbers up three sorts of beasts here. As if he should
say, Enemies will invade you on every side, who like Lions, Wolfes, and
Leopards, will exercise their because you have so often, so many ways,
therefore, or, because.

He adds, that the Leopard watches to rend all those in pieces that come out
of the Cities. Doubtless he signifies by this similitude, that after the
enemy has invaded the land, the Jews shall be so enclosed and shut up within
their Cities, that they shall not dare to peep out, because dangers from every
part, shall appear unto them.

In the end of the verse he repeats again, and more largely prosecutes that
which he understood by the particle, And therefore; or because. For he says,
because their iniquities are multiplied, and their reuolts increased. By these
words he shows yet better, that which he touched before; to wit, that God is a
just judge, even then when he seems to be most severe: for it was impossible
that this so desperate a people should escape without some strange judgment
inflicted upon them from God. Neither names he them simply wicked ones, or
Apostataes, but he says, their iniquities, or wickednesses were multiplied,
and their reuolts augmented. And by this latter word, he aggrauateth their
condemnation. For albeit the first word signifies not only to fail, but to
do wickedly: yet to revolt from God, is a crime much more odious and hateful.
Whence we gather, that the Jews are here charged with so great a peruersity,
that it was not to be chastised with ordinary or light remedies. It follows.

Verse. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? that is, how should I pardon thee?
for so it must be understood. Thy children have forsaken me, and have sworn by
that which is not God. Now I have filled them, and they have committed
adultery; or, notwithstanding they have, etc. and the house of the harlot they
are assembled, or, in the house of the harlot.
THe manner of speech here used, is by the Rhetoritians called A consultation
or talking.
communicatio. For God meant, after a sort, that his adverse party, against
whom he pleads, should be judge of the cause; and yet as of a matter already
out of question. Now this is a sign that one is very confident of his cause:
and therefore when the Rhetoritians mean to show, that the cause is clear and
manifest which they propound: they consult with their adverse party thus: What?
Do I not propound the matter plainly unto thee, as it is? Can thou any way
gainsay it? Put the case thou might have liberty and power to be judge thy
self; would not reason it self constrain thee to speak after this manner?
Even thus God also shows that he is forced (as it were) of necessity to punish
and chastise the Jews thus rigorously; testifying that he can do no less.
See to this purpose, verse. 9.
If I (says he) be the Judge of all the world shall those that provoke me
thus to my face, go unpunished? should I not expose my glory to open contempt?
should I not also dispoyle my self of my power? I should cease to be that I
am, and should in a manner renounce my self; if I should not punish so
desperate and rebellious a people. Now we have the Prophets meaning. Others
supply a letter here, and take one for another: and thus they translate, Not
upon this. But nothing constraining us to change ought; and that many also
subscribe to this exposition; I had rather follow that which is most received.
The Word which the Prophet uses in the Hebrew, signifies where: but oftentimes
it is taken for how? For it must not be understood here as having respect to
a place, but to the matter. How then (says he) should I pardon thee for this?
We see how God consults with his adverse party, making themselves (as it were)
the judges. As if he should say, Answer me: say that I should give you
authority and leave, to name and appoint the chastisement which you have
deserved; can I, who am the Judge of the world, pardon so hateful impieties.

For thy children have forsaken me: this is the first sin. Now when God
complains he was forsaken, his meaning is, that the people had wittingly and
willingly rejected the yoke: for the like could not have been affirmed of the
profane nations. I grant if we have respect to the beginning, soon after the
creation, all may be condemned of forsaking of God, and of reuolting from him;
in regard he manifested himself to Adam, and to the sons of Noah: and when
they fell afterward into superstitions, they were therein guilty of Apostasy.
But the revolt of the Jews was much more later, and therefore less tolerable:
and especially, seeing they gloried much of the title of Gods people; what
pretext or color of ignorance could they allege? We see now then, what the
Prophet means, when he says, God was forsaken of this people.

Then he adds, and have sworn by that which is not God. See verse. 2.
Under one part he notes, that Gods service was perverted and corrupted: in
regard an oath (as we said yesterday) is a part, or one kind of Gods service.
For as often as make protestation of our subjection under his authority; and that
we cannot escape unpunished if we lie. Secondly, we attribute that he is
true. Thirdly, we thereby that nothing is done without his priuity; but that
all things are manifest before him. When he says here then, that the
Israelites swear by that which was not God, he means, they spoiled God of his
right. No doubt but they were culpable of other sins: but (as we have said)
under one kind, the Prophet comprehends all those superstitions, which at that
time had full swinge amongst the people. It is as much then, as if he had said,
they worshipped idols, and the gods which their own hands had forged.

He adds a circumstance which aggrauates their crime: Now I have filled them
(says he) to the full, and they have committed adultery. There is a certain
kind of correspondency in the Prophets words, which has great grace; but we
cannot express it well in our language. He said before, (...).
Sabeu, that is to say, they swear: now he says, Sebea; (...)
I have filled them. There is no difference between the words, God filled this
people to the full, and they swear.
one point only excepted: for if you place the prick on the left hand, it
signifies to fill; if on the right, it signifies to swear: therefore the
Prophet says, they swear, notwithstanding they were filled. And here God
notes out the detestable ingratitude of the Jews, in that being repleat with
the abundance of all good things, even till their skins cracked (as it were)
yet they acknowledged not him who was so liberal and loving a father unto
them. I have filled them (says he) and they have committed adultery. Now this
place shows, that such are least worthy to obtain pardon, as sin with an
high hand, after God has drawn them to himself, by his fatherly goodness
and clemency. When men then, play the wild colts after this manner, despiting
God, whilst he so graciously forbeares them: no doubt, but such treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath; Romans 2.5.
as Saint Paul says in the second to the Romans: and therefore we ought to
take diligent heed when God dandles us in his lap (as you would say) that we
flatter not our selves, nor suffer our prosperous estate to prick us forward
to such intemperancy, A profitable lesson.
as to cast the doors off the hooks, as they say. But when God vouchsafes so
graciously to allure and draw us to him: let us learn willingly to subject our
selves unto him: and whilst he shows himself so amiable: let us learn to
carry our selves amiably toward him.

He says, they committed adultery. This may be taken metaphorically: but
because in the next verse he inueyes vehemently against looseness, and
adulteries, we may expound this according to the letter, as they say. And yet I
think it to be a similitude, when he says, they committed whoredom: in
regard there was no spiritual chastity in them; howsoever the Lord for his
part labored to keep them within compass.

He says, and in the house of the harlot, they assembled. This may be taken as
if the Jews were termed the harlots house: as if he should say, The whole
City of Jerusalem, and the land of Iudeah is no better than a stews. Others
notwithstanding expound it, that they assembled as into the harlots house: and
thus he should allude to their Temple. Now it is a sign of impudency, when
many adulterers and whormasters assemble together in an house. For you shall
have many that are ashamed to have their whoredoms known: they are careful
therefore to cover their villainies, as much as they can. But when they flock
in by heaps, as it were with banners displayed, it is a sign all
shamefastness is banished: and that such as ouerflow thus in intemperancy, may
well be resembled to brute beasts. This sense then suits very well in this
place; namely, that such as glory in their superstitions, and sacrilegious
actions, are assembled together into a brothell-house. It follows.

Verse. 8. They were of fed horses, others translate, armed; they mean, well
trapped, stout, and sturdy, rising early, others translate, drawing; and derive
it from another verb, every one neighed after his neighbors wife. The words
indeed are in the future tense; yet he signifies a continued act.
HEre, as I take it, Jeremiah passes from the first table of the Law, to the
second, and touches one kind only. But his meaning in a word is, that there
was neither faith nor honesty in this people: he co^pares the^ then, to wanton,
and pampered horses: and thus he discouers their filthiness (as it were) upon
the stage. For had he said every one had watched his opportunity, to defile the
bed of his brother; this had been odious enough in it self: but when he
terms their inordinate lust, a neying: when he calls them that did so,
horses; yea, fed horses, rising in the morning, after they are filled:
doubtless he thereby notes, that their intemperancy and dissolution was
grown so great, that they ought not only to be esteemed whoremongers, or
adulterers; but that there was in them a much greater and detestable villainy,
in regard they differed in nothing, from pampered horses, neying after mares.

They are fed horses, says he: those which translate, armed, derive the word
from a verb which signifies, to arm: but others had rather derive it from a
verb which signifies, to eat. How ever, questionless he means here, fat,
and fed horses. For otherwise, why should he say, they were well pampered?
Whereas some others also affirm, that they rose early, after they had defiled
themselves, to discover their filthiness, and gloried in their vices: this is
much more unapt. For he notes out strong horses, that are nimble about their
business; and therefore they rise the morning after they have well farsed
themselves. Now we see the Prophets meaning. The sum is, that no chastity
remained in the Jews, in regard they gave over themselves to inordinate lusts,
not only as adulterers are wont to do: but therein they rather resembled
horses, well pampered. And yet (as we have said) under this incontinency, he
notes and comprehends thefts, and other deceits, violent robberies, with the
like. For it is certain, that he taxes the transgression of the Jews, in
those things which respect the breach of the second Table of the Law. It
follows.

Verse. 9. Shall I not visit, or should I not visit, upon these things, says
the Lord? And shall not my soul be avenged upon such a people as this? or,
which is like to this.
Again, God talks with them, See verse. 7.
as by way of consultation: which he does to prevent their complaints, and to
stop their mouths, lest they should allege that he censured them over
sharply. To take away all their replies then, God once again repeats, that he
can not pass by such enormous and crying sins as these. Now he lays down
this as a principle, that it is impossible for him to spare such a people as
repent not. For if God be the Judge of the world; he can no more renounce his
judgment, than his own essence. In as much then, as these things are
inseparable; to wit, God Majesty, and his office of being Judge over the whole
world; the Prophet here concludes, it was impossible for the conceit of the
Jews to stand; namely, that they should escape unpunished, albeit they
wilfully and obstinately persisted in provoking him by their horrible
impieties, as if they meant to make open war upon him. Should I not visit upon
this, says the Lord? He uses the name of God here. Why? An earthly Judge may
well pardon and show mercy to the most wicked offender in the world: but this
can no way stand with Gods Justice. For as often as he pardons, He which truly
repents, becomes his own judge, and so preuents Gods judging of him.
he therewithal brings sinners to repentance; thus he never suffers sins to
go unpunished. Truly, he which repents and amends his life, becomes his own
Judge. And thus he preuents the judgment of God. Where true conversion is
then, there God bears with sinners: but when men are grown so obstinate in
committing evil, that being admonished, they despise all admonitions; there it
is certain God cannot pardon: if he should, he should therein also renounce
his own glory, which (you know) is impossible. Sold I not visit then? says
the Lord.

And should not my soul be avenged, etc. Here God speaks after the manner
of men: for he is not carried away with desire of revenge. And when he
speaks of his soul, this also is improper: but the sense is not obscure. For
the meaning is, that God hates all impiety with a deadly hatred. As in Psalm.
5.5. Thou hate all them that work iniquity. Seeing it is so, it hence
follows, that either he must be pulled from his celestial throne; or that
the wicked must be punished: who like wild colts, take the bridle in their
teeth, and cease not to add sin unto sin. As often therefore as vain
flatteries shall come in our heads, and that Satan by his allurements,
endeauours to make us forget Gods judgment; let it be remembered, that God
should not be God, God should not be God, if he should not punish transsors.
unless he punish the iniquities of the sons of men. It necessarily follows
then, either that he must punish, or be our enemy. Moreover (as has been
said) he should not otherwise be constant; nay, he should (as it were) change
his nature; whose nature (as we know) is unchangeable. Where his hand therefore
is already lifted up to punish us, there it is needful that we prevent the
judgment. But what shall be the means? We must learn to pronounce sentence
against our selves, and to be displeased with our sins: when there is such a
conversion, then God will show us mercy. And thus he will pardon our sins;
not as if he approved of them, or as if he still exercised not the office of a
Judge: but (as I have already said) the doctrine of this verse is properly
directed against those that are utterly rebellious; or to such as the devil
has so bewitched and dulled, as they pass not what become of them. In a word,
this doctrine either makes the wicked clean without excuse, if they persist in
their obstinacy: or rather, it ought to awaken such as are not yet past cure;
that in judging themselves now, they put it not off, till God reueales his
wrath from heaven, and to execute his last sentence against them.

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly Father, for as much as we are inclined to the same
vices, which we read the ancient people of the Jews were once too much
addicted unto; grant that we being governed by thine holy spirit, may not
harden our hearts against thine holy admonitions, whereby thou daily rebukest
both us and our sins: but grant we may become truly teachable, and obedient.
And because hitherto we have been but too rebellious, and have proclaimed open
war against thy justice; let us another while learn to fight against our
selves, and our vices: that taking our direction from thy holy word, and having
gotten the conquest over our selves, we may at length also obtain the crown
which is prepared for us in heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE TWENTIETH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE THIRD UPON THE fifth Chapter.
Verse. 10. Climb up upon her walls, and destroy them, or scatter them, and
yet make not the consumption, or rather, an end, take away her spreading, or
branches, or the teeth of the wall, as others translate: or the battlements;
for they are not the Lords.
HEre God, by the mouth of his Prophet, speaks to the enemies, whose service
he meant to use, for the execution of his vengeance upon the Jews. Now this
is usual with the Prophets, when they mean to gaul men to the quick: for
we are not ignorant that there rests in men a world of carelessness, when God
summons them before his judgment seat. Jeremiah then seeing he profited
little, by a plain manner of teaching, takes this course as ye see. In the
person of God, he speaks to the Chaldeans, and commands them to speed
themselves to the siege of Jerusalem. Thus the Prophets are wont to speak: God
will hiss for the fly that is in Egypt: or he will sound a trumpet, and call
the Caldeans, Isa. 7.18. and 5.26. But this kind of figure has much more
efficacy to wound men's hearts, when the Prophet, by Gods express charge, as
an herald sent from heaven, calls the enemy, and appoynts them out their
task; namely, to destroy the whole City. In the first place he says, Climb
up upon the walls, whereby he signifies, that it is but in vain for the
Jews, to trust in the height of their walls; because God will so advance and
lift up their enemies, that the entrance shall not be difficult unto the^. The
Jews thought themselves safe, in regard the City was well defenced. But they
shall be deceived, says he: thus then he reprooues their folly, because their
walls should be insufficient to save them.

He further adds, make not an end. This clause is expounded two ways: for some
take it in the good part, as if God should mitigate the sharpness of this so
great a punishment, Chap. 4.27.
as in the former chapter we have seen that some take it so. For albeit
there, God affrights his people; yet (as they think) by way of correction he
adds, yet will I not make a consumption: that is to say, there shall a remnant
escape. The Prophets also are wont to speak thus, when they mean to show that
some seed shall always remain, to the end the Church be not wholly
extinguished. Thus now the expositors interpret it: as if God should say,
Ierusalems ruin shall not be so great, but the Church shall still remain
safe, in regard all should not be consumed. Others take the word here used,
for end: and this sense agrees much better. For in this verse God threatens to
cut of the Jews. Neither does this contradict that which is said elsewhere;
Isa. 10.22.
to wit, that there should not be an utter wast or consumption; in regard it is
well enough known that the Prophets keep not all one tenor in their
speeches. For when they denounce Gods judgments against the reprobates, they
leave them without any hope at all. Which manner of speech is often met
withal: I will make a consumption. But in directing their speech to the
faithful, they moderate this rigor by way of correction; to wit, God will not
make an utter consumption: I willingly therefore receive their exposition, who
take the word consumption in this place, for end; for the verb whence this
word is derived, signifies to finish. The sense then will be, Destroy the City,
and let there be none end; that is, raze it wholly. For forthwith it follows
in the same sense, take away her spreadings, or her branches: or as other
translate, The teeth of her walls; which are in the foundation. For we know
that walls are so built, that the foundation is always the largest: and the
word which the Prophet uses, signifies spreadings, which are extended every
way abroad. Those who turn it iaggs, notches, wings, or battlements of the
walls, seem not to have attained the Prophets meaning: in regard he speaks not
here of the top of the walls, but of the foundations: as if he should say,
overthrow her foundations, or raze the walls of the City. Why so? He adds,

They are not the Lords: for the Jews were puffed up with a vain confidence,
thinking they should be hid under Gods protection: as if God (forsooth) would
keep their City, because the Sanctuary and the altar were seated within the
same. The Prophet therefore flatly denies, that the walls were the Lords, or
that the foundations thereof were his. Neither may that which is said elsewhere
be alleged to the contrary; namely, Psalm. 87.1.
that God laid the foundations of this City. God indeed had chosen it for his
dwelling place; howbeit on this condition, that his people should there serve
him in sincerity. Jerusalem being afterward become a den of thieves, God left
her, Ezech. 14.16.
as it is in Ezechiel. The prophet then refels this fottish confidence,
wherewith the Jews deceived themselves: for they thought that God (after a
sort) was so bound and tied unto them, as he could never cease to be the
guardian of the City. He says then, that their foundations were none of Gods:
for the Jews had so profaned this place by their wickednesses, that God could
not endure to dwell in such a dunghill. It follows.

Verse. 11. For the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, have dealt wickedly
against me, says the Lord.
THe word which the Prophet uses, signifies to deal disloyally. God here
then condemns the Jews of disloyally, because they had revolted from him. For
he not only complains that they failed in some one kind, and had thus
offended him; but he condemns them in regard of a general re^olt. He
affirms, that both the houses of Israel, and Judah, were become Apostataes.
We know the people were then divided into two kingdoms. Now albeit Jeremiah
was properly ordained a Teacher of the Tribe of Judah; yet was he therewithal
to bestow his labors on the Israelites also. The kingdom of Israel was in
part subdued; for four tribes were already led captive: this kingdom then,
was (as it were) rent in pieces, and grown feeble: notwithstanding, as much as
in him lay, he sought the good of that remnant which was left. You see why he
says, that both the one and the other, are wicked Apostataes, in regard they
had carried themselves disloyally against God. Now because this was a most
bitter complaint, and therefore would gaul them to the quick, he referres it
to God; knowing well enough that the Jews would never take this reproach well
at his hands. It is the Lord that speaks, says he: as if he should say,
plead not with me, as if I handled you ouerseuerely: but if you will plead;
argue the case with God: for it is he that affirms, that as well the
Israelites, as the Jews, are become perfidious and disloyal. It follows.

Verse. 12. They have denied the Lord, others translate, they have lied to the
Lord, and said, It is not he, neither shall evil befall us, For the
application of this latter member, see the second section following in verse. 13.
neither shall we see the sword nor famine.
HE expresses that which he said before more clearly, and also in more words.
This was a kind of disloyalty, in that they had denied the Lord. For I do not
utterly reject the other translation; to wit, that they lied to God. But
because there is one letter in the word here used, I will not say whether it
signifies, to lie, in this place, or no: I make no question but he simply
affirms, that they had denied God; and the context it self requires it should
be so. For by and by after, they expound themselves, when they said, that God
was not. Certain it is, that this was not simply to lie to God; but so to
reject him, as if he had not been at all. In regard this sense then, that they
lied to God, would be too favorable: I rather incline to the other side,
namely, that they denied God; that is, they regarded him not; or they labored
to abolish the memory of him: and yet the reason is added, which also ought to
be well observed, They said, God is not. The more fully to express this, he
says, that they gloried, as is they should have escaped punishment. Indeed it
seems an excessive speech, when the Prophet affirms, they renounced God. But
to prevent all cauils, he confirms his speech, namely, they said, God was
not. In the mean while, let us see wherefore he charge them with so hateful
a crime. They made their vaunts, they should be freed from those plagues,
wherewith the Prophets threatened them. Now we see what it is with which the
Prophet taxes them: even an obstinate contempt. For they had hardened their
hearts against all the menaces of the Prophets. Which Jeremiah terms no
less, See verse. 3.
than a plain denial of God himself. If we our selves might be judges, we
would think this definitive sentence too sharp and severe: but we must hold
it our wisdom to rest in the judgment of the holy Ghost. This is an
excellent place then, and well worthy our observation: for hence we may
gather, If we take from God his power to execute judgment upon offenders, we
deny him to be God.
how much the Lord abhorres the carelesnes of such as harden their hearts
against his threatenings, and set light by his judgments. For if we know him
to be God, we must not pluck from him the power to judge. For what imports
this Name God? Such as imagine he sits idle in heaven, and cares not how
things go in the world, but follows his delights: albeit they deny not God in
word; yet do they nothing but toy with him. But in the mean while there is
not so much as one dram of religion in such, nor any feeling of the divine
power. This place then, is diligently to be observed, wherein God testifies
that we renounce him, See verse. 13.
if we be not touched nor moved with his threatenings. Why so? Because our
carelessness, in which we rock our selves asleep whilst God thunders against
us; is nothing else but an utter renouncing of him. Neither ought they here,
who despise Gods judgments, to lessen this their fault. For this ye holy Ghost
has pronounced as a resolved truth; namely, all they that scorn the Prophets,
do as much in effect as conclude in their hearts, there is no God. For they
bereave him of his power and office, and only leave to him a bare naked
essence, that is to say, I know not what dream, or fancy. We now then have
attained the Prophets meaning. See verse. 11.
For with many words he amplifies the disloyalty of the Jews, which before he
condemned in them, because they had denied God, and had said, it is not he;
that is, because they had concluded in themselves, surely, the evils which the
Prophets threaten, are not so near us, as they would make us believe they are.
It follows.

Verse. 13. The Prophets shall go away with the wind, and the word is not in
them: thus shall it be done unto them.
THe Prophet prosecutes the same doctrine: wherefore this place is diligently to
be noted, in regard the external ministry of the word, is therein singularly
recommended unto us. For what thing more detestable can be imagined, The word
is not in them.
than the denial of God. But if the word retain not its authority; it is all
one as if the contemners should pluck God out of heaven, and deny him to be
God. We see then, how the majesty of God is with an inseparable band, joined
with the outward preaching of the word. And this verse tends to the very same
end: wherein Jeremiah discouers the scorns and deridings of the Jews. For he
brings them in speaking these words, The Prophets shall be as the wind, the word
is not in them: that is, the evils wherewith they threaten us, shall fall upon
their own heads. It may be the Jews uttered not such blasphemies in plain
terms: but there was among them such a gross and shameful contempt of the
Prophets, that this impiety was manifested well enough to all ye world, by
their practice: it is not without cause then, that he condemns so odious an
impiety when they said, the Prophets should go away with the wind. As the most
part of men at this day, who when God thunders from heaven, and by his servants
manifests sure signs of his displeasure; they are not a whit moved therewith,
but stand scorning of us, and boldly repulse all fear far, enough off from
them. Oh! These are but words. These Preachers thunder terribly, Against such
as think the preachers words are but wind.
when they are in their pulpits, but all shall vanish in the air; and that
which they denounce against us, shall light upon their own heads. Many such
scorners and profane persons we may hear of, almost in every corner, who
stick not to disgorge such blasphemies. Although (as I have said) the Jews
peradventure durst not spit thus openly (as it were) in Gods face. But the holy
Ghost, who exercises his jurisdiction upon men's hearts, spirits, secret
intentions, and affections; no doubt justly condemns the Jews, of this so
shameful and execrable an impiety. Albeit out of other places it is not hard
to collect, how they were grown to such a pride, that they made no bones, in
plain terms, to scorn all the threats which the Prophets denounced. How
ever it be, the Prophet, as in a glass, sets before us, to what a height the
obstinate rebellion of the Jews against God, was now come unto: for he here
makes it plain, into what a wretched condition the Jews were fallen, when
they durst set upon the Prophets with such a desperate boldness, as to charge
them with words of vanity, and lies. The Prophets (say they) shall vanish with
the wind: and then, the word is not in them. Thus the Jews denied that any
credit was to be given to the Prophets, albeit they pretended the name of God:
for in their seeming, they did but foolishly brag, that this and that was
commanded them of God. We see here then, that all reverence of found doctrine
was trodden under foot: whereof we have but too much experience at this day. For
what reverence do men for the most part show toward the word of God? This
place then, ought diligently to be observed, because we see here, as in a
mirror, into what a malepertnesse and fury men plunge themselves, after they
have once begun to call the truth of God into question.

Thus shall it be done unto them; or, thus be it to them: for some think it to
be an imprecation; Verse, 12.
as if the godless should say, Let the Prophets, to their own ruin, feel
what force the sword, famine, and pestilence has; seeing they cease not day by
day to dull our ears with such terrors: let them then know, what these
scourges mean. But we may retain the tense of the verb here used, so shall
it be done unto them: as if they opposed against the servants of God; and as if
themselves seemed to be his Prophets, forsooth: Well; we have a prophecy
clean contrary to his: he fears and terrifies us, in threatening the sword,
famine, and the pestilence: he shall have as good as he brings; we will
another while, threaten that the sword, famine, etc. are now to fall upon them.
For by whose authority do they thus insult over us? Is it not lawful for us
to retort the same back again upon them? Now then we see the drift of this
lattter member. It follows.

Verse. 14. Wherefore thus says the Lord of hosts, seeing you have pronounced
this word; behold I will give, or, will put, my words in thy mouth as a fire,
or, for a fire, and this people shall be the wood, and it shall devour them.
GOd here shows how insupportable this pride of theirs is unto him, when they
contemned his Prophets, by whose ministry he only will be heard. For albeit
Jesus Christ had not at all pronounced this sentence, He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, Luke 10.16. yet had this
been a perpetual law, in regard God from the beginning, meant that his
servants should be no less obeyed, than if he himself had in his own person
descended down from heaven. And therefore the Jews offered as much violence
to God, as often as they contemned his Prophets, as if they had presumed to have
spit in his own face. God now shows then in what detestation he has this
their folly and madness; in that they profited nothing by the labors of his
messengers.

Wherefore thus says the Lord of hosts. Jeremiah uses this preface the better
to awaken the Jews. For if in omitting these words, Thus says the Lord: he
had begun thus, Because you have pronounced this word, behold, God will make
his words in my mouth as fire: his doctrine would have been received, but by
way of contempt. But now putting the name of God in the first place, neither
yet that simply; but adornes him with this title, and calls him, the Lord of
hosts, therein magnifying his power, to terrify them the more: doubtless this
must needs touch the Jews to the quick. he says then, thus says the Lord of
hosts; namely, because you have ponounced this word. He often changes the
persons here, but it is that the doctrine which he brings, might have the more
efficacy. He might as well have said in the third person, Because they have
spoken thus, behold, I will put my words in thy mouth. But he speaks one while
to the people, and then again directs his speech to his servant Jeremiah. He
says then, you cannot deny but you have spoken thus: that is, you have thus
scorned me with your disdainful speeches, as if my Prophets whom I sent, had
buzed but an empty sound of words in your ears, or had fed you with fables.
Behold (says he) I will put my words in thy mouth as fire, See verse. 13.
(here he speaks to the Prophet) and this people shall be the wood; and the
fire shall devour them. God compares his word to fire: Why Gods word is
compared here to fire.
not as in other places, nor for the same end: but there is a special cause of
this similitude here, to wit, that the words of the Prophets should consume
the people, as the fire consumes dry wood, or stubble. The word of God is
elsewhere termed burning, or flaming, in regard it inflames the hearts of men;
and because it purges out, and consumes away their drossinesse. But the
question here, is neither of the vtility which the word brings with it, nor of
the fruit which the faithful reap from it. For God simply denounces, that
the Prophets doctrine shall be the ruin of the people: and therefore he
expressly says, I will put my words in thy mouth, as a fire. Had he only said,
Behold, my words shall be as the fire, and this people as the stubble; this
had not been clear enough. But in regard the Jews had now accustomed
themselves to disdainful scoffings: And (I pray you) what are these Prophets?
and what are their big and high words? words that only beat the air. Because
the Jews (I say) accustomed themselves to these contemptuous speeches:
therefore the Lord on the contrary answers, Behold, I will put my words in thy
mouth: that is to say, Thy tongue shall be more than sufficient to abolish and
root out this people. Jeremiah then teaches the same here, which Paul does in
other words, 2. Cor. 10.4.5 We have vengeance ready against every high thing
that exalts it self against the Gospel of God. For this vice has reigned in
all ages: namely, men have either little respected, or rather utterly contemned
Gods servants. Now Saint Paul seeing the Gospel despised of many, says, that
he, and his fellow-ministers had vengeance ready: as if he should have said,
all the words we utter, shall be as so many swords to overthrow and destroy
the wicked; though now through their malepertnesse they dare repulse Gods
judgment: such a rebellion shall stand them in no stead. They then, shall
feel no less efficacy in my words, then if God from heaven had openly
discovered his arm unto them, and had thence thundered down upon their heads.
And this is Ieremiahs meaning in this place: Behold says the Lord, I will put
my words in thy mouth as a fire: that is, there shall be such force in thy
words, that the wicked shall well perceive to their cost, that thou art the
executioner of my vengeance.

We ought advisedly to bethink us of the doctrine of this place, lest by our
ingratitude we provoke Gods wrath so to be kindled against us, The word of God
by our unthankfulness, may become a fire to consume us, which in it self is
food to feed us.
that we cause his word to be converted into fire, which otherwise is ordained
for our food. For to what purpose does God send us the ministers of his
Gospel, but to allure us to life eternal, and hereby sweetly to feed and
refresh our souls? The word of God therefore is unto us as the water,
wherewith our souls are besprinkled and washed. It is indeed as a fire unto
us; but for our good. It is a fire, but it is to purge out our dross; not to
consume us. If we then shall dare proudly to contemn this fire, what will
follow, but that it be turned to the clean contrary use; namely, to devour
and utterly consume us?

Now he says, the people shall be as wood, in regard the wicked, all the while
they obstinately bend their iron brow against God, think thereby to make his
vengeance to recoyle a far off from them. But our Prophet derides this folly,
and says, they shall be consumed as wood, or stubble. It follows.

Verse. 15. Behold, I will bring upon you, O house of Israel, a nation of a
far country, says the Lord: an hard nation, that is to say, which shall be
hardy, an or, of an age.
ancient people, a people whose language thou understand not, or shall not
know, neither shall thou understand what they shall say. See Deuteronomy. 28.49.

THe Prophet here shows how the people shall be like to stubble, or
seare-wood, namely, because God shall send such a calamity, as they little
feared: and the context is here to be noted. The Prophet told them in the
former verse, that his tongue should be as the fire: now he applies this to the
Assyrians, Gods word, and the efficacy thereof, goes always together. See
Isa. 55.10 11. 2. Cor. 2.14.15.16.
and Caldeans. It should seem there is some repugnancy in these speeches. But
we have formerly advertised you, that all Gods rods depend upon the efficacy
of the word. When the City then, was destroyed by the Assyrians, and Caldeans,
then the fire, according to the word which Jeremiah had foretold, destroyed
both the City and people. In a word, Jeremiah signifies, that when the enemy
shall approach, respect must be had neither to their men, nor munition, nor yet
to all the warlike powers they shall bring with them; but that it shall be the
execution of the doctrine which proceeded out of the Prophets mouth. In another
place we shall see how God sends Jeremiah to lay siege to the City: but with
what power? None but himself alone, without any munition at all. True: but
this was a mystery to the reprobate: and yet had it, its effect. For as the
Prophet spoke, so did God execute that which proceeded out of his mouth. We see
here then, that the Caldeans came as it were out of Ieremiahs mouth, even as
if the enemy minding to batter the walls of a City, should shoot against it,
and play upon the walls with Canon shot: for which purpose we at this day have
new engines, and inventions for stratagems of war, to batter and raze Cities:
what are then all the engines of war? They are the fire, which God casts out
by the mouths of his servants, and the doctrine by them taught, The word of
God has greater force in it, than is in all the engines of war.
brings forthwith with it, all the preparations of war that can be invented;
not only to destroy a City and people, but the whole world also, as often as
need shall require.

I then, will bring upon you, O house of Israel, a nation from far. We have
told you elsewhere, why the Prophet notes out this distance of place; namely,
because the Jews imagined they were safe enough, in regard of these nations,
so far remote from them: as at this day, if one should tell us of the
invasion of the Turks: we would reply, Oh, they have enough to do with many
of other countries: let them that dwell near them, fear their incursions; we
hope it will be three or four ages ere they come at us. We see (I say) amongst
us such a carelessness, to reign in many. The Prophet then, that he might keep
the Jews from feeding their humors with this vain confidence, says, that
this people shall be in a readiness at an instant, though they come from
far.

He says, It is an hard, or strong people, The word Siecle, is commonly
vnderderstood of an 100. years.
and a people which is wholly of an age: by this word age, he means not only
strong, but hard, or cruel. For he will say by and by, they are all strong.
He calls this nation hard then, in regard they were cruel: afterward he will
also express their barbarity. But first of all he says, it is of a whole age:
because when a nation has ruled time out of mind, it easily begets cruelty and
pride in them. This length of time often puffes up men's hearts with pride and
presumption, and makes them the more cruel.

Now he speaks of their barbarity, Thou (says he) shall not understand their
speech, etc. The tongue the image of the mind, and a band that knits men
together in humane society.
We know that in the tongue, there is not only a communication of words, but
also of affections. The tongue is the lively image of the mind, as they usually
say; and therefore it is a band that knits men together in humane society. For
were there no use of the tongue, wherein should men almost differ from beasts?
one would offer cruelty to another: In a word, there would be no humanity
amongst them. In as much then, as speech unites men together; therefore the
Prophet to terrify the Jews, says, that this shall be a barbarous nation, in
regard there shall be no community neither of speech nor of affections,
between them. Whence it also follows, that they should show no pity, in
sparing the vanquished, though they should use never so many entreaties: yea
the poorer sort, who peradventure might find some favor if their speech could
be understood; even those should obtain no audience.

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly father, seeing thou may justly condemn in us at
this day, that gross and cursed impiety which in times past thou condemnedst
by the mouth of thine holy Prophet, in the ancient people the Jews: grant we
pray thee, that we may not persist in our rebellion, but may learn in all
meekness of sp rit, so to subject our selves to thy word, that it be not a
fire to consume us; but by good experience let us find it ordained of thee unto
us for our good and salvation, that being inflamed thereby with a burning
desire after piety; and also being purged from all our wicked lusts and fleshly
desires, we may fully give over our selves to thy service, till being rid of
this flesh, and the filthiness thereof, we may at length come to that solid
and perfect purity, which is set before us in thy holy Gospel, and so may
partake with thee in thine eternal glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FOVRTH upon the fifth Chapter.
Verse. 16. His quiver is an open sepulcher, all shall be strong.
THe Prophet began in the former verse, to threaten the Jews with Gods
judgments, and told them that the Chaldeans should be the executioners thereof.
He still prosecutes the same argument, and says, their quiver shall be like
open sepulchers. We know the Eastern people, for the most part, used arrows
and darts: for they fought not standing still, but seemed to flee; and then
suddenly turning back, they discharged their arrows, or darts against their
enemies. The Prophet then alludes to this custom of theirs, when he says,
their quiver shall be as open sepulchers. This similitude might seem harsh and
strange at the first: but it is all one as if he had said, they shall be so
expert in the art of shooting, that they shall make havoc of all they meet
withal.

And he adds, All shall be strong; to let them know, that this should be no
light skirmish: in a word, it is as if he had said, this war will bring such
ruin upon the Jews, that they shall all perish.

Verse. 17. And shall devour thine harvest, and thy bread: they shall devour
thy sons, and thy daughters; they shall devour thy flocks, and thy cattle;
they shall devour thy vine, and thy fig tree; they shall bring thy defenced
Cities, in which thou did trust, to poverty, by the sword.
HE touches the cruelty of the enemy here, Read the 18. verse with this,
for the further explanation thereof, and so forwards.
in the same sense with the former: as if he should say, they have the conquest
already. Why so? Because they are Gods executioners. He omits to speak to the
Jews then, of the difficulties and tediousness of war: but speaks here,
as to those that are vanquished: only he shows, that the Caldeans in this
conquest, shall be very cruel. He by Gods appointment. But he adds a second
point, namely, that they Therefore he says, they shall eat; and shall eat:
for he changes the number in the verb, and yet the sense is all one. He
shall eat (says he) thy harvest, Harvest. Bread.
and thy bread: that is to say, whatsoever thou reapest, shall be a prey for
the enemy. By the harvest, and bread, he means all their commings in.

Next he adds, they shall eat, or devour thy sons Sons.
and thy daughters. This cruelty yet far exceeds the other. I grant it is an
hard case to be deprived of sustenance; Daughters.
but when they come to cutting of throats, and that of poor infants, in the
sight of their fathers and mothers, this is terrible indeed. And yet the
Prophet says, the enemy shall be so sauagely minded, that they shall not
spare, no not little babes.

Flocks of cattle. Vine. Fig cree.
He adds the same of the flocks, and cattle: and then he comes to the vine,
and fig tree: as if he should say, the Jews shall be stripped of all;
because the enemy shall rake all to himself, and shall not content himself
with victuals, and the rest of the booty, but shall also slay the little
children.

Cities defenced.
Now in regard the Jews had Cities well defenced, they malepertly insulted over
the Prophets: the Prophet now insults over them, to wit, over their pride and
vanity: your Cities so well defenced (says he) shall notwithstanding be
impouerished. Then he adds, wherein thou did trust: all these (says he)
shall be put to the edge of the sword. For this latter clause, by the sword,
refers it self to the whole verse, and to every particular branch of it. As if
he should say, the enemy obtaining the victory by law shall first spoil the
whole country; then seize upon

Verse. 18. And in those days also says the Lord, I will not make an end with
you: others translate, I will not wholly consume you.
THe expositors concur not about the sense of this verse: for the most of
them think, that some hope is here left for the faithful; yea all, almost
lean this way: neither have I seen any that expound it otherwise. They think
then, that God here moderates his former threatenings, and gives his servants
good hope, lest seeing the the Church so ruinated, they might imagine that no
seed thereof should remain. See verse. 10.
The word which the Prophet uses I grant, is often taken in this sense, as was
said yesterday. But taking a narrower view of the whole context, I am forced to
incline to the contrary opinion: to wit, that God rather aggrauates and
amplifies the greatness of his vengeance. And this word, Also; has reference
thereunto: as if he should say, Think not I have done with you, See verse. 17.
after the enemy has preyed upon all your goods, deprived you of your
children, and brought you to extreme poverty: think not I say, that you shall
so be freed from all calamities. For my vengeance shall further prosecute you.
Namely, from chap. 29. to 33.
Hereafter indeed, there follows promises to allay the tartness of the former
threatenings, lest the faithful should be put clean out of heart. But
doubtless, in this place the Prophet brings in God as a Judge, who takes
vengeance in such wise of his people, as if no place were now left for
compassion or mercy. Then also, says he. For this word Also, augments the
threatening; and has great emphasis here.

Then also, in those days: that is to say, after the enemy has bereaved the
land of her fruits, of all her cattle, and of all her inhabitants; yet then
will I not cease (says God) to prosecute you still. I will not make an end
with you then; in regard I have other plagues in store for you, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: for after he has
punished a people one way, yet has he still variety of plagues in store. See
Deuteronomy. 32.22.23.24.25.
when you shall think all is hushed, and that an end is now come of all your
miseries. Thus God is wont to deal with hypocrites: for such is their
malepertnesse and obstinacy, that being smitten, they grow the more hardened in
their bad courses, and fall to biting or gnawing of the bit, as the proverb
says. Now this stubbornness arises from this conceit; they think God has
left himself unfurnished of judgments, after he has once or twice punished
their offenses. He denounces then, that he has sundry sorts of chastisements
ready, wherewith to punish their sins. To which purpose is that which
follows in the next place.

Verse. 19. And it shall come to pass, when you shall have said, wherefore has
the Lord our God done all these things? Then shall thou say, As you have
forsaken me, and have served the Gods of strangers, word for word it is, of the
stranger, in your land: so shall you serve strangers: other expositors supply,
Gods: but they pervert the Prophets meaning: in a land that is not yours; that
is to say, in a land that shall be none of yours.
THat which I said before, appears now plainly; to wit, that the Prophet yet
mitigates not that tartness and sharpness which he used in the former
threatenings: but handles the Jews according to their obstinacy and rebellion,
in regard he saw they were incorrigible. And the holy Ghost also gave him to
understand, that there should be such great obstinacy in them, that till they
were utterly dashed to pieces (as it were) they would not bow their neck to
receive the yoke. He also here alleges the cause; lest they should fall to
pleading with God; which hypocrites are wont to do, as often as God begins to
correct them a little severely; for then they murmr against him; then they
complain of him, and must needs know the causes (forsooth) wherefore he
handles them so roughly, as if they deserved no such matter. Because the
hypocrites then, had these things in their mouths; the Prophet here preuents
them, It shall come to pass (says he) when you have said; He speaks to the
Jews, in the person of God: and by and by returns Gods speech to himself:
When you then, shall have said, wherefore has the Lord our God done all these
things? He here attributes that to these hypocrites, which always went
current amongst them, as often as they were summoned before Gods judgment seat.
For they are as forward in pleading their cause, as if they only were wronged:
and, as if God being summoned before them, to yield them an account: they were
able to convince him either of cruelty, or of over great severity. We see then
how the Prophet deciphers out this desperate people to the life, who could
neither be brought into any good order, nor yet to acknowledge their fault: but
stood out against God with brazen foreheads, as in the rest of the Prophets we
have seen, See Isa. 48 4. Mal. 1.6.7.
but especially in the first chapter of Malachy. For there the Prophet often
repeats this cry of the people, wherein? wherein? what means this? So our
Prophet here in like manner, when they shall have said (says he) wherefore
has the Lord done all these things unto us? As if they, forsooth, were
guiltless. Prou. 30.20.
For men of reprobate minds, as they have skill to wipe their mouths, with the
harlot, See verse. 12.
after they have committed their abominations: so can they also set a bold face
on the matter, and ask reasons of God, why he chastises them. So here in the
same sense these make no bones at all to call God, their God; albeit they had
even at this instant forsaken him; as was said yesterday. For this so gross
and graceless had forsaken God, yet the Prophet, the better to discover their
pride and rebellion, brings themselves in, speaking here; as if God had been
much obliged unto them.

Thou shall say unto them (says he) One while God speaks to the people, and
another while to the Prophet. When they then shall begin to murmr after this
manner; thou shall answer, because you have forsaken me. Now that the Prophets
words might have the greater weight, God bids him speak unto them, as in his
own person: because then you have forsaken me; as if Jeremiah spoke not, but
God by bis mouth.

And have served strange gods: that is to say, strangers, in your land. God
here shows in few words, what the Jews had deserved, and contents himself
with naming one kind only. We shall see hereafter, and have often seen
heretofore, that they were culpable of many iniquities before God. But that the
Prophet might (as it were) touch all in a word, he mentions no more here but
this particular only: You shall serve tyrants (says he) in a strange land, who
will oppress you with cruelty; in regard you have served their gods in your
land. God here puts them in mind of those benefits he had bestowed upon them;
namely, that having driven out from among them, the profane nations, he gave
them the land of Canaan for their own possession; which was so fruitful and
desirable, that it ought to have been their perpetual rest. God called this
land his rest: why so? Because he there maintained the Jews, and meant they
only should be the lawful inheritors thereof, to the worlds end. He now
says then, this land was yours. No doubt but in that he thus calls his
benefits bestowed upon them to their remembrance, it was to aggrauate their
unthankfulness, in regard they were the just and lawful possessors of this
land, Psalm. 44.3.
which yet was none of their conquest. He says, they served strange gods in
their land: and not only that, but strangers also. The Prophets speak often
thus: they call them the gods of the stranger, or of a strange nation: but the
phrase of speech has great weight in it; because it is an unworthy thing, and
much less excusable, that the Jews who had God dwelling in the midst of
them, should by way of borrowing, seek after the gods (here and there) of
profane nations: as if they should say, Give ye us your gods. The Prophet
then, points out this so detestable a crime, as with the finger, when he says,
you have served the gods of strangers.

In the next place he adds, you shall serve strangers. As I think, he means
not their gods: for (as I have said) those that refer it to those gods,
corrupt the true sense: but he speaks of tyrants. I have given you (says he
in Ezechiel) good laws, Ezech. 20.21.25.
which whosoever observes, shall live in them: but you would not obey them.
And therefore will I now give you laws which shall not be good: that is to say,
I will impose a tyrannous yoke upon you; and those that shall vanquish you,
shall pill and spoil you: yea, those barbarous nations, whose language you
understand not, shall take from you, your goods and riches, because you have
been disobedient and rebellious. It follows.

Verse. 20. Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it, word for word,
cause it to be heard, in Judah, saying:

21. Hear this I pray you, ye foolish people, that have no heart: they have
eyes, but see nothing; they have ears, but hear not, word for word, and shall
not hear.


THe Prophet here confirms his former doctrine, lest the Jews should imagine
he threatened and astonished them with words only; and in the mean while
should be fearlesse in regard of the effect. He says then, Declare,
Doubtless the Prophet alludes to the custom of those times: for they were
wont to make wars known by sound of trumpet, and by heralds of arms. The
enemy put not himself forthwith in battle array to sack all, but they first
manifested the war: that the cause might be known to be just. God then
affirms here, that he has spoken aloud unto them by his Prophet Jeremiah,
as if open war had been solemnly proclaimed, and as if the enemy had been at
the gates, ready armed for the fight. Declare this then. And what is this
declaration? Give ear O foolish nation. In the first place the Prophet here
reprocheth the Jews and Israelites for their carelessness, in that they were
void of common sense. For by the word heart, the Hebrews signify spirit, or
understanding, as we have seen elsewhere. He says then, this people is void
of all understanding. First, he calls them fools, or sots. But in regard many
are dull and blockish, who yet are not wholly destitute of reason; therefore he
adds, they were without heart. I grant he seems to add this by way of
correction, that they had ears, and eyes; but yet by way of derision he
aggrauates that which I have said; namely, that they were no less senseless,
than if they had been so many trunkes of wood, or stone. And why?

You have eyes, and ears, but you neither see, nor hear. No question but he
alludes to the Idols, Verse. 21.
whereunto they were addicted. For in Psalm. 115.8. it is said, That all they
who make, and trust in them, are like unto them. This the Prophet alleges,
after he had said before, They have ears to hear, and hear not, eyes to
see, and see not. Jeremiah then taxes the Jews closely here, for becoming
so besotted in their superstitions, that they had made themselves like to dead
idols. For there is some similitude of a man in an idol, and the parts of a
man are there distinguished: yet without any sense. So in like manner, says
he, The Jews have some resemblance of men, as touching their eyes, and ears,
and the external shapes which they have of men: but in the mean while they
are no less senseless than if they were stocks or stones.

Verse. 22. Will ye not fear me, says the Lord? and will ye not tremble before
my face? who have laid the sand for the bounds of the sea: a statute of an age,
that is, by a perpetual decree, and it shall not pass it: some refer this
to the bounds, some to the statute or decree, and his waves shall move, but
shall have no power, and shall make a tumult, or shall roar, and they shall
not pass over.
See verse. 20.
HEre God shows the reason why he called this people foolish, and without
heart. For it was a strange senselessness in them, that they feared not Gods
presence, seeing the very dumb and insensible elements, subject themselves
under his command. And above all, he proposes the example of the sea: for no
creature is so hidious and terrible as the sea, when it is tossed with tempests
and waves. Why so? The whole world seems to be turned topsie turuey, when her
waves arise with so great violence: who is it that hears or sees the same,
that trembles not every joint of him: Though the sea be never so terrible, yet
it obeyes God quietly.
and yet the sea it self, which terrifies the most resolute man on earth;
obeyes God quietly. For let her floods be never so furious, yet do they grow
calm and still, and keep within compass. But if you would know the manner
how; truly it is a miracle; and therefore who can give a reason of it? For the
sea we know (as other elements are) is round: as the earth is round, so is the
element of water; and so is the fire and air in like manner. Since the form of
this element then is round, let us see whether it be lower than the earth, or
above it: but her lightness shows, that she is above the earth. Whence is it
then, The cause why the sea ouerwhelmes not the whole world. See Job 38.11.
that the sea does not forthwith ouerwhelme the whole earth? For she is liquid,
and cannot stay in a place, unless she be restrained by some secret power and
moving of God. It follows then, that the sea is shut up within her place,
because it has so pleased God: as Moses also shows in Genes. 1.9. Let the dry
earth appear, says God. For he there shows that the earth was covered with
waters, so as not a fingers breadth thereof appeared, till God had gathered them
into their place. Now this voice of God, albeit we hear it not with our ears,
and that it sounds not in the air; yet does the sea understand it well enough;
because she is contained within her bounds. Put the case the sea should always
be calm, yet should this work of God at all times be admirable, in regard men
have some part of the earth dry, wherein they may inhabit. But when the
tempest rises, as I have said, and that it seems heaven and earth would go
together: which of us trembles not at the viewing of such a spectacle. Then
Gods power and outstretched arm appears more manifestly, which thus
composeth and quiets the boisterous sea. We now see the scope of the Prophets
words. He shows that the Jews are become monsters, and unworthy to be
reckoned among men; no, not among the brute beasts. For there is more
understanding in the sea, tossed with furious tempests; than in men, who seemed
to be endowed with sense and reason. This is the drift and scope of this
comparison.

But because this complaint was very bitter, the Prophet has used an
interrogation: Will ye not fear me? As if God should say, What means this? Is
it possible that I should not be feared, nor reverenced of you? The sea obeyes
me, and by my secret command her fury is staid; because I have once ordained
she should keep within her limits: and albeit she be violently tossed up and
down with her waves and tempests; yet does she not pass beyond the bounds
which I have set her. And O ye sons of men that are reasonable creatures!
will not ye fear me? will not ye tremble, or fear before my face?

He adds, that he has placed the sand for a bound to the sea. Now this
expresses much more, than if he had said, I have ordained limits for the sea.
For he speaks of the sand which is moveable, and with a little blast is
carried this way and that way. The sand also is easy to be pierced into? Were
there hard rocks placed upon all the sea banks, the miracle would not be
half so admirable. If God then should beat back the swellings of the sea
with such things as were of a solid substance; this work might peradventure
be ascribed to nature. But what solidnesse is in the sand? Let me power but a
little water upon it, incontinently it pierces into it. Whence comes it then,
that the boisterous sea, with her roaring waves, plowes not up the sand, which
of its own nature is so flexible? We see then, that this word sand is not
superfluous. There is almost the like place to this, in the book of Job, chap.
38.11. where God speaking of his inuinsible power, among other things, says,
And let the sea come hitherto: let her proud waves pass no further. For it is
most certain, that the least tempest arises not, but by Gods will. Why so?
Because he can always hold the sea at one rate. But he does it not: nay
rather, as if he laid the raines in her neck, he says, Go: but yet stay
here. Now when it seems these great waves mounted aloft as high as the
mountains, threaten both men and beasts, as if the whole earth should
therewithal be overwhelmed: then do these violent waves suddenly cease, and
are calm.

by a perpetual ordinance. I grant the sea sometimes ouerflowes. For we see
many Cities sunk by deluges and inundations: a perpetual ordinance, or
decree: namely, that God keeps the sea within her limits. For as often as the
sea inuades any part of the habitable world; then may we assuredly collect
thence, that she wanted her bridle; whereof Jeremiah here, and Job in chap. 38.
speaks. We gather then, that no let or impediment hinders the sea from
ouerflowing the whole earth, but only her obedience to Gods decree: yea and
this perpetuity also, The sea would ouerflow all, were it not kept in by Gods
perpetual command.
whereof the Prophet speaks, remains steadfast, in regard of the general. For
albeit tempests arise every year, this fury notwithstanding cease; end yet
no otherwise than by Gods special command. This is true then, that bounds are
set for the sea, over which her waves cannot glide.

And therefore he says, her waves shall move, and shall not prevail: and
then, they shall sound, or make a noise, and shall not pass over. We have now
the sum of this verse: namely, God complains that the Jews were grown so
furious, and so sottish, that their obedience came far short even of the Seas
obedience; albeit she be tossed with waves and tempests. He therefore brings
forth the Jews here upon the stage, as monsters in nature, in regard nothing
is more contrary thereunto, than to see more understanding in the senseless
sea, and that when it is most unquiet, than in man, who is created according to
Gods image, who also is endowed with some sense and reason. He afterward adds:

Verse. 23. And this people has a perverse and rebellious heart: they are
departed and gone.
HEre the sentence is complete, in regard it yet depends upon the former
interrogation. But now God shows more clearly why he mentioned this matter
touching the sea. And this people, says he, or, but this people, has a
perverse heart: for the word signifies, perverse. Others translate, declining,
which does not fully express the sense. We may also see in many places, that
the word which the Prophet uses, imports somewhat more than declining. Yea and
this translation agrees better; to wit, that this people has a perverse heart:
and then, rebellious: or which could not be tamed. No doubt but he compares, or
opposes the fierceness and rebellion of the people, to the obedience of the
sea: and thus in plain terms he teaches, that there is greater fury and
stupidity in this nation of the Jews, than in the tempestuous sea.

By the effect also he proves, that the peoples heart is perverse. Why so?
Because they were declined, and gone. Had he said in a word, they had declined;
it had not been a full proof: but by the word gone, he understands their
obstinacy. As if he had said, As desperate diseases cannot be cured by any
remedies; no more can you, because you persist in your rebellion. They are
departed then, and gone: that is, I could not reclaim them. For God had often
tried, by the labors of his servants, to see if he could bring them back
into the right way: but so much the more they discovered their incorrigible
obstinacy, and thereby also showed, that there was no place left for
repentance. It follows.

Verse. 24. And said not in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, who
gives rain, and the water of the morning, See Deuteronomy. 28.12.
and of the evening, of these words we have spoken in another place, in the
time thereof, or in his season, he reserueth us the perpetual weeks of the
harvest: that is to say, for the harvest.
HEre the Prophet in other words shows, that the Jews are convinced of
obstinate rebellion. He says, it came not in their minds once to say in
themselves, let us now fear God. We see then, that all these things tend to
one and the same end, namely, that the Jews were no less senseless, than the
insensible elements. Nay, that there was more insensiblenesse and rebellion in
their hearts, than in all the creatures of the whole world besides. To say in
the heart, See chap. 2.6.
is as much with the Hebrews, as to think, or consider in ones self. The
Latins say, it came not in their mind, that is to say, they were so far void
of common reason and understanding, yt at least this would not fall into their
mind, nor once conceive this thought, Let us now fear God. Here then he takes
from them all pretext of ignorance, lest they should allege, It is true, we
have not served God; but it was our error, or unadvisedness that brought us
to it. Nay, says he, you had your eyes, and your ears too, and the rest of
your senses? God gave you showers; not so much as one year passed over your
heads, in which the earth brought not forth her increase: and as often as you put
one bit of bread into your mouths, does not Gods liberality therein manifest
it self unto you? yet have you not once thought in your selves, this God,
surely ought to be worshipped and served. We see then, how he here takes from
them all excuses, in respect of their ingratitude, when he says, they observed
not Gods benefits, though they gazed upon them daily with their eyes, though
they touched them with their hands, and had a sensible feeling thereof in all
the parts of their bodies. But of this matter we purpose to say more to morrow.

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly father, seeing thou daily allurest us so sweetly,
and lovingly to come unto thee, and that thy word to this end sounds
continually in our ears; be so good unto us, that the peruersity of our flesh
may not cause us to stop our ears, but make us attentive hearers of the
doctrine of salvation: moreover, grant we may be so docible and obedient, that
thou may bow and bend us as thou would have us, and lead us in the path
wherein thou would we should walk; till at length we may come to that
blessed rest, which is prepared for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE, WHICH IS THE FIFTH upon the fifth Chapter.
YEsterday we set before you the brutish carelessness of such as are so little
affected with Gods benefits, that they are not stirred up thereby to honor and
serve him. I grant the Prophet spoke of such benefits as God bestows equally,
as well upon the bad, as upon the good: to wit, he gives them showers, the
spring time, and harvest; and so disposes of all the parts and seasons of the
year, that at the length the fruits of the earth ripen. For by the weeks
ordained, or established, he simply means, that God in such wise orders every
part of the year, that whatsoever men sow, ripens at last. And the word,
reserues; tends also to the same purpose: for it is all one as if he had said,
The seasons so change every year, that yet one continual course and order is
still observed, and they follow (as you see) one in the neck of another. Now
we have the Prophets meaning: for he shows, that the Jews had too long been
besotted, and brutishly minded; in that they considered not, no not in their
ordinaty and daily food, of Gods bounty and liberality toward them, which yet
ought to have been as so many goads in their sides, to have pricked them
forward to his fear and service. Saint Paul also (in his time) preaching to
profane persons, Act. 14.17. sets this consideration before their eyes, God
(says he) never left himself without witness, in that he gave you rain and
fruitful seasons: that is, he so disposed of the seasons, that one might
easily behold therein, as in a glass, his fatherly love toward mankind. But
the Prophet meant here to tax the Jews of ingratitude, in regard they
considered not how liberally God had always dealt with them, and that not
after an ordinary manner. For he had not only drawn them to him, by bestowing
common benefits upon them; but had also obliged them to him, by rare and
unaccustomed mercies. Seeing then he had bestowed extraordinary favors upon
them, so much the more odious was their unthankfulness, in regard they
considered not in themselves, that all the benefits they had received at his
hands, were as so many spurs in their sides, or allurements to bind them unto
him. This is the Prophets meaning then, when he says, They said not, Let us
now fear the Lord, which gives us rain: that is, the rain of the spring, and
the rain before harvest; and that in due time time and season. For therein we
see how the providence of God shines: namely, whilst the husbandman sowes,
the rain flows; which ministers moisture and juice unto the earth: moreover,
before the fruits be ripened, how God again breathes fatness into them, by
this rain of the evening. And that which follows, tends to the same end; who
gives raines in the weeks ordained: or, word for word, of ordinances. But he
adds, that at length the harvest may approach.

Verse. 25. Your iniquities have turned away these things from you, and your
wickednesses have hindered the good from you.
BEcause hypocrites (as was formerly said) are wont to make their replies ever
and anon against God, and to object this, or that. The Prophet here preuents
all their allegations, in saying that Gods liberality was hindered, and
withdrawn from them, only by their own proper fault. For they might have
replied, but we feel how by the excessive heat of the Sun, our fruits are
one while parched and burned up; another while unseasonable raines, rot the
grain in the earth: in a word, we see no certainty at all, Our sins are the
cause why Gods bounty is restrained from us.
But know, it comes to pass by reason of your wickedness and peruersity, that
God tempers not every part of the year in such wise, as with your eyes you may
behold his continual liberality. Your iniquities (says he) have deprived you
of these things, and your wickednesses have hindered good things from you. This
sentence then is very remarkable: for Gods fatherly goodness shines not
always alike, in respect of these outward things, but many mists comes ever
and anon overthwart our eyes. Thence it comes, that profane persons think the
barrenness of this year, and the fruitfulness of that; falls out by chance.
For in this life we see nothing so constantly to go on in a stright line, as
if the goodness of God so manifested it self in all things, that there should
not now and then happen many obstacles and hindrances in the way. But which of
us considers, whence this trouble and confusion proceeds? Doubtless it is,
because our selves have shut up the way against God, that his bounty should not
continually reach unto us: Note.
we trouble heaven and earth then by our sins. For if we kept our selves
within the bounds of obedience to our God, certainly all the elements would be
continually for us: and thus we should perceive an Angelical harmony in all
the parts of the world. But in regard we by our iniquities raise up tumults
every day against God; yea every day proclaim open war against him, and by
our pride, contumacy, and obstinacy provoke him: all things, as well in the
heavens, as in the earth, must needs be out of square. Hence it comes, that the
sky is darkened over us, and that continual raines mar the fruits of the
earth, and that we see no right order in any part of the world. This so
confused a distemperature then, which we discern in all the elements, must be
imputed to our sins; for that is the Prophets meaning.

Now this reprehension, no doubt, was then directed to the Jews; but we may
gather a general doctrine from it. These two points then stand firm: first,
Two points.
that God leaves not himself without witness; in regard For in the ordinary
course of nature, See verse. 24. Verse. 26.
we may behold an inestimabe goodness of God toward mankind: but in the
mutations which fall out, we must forthwith consider of the cause; namely, We
will not suffer the Lord to keep one certain rate, concerning the seasons of
the year.
that we will not permit God to govern the world after a certain and equal
rate; but we disturb his providence, as much as lies in us. Now we see then,
that the Prophet has very aptly added this sentence to the former, your
iniquities have hindered Gods blessings and benefits from you. Then it follows.

Verse. 26. For wicked persons are found among my people, they look, that is to
say, they craftily espy, where they may spread their nets, and prepare a pit to
take men therein.
HE now confirms his last speech, namely, that the Jews by their own fault,
deprived themselves of Gods fatherly favor. Otherwise, they would always have
had their replies ready: for as hypocrites are factious and lofty, so will they
not endure to be easily brought under. The Prophet then confirms that which
be said, to wit, that there were wicked persons found among the people of God:
as if he should say, we need not now seek out wicked ones among the profane
heathen: for iniquity so reigns even amongst us the elect people of God, that
there is nothing sound nor sincere amongst us.

When he says, they were found I expound it, that they were taken with the
manner, and convicted. For his meaning is, that their wickednesses were not
committed so closely and obscurely, that they could shift off the matter by
their euasions: See chap. 2.26.
for they were found, says he, as thieves that are taken breaking into men's
houses. The Prophet affirms then, that there was no need here, of any long
dispute, or traversing the matter; as if the Jews had been some way excusable:
for they were taken with the deed doing. This then was much more odious, then
if the poor blind Heathen had been found guilty of these things. For God had
adopted the Jews upon condition, that all holiness and integrity of life
should reign amongst them. Seeing then on the contrary, they were not only
sinners, but wholly wrapped in sin, and full fraught with impieties: this (as I
have said) was much more detestable. And thus he has stripped them of all
occasion of cauelling.

In the next place he presses them yet nearer; namely, that every one looked.
For the word in the Prophets language signifies so much. He shall look. I
grant he changes the number, but the sense is not therefore obscure. Now the
word, to look, here, signifies as much as to lay ambushes. He shall look
then, that is to say, every one of them watched and espied how, and which way
they might lay traps, as fowlers do.

Afterward he says, they were furnished with nets, to draw men into ruin,
after they had snared them. Here one kind is put for the general. For the
Prophet meant to to show, that at that time, there was neither faith nor
uprightness to be found among this people, in regard eueone oppressed the
simple, by wicked subtilties, and cunning practices. Being grown thus
perfidious then, and in that they dealt so trecherously one with another; he
justly compares them to fowlers, who catch the poor birds in their nets, or
gins. Which he expounds yet more clearly in the words following.

Verse. 27. As a cage is full of birds; so are their houses full of deceit: and
thereby they are increased and grown rich.
Jeremiah prosecutes the same doctrine, which formerly he began to handle. For
he used a similitude taken from fowlers, as we said erewhile. Now in this
verse, he applies this similitude to the Jews: to wit, that their houses were
as full of fraud, as a cage (others translate, a panyer, or basket) is of
birds. For when fowlers go to their game, they carry with them either bags,
cages, or baskets. Thus Jeremiah says then, that they got in their booty in
such wise on all sides, that their houses were full of fraud. Now by the word
deceit, in this place, he means the spoils which they obtained by cunning
practices. Indeed, at the first blush the speech seems somewhat obscure: but
if we take the word fraud, in the passive signification, there will be no
ambiguity at all. The Prophet then (to speak properly) says not that their
houses were full of craft, or fraud, but of spoils which they had gotten to
themselves by fraud and deceit. What means he then by this word fraud? He
means the spoils wherewith they enriched themselves; as we shall see by his
own exposition anon. We have now attained the Prophets meaning then, namely,
that proofs need not be sought out a far off, to manifest whether the Jews
deceived the poor and simple, by their crafty conueyances: for their houses
were full of such booties, that thence their peruersity might easily be
espied; in regard they had gotten riches on all sides, and by this means had
spoiled poor men of their substance. For which cause he adds,

Hereupon they are increased, and enriched. For it is likely they bragged much
of their riches; as thieves and robbers, that care not whom they spoil. For
being increased and grown great, they thought themselves far excluded out of
the common sort of men: as these Courtiers, who having snatched their riches
from this and that man by fraud, and by a tyrannous usurpation, so as one will
be able to dispend sixty thousand by the year; Courtiers taxed, who suddenly
rise to wealth by oppression.
another an hundred thousand: then grow they to be so much the more proud and
disdainful, in regard they think no man ought to call them to an account: for
their eyes are dazzled with the great splendour and glory of their riches. But
the Prophet deriding this vain and fond glorying, says, Behold they are
become great in the world, and therefore they will be magnified: but says he;
they are increased and enriched: That is to say, If any now do but search
their houses, I grant he shall find goodly and swelling titles there, by
means whereof they beguiled poor simple people: but in the mean while all
are but the spoils, booties, and robberies of thieves. In a word, they are
mere thefts. He adds,

Verse. 28. They are waxen fat, for the word here used comes of one that
signifies oil, they are anointed with fat (says he): If we will render it
properly after the Latins, they shine, or are white: he alludes to fat men
that are well fed, whose skin is fair, and shining, yea they ouerpasse, or,
albeit they ouer-passe, the words of the wicked, that is to say, the iniquities
of the wicked, they judge not the cause of the fatherless, and prosper; and
judge not the judgment of the poor.
HEre the Prophet taxes those who were the highest in dignity above the rest,
who also carried a great sway among them, in regard of their wealth: moreover,
they meant to be so privileged, that no man should dare to control them,
because they (forsooth) were the governors of the people. Before, he spoke in
general terms: but now he directs his speech to such as were most eminent
above the people; to wit, to the Kings council, to the Priests, Judges, and to
all such as were in authority. He says then, they were swollen with fatness,
and shined, albeit they ouerpassed, etc. We see how he confirms that which he
touched briefly before: for they shrouded themselves in such wise under pretext
of their riches, that none might compel them to render an account of their
life; and therefore by way of yielding them so much, he says, I grant indeed
you are shining, and glister as if you were all of gold. But whence comes this
glistering? Whence comes this goodly show wherewith you dazzle the eyes of the
simple? You shine and are fat, you have ouer-passed the words of the wicked:
that is, the ways, enterprises, and counsels of the wicked. In a word; he
signifies, that this nothing auailed wicked men, that with a look, they were
able to terrify the whole world, that they were in credit and estimation, and
were reverenced in respect of their wealth: to be short, that they were feared
of all. The Prophet yields them their honors, their riches, their goodly
shows, their fame, their reputation, greatness, dignities, and whatsoever
else: in the mean while, you (says he) have ouerpassed the ways and acts of
the wicked. For in the next place he reprooues them, because they judged not
judgment. Whence we see that the Prophet speaks not of the Commons, or of
private persons; but of set purpose taxes the Kings Counsel, and the Judges
of the land. They judge not judgment, says he, that it to say, They are
utterly careless of equity and vprightnes: but thefts, and wrongs, went
unpunished, and had their full swinge.

He also aggrauates their crime, and says, they judge not judgment; or the
cause of the fatherless: What pity should be showed to poor Orphans.
for many who are otherwise cruel, will yet have compassion upon poor
orphans. And it is certain that this young age, and those also that are left
altogether succourlesse, do much more move and affect our minds. When orphans
then, are left to the wide world, and none left to revenge their cause; when
they find no relief, no not from the Judges themselves: there, this place of
theeuerie is yet more apparent.

They prosper. He repeats that again which he said; to wit, that it is a
vain and foolish pretext, that they had gotten the applause of al, in regard
of their riches, honors, and power. They prospered, says he; what means he
by this? But in the mean while they judged not the judgment of the poor:
that is, they succored not the poor, but left them open to all the outrages
that might be. Now then we see how the wickednesses of the people are so
brought forth into the light, that the heads themselves are not exempted; for
God shows they had utterly forgotten their duties, and were altogether void of
common humanity. It follows.

Verse. 29. Shall I not visit upon this, says the Lord? And shall not my soul
be avenged upon such a nation as this?
See verse. 9.
HE yet repeats that which we saw before: and so this verse shall need no long
exposition. But this repetition is no way superfluous. For the Jews were so
hardened, that they scorned all reprehensions and threatenings. This is the
cause why God here rises up with greater vehemence of speech, and says,
shall I not visit upon these things? He takes this for a resolved truth,
whereof we also ought to be well persuaded; namely, that God is the Judge of
all the world. The office of a Judge.
Now it is the proper office of a Judge, to punish malefactors; also to succor
the poor an argument here, taken from his nature and office: as if he should
say, Can I that am God, suffer this so hateful an impiety, this pride and
presumption of my people, to have the swing on this manner, without executing
my vengeance on them.

And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Here (as we have
said elsewhere) God attributes that to his person, which properly appertains
not unto him. But it is all one as if he had said, Among earthly Judges, none
are found so remiss, that can put up such indignities, and outrages. For when
a Judge shall perceive the people scorn him, will he (think you) take it well
at their hands? Shall not my soul then be avenged? As if he should say, I am
not so slothful nor careless, but in the end, be sure I will pay you home,
for this contempt, so full of pride and ouerweening. It follows.

Verse. 30. A thing to astonish, or to terrify, and wicked, or shameful, is in
the land. The verb whence this word is derived, signifies properly to think,
or to consider: but it seems God in this place, as in some others, meant to
note out some monstrous thing, which cannot be comprehended within the compass
of common sense; as if he should say, you cannot imagine it. nor comprehend it
in your minds: I know this will indeed seem strange; but as I think, there is
good reason for it. Consequently he adds,

31. The Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests bear rule by their hands, or
receive by their hands, and my people will have it so, that is, they desire it
should be so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?


THe Prophet not contenting himself with his former reprehension, passes yet
further, in reproving the faults and iniquities of his nation. He says then,
the estate of the Jews was so corrupt, that the whole world might be
astonished at it. A fearful thing (says he) is fallen out: that is, a thing
past the reach of man's wit or reason, to imagine or comprehend. By these two
words he signifies, that the impiety of the people cannot be expressed with
words, or conceived in the mind of man, because it is an horrible monster. This
is the sum. Let us now see what that detestable thing is, which the Prophet
here notes out, and so detests: The Prophets (says he) prophesied lies. It is
certain that this might well astonish any that should hear of it, that in
Jerusalem (the City which God had chosen for his dwelling place end sanctuary)
these deceivers should dare to pretend the name of Prophets. What an horrible
profanation of Gods name was this? These impostors (forsooth) must have it
bruted every where, that they were the Prophets of God. In many places there
were Oracles; that is to say, illusions of Satan: but to see and behold in the
Sanctuary of God (there being then but one in all the world) the ministers of
Satan, to sow lies, which should bring the people to perdition, and in the
mean while to color all under Gods name; who (as I have said) had his
dwelling and his seat royal in this City: was it not an horrible monster that
might astonish all the world. And albeit even at this day it be a thing
detestable for the Monks, and those sinkes, to get up into pulpits to preach,
and wickedly to glory, as if they were Gods true Prophets, and faithful
teachers: yet if amongst us it should fall out, They are double monsters, who
dare teach lies, where the Gospel is purely preached.
that some one should corrupt the pure doctrine with their errors, and infect,
our people with their superstitions, he were a double monster. It is not
without cause then, that Jeremiah says, it was a thing both fearful, and
incomprehensible, that the Prophets prophesied lies.

Now he adds, the Priests take in their hands; some translate it thus: but the
sense may be double. It is said in Judges, 14.9. that Sampson took honey with
his hands, out of the Lion; where the same word is is used. And yet because
ordinarily and for the most part, it is taken to rule; me thinks the other
exposition agrees better; to wit, that the Priests ruled by the hands of the
false prophets. Now albeit we translate thus, they took upon their hands, that
is, they got in, and heaped together gifts on all sides: this also will not be
much unapt. How ever it be, the Prophet shows there was a mutual collusion
practiced between the Priessts, and the false prophets, so as they held both
together. For the false prophets (says he) deceived the people by their
flatteries. But what did the Priests? For they ought to have opposed against
them: but O, they received (says he) in their hands: that is to say, they
winked at it; because they saw these iuglings made for their advantage: and
thus the agreement was easily made up between them, and the false Prophets. We
see the very same at this day in the Papacy: for whilst the Monks, and that
rabble, seek to creep into the peoples favor, they thereby uphold and
maintain the whole Popedom. For which cause these curres, have also dared to
term themselves, The Popes Chariots upon which he is carried: to wit, the
four orders of beging Friars.
the Popes chariots. For the Pope, say they, is carried upon four wheels:
these four wheels are the four orders of beging Friars: and this they boast
of, when they mean to show what power they have to lie. The Pope then is
carried upon these four wheels of beggars. We see also he has adorned, and
every day adornes these beggars. Why so? Because they bear up his tyranny.
Such, at that time, was the condition of this people: for the Priests took the
prey, and the false Prophets also raked to them another part, as these hungry
dogs do at this day: and yet these dogs set not upon the people with such
violence as the Pope does: but like dogs, they lick up his stool. He with his
horned Bishops, devour the best and the fattest part. This sense then, ye see
agrees not ill; to wit, that they took in their hands. But as touching the
sum, it will also agree very well, if we say, that the Priests ruled by their
hands, in regard their state would not have stood upright, neither could they
have retained their credit and reputation among the people, without these false
prophets: for they were rejected of all. Seeing then, they reigned (as it were)
by their hands, there was a mutual compact between them.

He adds, and my people will have it so; because the common people might easily
(as they thought) exempt themselves from all blame: for even so it is their
custom at this day, to shroud themselves under this defense: Alas, we are
poor silly men, we were never at the schools, we are none of these great
Clerks: and what would ye have us to do, but follow our Prelates? Those of
the meaner, and baser sort of people then, amongst us, would willingly avoid
all blame, under this pretext. But the Prophet says here, the people will
have it so. It is certain we shall always find that which is written in Deuteronomy.
13.3. to be most true: The rising up of false ^^^^rs, a trial of the peoples
constancy.
as often as false Prophets arise, it is a true trial of the peoples constancy,
whether they will love the Lord or no, with all their hearts. As often then as
God means to make trial of the peoples piety; he lays the raines (as it
were) in the necks of false Prophets and deceivers, He that loves the Lord in
truth, will not be drawn away by false teachers.
to deceive. For whosoever loves God with a sincere affection, will be held
back by his holy spirit, from following lies and errors. When the ignorant
then are misled and reduced, it is certain, they are justly punished for their
contempt, in regard they were not attentive enough unto his word: and withal,
because voluntarily they love to be seduced by deceivers. For the Monks and
clergy men can say, A monk sh proverb.
and they have it often in their mouths, Seeing the world will be deceived, let
them in the devils name be deceived. Ye see these wicked deceivers are grown
so shameless, that they glory in the devils service, as being his slaves and
instruments, whereby he deceiues the world. And yet is this notwithstanding a
true proverb: for the world is never deceived, A true Proverb
but wittingly, and willingly. Why so? Because they that are most ignorant,
shut their eyes against the clear light, and flee from God as much as in them
is, delighting to hide themselves in darkness, as our Lord Jesus Christ also
says, Joh. 3.20.
Whosoever evil does, hates she light, Ioh. 3.20.

Lastly, the Prophet adds, And what will ye do in her last? or, in her end.
Some leave out the relative here, and others refer it to the Priests and false
prophets. But I assure my self, the Prophet notes out the City of Jerusalem
here, when he says, what will ye do in her end? For Jerusalem being founded
(as we know) by God own hand, and having him for her guardian and protector,
she grew altogether secure: but it was a false security: for in despising and
contemning the Lord, she grew proud and headstrong in her iniquities. What
will ye do then (says he) in her last? As if he should say, you much deceive
your selves, in thinking this City shall stand ever: for her ruin and
destruction is even at the doors. What will ye then do, when the City it
self shall go to wrack? must not every one of you perish together with her?

The Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly Father, seeing hitherto we have been too deaf, in
hearkening to so many exhortations, as also to those threatenings whereby thou
have more sharply pricked us forwards to repentance; grant that this our
obstinacy may not always remain in us, but that in the end we may subject
our selves unto thee; and that not by fits, or for a moment, but with a
constant resolution, that we may for ever give our selves wholly to thy
service, and that we may also so glorify thy name, that in the end we may
attain that glory, which thou have purchased for us, by the blood of thine
only Son, Jesus Christ. Amen.

The end of Master Caluins Lectures upon the five first chapters of the
Prophecy of Jeremiah.
THE SVMME AND ORDER OF SVCH THINGS as are handled by the Author, in his
Lectures on the former Chapters of Jeremiah his prophecy.
The figures in the margin, point to the Chapters, and verses: the residue, to
the page or pages, where the things themselves are to be found.

The first Lecture.
THe first thing noted in this Lecture, is the time when Jeremiah began to
execute his prophetical office: namely, in the thirteenth year of Josiah his
reign, over the kingdom of Judah. page 2.

In the next place is noted, how long he continued to execute his charge: to
wit, until the Jews were carried away captive into Babylon; which is thought
to be for the space of forty years together. p. 3. See verse. 3. of this
Chapter.

Whence is also noted his invincible constancy: first, if regard be had to the
message on which he was sent: secondly, to the parties unto whom it was sent.
ibid. for which see verse 18. of this Chapter.

The sum of his message, was to declare to the Jews, that the time of Gods
last vengeance was now at hand; because they had too long abused his patience,
and long forbearance of them. p. 5.

The Prophet by birth, is said to be the son of Hilkiah one, 7.

And therefore that his office suited well to his person: whereas Isaiah was
called from the Court, to be a Prophet; and Amos from the heard. p. 8.

9. 10.

It is probable that Amon was rather Josiah his legal, than natural father.
ibid.

3.

His words, mentioned in verse. 1.2. are here said to be to be the Lords
words. p. 11.

12.

13.

The second Lecture.
16.

18.

19.

21. 22.

A two fold use of the word, viz. to root up, and to plant; and why the words
are so placed. p. 23.



Ieremiahs vision of the rod of an Almond tree: and thererefore verse. 10. and
11. must be considered both together. p. 27.

The third Lecture.
3.

34.

God: secondly, they worshipped false Gods; even the works of their own
hands. p. 37. 38.

Which judgment (let them take it as they would) the Prophet: 39.

And lest he should slacken his duty, the Lord armeth him again the second
time, against immoderate fear: adding thereto a severe threat, if he should
decist, viz. that he would surely be avenged on him. p. 40. 41.

The fourth Lecture.
Contrariwise, if in the strength of the Lord, he went on 43. 44. 45. 46.

The maine cause why God sent his Prophet to reclaim 51. 52.

Here are recited many fruits flowing from this mercy and 54. 55.

Now because their revolt from God was causeless, as on 56. 57. See verse. 8.
and 11.

The fifth Lecture.
Taxing them for not seeking to him in their extremities, 59. 60.

Now the better to set forth Gods provident care over them, together with their
ingratitude for the same, here is a description of the wilderness, through
which he miraculously led them. p. 61.

Where he not only preserved and fed them, for many years, but brought them
afterward into a land flowing with milk and honey; but like foolish people
and unwise, they turned his grace into wantonness. p. 62. 63.

6. was not to be charged upon the common people alone; but the Prophet shows,
that even their leaders and teachers were deeply guilty of the same crime with
them. p. 64.

Not only so, but that therewithal they reverenced dumb Idols, more than the
living God; albeit by experience they found, that they honored such gods as
could give them nothing. Deuteronomy. 29.26.
p. 67.68. See verse. 5.

69.70.

72.73. See verse. 5. and 8.

The sixth Lecture.
75.76.

76. 77.

79.

81.

Yea, sin causes God to set, not only our enemies upon 81. 82.

If ye ask for what sin this judgment befell the Jews? 82. 83.

Never look therefore for comfort from friends, when God 85.

Rather than wicked rebels shall want a fury to vex them, 88.

The seventh Lecture.
God cannot (...) that men should turn his grace into wantonness. p. 93. 94.

God had planted the Jews as a vine of choice, and there-therefore 96.

In regard whereof their guiltiness was grown to be of such 98.

And yet their impudency being such, as for all that, to plead 100.

But in the middle of their race, God at length gave 102. 103.

The eighth Lecture.
But for all this they could not be kept in, no not by reprehensions, 105.

Thus their revolt is manifested by God himself, to their 109. 110.

Yea, he conuicteth them out of their own words and deeds, proving that they
gave that honor to false gods, which belonged to the true God. p. 111.

114.

115.

See verse. 34.
which God had sent among them to a far better end. p. 116. 117. 118.

The ninth Lecture.
121. 122. 123.

123. 124.

126.

30. showing, that they killed not the Prophets privily, as thieves do true
men; but that the signs thereof were to be seen in every place, yea upon the
hems of their garments. p. 127. 128.

130.

134. 135.

The tenth Lecture.
That which is noted before in verse. 18. may show the sum 36. verse. p. 135.

That which to their thinking would prove matter of relief and succor unto
them, should be turned into cause of shame and confusion unto them.

The Lord in these verses proves once more, whether he 140.

For proof of which disloyalty, he requires but their own 144.

And if they refused to do it, they needed but the very 146.

The eleventh Lecture.
And yet whilst the heavens might seem to be merciless, 148.

But were they allured? No, they stiffly resisted, both in 150.

Though Josias were a good Prince, and was exceeding 152.

And yet then, God sought also by his lenity, to draw 154.

God was therefore constrained, when he saw she would needs 155.

But this was so far from fearing Judah (for whose cause the ten tribes are
here brought in, under the similitude of an adulterous wife) that contrariwise
she is said to be fearlesse. p. 156.

157.

Josias, they made any show of converting unto God, yet (in respect of the
multitude) all was but from the teeth outward, and merely in hypocrisy. p. 158.

159.

The twelfth Lecture.
162. 163.

64. 65. 66.

this ground. viz. that sowsoeuer they had showed themselves as a disloyal
wife toward him: yet he retained the affection of a loving husband toward
them; and would be ready to accept them again into his favor, though but one
out of a City, or but two out of a Tribe should come unto him. p. 168. 169. 170.

And would be ready to show a token of his especial favor 171. 172.

And thus, after God and they should be at one again, then 173. 174.

Which exposition is here confirmed, with the cause thereof 175.

The thirteenth Lecture.
For Gods wrath being now appeased; after both houses 178. 179.

But what should be the means to effect this? God would

And this; not for any merits of theirs, for by their sins 181.

Bringing them in lamenting, whilst the Jews lay securely 182. 183.

Here God is brought in, as a father relenting toward a 184. 185.

185. 186.

186.

187. 188.

The fourteenth Lecture.
190. 191.

192. 193.

Showing, that if they had taken this course, they might every way have been
mirrours of Gods mercies: but the contrary, was the cause of Gods curses upon
themselves; which also kept off the Heathens from coming in, to partake with
them in the worship of the true God; who had promised, that in Abraham's seed,
all the nations of the earth should be blessed. p. 194. 195.

196. 197.

bare and outward ceremony only, but to show forth the effect thereof; first
in their inward man, and then in their whole conversation. p. 198.

And this he bids them do without delay: for if they deferred their
repentance, it would be the next way to hasten the wrath of God to break
forth upon them as fire; which being once inflamed, will not easily be
quenched. p. 200.

For if it be once kindled, all defenses wherein they trusted, 201.

The fifteenth Lecture,
That he might yet strike the greater terror into them, he 203.

And therefore it is high time for them now, unless they 204. 205.

Now lest the Prophet might be thought to affright them 206. 207.

So as by the effects they should discern, whether it had 208. 209.

They must not think therefore that he will correct them now, as in times
past, for their amendment; but rather to 210. 211.

Neither must they think God will be long in effecting it; 112. 113

Yet lest they might think their case utterly desperate, God offers them
conditions of peace, upon condition of their unfeigned repentance. p. 212. 213.

The Sixteenth Lecture.
217. 218.

219.

Telling them, that howsoever the enemy seeemed far off, yet their cry might
(after a sort) be heard into the Cities of Judah. p. 120.

221.

222.

223. 224. 225.

226. 227.

and the trumpet begin to sound an alarm to the battle, they must expect no
truce. p. 228.

And if they would know for what cause all these evils 229. 230.

The seventeenth Lecture.
Here under four visions (containing sundry figures) the 232. 233. 234. 235.
236.

And lest he should not be believed, he brings in the Lord 237. 238.

Now after sinners come once to be pursued of God in his 243.

No not when they have added thereto all the policies, which 245.

For when all is done, anguish will overtake them, ere they 148.

The eighteenth Lecture.
That God might be just when he speaks, and pure when 250. 251.

But because none was able to control his judgments, he 25^. 254.

For they could not so disguise themselves with their hypocritical 256.

Adding thereto a complaint, that they would not take knowledge of the hand
that smote them, but were so hardened in their sin, that no corrections could
amend them. p. 258. 259. 260.

The nineteenth Lecture.
263. 264. 265.

266. 267.

268. 269. 270. The latter, the breach of the seventh, and that after a most
gross and brutish manner. p. 272.

7. so here, he falls to debate the case with them; making themselves judges
of the equity of his dealing toward them: whether in regard of the sharpness
of his reprehensions, or of his judgments threatened to ensue; if the first
took no place. p. 273. 274.

The twentieth Lecture.
275. 276.

278.

Jeremiah, had threatened them thus sharply, yet they should speed well enough
for all that. p. 279. 280.

Jeremiah himself; as for his words against them, they should pass away with
the wind, without taking any effect at all. p. 281. 282.

Which intolerable pride of theirs, in insulting over the word 283. 284. 285.

Which metaphor of fire and stubble, is here in plain terms 286. 287

The one and twentieth Lecture.
Here under another metaphor he shows how the enemy 288. 289.

The which he lays forth in the particulars: showing how 289.

And yet the Lord tells them, they must expect no truce; because 290, 291.

And if they would needs have him to give them an account 292, 293. 294.

But lest he might be thought to affright them with 295.

Which they could not be ignorant of, but that they were become 295. 296.

Now lest they should make their replies; God conuinceth 297. 298.

Here the doctrine of the similitude formerly mentioned, is 299. 300.

And though God came nearer to them by his benefits, in conceive so much as a
thought tending to thankefulnes. 300.

The two and twentieth Lecture.
Therefore if they found God to restrain his benefits from 304. 305.

For their wickednesses were grown so apparent, that the 305. 306.

Showing, that Fowlers cages are not commonly more replenished with birds, than
their houses were filled with the 307.

Neither was this to be found among the common sort: but among the Judges and
Magistrates: who because they were 309.

To which purpose he takes up his speech again, used verse. 9 which shows,
that the Jews were grown to be so hardened in 310.

311. 312. 313.

Concluding the whole with this; that seeing there was such disorder among all
sorts, both high and low; therefore they must in the end, look for a miserable
downfall. p. 314. 315.

FINIS.

