SERMONS of M. John Calvin, upon the* X. Commandementes of the Law, given of
God by Moses, otherwise called the Decalogue.

Gathered word for word, presently at his Sermons, when he preached on
Deuteronomie, without adding unto, or diminishing from them any thing afterward.

Translated out of French into English, by I. H.

Imprinted at London, for John Harison. 1579.

To the Right excellent and Honorable Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's horses, and one of her Graces most Honorable
privy Council, John Harmar wishes all godly felicity, continuance of
health, increase of Honor, and Graces eternal.
OCcasioned, Right Honorable, to consider certain of M. Caluins Sermons in
the French tongue, upon the law of God and his hestes, and finding them
(though gathered and set forth by others, yet) aunswerable to their makers
labor, to be godly, learned, and profitable, I was the bolder to adventure
the deliverance of them into our mother language, and most bold to present
your Honor therewith: the beginning of small ability, such as they be, yet
due to your Lordshippe, unto whom I owe all thankfulness and humble duty.
Your Honors good procurement of her Majesty's gracious favor, whereby I first
became a Scholar in Winchester College, afterward to be removed to the New
College of Oxford, whereof at this present I am a poor member, I could never
since forget, or bury so good a benefit in such great oblivion. Some
signification therefore of a grateful mind is herein sought, together with
the profit of many the simpler sort, which the rather may be atteined to, by
your Lordshippes honorable name, favorable countenance, and protection, which
being vouchsafed, will be sufficientlieable to counteruaile the contrary
endeavors of such evil disposed persons as seek even under the color of
greatest truth, to pull out the eyes of knowledge, and to bring a palpable
darkness upon the face of the earth, a darkness to be brought in by the
gross mist of devout ignorance as more perilous, so more lamentable than the
temporary darkness of Egypt. For that is the pretense which they use, when
as they seek no other thing than to entrap men by devilish Sophistry. What
need the law (say they?) We have the Gospel. What need we written expositors?
We have the lively voices of Preachers sounding in great plenty every where.
Of which two speeches, the former is vain, the latter parciall, and both of
them are wicked. Truth it is, that the strength and sting of the laws dominion
to condemnation, concerning the faithful, is weakened and clean plucked out:
that the fire is extinguished wherewith the mountain smoked, that the stony
tables are softened, that the heavy yoke is lightened, that grace has
superabounded, and an horn of strong salvation is erected and declared through
the administration of the spirit. What then? Shall we therefore welter in
sin, and wallow in the lusts thereof, because of these things? God forbid.
Nay rather, as the law schooleth us, to seek for grace at the body of
Christ, so the gracious Christian is taught to repair again to the book of
the law, to live thereafter: in deed now, without servile fear, being
delivered from bondage, to serve in freedom of an upright, holy, and sincere
conscience. But as the Be that has in her honey, has also a sting: so the
best men endued with the grace of GOD, a thing incomparably better than honey,
have notwithstanding certain remnantes of the stain of Adam, as a sting of
corruption to their mortal bodies. Whereof to put us in mind, that we may
pluck out this sting, and as it were weed the garden of our consciences (who
as the purest ground, yet bring forth some weeds of imperfection:) the law of
God is most behoouefull and necessary, and M. Caluins trauelles thereon, most
fruitful and profitable, who strikes ever at the original and root of
sin, and brings the commandment to his old, first, and true meaning, from
the corrupt and common understanding. For he groundeth the exposition of the
law, upon the nature of the Lawgiuer, who, because he is a spirit, will be
served in spirit and truth. And because he searches the reins, and sounds
the depth of the heart, will be served with every affection and motion
thereof, in all holiness and sincerity: so that no man can safely feed or
flatter himself in the smallest of his own faults or follics. And now, what
need there is of this knowledge in England, all men see, and others can better
say, than my self declare, how thinlie, scant here and there, such excellent
understanding grows. Which thing in more words to lament, were an ouerlong
deteining of your Lordship from your greater affairs. The Lord of Lords, and
God almighty guard you ever, and guide you with his holy spirit, to the
benefit and commodity of our country, and to the profit of his Church, with
increase of honor, to his honor always.

Your humble to command* John Harmar.

The first Sermon of M. John Calvin, upon the Commandments of the Law.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 4. 44 This is the Law, which Moses set before the children of
Israel.

45 These are the witnesses, and the ordinances, and the Laws, which Moses
declared to the children of Israel, after they came out of Egypt.

46 On this side Jordan, in the vallie over against Beth-peor, in the land of
Sihon King of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.


FOrasmuch as the world is hardly kept and retained in subjection under God,
let us see how he, for his part, after he had chosen to himself one peculiar
people, vouchsafes to rule them, not for one time only, but so long, and so
often, until the people should be well accustomed to the yoke: which order
he uses yet daily in his Church. It ought to suffice us, that we had
understood of the truth of our God in one simple word: but because we are not
so ready to believe, as were requisite, and when we have begone, we decline
and fall away in the end, insomuch that we utterly forget that which was taught
us: see I say, how he is not contented to have declared unto us for one day,
that which apperteineth to our salvation, but calls the same to our minds
continually, and imprinteth it in our hearts as much as is possible. Let us
consider to this purpose, how Moses recites in this place, that he not only
delivered the Law in Horeb, but also that after that he had made his circuit
in the wilderness by the space of forty years or there about, he has again
instructed the people, yea, that of all the time he was with them, he never
ceased to set before them, that which God had commanded him to publish, as we
have already above touched. And the diligence we here see in Moses, is not
superfluous, but to good purpose, when he says, that being come almost to
Jordan, and having discomfited Sehon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of
Bashan his neighbor, that he yet puts them in mind of the statutes and
ordinances of God, to the end the people should rest on them, and put them in
practice, and that if heretofore they have not been sufficiently instructed,
they should at the lest then know the truth of the Lord, wherein they should
wholly abide. Thus ye see what Moses meant by this place: and here he purposely
places together these words: the Law, the Witnesses, the Statutes, the
Ordinances, to the end he might more fully express and declare (as we have
before showed,) that God has not instructed his people by halfes, or delivered
unto them some obscure or short and imperfect doctrine: but that he has
comprised in the Law whatsoever was good and profitable: so that if in it the
people would stay them selves, they should not need to be busied in seeking
for any thing beside, as being fully and wholly guided and directed by it. Let
us mark this, for in this sense the Law is a doctrine, as indeed, the word
whereby it is called, is hence taken and derived. It follows, The witnesses,
which unporteth as much, as if God should declare that he makes some contract
or bargain with men, that he sets down articles to this end, that he
neither omitteth or forgets any thing, which should serve to knit up this
mutual agreement and aliance, when it pleases him to choose and adopt us for
his people and for his Church: and to bring us to himself. For to speak in
few words, all that which concerns this spiritual covenant between him
and us, is comprehended under this word, Witnesses, because these are as the
articles and points of the covenant, as when bonds are given when men
contract and bargain together, all is put in, which may serve for the one, and
the other party. We see then how God has protested, that the Law contains
a sufficient doctrine, if so be men would keep them selves under it: to the
declaration whereof the two other words follow, the Statutes, the
Ordinances. Now when God bestows such pain to teach and instruct us, and
declares that he has omitted nothing which might perteine hereunto, who will
not meruell that our minds for all this are so fleeing and wandering, that we
always desire, I know not what something better than that which we find in
the word of God? This devilish curiosity both from all times reigned in the
world, and at this day a man may see, that whatsoever one does, he can not
repress and stay this wicked and cursed desire, but that men will be always
wiser than God would have them to be. And why? We can not deny when his word
is preached, but that he has declared all things, which were good and for our
profit: but yet we for all this time are very ticklish, we flote in out
fantasies, and we will always have one thing or other, more than that which
God has showed us. Seeing then that such a vice bewrays it self in us, it
does stand us in hand to bear in mind the warning which is here contained:
namely, that if we will suffer God to be our master, we shall find in his
school all perfection of wisdom. For his law is sufficient of it self to
make us wise again. Col. 1. 28.
It contains as we have said the articles which serve to join us to our
God, in whom all our glory and felicity consists. Moreover, it shows us
the rule of well doing, in such sort that we need not search further to
understand what God likes and allows: for we have both his statues and
ordinances. So then we may know and be thoroughly persuaded, that our life
shall be acceptable unto God, if we pass not the bounds which he has set and
assigned us: but if we add any thing of our own, whatsoever it be, let us
not think that God approves it as right and good: for he has forgotten
nothing of that which belongs to our profit and necessity. These two
points are well worth the noting, for they serve to make us to have in greater
price and reverence the doctrine, which is every day proposed unto us in the
name of God. For when we see that in it is perfect wisdom, ought not we is
apply all our senses to it, and to hold our selves thereto? When we see that
God cease not, but continues daily to teach us, ought not we for our part to
be diligent and attentive, to the end we might profit under him? And if at the
first we be not so given unto it, as were requisite we should be all the time
of our life, ought we not to train our selves to know always better and
better, the will of God, even until we be wholly rid of all ignorance,
which shall be when we are taken forth of this world, and not before? Now it is
certain, that which Moses has done, ought at this day to serve us for a rule
and example: for it is not done at randon, and beside good purpose: Again, God
appointed him as a spectacle and mirror to all Prophets, and to all those
which have the charge of teaching in his church. Let us then understand, that
God will not that we receive his truth for one day only, as if one lesson were
enough for us: but that we should repeat again that which before we
understood, to the end it might tarry by us, and take such deep root in us,
that we might have no excuse, nor make any allegation, to say: O, I have not
been yet thoroughly instructed. God then on his part is always ready to teach
us, to the end we might not err, except we our selves would wittingly
decline, and of wilful malice. And here is express mention made of the temple
of Peor, to show, that although the people had in that place an object or
sight to turn them to superstition, yet they had also a remedy, in that God
daily stirred them up by his word, to the end they should not meddle with the
idolatries of the Painims. True it is, that it was an hard and grievous
chastisement, that the people of God were feign to have ever before their eyes
the temple of an idol: it was all one, as if God, to spite and anger them,
should say: I did call you to possess a land, which should be dedicated to
my service, where you should have seen nothing which might in any point have
offended you: for my sanctuary should have been set up in the midst of you.
I would have been purely worshipped according to my law, the land should not
have been unhallowed and defiled with her old superstitions, all idolatry
should have been so raced out, that a man should hear nothing but my praises
sounded: but now ye see ye are here in the corner of the country, where you
see a temple of idols, where you see many villainous abominations. This is then
as a vengeance which you feel for your sins, for as much as you have not
been worthy to enter into the land, which I did promise you. See then how God
would chastise his people, when he suffers them to dwell nigh unto the
temple of Peor. And at this day, when we are mingled among idolaters, and
perceive what uncleanness they commit, and how they peruertall religion, let
us know that God by this means does punish us, or at least humbles us because
of our sins. And in deed considering this, we ought not only to lament for
the sins which are committed by these incredulous and unbelieving persons,
but also because we know that we are not worthy to have the world wholly
reformed, and to behold an agreement and harmony in religion, that God might
be in all places purely worshipped, that when we are so near to the
superstitions of other, that we be constrained to see some of the marks and
signs, and to hear something thereof, we must impute this to our own sins.
But how so ever it be, God cease not to give a good remedy to the people of
Israel: for when the law was in this sort taught by Moses, it was all one, as
if God should separate his, from those miserable blind ones, which wandered
and went astraie in their superstitions. Now hereupon we have to note, that
although all the world be perverted, and that in it we see great confusions,
and that all is full of errors and corruptions, yet notwithstanding it
behooves that we have recourse to the word of God, to be guided thereby, which
must strengthen us in such sort, that we may defy all the superstitions of
idolaters. And if we be so full fraughted with vanity, that we give over our
selves to decline and to turn aside hither and thither, after that God shall
have given us his word, there remains then no excuse. For (as I have
already said) this should be a bridle good enough for us, that God declares
to us his will. Although all the world draw backward, and some have one
fantasy, and others make a fair show of some religion, yet all this must be
esteemed as vain and frivolous, after that we have heard the voice of our God,
and by that shall have intelligence of his will. And therefore let us put to
our use this certain and infallible doctrine, the word of God, to withdraw
us from all wicked opinions, from all evil errors, from all that the devil
has forged and counterfeited, and from all that men shall have invented and
devised in the world. Thus ye see what we have to bear in mind, when Moses
makes mention here of the temple of Peor. Now he also adds, that this was
after the two kings, Og the king of Bashan, and Sehon the king of the
Amorites, or of Heshbon, were discomfited. This circumstance serves to reprove
the people, if they should not yeald them selves in all obedience unto God. We
know that according to the benefit GOD bestows on us, we ought so much the
more to be stirred up and provoked to love and to fear him. God has showed
himself bountiful and liberal toward us: ought it not to draw us so much
the more unto him? For when a mortal man is indebted and bound unto us for
some benefit and good turn, shall he not be accounted dissolute and very
unthankful, if he reknowledge not the good we did him? How then shall there
be less excuse toward the living God? Let us then remember that Moses in this
place makes express mention of these two Kings, which were banquished and
subdued, to the end the people should reknowledge this benefit in this manner:
Go to, we have had here two excellent victories. When heretofore we attempted
war against the commandment of God: our enemies with great courage gave us
the foil, there was in us no strength: our enemies were as waspes, which come
to put out our eyes, as the similitude hereof has been before given: there are
now two Kings strong and mighty overthrown, and subdued, without any cost of
ours, God has delivered them into our hands. Who has been the cause of both
these victories? Has it not been God, which has ruled and governed all
herein? Sithence then it is so, that he has pity on us, and has begone to
accomplish the promise which he made to our fathers, and that we have alredie
so good a warrant and gage thereof, ought not we to endeavor to yeald our
selves wholly to our God? Ought we not in all things to be subject unto him?
Ought we not to give our selves over into his hand, which he has showed so
strong by reason of the love he beats us? See I say how Moses has understood
this, which he recites touching the overthrow of Sehon and Og, even to reprove
the unthankfulness of the people, if they submite not them selves willingly
to the service of their God, to whom they were so much bound. But now we ought
also to apply this doctrine to our own use that is, that as often as we
perceive in our selves any sloth or lithernesse in the business of the Lord,
any remiss negligence, any coldness, any rebellion of the flesh, which strives
and stubbornly resists in such sort, that we come not to God with so
cheerful and earnest affection, as were requisitie, that then we enter into a
count of the benefits we have received of him, to say: Wretched creature,
how art thou so negligent, that thou cleauest not to thy God, when he has
declared his will unto us? Consider what thou hold of him, consider the
benefits he has bestowed on thee, even unto this hour. So then let every one
examine and consider, how far he is indebted to God, that we may be the more
provoked to serve him. And in general, let us know that he not only created
us, when we were not: but also that after that he had redeemed us, by the blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as he redeemed his people out of the land of Egypt,
he has by his grace drawn us to him: so as we had the doctrine of the Gospel
delivered us, which is all one, as if he had received us under his guard and
protection, and daily he shows the same unto us by effects: for what greater
aides and succors have we from him in our infirmities? Should we not a
thousand times be overcome of Satan, if our God had not his hand stretched out
to succor us? Yes uerelie: we should be then all overcome, and not only
oppressed, but also swalowed up in our temptations, without such a stay and
refuge as I have said. Since then it is so, that our Lord cease not to
confirm daily his goodness toward us, let us on our part advise our selves
and consider to take this occasion, to serve him with a more ardent desire, and
greater zeal, as we see it is here spoken. In this sense it follows, that
Moses speaks to the people of Israel saying, Hear O Israel the law which
the Lord has caused to be proposed unto you, that ye may learn it, and
observe it. Here again Moses sets down the preface, of which before we
took some view, that the Law is not given only, to the end that men should
hear it, to know what it contains: but that by it we should also be
reformed, and that God might prove herein what subjection we yealde unto him.
In few words, we see that the doctrine of God consists in practice, and
that we must by our doings show, that we have not in vain been taught it.
Now, then Moses says in the first place, Hear the Law which I propose in
your ears, to the end you should learn it: As if he should say, that God will
not that the doctrine which is preached unto us in his name and authority,
should fall to the ground: but that we must receive it with all diligence, and
apply our whole studies therein. For what is the causes that we profit so
evil in the word of God, but that we are overmuch busied in the things of
the world? And if we come to the sermon, if we read the holy scripture, it is
but for fashion and manners sake: we seek not to perform our duties as we
ought, in observing that which is taught us. But let us advise our selves to
be better and more diligent scholars, while the Lord vouchsafes to instruct us
by his word: and that is the cause why Moses says he has told the Law in
their ears. Indeed, this manner of speaking would be very hard in our
tongue: howbeit, it imports as much, as if God should say, That he speaks
not unto us in an unknown and strange language, but shows himself in as
plain and familiar manner as may be desired. Seeing then it is so, that God
comes down unto us, in such sort, as to make a plain and familiar
declaration of his will, what excuse shall we have to allege, if his word be
lost in us, or if it slip from us, or if we keep it not to make our profit
thereof? It is true, that for as much as we are over dull and ignorant, we shall
always find much obscurity in the word of God, that the langauge of the Lord
is to high and profound for us, but to whom should the fault thereof be imputed?
Let us note therefore, that all they which complain, that the word of God is
hard and obscure, as if it were hid under an unknown tongue, are here reproved
of a manifest lie. Yea, that they do God great injury, yea, blaspheme him, for
that they despitefully dissemble, and deny the bounty and goodness, which
Moses protests was showed the people at the publishing of the law: for it is
there said, that God spoke to the ears of the people by the mouth of Moses. So
that the doctrine which he delivered, ought to have been thoroughly known of
them. And at this day we have less occasion to use this shifte, to allege
that we understand nothing of that which is contained to holy Scripture: for
GOD speaks so neerelie and familiarly unto us, that we need but to have our
ears cleansed and prepared to hear him. And let us note, that there remains
nothing, but that we be attentive and diligent to profit in the doctrine of
salvation. But withal let us call to mind that we have above touched, namely,
that this doctrine must be kept and followed thoroughly: for if we do not allow
the word of God, and yeald our consentes that it is good, and true, and holy,
God is much beholding unto us. What must we do then? See: God will make a
trial whether he shall be master over us, or no. Now then, if the word of
God rule our life, that is: if we not only inquire after that which he tells
us, but forsake our naughty lusts and desires, and endeavor only to please
him, and to be governed by him, and his righteousness: when we come to this,
then see we one good proof, that he has such dominion and superiority over
us, as he deserves. But, until we have profited so much, that we are come
hither, let us not think that we have profited any thing at all in the
doctrine which has been taught us. Let this word therefore of Doing be often
called to mind, and imprinted in memory of them, which hear the word of
God. As how? Behold, God does us this courtesy in vouchsafing to teach us.
And why is that? Is it to this end, that we should only lend our ears to say
in the end, Yea: well said, that is good? Nay, but to the end our life should
be reformed, and because it is a true and certain rule that we should not
err as we have done, and as many poor ignorant wretches do which are straied
from the right way, and are not instructed as we are, unto whom this doctrine
ought to serve for mortification and newness of life: that God may bear rule
over us, and that we be subject to him. Thus we se in effect what Moses meant,
when he protested unto the people in this preface, that he set before them the
law, not that they should hear it, and so but have their ears beaten there
with: but that they should receive it and keep it. Now for the better
confirmation of this, he alleges: That God had made his covenant with that
people on the mount Horeb, the better to persuade them to fear God, and to
continue in his obedience. For if God would only require of us that which is
his due: yet were we sufficiently bound to cleave unto him, and to observe his
commandments: but when it pleases him of his infinite goodness to covenant
with us, to bind himself unto us, when he needs not: to stand on articles
with us, that he will be our father and savior, that he will receive us for his
flock and heritage, that we may live under his guard and protection, offering
us everlasting life: seeing that he does all these things, ought not our heart
to be softened though it were of stone? When the creatures behold that the
living God abaseth himself hitherto, as to treat the matter with us, and to
say: Go to, let us consider what we are, both you see what an infinite
distance is between you and me, and know that I could command you what
seems good to me, and not have any thing to deal with you, and that you are
not worthy to come nighe me, or to have any acquaintance with him, which can
command what he will without any further declaration than this. See, this I
will, and this is my mind: yet lo I yeald of my right, I come hereto offer my
self to be your guide and savior, I will govern you, you shall be my family,
if so be that you will content your selves with my word. I will be your king and
you shall be my subjects: and for all this, think you not that the covenant
which I have made with your fathers was to gain any thing of you: for I have
no need nor want of any thing whatsoever, and what benefit can you bestow on
me? But all which I have done and do, is only for your profit, and for your
welfare. I am then here ready to covenant by articles with you, and to bind
my self unto you on my part. Seeing I say, that the living God does abase
himself so far, I pray you shall not we be to unthankful, if we be not
herewith beaten down to humble our selves under him laying aside all our pride
and hautinesse? It is not therefore without, cause, that Moses speaks here of
the covenant which God has made with his people, to the end that especially
his favor and goodness should be known. Now if this was to be done in the
time of the law, there is at this day much greater reason thereof: for the
Lord has not only made a covenant for one time, as with the Jews: but
when he sent this only some, then declared he him self to be our father and
savior much more fully than before he had done, and that after so sweet, so
gracious, and so amiable a manner, as nothing more: in such sort that he has
here as it were laid forth his bowelles of love and compassion toward us.
Seeing therefore God has presented unto us his heart in the person of our
Lord Jesus Christ, John* 15. 15.
and we hear besides the protestation which Jesus Christ makes, that he will
call us no more his servant, but his friends: because he has so familiarly
communicated unto us all the secrets of his will: must it not I beseech you
needs be, that the devil has bewitched us, if we be not hereby moved to
frame ourselves wholly unto him, renouncing even our selves, and all our
affections? So then, when we perceive in our selves any wickedness, whereby we
are hindered to serve God, when we feel our selves idely disposed in the work
of the Lord, and are even brought into an heavy sleep by the cares of this
world, to stir our selves up to praise our God, let us have in mind this
covenant which the Lord has made with us. Now hereupon Moses further adds:
The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even with us
which are alive at this day. This place may be understood after two sorts:
for it may be taken for a comparison which Moses makes, the better to
declare, that the people which then lived, ought to be so much the more
diligent in the service of God, because they had received greater benefits
than their fathers. In which sense he speaks in Exodus, Exodus 6. 3.
I have not communicated this name to your fathers: where God speaking unto
Moses says, that he declared not him self so plainly to be God to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, as he did unto Moses, And by this he signifies, that the
people should be now more attentive, because God had revealed himself unto
them after an unaccustomed manner. Even so in this place one may understand
this, God has not made such a covenant with your fathers. It is true that God
spoke unto his servant Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and did sufficiently
instruct them. And it is expressly said in the. Genesis 18, 17 19.
18. of Genesis Shall I hide from my servant Abraham that which I will now execute
upon Sodom, and Gomorra? For I know that he will instruct his household in my
decrees and ordinannces, in my statutes and judgments. See then how Abraham
instructed his family, not after some bare and naked manner, but in the
judgments and statutes and ordinances of the Lord, Briefly, we must needs
say that Abraham had the law of God imprinted in his heart: yet lo besides a
benefit not to be contemned, when God has sent this law in the two tables,
to the end the instruction thereof might remain and abide for ever to his
people, and that the things therein contained, might be ratified for ever, and
testified to all posterity as well as to them. We see then what we may gather
upon this sentence, even as much as if Moses should have said unto the people,
Beloved, acknowledge we the benefit the Lord bestows on us this day, even
such an one as our fathers have received none the like: for he delivered not
unto them the law by writing, as unto us, he has not declared to them these
things in such plain order. True it is, that he did sufficiently instruct
them, and as much as was necessary and requisite for their salvation- but here
is yet an higher degree and further step, to which we are come at this day,
and therefore we ought to draw so much the nearer to him, seeing we see that
he has so stooped unto us. And this is the meaning of Moses, if we understand
the place in this sense. As if a man should say at this day, that God has not
done so to our fathers, as he has done unto us. And this is that which Christ
said to his disciples, Mat.. 13. 17
That many Kings and Prophets have desired to see those things which you see,
Luke* 10. 24.
and hear those things preached which you hear, and yet have not had their
desire. Seeing then it is so, that God of his infinite mercy and goodness
vouchsafes to prefer us before the Patriarchs and Prophets, (as it is also
said, that the Prophets served not so much their own time as ours,) we ought
with greater diligence to suffer our selves to be taught under him, 1. Pet. 1.
12.
and to apply our selves wholly to his doctrine. Notwithstanding, when all is
well considered, although this we have alleged be profitable, and the
exhortation is often brought in holy Scripture, yet when we shall have weighed
all the words, we shall find that Moses, when he says that God did not make
his covenant with them which heard the law the first day it was published,
means to say, that not only with them he made his covenant, but also with
those which over lived them, and succeeded in the place of those which were
dead. So that in few words Moses would here declare, that the law was not
transitory, to endure only for the life of them which first heard it, but
that it was a doctrine which should retain his strength and authority
forever. The Lord our God (says he) has not made a covenant with our fathers,
that is to say, he would not only have our fathers for his people, he was not
tied to them, so that his law should serve but for forty or fifty years,
but he has made a covenant with us as well, and with them which were not
borne when the law was published. You then which were not at the mount of
Horeb, which have not seen the fire on the montaine, nor heard the
thunderinges, know you not withstanding that your God did then adopt you also
to himself, and that he made a covenant, in the which you also were
comprised. You must therefore observe his law, because it has been
established to be perpetual, to endure from age to age and to be preached
even to the end of the world. And this is the true and natural meaning of
Moses. And from hence we may gather a good and profitable doctrine: namely,
that although we were not at first when the Gospel was published, although we
have not seen with our eyes those things which are mentioned in the law, yet
ought we not therefore to have in less estimation and price the authority of
he word of God. And why? I grant that when God raised up Moses, it was an
especial token of his favor and goodness toward the people, which then
lived: yet notwithstanding, the authority of the Law must not at any time be
diminished: for it co^teineth the truth of God, which always abides, and is
not variable and transitory as men are. It is said, that men are as a flower,
Isaie* 40. 6. 7.
or as an herb, which by and by dries and withers, but the truth of the
Lord endures for ever. 1. Pet. 1. 24.
Now this truth which is unchangeable, is contained in the Law. Truly the
Law as touching the ceremonies is utterly abolished: but as touching the
substance and doctrine which it co^teineth, it reteineth always his force and
power still: not one jot thereof falls away or perishes. So then let us
note, that though we have not lived in the time of Moses, this serves not to
allege, that we may therefore contemn the admonitions he has given and are
contained in the law. And why? For he has spoken to us, he has not only
spoken to the multitude which was assembled at mount Horeb, but generally to
the whole world. And if this be said of the law, by a greater and more strong
reason is it to be said of the Gospel. For as we have said, the law concerning
the shadows thereof is clean done away, but the Gospel has no such thing.
For in it our Lord makes a new and everlasting testament, and a covenant to
last from generation to generation. How then must we be affected, when the
Gospel is preched? We must remember that the son of God came into the world,
not only to instruct them, with whom he was conversant in his manhood: but
that he has won us to God his father, and has called us to salvation, by
sending his Apostles, that their voice should sound to the ends of the world,
to them which heard not him, to make them partakers of the doctrine of
salvation: the which at this day also we ought to receive, as if Jesus Christ
were yet in the midst of us, or as if the Apostles with their own mouths
did speak unto us. And this is that which we have to bear in mind upon
this place, that we make no alteration in the Church of GOD, neither attempt to
change any thing in his word, knowing that he will always have kept therein
one equal train. For seeing that he has delivered unto us his Gospel, and
stablished a certain rule of regiment in the time of the Apostles, and in the
primitive Church, we must held the same, and thereon rest our selves. If we do
otherwise, it is as if we would make the word of God mortal and corruptible
with us. So then let us learn, that though the world be variable and
inconstant, and has every day his backturning: and though there be none of
us, which has not always many gadding opinions, which trotte in our brain,
that yet not withstanding, concerning that the word of God has appointed, we
are not to take that liberty, to do at one time this, and at an other time
that, as we list, and as we fancy. Wherefore? Because God has not made this
covenant with our fathers, but with us which are alive at this day. As long
then as we are in the world, let us know, that Gods governing of us, and his
showing us the way, is to the end we should not be as wandering pilgrims to
stray hither and thither, and to raunge as our lusts and appetites turn us:
but that we should be conducted as by his hand. To be short, whereas Moses
says, Hear we that are all alive at this day, it is to declare and prove,
that men during their life time, ought not to forge any new Law, that they
ought not to have to day one, to morrow an other. And why? For the life of man
is in the law of God, which ought to suffice us. Let us then make our profit
by regarding the things that tend thereunto. And further, it is no doubt, but
Moses here charge the people with unthankfulness which should be in them, if
they dedicate not their lives to the service of God: as if he should say, How
live we? Is it not for that the Lord has placed us in this world? If then our
life we have, be given of him: ought we not to bestow it and employ it in his
service? Ought it not to be wholly consecrated to his will? We see then how
Moses reproves here all them which wander, and continue not then course in the
word of God. Let us withal retain in memory that which I have above touched,
that is: that we have not a doctrine for three days, but one wherein we must
be confirmed as long as we live. Therefore when we have once received and
embraced that which is contained in the holy scripture, let us study to
profit our selves by it, and to go forward, increasing in the knowledge and
practice of it, till God shall draw us out of this world, knowing that he will
vouchsafe to take us into his covenant, and that he for his part will not be
unfaithful and unconstant, but sure and steadfast in his purpose and promise.
Let us do the like, that we may be joined to him: and as long as we live let
us have no other purpose, but to cleave unto him, howbeit as he has declared
in his word. But let us not think to join and unite our selves to our God by
our own fantasies: but since he comes unto us, let us go unto him, and when
we are come thither, let us take good heed to stay our selves there. And thus
we see what we have togather upon this place, to the end we may the better be
disposed and prepared to receive the instructions, which shall hereafter be
given us, concerning the law of God and his Commandments.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowleging of our sins, desiring him to make us feel them better than we
have done, in such sort that we desire nothing but to yeald out selves wholly
unto him: and that it will please him to reach us his hand, and not suffer us
to be wedded to our own fantasies, and affections, that we may always
magnify his goodness, which he uses toward us, that we may profit by it,
in rendering unto him that obedience and duty which he deserves, especially,
for that it has pleased him to bring and deliver unto us his law, and that he
is not only contented to show us the way of well living, but has vouchsafed
also to adopt us for his children, and to declare himself our father and
savior, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that he will not only grant this
grace to us, but to all people and nations of the earth, etc.

Deuteronomy. Chap. 5* 1 Then Moses called all Israel and said unto them, Hear O
Israel the ordinances and the laws which I set before you this day, that ye
may learn them, and take heed to observe them.

2 The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.

3 The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, which are
all alive at this day.

4 The Lord talked with you face to face on the mount out of the midst of
the fire.


WE have seen heretofore how greatly Moses has labored to make the people
perceive the Majesty which is in the word of God, to the end they should
receive it with all reverence and fear. For although men protest that they
will obey God, (for so nature constrains them,) yet can they not order them
selves and their doings according to his word: and that is the very true
touchstone to know whether we be obedient to God or no. But herein is the
rebellion of the world seen, that although all will confess that the word
of God is to be received without any gainsaying, yet shall one find scarce
one among an hundred, which willingly humbles him self to yeald unto it that
authority it deserves. And why is this? Surely, because we consider not of
the Majesty of God, which declares it self therein. See then how Moses, not
without cause, so often heretofore has wained the people, that the word of
God should be of such Majesty toward us, that all creatures should tremble
at it. And now again he adds a confirmation of the same matter when he
says, That the Lord talke^ face to face on the mount, out of the midst of
the fire: as if be should say: You have no cause now to doubt whether the
doctrine which I propose unto you be of God or of men: for it is sufficiently
proved. God has declared himself unto you by plain and visible signs, in
such sort, that you may well perceive, it is he which speaks. Now then we
see the intent and meaning of Moses. But before we pass any further, one may
here make a question, How it is said that God spoke face to face, seeing that
men cannot comprehend his infinite glory? For with what eye can we
contemplate his substance and being? We are so frail and weak, that if God
should but show one beam of his brightness, behold, we should be all dazeled
and confounded therewith. On the other side we know how it is said, That we
cannot se God face to face, 1. Cor, 13. 12
until we be renewed, which shall not be until the latter day. For now
(says S. Paul) We see as in a glass, and in part, even obscurely and
imperfectly. 2. Cor. 13. 14 and 18.
Which more is, he says in an other place, That the Gospel at this day does
present unto us the Majesty of God, in such sort, that we may see it, but the
law was dark and obscure, and had avail which hindered our fathers to know
God, in so plain and familiar a manner as we do at this day. But all this
agrees very well. For when we make a comparison of the law with the
Gospel, it is certain we shall find this which Saint Paul speaks to be
most true. For then God declared not himself in so familiar a fashion as he
does unto us, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 1. ^.
who is the lively image of him. Now a days therefore, there are laid open
unto us the great treasures of wisdom, in that God calls us to the kingdom
of heaven, and shows that he holds us for his children and heirs. Now this
was not in the time of the law. And yet, although at this day we have such a
knowledge and so plain and manifest, yet remains that always true which we
have alleged, that we see but in part. And why? For we are not yet partakers
of the glory of God, neither can we come near it, but it behooves that he
show it according to our rudeness and infirmity. Yet notwithstanding, from
the beginning of the world God has appeared unto mortal men. Howbeit, this
was not to show him self as he is, but as the weakness and infirmity of men
might bear it. We must then note, that God was not known to the fathers,
neither appears at this day in his own being: but he applies him self to
us, in as much as he shows him self for our measure and ability, to make us
perceive that he is present. And yet for all that, it is not without cause,
that Moses says here, that God spoke face to face: for he understands
hereby, that the people had not some coniecturall sign, that they might dout
of him, or conceive only some small opinion of God, but that they had a
certain and infallible warrant: whereby they might in this sort conclude:
Behold, God has so showed himself to us, that our faith need not waver and be
doubtful: and the doctrine which is proposed unto us in his name, ought no
longer to be disputed of, whether it be to be received or refused. And why? For
God has delivered unto us a sure and certain mark, which can not beguile,
nor leave us in doubt, but that this doctrine proceeds from him. Now we
understand the mening of Moses, from whence we have to gather a good lesson,
that is, that if God declare not himself unto us after so high and glorious a
manner as our lust desires, let us know that he does it for our profit and
salvation. For let us have an eye to our infirmity, and it will be sufficient
to abate that over boldness, to the which our nature always stirs us. For
we would inquire and seek after the secrets of God, without end or measure:
And why is that? Verily, because we consider not our own power and ability.
Wherefore let us praise the great goodness of our God, for that he in favor so
considers of us, and regards our weakness, that he is content to hide his
glory* least we should be swallowed up thereof. For as I have already said,
we can not bear it, being so frail and weak as we are. And here withal let
us know, that when God gives us some evident sign and token of his presence,
there rests then no excuse, if we yeald not to him the honor, and do him
the homage he is worthy of. Let us not then desire that God come in his
inestimable glory, that the heavens cleave in sunder, that all the Angels of
heaven appear: but when the Lord any way declares, that it is he which
speaks, let it suffice us, and let us humble our selves incontinently. For if
then we will foreslowe to yield him our duty, we shall be sharply reproved for
turning our back to him, when he shows his face to us. It is true that it is
said in an other place, That men cannot see the face of God, Exodus 33. 20.
and live. And although Moses had a wonderful revelation of the glory of God,
Iud. 13. 22.
as he speaks in Exodus 33, That the Lord spoke face to face unto him, Exodus
33. 1^
as a man speaks unto his friend: yet is it said, That he saw but the back
of GOD only: but this is to the end always to show us, that while we be
environed in this flesh, we ought not to approach unto the majesty of GOD, or
think to mount so high. Esaie. 6. 2.
For if the very Angels of heaven, under the figure of Cherubims, hide their
eyes, when there is any mention of the appearance of God, what must we do which
do but traile here and creep on the ground? But how so ever it be, God will
condemn us of unthankfulness, when we will not behold his face, and be
sufficiently contented with those visible signs, which he shows us of his
presence. Above all, let us be mindful of this, when any question is of
submitting our selves both to the law and the Gospel. For it is there
especially, that God will be known of men, to the intent they should
worship him, receiving simply what soever comes out of his mouth. To what
purpose then shall we apply this sentence of Moses? Forsooth to this, that
when the Scripture is set before us, when one preaches and expounds it unto
us, or that we our selves read it, this speech of his must serve to humble
us, to the end that God may be with all reverence exalted, and that we
presume not to make any reply to his word: but that we tremble at it, Esaie.
66. 2.
as he speaks thereof to the Prophet Esaie. For all that which is contained in
the holy Scripture, is in such sort proved, that one may say, that God has
spoken to men even after a visible manner. Now Moses after this adds, That he
stood between the Lord and them, as a mediator between God and men, because
the people feared, and durst not ascend up into the mount. Whereby Moses
signifies, that though the law were brought by a mortal man, yet ought it
not to be derogation to the authority thereof. And why? Because this was for
the instruction of the people: so that the fault rested in them. And this
place is well worth the noting. For we always seek some starting holes, to
the end we might set light by the word of God. Truly, we do not pretend it
openly, but in covert, but yet all the world is set upon this wickedness, so
that a man shall find, men think them selves well, and at very good rest,
when they can find any color to say: O, I know not whether this be the word of
God, or no: I know not whether it be spoken to me, I know not what condition it
has. Thus ye see how the world seeks always to exempt it self from the
obedience to Gods word. And this excuse is over common, to say: Yea, it is
true, that God ought to be obeyed, but they be but men, which preach it to us,
as we be: must we then receive their doctrine, as if Angels appeared to us
from heaven? Many think it suffices to say thus, when notwithstanding they
show them selves herein rebellious to God, or rather they have no care to
submit themselves to him and his word. But we have here one answer to cut off
al such vain allegations, that is, when God sends his word by the hand and
ministry of men, he does it, because of our fault and infirmity* Howbeit, he
cease not to show us some mark of his glory, in such sort, that his word may
be known to be heavenly: and so that being duly considered, it is evident,
that God has warranted enough, and more than enough. Neither has Moses spoken
this only for the instruction of the ancient fathers, but this admonition
serves also for us: that if men, as we are, be appointed messengers to preach
unto us the word of God, it ought not in our estimation derogate any thing from
the majesty thereof. And in very deed we consider little of our own frailty
and weakness, when we desire that God should teach us by miracles every day,
and we know not what is meet and convenient for us. For as for miracles, there
have been enough already showed, to confirm the truth, both of the Law, and of
the Gospel, that we might have a full and certain assurance of them. Yet, it
is most behoofull, that God deals so mercifully with us, that he sends men
like to our selves, and commits unto them the charge and office of teaching
us in his name, and in his room, as one that allureth us unto him self, with
all kindness and gentleness. For can we think our selves able to sustain
and abide his presence, if he should appear to us as he is? Alas, we should
be all utterly consumed, if God should speak in his majesty and power. We
know it is said, Psalm. 29.
That the voice of the Lord is enough to shake mighty rocks, and move huge
mountains out of their places: and can we which are so feeble and weak, as
nothing more, stand before so puissaunt a power, and not be daunted, and cast
down, as with the force of some vehement thundering, to the bottomless pit of
hell? Let us note then, that when God has ordained, that his word should be
preached to us by men, and committed to writing: therein he applies himself
to our weakness, and deals with us, as if he were a mortal man, to the end we
should not fear to come unto him, being drawn by so great lenity and
gentleness. And withal let us consider, what honor he does us, when he
vouchsafes to choose out from among us poor and vile wretches, to represent
his person, and to speak unto us in his name. For what greater thing could he
yeald unto the Angels of heaven? What more honorable charge and office could
he commit unto them? Therefore when he daineth and vouchsafes men of so great
and excellent honor, as to carry abroad his word as his Ambassadors, does he
not declare unto us in this one thing his more than fatherly goodness toward
us? Now on the other side he makes trial of our humility. For if he should
thunder from heaven, if he should appear in visible manner, if the Angels
should descend unto us, we need not greatly meruell, if men did give credit to
his word: but when all both great and small receive the order which God has
set in his Church, as they yeald obedience to his word when it is preached,
therein is our faith tried. But in the mean while let us always remember
this, that God has sufficiently declared him self to men, so that we have no
occasion at all to doubt of his word, and to dispute whence it comes. For his
will is made more than certain, if so bewe be not unthankful in receiving the
signs which he has given us. Thus ye see then, what we have to note in this
place, when Moses says, The people durst not approach nigh to the hill, for the
great fear they had conceived. And although at this day we refuse not, but
that God should speak unto us: yet when all is well considered, it should not
be profitable for us. And therefore let us know, that this ought not to
lessen the certeintie and assurance of our faith, when God thus uses the
means and ministry of men. It is said consequently, That God has taught his
people, saying: I am the eternal or everliving thy God, which has brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, thou shall have no other GOD before my face. In
this place, GOD, to hold his people as with a bridle in obedience, tells
them, that the knowledge they have, ought to keep them far from all
superstitions. For it is no strange thing to see the Heathen have their idols,
and to run astray after their errors and fantasies, if we remember what man
is in him self. We are also so given to vanity, that it is lamentable to
behold, neither need we to go to schole to learn to be deceived: for
every man herein is a great Doctor in that case: briefly, we all run to
evil, though under the cloak and color of that which is good: so that for
the true service of GOD, there is nothing in us, but superstition and
idolatry: and so the Gentiles have had their diverse kinds of superstition:
for every one has forged somewhat at his pleasure, and all this while the
living GOD has been left and forsaken of all. And why? Because GOD vouchsafed
not to be so gracious to all the world, to declare him self unto them. We
see then how men were become as beasts in their opinions, and that was for
default of teaching: although for all this they are not held excused, for they
are always guilty before GOD, for as much as the founteine of idolatry
proceeds from their own malice, and unthankfulness, when as men by their
own motion have forsaken the everliving GOD. But when the world was grown
out of kind, the poor Gentiles wandered like blind men in darkness, for
they wanted the light to show them the way of salvation. How here the Lord
accuses the Israelites of rebellion, if they observe not the Law which he
has given. Why so? I am the everliving thy GOD. When he says, The everliving:
it is to exclude other Gods, which are invented of men. As if he should say,
There is but one Godhead, and that is found in me: it must needs then be
concluded, that they, which having known me, turn themselves after their
idols, have no excuse to allege, that they have not willingly and wittinglie
renounced the living GOD. Now, when he adioyneth, That he is the GOD of his
people: this is to show that he has sufficiently declared himself to be
known unto them, as if he did say: I have separated you from among the rest of
men: you see how others wander, and that because they lack wherewith to
guide, and direct them: but I have chosen you for my people, and I have given
my self to you. Seeing then I am your GOD, hold your selves to me, otherwise
you shall have much less excuse than the Painims. My bengeance must needs be
double upon you: yea, an hundred times more grievous than upon other, because
you have falsified the promise, and broken the covenant which I made with you.
He alleges yet further the favor he did show to this people, when he says,
That he brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:
whereby he signifies, that he has so bound the people unto him, that they can
not revolt, but that they shall deserve to be more grievously punished. For
when they shall have forgotten the redemption, by the which they were
delivered out of bondage, should not their unthankfulness be double, when
being delivered by so mighty an hand, they yeald not them selves wholly to the
service of their redeemer. And of purpose does he call Egypt. The house of
bondage, to the end the people should well consider, in what estate they had
been there. For we see how they, which had sighed and cried when they were
oppressed with such great violence, and tyranny, (as we read of in Exodus)
as soon as God had delivered them, Exodus 1.
desired to return thicher again. And whence proceeds this, but that they
remembered not their wrong and oppression, but while they endured it: and that
the devil did shut up their eyes, that they should not esteem the favor of
GOD, according to the price and worthiness thereof? That is the cause, why
Moses in this place names Egypt, The house of bondage. In the end there is set
down the commandment, that the people should have no other GOD before the
face of him, whom they ought to hold for their God. Now let us apply this
whole doctrine to our use. First therefore, when it is said, I am the eternal
or everliving, let us learn so to weigh the sense and meaning of this word,
that when as the majesty of GOD appears unto us, we imagine no other deity.
For GOD can not suffer any companion. If the brightness of the Sun darken
the light of the Stars, is it not great reason that when GOD shows him
self, every one should worship him, and that all glory, which shall have
been before, be as it were brought to nothing? And this is the cause why it is
said to the Prophets, That when the Lord shall reign, Esaie. 60. 9.
there shall then appear no other brightness but his: that the Sun it self
shall be dimmed, and that the Moon shall be turned into darkness. This is to
show, that if we mingle with GOD the fantasies of our own brain, we take
away so much from the right which apperteineth to him: for he can not suffer
any companion. It behooves then, that this word, Everliving, bridle all our
fantasies and fond imaginations, in such sort, that we presume not on the
liberty to conceive this and that, but that we content our selves with this
simplicity, to have one GOD, and that this suffice us. And for this cause, it
is also said: That when our Lord Jesus shall prepare and establish his seat
in the world, that all the idols of Egypt shall fall to the ground. Now this
place apperteineth unto us. For as Moses said to the people of ancient time,
You have the everliving, and therefore it behooves that all idols be chaced
from among you: even so now, sithence GOD is declared and made manifest unto
us in the person of his only son, all our idols must fall down. Moreover,
we know, that Egypt, above all countries of the world besides, was full
fraughted with idols. Therefore, though we have been in former times even
plunged in lies, and errors, and darkness, though we have had an infinite
number of idols, yet as soon as GOD declares that he is the everliving, all
must vanish and fall away as water. Now, when further he names himself, Our
GOD, this is to entise us after so gentle a manner, that his majesty might be
known unto us in most loving and amiable wise. For if GOD should speak only
of his eternity and sovereign being, we should be all confounded. Of a
truth, this might suffice to condemn all our dotages: yet we in the mean
time can not be fitly hereby instructed to our use and profit. It behooves
then, that after it has been declared, that it is he alone whom we ought to
reverence, and to whom we must do homage: that he come unto us all, after a
gentle and familiar manner, that we may perceive him to be our father and
master, and that we may know that he will alie himself, and make a covenant
with us, to the end we should cleave unto him. This is meant by the title which
he gives himself in this place, saying, I am not only thy everliving, which
come here to fright thee: but I am withal thy GOD. I have chosen thee to my
self: I will that thou be my heritage. So then we now see, how GOD
authorizeth his Law, to the end we should receive it in all fear and
humility, and how withal he sweeteneth it with his love, to the end we
should take a taste of it, and with a delighte and pleasure, submit our selves
unto it, not refusing to be governed by the doctrine therein contained. And let
us know, that we can have no excuse, if at this day we honor not our GOD in
truth, renouncing all our superstitions, and what soever is contrary to his
service. And why? Because he should win us to himself by these titles,
which are given to hold us in his fear. When he speaks of the rule and
power he has over us all: and when he calls him self, Our GOD, this ought
to make us taste his fatherly goodness. These two things are here comprised.
We see then that there remains nothing, but that we give diligent ear to
that which is declared unto us in the law of God, and thereon wholly rest and
stay our selves. And for this cause he vpbraided the people of Israel, that
they neither feared nor loved him. If I be thy God and master, where is then
my fear? Malach, 1. 6.
If I be thy father, where is my love? says he by his Prophet Malachie.
There is no doubt, but the Prophet in this place had respect unto this which
Moses here breefly touches. For when GOD names himself, The everliving, he
does it to the end, that we should bear him due reverence. When he names
himself, The GOD of his people, it is to win them by love and gentleness,
and to show, that after he has elected them, they should give them selves
over wholly into his hand. Now if this were under the law, by greater right it
agrees unto us. For although God in the person of his only some would as it
were be much abased, yet for all this remains he always in his glory,
neither is any thing diminished from the highness of that majesty, whereof he
here makes mention. The abasement of our Lord Jesus Christ, is an infallible
testimony of the mercy and love of our God, yet howsoever it be, this ought
not to occasion us to contemn, or to less esteem his majesty: for God in
this sort has stopped to us, that he might allure us to behold with less
fear his majesty, and learn to reverence him in such sort as we ought to
do. So then of good right shall he reprove us at this day, as being
altogether inexcusable, if we do not fear and love him. For he shows
himself our GOD, and our master. But where is our fear, when we regard not
that he commands us, when we have hardened our hearts against his
threatenings, as if we would despitefully resist him, when we continue in our
wickedness. And although he has said, He will be our judge, and that he will
one day take an account of our doings: how is it that we make but a scorn
and mockery of it? Where is (I say) the fear which we owe to our GOD? For it
seems, that we will fear a mortal creature more than the living GOD, which
has all preeminence, and superiority, and maistershippe over us. Moreover, it
is not enough that we fear GOD, after some servile manner, as being forced
thereunto: but we must have a love always joined with our fear: For
therefore names he him self, Our father. And let us also note, that when he
declares him self the God of Israel, he means by this word, that he is our
Savior also. Abac. 1. 12.
Thou art our God (says the Prophet Abacue) and we cannot perish. So then let
us keep in mind these titles, forasmuch as they apperteine to us, and ought
to serve this day for our instruction: knowing that the Majesty of God has
appeared in our Lord Jesus Christ. Now let us mark this which he further
adds for the greater proof of his love and favor: I have brought you (says
he) out of the land of Egypt. It is true, that God here especially binds
unto himself the people of Israel above all other nations, to which end he
expressly sets down the redemption he had wrought them: But when God
speaks, we must consider of all the benefits for the which we are indebted
to him, which albeit they are in number infinite and inestimable: yet we ought
at least wise call them to mind, so far as our small ability may do,
applying all our wits and senses thereto: and perceiving, that we fail, and
are behind in this point, let us strain our selves better to mind them, at
least so far, as to be thereby instructed in the love and fear of our God.
Does then God speak? We must first consider, that this is he which created us,
we are therefore his. This one benefit were sufficient to provoke every one
with all his might to serve and honor God. For what sufficient recompense can
we make him, if there were but this, that he has placed us in this world, and
of his mercy nourishes us here? But yet, when we shall have cast our eyes up
on high, or down below, and take a diligent view of all the tokens he shows
us of his love, seeing that he has created the world for our sake, that he
has appointed all things to our use, considering that he has engraven his
own image in us, that we should be immortal, understanding that he has
prepared a better heritage for us than this brittle and transitory life: when
we perceive all these things, must it not needs be that we are more blockish
and brutish than beasts, if we be not ravished with a fervent desire to
worship our God, to vow, and to dedicate our selves wholly unto him? But yet
further than this, we must make inquiry, and enter into account, as well of
the benefits which are bestowed on us all in general, as which every one
also particularly receives, and then behooves it every one to make his
confession with David: Lord when I think on thy benefits, Psalm. 40. 5.
lo my spirit is plunged as it were in some great deapth, they surmount in
number the hairs of mine head, as he speaks in the, 40. Psalm. Again, when
we shall have known how far we are all bound to God in general, let
every one in the privy chamber of his own heart consider the benefits which
he has received of the hands of God. And in stead of that which was said in
old time to the people of Israel, I have redeemed you out of the land of Egypt,
let us remember from whence our Lord has delivered us, when it pleased him to
receive us into his fannlie and into his church. For we are the children of
Adam, by nature cursed, and inheritors of death, we have nothing in us but
sin, and so consequently we must needs be accursed before God. Let men
please and magnify themselves as they list, yet behold their birth, behold
their nobility: they are but bondslaues of Satan, they have a sink and
bottomless gulf of corruption in them, they are worthy that the wrath and
malediction of God fall on their heads: briefly being banished from the kingdom
of heaven, they are given over to all misery and wretchedness. Now our Lord
and God, by the hand of his son, has hence delivered us. He has not sent a
Moses, as to the people of ancient time: but not sparing his only son, he
has delivered him to death for us. Being then raunsomed with so dear and
inestimable a price, as is the holy and sacred blood of the son of God,
ought we not wholly to yield our selves unto him? And withal let us note,
that if it be said, That Egypt was a house of bondage, what thraldom and
servitude is this, when Satan holds us in his bonds, and under his
tyranny, in such sort that we have no mean to escape death, that we be
excluded from all hope of salvation, that God is our enemy and adversary?
Now being delivered from all this, is not our redemption far more greater
and excellent than this, whereof Moses here speaks? So in steed that it was
sa^ed to the ancient people, Thy God has delivered thee out of the land of
Egypt, it is now said, That we be redeemed from the bondage of Satan to live
unto the Lord, as Saint Paul speaks in the. Romans 14. 9.
14. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, and the sixte of the first to the
Corinthians; 1. Cor. 6. 19.
that we are not our own. It behaueth therefore the faithful, that they
presume not on the liberty, to do what seems them, and to live every one
after his own lust. And why so? The Lord Jesus therefore died and rose again
and revived, Romans 14. 9.
that he might be Lord both of the quick and dead. It is then good reason,
that Jesus Christ should be Lord both of the living and of the dead, seeing he
has not spared himself for our redemption and salvation And besides this, that
the son of God has offered himself upon the cross to redeem us, let us
know that at this day by the mean of the Gospel he makes us partakers of
this benefit: for he has gathered us to himself, to the end we should be
of his flock and inheritance. It is true that he is that undefiled Lamb and
without spot which takes away the sins of the world, and that he has
offered himself so reconcile man unto God. Howbeit, so it is, that we see
many people for saken, to whom the gate is shut, and to whom God has not
showed this favor, to inlighten them in the faith, as we are. And withal let
us note, that forasmuch as the Gospel is preached unto us, we have herein a
sure testimony, that the son of God will make the redemption which he has
once accomplished, auailable unto us, and that he will have us to rejoice in
such a benefit. Let us learn then that our unthankfulness shall be so much the
more vilainous, if we employ not all our pains to serve that God, which has
by such benefits bound us unto himself. If such as are not of the household
of faith behave themselves as untamed horses broken loose, if they pass all
measure in their superstitions, if they be loose and lawless in their living,
this may well be, because they have no bridle to restrain them, because the
Lord raineth them not back as he does his household servants. We see the
horrible confusion which is now in the Papasie. But all this while they have no
doctrine to reduce men unto God, but rather to estraunge them from him. And we
see how the devil has gained an empire and kingdom among them in such sort,
that all is full of deceites and illusions, and that the living God is
forsaken. See then here an horrible confusion. But as for us, seeing God has
drawn us to himself, is not this a most straight obligation, to make us knit
our selves wholly unto him, to make us hold the obedience of the doctrine
proposed unto us in his name? Let us therefore learn so to cleave unto our
God, that we renounce all that we might forge of our own brain, that we
stagger no more hither or thither, or be moved and tossed in any sort
whatsoever. Know we that there is one God which will possess us for his
people, and so wholly possess us, that his honor be not taken from him, to be
bestowed on creatures, know we that he watches over us, to the end we
should acknowledge, that it is he only whom we must call upon, and of whom
we must look for all help and succor. And for that he will receive us, and
keep us in house, let us walk as in his presence: so that we worship him
as our only God, not only by way of ceremonies and outward protestation: but
sincerely and in heart, as we know that his service is spiritual. Briefly,
let us yeald up our selves, our souls, and bodies, to be governed by him, that
he may be in all things honored and glorified.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, beseeching him that he will make us feel them
better than we have done, that we may be led to a true and earnest repentance,
that he will mortify us more and more, cutting off our evil and disordered
affections, to the end we may be wholly given to fear and honor him. And
because we cannot serve him so purely as he deserves, whiles we be held
bound under the infirmittes of our flesh, pray we him that he will bear with
us, until he has clothed us with his righteousness. And so let us say humbly
from our heart, Almighty God and heavenly father.

The. 3. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 8 Thou shall make thee no graven image, or any likeness of that,
that is in heaven above, or which is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
waters under the earth.

9 Thou shall neither bow thy self unto them, nor serve them: for I thy Lord
thy God am a gelous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, even to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

10 And showing mercy to thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.


BEcause men are so far inclined to corrupt the worship of God by wicked
superstitions, it behooves that God fear them by his threats, to the end they
might be as it wereforceably kept back: when otherwise they would carry them
selves headlong by their vanity, to imagine of GOD clean contrary to all
that which is agreeable with his Majesty. And this is a point worthy to be
noted. For it seems (as we have already touched) that it was now needelesse
to forbid the people of Israel to make any images, after they had known the
living God. But because of our cursed inclination, it was requisite that this
so straight a forbidding, as we see, should be adjoined. And this is done as
well for us, as for them: because this vice is as it were settled in our bones.
If God show not, that he will not suffer idolatry, and that we be not
wounded with such threats, there is not one amongst us which forgeth not an
infinite number of idols, and by this mean the honor due to the living God is
transported unto our fantasies. Let us note then, that here we are reproved of
having a cursed and perverse nature, which always draws us to superstition,
and that there is great need that we be held back after some violent and
forceable manner. For of our own good will we never serve GOD in such sort, as
that we imagine nothing of him, but that which is proper to his Majesty. And
withal we may note, to what purpose our good meanings serve us. For if there
be any thing in which men may excuse them selves with this, that they think
they do well, it is when they forge unto them selves idols. For to what end do
they make them, but to serve God, to be stirred up to greater devotion, and to
have a more strong assurance that GOD will hear them in their requests:
These then are the men which may best pretend this color of good meaning: but
yet we see on the contrary side, that God hereby is grievously angered: we see
how he pronounces an horrible sentence of condemnation upon all them, which
leave them selves to be governed by their thinking and meaning. They will say
still, and the thing is so, That they think to serve God: but what? He
accepts no such service, but rather accurseth it, and that by good right. For
as we have above showed, his maieslie is disguised, when one will make unto
him a visible image. We are then instructed in this place to do nothing as
seems us, especially when there is any question of the service of God, that
we attempt nothing after our own fantasies, but that we follow in all
simplicity that which he appoints by his word, without adding of any thing
unto it whatsoever. For as soon as we shall have declined never so little
herein, what ever we allege to make our cause good, God will not leave us
unpunished. For this is no vain threate, when he says, That he is a God of
gelousie and anger, which visits the iniquity of parents upon their
children. Thus you see then two points which we have to bear in mind in
this place. The one is, that because we are by nature over much given to
idolatry, this threatening of God commes always before our eyes, to the end we
presume not to mingle any thing with his word, or to devise any kind of
idolatry, but that we serve him purely according to his nature, and not
according to our fantasy. And let this be for one note. The other is, that we
know we must not pretend our good me aninges, to justify that which we shall
have invented and devised: but contrary wise let us remember, that the
principal service which God requires, is obedience. Now let us come to the
words which are set down in this sentence: God says in the first place, I am
thy everliving thy God, or thy mighty and strong one. Here again, he sets
himself against all idols. For we have already seen, that to redress the
superstitions of the Israelites, he declared himself in his majesty. Now
this is to take all excuse from men, when GOD once manifests himself unto
them. When we know not which is the true religion, neither can discern who
is the true GOD, it is no marvel if all our senses wander, and we run
hither and thither without any right directing of our ways, as poor
wanderers: but when God has once declared himself unto us, and we know his
truth, then is there great reason that all our dreams fall to the ground,
and that we abide steadfast in that, whereof we have knowledge. For this cause
God repeateth this thing, That he has declared himself to his people, and
has chosen them to himself, and that he will govern them even by the law
which is now published. And of purpose names he himself A gelous God, and
wrathful. For this word imports both these things. And again, although he
be called here, God, notwithstanding the word he here uses, is derived from a
word which signifies strength and fear. Now when he names himself Gelous,
there is no doubt but he means thereby to signify, that he will not suffer
that his honor be violated, or that he be robbed of that which properly
belongs unto him, to have it given to creatures, that he can not patiently
endure any such treachery. Therefore when the honor of God shall not be so
priced on our part as it deserves, let us know that he will not neglect it.
For we shall feel in the end that he forgets not himself, but will
maintain his glory, as he declares throughout all the holy scripture.
Verily if we had but one drop of true understanding, we would be zealous
for the honor of our God, so that we needed not to be stirred up hereunto:
we would of our selves endeavor to accomplish that which is written in the
Psalms, Psalm. 69. 9.
that is, That his zeal should devour us: that we should burn within our
selves when we see his majesty reprochfully abused, it would be (I say) that
we should then feel within us a burning and consuming fire. But what? We are
curious to maintain our own honor, and in the mean while we will suffer
that the honor of the Lord be trampled under feet, that men make their
sport and game of it, that men have it in derision and mockery, or at least
that men mangle and tear it in pieces. And therefore when the world shall be
wholly set on idolatry, when all of us shall neglect our duty in the service
of God, shall not our Lord, after he has reproved our looseness and
unthankfulness in this point, show that although we have been careless
herein, he will yet have such a zeal as behooves him to maintain his honor,
and that when he shall be trod under the feet of men, he will execute on
them a sharp and grievous revenge? Now to the end that we should know
that being gelous in his honors behalf, he knows well in what sort to
punish the idolaters, he takes to himself the name of God, which imports
force and strength, as we have already touched: and to this end he does it,
that we also, when we think of him, should join these two words together.
For Moses understands in this place, that which is more fully expressed by
the Prophet Nahum, Nahum. 1. ^.
when he says, The Lord is agelous GOD, a God of vengeance, a God which
punishes them that have offended, which reserueth wrath for his enemies, a
God, which shall come in a whirle wind and tempest. The Prophet uses this
word, that God is Gelous, that is to say, that he is not forgetful, that he
has not his eyes closed and shut up when men contemn him, but that he marketh
it, that all which is done is registered before him, that he will one day take
account of it. Now after that he has spoken of this affection, that is to
say, that God will maintain his honor, he shows by and by that he has
wherewith to do it, that he is armed with force and might to punish his
enemies, and that they cannot by any means escape his hand. And to that end he
speaks of a whirle wind and tempest. See why he speaks of vengeance. He
adds also further, that though God dissemble for a time, that yet he
reserueth wrath for his enemies, and will in a convenient time make them feel
with whom they have had to do, and that they have provoked the living GOD to
anger. We see now what Moses understands namely, that God will have his
honor esteemed of us. And although we think to remain unpunished, when we
have polluted his service, and corrupted it, in what sort so ever, yet in his
time he will show, that he is not forgetful of him self, but that he will
maintain and defend his own honor. This is one point to be noted. Moreover he
adioyneth, that he is also mighty enough to put in execution, his gelousie.
For the Lord is not as mortal men, which can but fume and chafe, when their
honor is foiled, and they contemned and iniuried, but they have not the mean
to work the revenge they would. God is not such a one: he is armed with might
and power to confound all his enemies. Truly we must not imagine in God any
humane affections, such as with which we see men to be moved and carried
away. There is neither anger nor wrath in God. But because we cannot
comprehend him as he is, it behooves that he apply him self to our rudeness.
So, as often as the Scripture speaks of wrath, anger, and indignation: this
is not that God is changeable, that he resembles us, to be moved as we are
with passions. For he always abides in one estate: yea, there is no shadow
of change in him. As Saint James uses the same similitude, to declare, that
in his nature and being there is no change. Iam. 1, 17.
But because we comprehend not the judgments of God, but by these words, of
anger, wrath, and indignation: for this cause the Scripture speaks after this
manner. Now let us also note principally in this place, that it is a fearful
and horrible thing, Heb. 10. 31.
as God here declares, to fall into his hands: and above all, when we shall
have perverted the purity of his service by our wicked inventions, rashly
attempting that which our brain has fondly conceived. Let us therefore know
we shall feel with whom we have had to deal, and that he is a greater
master, than with whom we might think to dally after such a fashion. Now
withal, God is not here contented to threaten them which by idolatry are
turned away from his law, in saying only that he will punish them in their
own persons, but he extends his vengeance to their whole posterity. I am
(says he) a gelous God, which punish the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation. It seems at the first sight,
that this is evil agreeing to the justice of God, to punish the children for
the sins of the fathers and mothers. And beside that, natural reason is
against it. We see what is spoken concerning this point, to the Prophet
Ezechiel, namely, That he which shall have sinned shall bear his own payment,
and that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, nor the father
the iniquity of the son. This place then here which might seem somewhat too
austere and rigorous, which should seem to derogate from the righteousness of
God, for sin, brings his hire, that is, the death of him which commits
it. He then which is innocent why shall he die? Romans 6. 23.
And albeit this reason were not sufficient, we have the testimony of the
holy scripture, where God declares, that he will not punish the innocent
children for the sins of their fathers. For he reproves the Jews for this
blasphemy which ran much in their mouth, and whereof they had now made a
common proverb: Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and our teeth are set on
edge. Ezech. 18. 2.
We are not thus rigorously handled for the faults we have committed, for
we have lived as behooved us, but he grateth here upon the sin of our
fathers. Thus the Jews murmured against GOD. Now he swears that this
blasphemy shall no more reign among them. But for all this, when all shall be
well considered, there is no contrariety in these places. For in the place of
Ezechiel God understands no other thing, but that those which are punished of
him, cannot allege their innocence, that they cannot say that God does them
any wrong or injury, if he use them sharply: for they shall find themselves
guilty every one in his own person, and that he shall be declared just,
when every one shall see that he exceeds neither measure nor reason.

Now this is also certain, that when God punishes the children, because of
the fathers: yet cease he not to be just in his chastisementes: for the
children on their part being well examined, shall be found faulty. I say yet
further, that they can no sooner come forth of the womb of their mother, but
they commit many notable and manifest sins, and such as might be known to
the whole world. For what offspring are we? What bring we forth by nature, but
sin and wickedness? See then the infantes which are alredie sinners, yea,
being in the womb of their mother, they are condemned before God, there is yet
no evil perceived in them, howbeit their nature is altogether corrupt and
sinful. They have a seed of wickedness in them, and because of this
original sin which is descended from Adam upon all mankind, behold they are
alredie under condemnation. Now seeing it is so, that the little infantes are
not exempted from the auger and maledicion of God, it is certain when he
punishes them, this shall not be without good cause: but we shall always
know, that he proceeds herein in all equity and justice, as an upright
judge: by greater reason they which are elder and further stricken in years,
are punished as not innocent, for one shall find them by many degrees more
faulty. And so as concerning the place of Ezechiel the case is clear, that
God punishes not the innocent children for the transgression of their fathers,
for the faults shall be also found in themselves. As for this, when he says,
That he punishes the iniquity of fathers upon the children, let us consider
how this is done, and then this hard knotte shall be easily unties. First
then let us know, that God owes us nothing, and that if he bestow any
benefit upon us, this is altogether of his mere liberality, not that he is
any thing beholding unto us. In the mean while, if he will use his rigor
toward us, he may leave us in condemnation as we are. Let God only
withdraw his mercy, and show himself judge over the whole world, and what
shall beecome of us? Surely we shall all perish, there is no remedy: little
and great, fathers and children, without exception (I say) we are all
condemned, if GOD draw us not out of the curse in which we are, and that by
his free mercy, without the least occasion of being bound unto us. So now,
seeing GOD may bring us all to destruction, if it please him to use his
goodness and clemency toward some, if he call them to himself, if he
deliver them from this deep dongeon of damnation, in which they are: may any
one accuse him for this? May any one reprove him herein, the least that may
be? No. For our eye must not be evil, if he of his goodness takes pity
and compassion of his creatures.

And although he use not the like measure toward all, yet notwithstanding we
must have our mouth closed up: or rather wide open, not to murmur, but to
confess that all which he does is in equity and justice, although it surmount
our sense and reason. For we comprehend not always the reason why GOD
disposes so of men, and yet must we lay aside our prating, and learn to
reverence and adore God in his judgments, when they shall be over high for
us, over wonderful, over secret. How ever it be, let this general rule
abide certain, that is to say, That God might leave us in our destruction,
wherein we are, if so it pleased him, and that by this means the whole world
should perish: but because it pleases him to show himself gentle and
pitiful, not toward all, but toward a part, see what discerns the one
from the other.

Now, herevppon he leaves them, as it seems good unto him, in the curse
wherein they are borne. And if one demand why God uses his mercy toward
some, when on others he executes his severity? It is certain, the first and
principal cause is unknown unto us, neither ought we to enquire after it.
And why? For it behooves that all our senses be locked up captives in that
behalf, and that we confess that God has liberty to choose whom he
pleases, and to refuse the rest. But howsoever the case stands, he makes
this promise to the faithful, that he will take pity on their children, and
that as he has begone his mercy in their persons, so he will continue it in
their posterity, even to a thousand generations. Seeing God has made this
promise to his servants, we see now there is some cause why God has pity
of the one, rather than of the other.

(...) contrary part, he threatens the unfaithful that the (...) not only
in themselves, but also in their issue, and (...) which shall descend from
their stock and family. But now let us come to the mercy which God shows,
and to the punishments he executes. His mercy then is not in this, that he
blesses the children of the faithful with riches, with health, or other like
things: or that he makes them to prosper to the world ward: those are not the
chief blessings of God, that is not the end whereat he begins, but rather
he shows them his goodness and mercy, when he governs them by his holy
spirit, when he gives them the mark and seal of the adoption of his
children, when he corrects them, and purges them from their sins, to
reform and renew them to his image and likeness. Ye see then the mercy
which God extends to the children of the faithful, that is to say, he
suffers them not to remain in their corruption and wickedness, but that he
reformeth them and governs them by his holy spirit. This being done, he
continues his mercy further more and more, and makes them to prosper even in
this world, until the fullness of his mercy be heaped upon them: namely,
until he has drawn them out of this world into his kingdom, and gives them
there the fruition of everlasting life. On the contrary side, whereas he
punishes the iniquity of fathers upon the children, this is as much to say,
as that he will leave the stock of them in the same plight, they are in. There
is a wicked man, there is a despiser of God, there is an hypocrite, there is an
unfaithful and unbelieving man: well, he shall have children: God will, as we
may see, forget them, and account them for strangers. And whereas he
acknowledges them not in the number of his own, he daineth not nor
vouchsaleth to show himself a father toward them. So he leaves them as
forsaken, and then it must needs be that Satan possess them, and being
destitute of the spirit of God, what other thing may happen unto them than
evil and mischief, so as they procure to themselves the wrath and anger of
God more and more? Now then does our Lord punish them without good cause? Can
then say they are innocent and guiltless: No. For there is sufficient fault in
them before hand. We see then a great deal the better how this which God
has pronounced by Ezechiel is true: namely, that he which has sinned shall
bear the payment and punishment as he has deserved, and that the innocent
shall not be punished for the cause of the sinner and transgressour.
Notwithstanding, we see also, that not without cause he declares, that he will
punish the iniquity of fathers upon the children. For why? It is in him to
show mercy to the children of the wicked and unbelieving, or of the contemners
of his word, or of hypocrites, which abuse his name: it is (I say) in the
choice and liberty of God, to withdraw his grace from their posterity. And
when their children are estraunged from God, what retain they but the filth
and corruption of Adam? There is nothing else in them, but sin and
wickedness. And therefore needs it must be, that they be enemies to God. Ye
see then how he punishes them in justice, and that they can not shift them
selves out of his hand, in saying that he does them wrong, that he is over
cruel toward them. It behooves that every mouth be stopped in that behalf.
True it is, that a man can never satisfy and content the rebellions, as we
see there are many which advance them selves against God in this case, with
such boldness and presumption, that good men which are sober and modest, are
ashamed to behold them, but leave we these dogs to bark their fill, and in
the mean time let us glorify our God in all humility, knowing at least wise
this one thing, that he has this authority, and might, to show favor and
mercy to whom it pleases him. And for this cause we must conclude, that if
God withdraw his spirit from the posterity of the wicked, he may not be
accused of cruelty: For they are in them selves punishable, when they are in
this sort forsaken of him, and are not governed by his holy spirit. Let us
then note well that this sentence has no contrariety to that of Ezechiel.
Now let us return to see the meaning of Moses in these words. There is no
doubt, but by his manner of speaking in this place, he would imprinte a greater
fear in us, than if barely and simply he had said: God will punish you, when
you shall have corrupted his service, when you shall have changed any thing in
religion, when you shall have devised and fashioned any image or likeness of
him, think not that you shall escape his vengeance: for he will not suffer
that his honor be defaced, and brought to nothing in such sort. If Moses had
thus spoken, men as ouerhardied and flow of nature, would not have been
sufficiently moved with fear. Therefore he here passes further: God (says
he) will not only punish you in your own persons, but he will extend his
vengeance upon your offspring, and not only on your children, but he will
pursue it even to the further end of your lineage, in such sort that you shall
for ever feel his wrath, as a kindling fire, and after your death, men shall
behold the signs and marks of your iniquity: GOD shall place you in such
ignominy and reproach, that you shall be as spectacles to the world: and although
you be rotten and putrified under the earth, yet shall his vengeance pursue
you so, that your sins shall be grated on, and called to remembrance from
age to age: and men shall know that you have rebelled against him, which
showed you so many of his benefits, that at least you should have been as the
sheep of his flock, to be governed by him and his word. Now then let us
take heed, we be not over sluggish and past sense, when God in this manner
stirs up and awaketh us. Truly if only in one word, or by some exterior
signification he should signify his anger, we ought to be touched with great
fear: but since we are dull upon the spur, yet at least then, when God
declares that after he has punished us, he will yet follow on his vengeance
upon our posterity, and that after our death it must needs be, that those
which shall be begotten of us be condemned, when (I say) God speaks in this
wise, let us then be more attentive to walk in his fear, and to turn our
selves unto him, that we provoke him not to anger, being as it is so fearful
and terrible. Thus we see in what sort we are to make our profit by this
text. Now he adds further, Of them which hate him: in which word he
comprehends all the transgressors of the law. If then one demand whether all
those, which turn them selves from the obedience of God, hates him
therefore? This place here answers, Yea: not that it seems so them, and yet
the truth is so. And we ought here not to rest upon our own judgment, for
God only is a competent judge to pronounce sentence herein. And because that
men, when they give them selves over to work wickedlie, will not say, neither
think so in heart, that they hate God, it behooves that this vice should be
discovered. It is true that hypocrites will make a fair show, that the love of
God causes them to show some good countenance. And in deed it may have some
small seed, but it is a bastard and vicious seed. So then this hatred is not
apparent in hypocrites, nether in many other which lead a disordered and
dissolute life: but yet is it in them, though we know it not, for as all male
factours and licentious livers would there were neither judge, nor order, nor
policy in the world: so all they which willingly and of their own accord
would not acknowledge them selves Gods subjects, they spite him, and could be
contented he were plucked out of heaven. This appears sufficently in them,
which are wholly given over and perverted. When men have loosed the bridle to
all iniquity, they can not bear any correction, and are so far from being
tractable to be taught, when they are threatened, they grind the teeth, they
storm and rage, they are furious, and mad against God. This hating then of
God is manifest enough in them which have granted them selves a more outrageous
liberty of doing ill, in the^ which are carried away as with a tempest in
their wickedness, and are fully settled in their sins. In others which have
yet some fear, and are in some sort moved, when we speak of God, and of his
judgments, this appears not, and yet there is already in them an hatred of
God. Truly they think it not, but God sees much more clear than we, and
when things are hid and unknown unto us, he notes them. We must always
bear in mind, how Saint John says, That God is much greater than our
consciences: that is to say, 1. John. 3. 20.
That if our consciences bear us witness of our faults, God shall not sleep
in the mean time. And so let us briefly remember, that all they which
conform not them selves to the obedience of God, and which humble not them
selves under his majesty, to serve and honor him, that all they hate him,
although by effect they show it not at first, and that men can not judge so of
them. And for the same cause we see why in like manner, when God speaks of
them, which keep his commandments, he begins with his love. He says,
That he will show mercy on thousand generations to them which love him. And
why? For it is not possible to desire to honor God, and to be his subjects,
if we have not a feeling of this love, whereof he here speaks, And this may
serve us for a good lesson, as we shall see herafter, that Moses when he would
give a short abridgment of the Law says, What does the Lord thy God Israel
require of thee, but that thou love him with thy whole heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 1^.
and that thou cleave to him? We shall never (I say) know, what it is to yeald
obedience to Gods law, and to rule our selves according to it, if we begin
not at this love. And why? For God requires a willing service, he will not
that we serve him with a servile fear but his desire is that we come unto his
worship with a free and cheerful courage, and take, even a pleasure in obeying
and honoring of him. Now this can not be, except we love him. Wherefore let us
not, that the beginning, the founteine, the foundation, and root of obedience
is this love of God, so as we be not forced to come unto him, but even take a
singular delight and pleasure therein, knowing that this is our true
happiness, that we desire nothing else, but to be ruled by his will, and to
be in all points conformable to the same. And moreover let us note, that this
love can not be in us before we have tasted of the goodness of our God. For
as long as we conceive God our adversary and contrary party, we can not,
but flee him. Will we then love him? Will we be reformed to his obedience to
take a pleasure in his service? We must first know, that he is our father
and savior, and that he desires nothing more than to show himself loving,
and favorable toward us. When we shall so have casted the great love he
bears us, then shall we be stirred up to love him as our father, and when
this love shall be in us, there is no doubt, but we shall obey him, and his law
shall bear rule in our thoughts, and in our affections, and in all our
members. For what is the cause that we are so rebellious against God, but that
we hate him, as we have before said? Again on the contrary side, the love of
God shall lead us to serve him, and to set our selves, and our doings in order
according to his justice in such sort, that a man shall see a certain
conformity and melody between the law of God, and all our desires, and
affections. But yet the better to understand this, let us consider what God is,
for he will not be known according to our nature: and when we shall hear him
speak, it is not enough to yeald him this title of God, but he will be known
as he is: namely, just, and good, that he is the founteine and perfection of
all wisdom, of all power, of all uprightness, of all equity and justice.
Now then let us conceive God as he is, that is, with his justice, and
uprightness, and equity: and then shall we not desire but to frame and
fashion our selves unto him: contrary wise, when we shall love that which is
evil, and shall be wrapped in wickedness as in a garment, it can not be, but we
must hate him. And why? Because here is no question of some bare nature and
being, neither ought we to imagine God as an idol, but we must comprehend him
in his justice. It then we shall hate this which is in God, that is to say, his
justice and uprightness, it must needs be that we hate him also. For he can
not deny him self, he cannot be disguised, he cannot be transfigured after
our fancy, he always abides like himself. So then, as I have already
touched, all they which love God, they fail not to be obedient to his law,
they cease not to observe and keep his commandments, for these things are
knit together, and are inseparable. And this we have to bear in mind upon
this place. Now here hence we are to take a warning, that we have in greater
horror, than we are wont to have, all rebellion, all sin, and offenses. For
it is no small thing to be proclaimed the enemies of God, and to make open
war with him. Now, it is so, that we cannot turn our selves from him, nor
cast off his yoke, but we shall be convicted to have been his enemies, and to
have waged open battle with him? And lo, is not this an execrable thing? Let
us therefore learn to have our sins and offenses in horror and detestation,
forasmuch as by them, we are accused to be the enemies of God, and that he
also must show himself our adversary party. Withal we are also warned to
come unto God with a pure and sincere affec^ion. For it is not enough to
withhold our feet, and our hands, and our eyes from evil doing, but it
behooves that our heart go before, and that God be served of us with a true
meaning mind and upright affection: and this affection must not be forced and
constrained, but it ought to proceed from a true love of God. Therefore, when
we will rightly observe his law, we must first know, that God is unto us a
kind hearted father, gentle and favorable unto us, to the end we may be led
to yield unto him like love and affection. And withal, let us not think to
mock and deceive our selves, in protesting that we love God, if in the mean
while this be not showed in the whole course of our life. For when here is
mention made of the love of God, Moses adds, that they which love him do
also keep his commandments. It behooves then that our life be aunswerable
in this behalf, and that it bear witness whether we love God, or whether
we hate him. For the rest which follows, it is not without cause that God
making comparison of his wrath and vengeance, with his favor and mercy,
says, That he will punish them that hate him to the third and fourth
generation, and that he will show mercy to them that love him in a thousand
generation?. For by this he declares that, which is better and more folly
expressed in other sentences of the scriptures, that is, That he is slow to
anger, greatly inclined to compassion and pity, Psalm. 103. 8.
that he is patient and of long suffering, Psalm. 30. 5.
that his anger endures but a while, that his mercy is to life, and endures
for ever. Ye see then the true nature of God, that is, that he desires nothing
more, than to draw men unto him by all lenity and gentleness, and to use his
mercy and goodness toward them. When he punishes them, this is as it were
against his nature. Not, but that it is agreeable to God, as well to punish, as
to show mercy: but he will show us, that his goodness is much more greater:
and briefly, that he is not sharp and rigorous, but desirous to lay open his
heart toward us, if we would suffer him, for in very deed he will be known
gracious and pitiful. And this is that wherein his principal glory shines.
Therefore let us note well, that not for naught Moses here assigns a thousand
generations to the mercy of God, and restrains his wrath and vengeance to a
three or four generations. As if he did say: It is very true that our Lord
will not leave superstition unpunished, when you shall have perverted his
service, and defaced his honor, busying your selves in your own dreams, and
doting fanstes: you shall surely feel the punishment, and your children after
you shall feel it: and when the fire of his wrath and indignation shall be
kindled among you, it shall not be so soon quenched as you think: but yet
for all that, God will not cease to be pitiful, and his mercy shall be always
greater than his anger. And in very deed, as God by the threat we have here
heard, would retain the world in true religion, to the end it should make no
idols nor puppittes to counterfeit him, so he would by his promise here
contained, as it were allure us to bear him the love and reverence which we
owe unto him, and he desires rather to win us by his gentleness, than to
restrain us by his threatenings. Ye see then in what sort he speaks: My
children, think not that I will deal roughly with you: it is true, if you
provoke me, I shall not suffer that men make a sport and game of me, but when
I have declared mine anger, I desire yet rather to train you, and win you to
my self by mercy and gentleness. I protest then, and declare unto you, if
you abide wholly and sincerely in my obedience, I will continue to bestow my
benefits upon you, even to a thousand generations: so that your children,
after your death, shall find me the same I have been to you. Behold what
we have to bear in mind upon this place.

And moreover, for conclusion, let us note, that it is not without great cause,
that God places here this word of Mercy, although it be as a reward of the
service which is done him, He might well have said, I will consider the
service of them which shall have honored and worshipped me, which shall have
loved me in observing my law, I will show them that it is no lost labor to
have served and honored me, as they shall have done. God might have spoken
so. But he says, I will show mercy? And how so? Seems it not, that if we
serve God, as he has appointed, he owes us a recompense? Now he declares
that he will bestow a benefit upon them which have honored him, and observed
his commandments, and that this is not by any obligation of due debte, or
because of their merits and deserts: for he uses herein mercy. So this
word of Mercy, is to beat down all pride of men in such sort, that they
may not boast of their works, as if they were worthy of reward and payment:
but rather know, that God meant to declare by this, that when we serve him the
best that we can, we have always need to be borne, withal of him, and
that he pardons us our vices and our infirmities. Thus are there two things
which we have to note in this place. 1. Cor. 15. 11.
The one is, that although we should serve God in all purity, if he
recompense us, it is not of any duty he owes unto us. For in deed, from
whence comes this, that we have served him, but from his mere and only
grace? And what then may he owe us? The other is, that we shall be all found
guilty, when it shall please him to examine us according to the exact measure
of his justice. So then, in that God recompenseth us, when we have served him,
he does this for his mercy and goodness, and not that he is bound unto us:
Nay, which more is, he must forgive us our sins, and bear with us, even in
that which we do well. Know we therefore, that GOD shows himself gentle
and liberal toward us, in that it pleases him to bear with our
infirmities, making us to taste his mercy, where he might of right make us
feel his rigor. For let us not think, but without this mercy we should
all perish: yea, though we should enforce our selves to obey him, we should
notwithstanding be always found faulty, were it not that he would use this
mercy toward us, of which he here speaks: So then this is that whither
unto we must flee for refuge, if we will be assure of our salvation.

Now let us cast our selves down, before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, praying him that he will make us feel them
better than we have done, to the end he may lead us to a true repentance, and
that being taught to fear him, we tremble and stand in such awe of him as soon
as he shall threaten us with his anger, we may conceive the force thereof,
that being humbled therewith we run to his fatherly goodness, not doubting but
that if he has once begone to show himself our father and Savior, he will
continue it even after our death, if so be we withdraw not our selves from him
by our wickedness and rebellion. That it will please him to grant this grace
not only to us, but to all peoples and nations, etc.

The. 4. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 11 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless which shall take his name in vain.
IF we were but well advised, there were no need that men should teach us to
bear reverence unto God. For nature ought to lead us hereunto. For to what
end are we created? And why live we in this world, but to do homage to him, to
whom we be beholden for all good gifts, and to apply our selves to honor and
glorify his Majesty? Behold the whole end and sum of this life. But for all
this in steed of honoring our God, and applying our whole studies and
endeavors hereunto, it seems that we have conspired the clean contrary.
For some would have the remembrance of God burried: others despise and mock
him, others with full throat and open mouth blaspheme him, so that we
sufficiently declare, that we know not why we live or should have our being.
Now because there is such a vice in us, God, to remedy it, shows that we
ought likewise to abkeine from abusing his holy name, for this is as it were
to unhallow it, and therefore he has forbidden that his name be not taken in
vain. By these words we ought diligently to consider, what is the right and
lawful use of his name. True it is that we are not worthy to take in our
mouth the name of the Lord, in what sort soever it be, for we must consider of
that which Esaie speaks in the. 6. Chap. Lord I am a man of polluted lips,
Esaie. 6. 5.
and I dwell in the midst of a people, which is altogether filthy and
defiled. Seeing then we have such filthiness and uncleanness in us, it is
certain we can not take the name of God in our mouth, were it not that God of
his goodness would that we use his name, so it be to glorify him withal. Let
us then note well, that when it is said, That we take not the name of God in
vain, that the Lord reproves us of unthankfulness, if we use not his name,
as he has permitted us, and follow not herein the rule which is contained in
his word. For this is the lawful mean, by which we may use his name. But to
the end that this be yet more clearly understood, we must mark, that God
under one kind would here show us, what majesty there is in his name, to the
end we speak not of it, but with all fear and reverence. Therefore above all
other kinds of profaning his name, he takes the especial form of an oath,
when any question is of swearing. We see how our Lord loves us, in that he
lends us his name, to the end we might communicate with our neighbors, and
if there were any controversy and dissension among us, it might be ended by
this mean: namely, that if we be not believed, if any matter were in doubt,
the name of God should be brought forth as Vmpier in the matter to end the
controversy, so as the thing should be altogether certain, when it shall
have such a confirmation. Is not this an inestimable goodness, that our Lord
abaseth himself so much, as to permit us to use his name? And why? For it is
certain that the majesty of God is so precious, that it ought not to be
abased so far: but yet he bouchsafeth to apply himself unto us. So much
greater then is our villainy and wickedness, if we vnhallowe the name of God in
our oaths. Now this is done, not only when we are forsworn, but if we take
the name of God, in our mouths rashly and at randon: when we have not a
regard to speak thereof in all wisdom and discretion, and consider whether
the thing which is in controersie deserves to be confirmed in such manner or
no: For if we use it rashly and foolishlie, behold the name of the Lord is as
it were unhallowed. It is true that God accounts it for one kind of his
service, when men swear by his name, not that he is herein bound unto us, but
altogether the contrary. For (as I have already touched) we ought to
perceive in this thing, how GOD bears with us, when he licenceth us to use
his name. But yet do we in swearing confess that GOD has all preeminence and
superiority over us. He which is inferior, swears by him which is his
sovereign and greater, Heb. 6. 16.
says the Apostle to the Hebrews. And if we knew to what end an oath serves,
we shall understand, that this can not agree, but only to the majesty of God.
For by it our meaning is to confirm those things which are secret and can
have no other proof among men. Now this can not be done by any creature, but
herein GOD must show himself, for it is he which sounds the deapth of men's
hearts, and hereupon also not without cause he challenges to him self the
title of truth. We see then that in swearing we do homage unto God,
protesting that he is our Judge, and that it is he unto whom we ought to have
recourse for things which are doubtful and hidden, because it is his office to
bring them unto light, and because he will maintain the truth: for that it
apperteineth to his honor and glory. That is the cause, why GOD reputeth it
for one form of his service, when one swears by his name: so that it be not
in superfluous and unnecessary oaths. By this we perceive, that the fault of
them which forswear them selves, or swear at randon, is so much the more
grievous. For this is as it were to violate the service of God, and as much as
lies in us to bring it to nothing. As for them which peruire them selves,
they be not only culpable of taking the name of GOD in vain, and of falsely
abusing it, but they are rebels and traitors to the majesty of GOD. For
know we how to work any greater outrage against GOD, than to abolish his
truth? No. For there is nothing more belonging unto him. So this is as much as
if we would pluck him out of his throne, and utterly beereue him of all
divine honor and glory: for this is done, when his truth is turned into a lie.

Whosoever therefore forsweareth him self, that is to say, whosoever takes
the name of GOD in an evil conscience, to color false things, to cloak and
disguise an untruth, to the end he might beguile and deceive others: let him
know it for certeintie, that he blasphemeth God in so doing. Now purposelie I
say, to disguise an untruth. For many dispense with them selves, because before
men they can not be convicted of perjury. And why? They turn the best side of
the coat, they paint and trim their matters so well, that it shall seem
very well to men they speak the truth, and are not perjured: but GOD allows
not any such subtilities. Let us not then think to be acquitted and absolved
before him, when we shall have used such policies, such shifts, and sly
practices. And so in sum we see, that all they which take the name of GOD
otherwise than in truth and in simplicity, blaspheme him. Mark this for one
point. Now as for them, which swear rashly and without cause, they declare
sufficiently, that they make no other account, than to sport them selves with
GOD. It is true they protest the contrary, they will still say their meaning
is not such, but this is but hypocrisy. For the effect sufficiently proves,
that they bear no reverence unto God. If a mortal man be heald dear of us,
we take not his name in vain, we will not that any make a scorn of him, and
floute him, and when a matter of play and mockery is proposed, we can not
suffer that he be brought in as on the Stage, for we take this to be to his
infamy and discredit. And will we have a greater privilege than the living
GOD? We are vile carions, and rottenesse it self, and yet will we be had in
honor and estimation? And shall our God in the mean time be placed beeneath
as our underling? And thus we see, that there are at this day very few of any
religion in the world: although many make a show and countenance of being
Christians, that yet not withstanding never knew, what it is to worship GOD,
to do him homage, or to yeald him the service which apperteineth unto him.
For how is this, that the name of GOD runs in every man's mouth? One can
not bargain for the worth of one farthing, without he has some oath at the
end of every word. If the honor of GOD were of price among us, it is
certain, we would abstain from such superfluity of oaths: which more is,
it would breed an horror in us. But now a days every one makes a game of
it, and when a man is reprehended for swearing, he will think he has great
wrong done him.

Now, if one should maintain any matter which were not for his profit, he
would be much grieved therewith: yea, he would make his complaints
thereof: but if we have the zeal of God to be grieved, when his name shall be
thrown to the ground, see what quarrels are made with us, see on what spite men
are set, how they grind their teeth at it. Now when the world is come into such
a possession of contemning God, and men have hardened them selves herein, is
not this a sign that his majesty is not known nor regarded? And albeit, men
yeald unto them selves such an outrageous liberty under this shadow, that the
thing is accustomably used, and that of custom is made a law: yet will God in
the end show, that his name is more dear unto him than men have had it, and
though we sell it good cheap, it shall cost us dear, and with an over
vantage: and it shall be in the end that the land wherein we have been
conversant, which has been defiled, and made unclean by us, be raised up in
judgment against us. In like manner all the benefits which we have received,
and which God with a liberal hand has bestowed on us, shall come into account
for our condemnation, for as much as we have not known him, which has been the
author of them, to honor him as he deserves. Ye see then what we have first
to observe and note in this place: namely, that God bears graciously with
us, and uses so great gentleness toward us, as that he is willing and
content we use his name in things lawefull and right: by which leave of his
we may sufficiently know, that he is more than a father unto us. But withal
he warns us, to take so much the more diligent heed we abstain from all
wicked oaths. For as for periuries (as we have said) this is a villamous
outrage which we do to God. For in as much as his truth is converted into a
lie: we are falsifiers thereof as much as in us lies. Ye see then a mortal
and deadly offense. But this is not enough to keep our selves from
forswearing, but our oaths also must be sober, and the name of God must not be
tossed up and down among us as a Tennise ball: but it behooves, that there be
some great necessity which may hold us excused, when we make mention of it.
Now forasmuch as we protest in our oaths, that God has all superiority over
us, by this we may understand, that all the oaths which are made by creatures
are wicked and intolerable, as proceeding from superstition: as among the
Papists, one will swear by Saint Anthony, an other by Saint John, which is
as much as if one would make idols of them. And why? For we must always return
back to that sentence which I have before alleged of the Apostle, that we
declare God to be our superior: yea, our sovereign, when we swear by his
name. And this is the cause why, when God swears, to confirm us in his
promises, or happily to awaken us when he sees us hardened in our sins, and
that we stand not in awe of his judgments, he swears by himself, he
reserueth to him self this honor, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
whereof it shall be further handled in the ninth Chapter of this book. And so
they which swear by creatures are idolaters. And for this purpose also, when
there is mention made of superstitions, the oths of men are put in as witnesses
to convince them, that they have turned them selves from the purity of the
law. The Pastors, says Jeremy, Iere. 12. 16.
which have charge to conduct and lead the people, must teach them to swear
by the name of God, that is, that all other oaths be laid aside, and that
creatures be not mingled, and brought in, when any thing by oath is to be
confirmed. Moreover, when it is here spoken of the name of God, let us note,
that we are not only forbidden to pronounce this word, but that the
substance thereof is here considered: for God regards the deed. As there
are some which swear not expresselie by the name of God, and yet
notwithstanding they cease not to offend and transgress against this
commandment. For we must always have regard to come to this which our Lord
Jesus Christ handles in the fifth Chapter of S. Mat. 5. 34.
Matthew. When you swear by heaven, is not this the throne of the living God?
If you swear by his temple, is not this the place where his majesty abides?
If then we think we shall not be accused and condemned, when we express not
the name of God in our oaths, we greatly abuse our selves. Let us not
therefore think to deceive him in this, for the excuse is altogether foolish
and childish. And why? The heaven, bears it not a mark and token of the
majesty of God? Se then how his glory is diminished. As much is to be said of
the earth, for it is his footestoole, as Christ touches in that place which I
have alleged. Therefore, so let us briefly learn, that we ought to bear
such a reverence to the name of God, that all oaths be laid aside and banished
from among us, but as necessity requires, when God suffers us to borrowe
his name. Otherwise let us follow this form of speech, as handling our matters
in all simplicity, to say. Yea, it is so. And let us know, that all which is
besides this, Mat. 5. 37.
is evil and rondenmed by the law: namely, if we take the name of God in
vain. And withal let us note, that all superfluous oaths, and those in which
the name of God is not honored, as it deserves, have in them a double evil.
For first, when men let them fly so at all adventures, it is a sign they
scarce make any account what they say: secondly consider we from whence this
common swearing proceeds, and we shall find that from none other thing, but
that men be such liers, so full of falsehood and deceit, that when they speak
the one to the other, none can believe that it is true which is said. So then,
it must needs be, that there is in us great wickedness, considering that
when God has given us a tongue, it is in part to communicate one with an
other: For our tongue is the messenger of our heart, whereby we express unto
others what we have in our minds conceived. We may then conclude, that
superfluous oaths proceed from the disloyalty and rebellion of men, neither
need we to make much inquiry, or use any long process in this matter: for
every one has his own witness. How ever it be, let us learn to use in this
thing such sobriety as God commands, and let us not swear without great
necessity, and being hereunto required. But to go on somewhat further in this
matter, that all may be easily understood: there are some, who think that
when they swear by their faith, it is as if they swore not at all. It is true
indeed, that the most part swear nothing, for they have no more faith than
dogs, they have no conscience, nor religion. But yet this name of faith
cease not therefore to be in price before God. For he holds it dear, and
it is as an hallowed thing unto him, which neither can, neither ought to be
unhallowed: except we will be in great fault, and incur the danger of the
threate here made, as we see. So it is not sufficient not to have pronounced
expresselie by God, but when one swears by his faith, or takes any
confirmation from that which has any sign of the majesty of God, his name is
unhallowed in this thing. What shall we say then of them, which use false
oaths to disguise their purposes, which swear rashly, even to sport them
selves with oaths: yea, to despite God by their execrable blasphemies, in so
much that he has neither flesh nor blood, nor nothing else which they spare?
Are these only holden faulty for abusing the name of God? No, but because
they use him to the greatest and most execrable reproach, that they may do.
Behold our Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 7.
which made himself of no reputation for a time, (as Saint Paul speaks) who
being the founteine of all life, became mortal man, having superiority and
dominion over the Angels of Heaven, took the form of a servant, even to
shed his blood for our redemption, and in the end to suffer the curse that
was due unto us. And now for a recompense of all this, he must at this day
be rent and torn in pieces of the carrion and stinking mouths of them which
name them selves Christians. For when they swear by his blood, and by his
death, and by his wounds, and by this, and by that, is not this as much as in
them lies to crucify the son of GOD, and to tear him as it were in pieces?
And are not these altogether worthy to be cut off from God: yea, from the
world, and not to be numbered in the band and company of creatures? Must
Jesus Christ for abasing, and humbling himself for us, have such a reward at
our hands? Esaie. 5. 2.
God vpbraideth the people of Israel in this sort, O my people, Ierem, 2. 21.
what have I done unto thee? I have brought thee out of Egypt, I have conducted
thee by the desert, I have nourished thee in all gentleness and sweetness, I
have planted thee as in my heritage, that thou should have been as a vine
which should have borne me good fruit, I bestowed all labor in keeping and
fencing thee, and must thou now be turned into bitterness unto me, and bring
forth sour fruit to strangle and to choke me? Now the same apperteineth
also at this day unto us. For when the son of GOD, which is appointed Judge
of the world, shall come in the last day, he may say unto us, What means
this? You have borne my name to be called Christians, you have been baptized,
in witness and testimony that I was your redeemer: I have drawn you forth
of the deep dongeon, wherein you were plunged, I have delivered you from
everlasting death, by the cruel death which I suffered, and for this cause I
beecame man, I sbmitted my self to the malediction of GOD my Father, to the
end you might be blessed by my grace, and by my mean. And behold the reward
you have rendered me. I have been rent in pieces of you, I have been as a
^easting stock, the death which I have snffered has been had in derision
and mockery, my blood which is the washing of your souls, was as it were
trampled under your feet: briefly, you have taken all occasion to blaspheme
and to rail on me, as if I had been a wretched and miserable creature. When
When this shall be rebukefullie told us of our sovereign Judge, will not this be
to thunder on us, and to throw us down to the bottomless pit of hell? And yet
notwithstanding, there are very few of us, which deeply consider of this.
For if superfluous oaths were at this day had in such great horror and
detestation, as they should be, men would not yeald unto them selves any time
hereafter such an outrageous boldness and liberty of swearing and
forswearing. As for blasphemies, see we not how common and rife they are? And
in the mean time we will be very zealous for our own honor and reputation,
when the name of God is so trodden under feet amongst us. If one speak any
thing reprochfullie of ones father, he will make a great quarrel of it, or
enter some action of slander: yea, many will revenge them selves by their own
hands, and by all means they may on every side: and it seems to them, that
they have an honest excuse to take upon them the defense of their fathers.
Behold our sovereign father shall sustain wrong and injury, behold in like
manner our Lord Jesus Christ, who not without cause is named The Lord of
glory, before whom every knee ought to bow, 1. Cor. 2. 8.
as Saint Paul speaks to the Philippians, Phil. 2. 10.
lo he (I say) shall be mocked, than which despite none could be wrought him
greater, except a man would spitte in his face: and yet notwithstanding, they
which name them selves Christians, which make a countenance of procuring and
mainteining his honor, will not be moved any whitte therewith: nay, they them
selves will be the men, which will blaspheme him in most execrable manner:
But for all this (as I have said) our Lord will not cease to maintain his
own honor, as he himself speaks, when he sees that men are so wicked and
profane, so to violate his majesty, as much as lies in them. For he makes a
solemn oath, that he will wreake his vengeance upon them for this
wickedness. I am the Lord (says he,) this is my name, Esaie. 42. 8.
and my glory I will not give to an other, neither my praise to graven images.
Now, as he will not that his honor be transferred to idols, so is it certain
it extends it self further: namely, that if men shall falsely abuse his holy
name, they shall perceive in what price it was unto him. And therefore let us
not wait until this be accomplished upon us, but let us learn to bear
such reverence unto our God, and to him that has all sovereign majesty, that
is, to our Lord Jesus Christ, that we be thoroughly instructed to swear in
such sort, that this be always to confirm, that it is he by whom we are,
that he is our Father, our Creator, and our Judge. Thus ye se in effect, what
we have to gather of this place. Now here is withal anuexed a threatening,
whereby we are to understand the blockishnes of men, how Satan has as it were
bewitched them in such sort, that they conceive not the wrath and anger of
God, when it is set before them. I will not hold him guiltless, which shall
take my name in vain. Lo God, who speaks. I pray you, ought not all the
hairs of the heads of them stand on end, which blaspheme God so wickedly and
villainously, as I have said? When one swears lightelie by his faith, behold
God who is armed, and says, For as much as thou have not honored me, thou
shall give an account for such treachery: God can not bear with us for a
simple lie: if one periure him self, this is much worse: if an other
blaspheme: herein is the extremity and furthest degree of all evil, when we
openly despite God, as if we would arm our selves against him, and strike
him with some deadly wound. Now, if after this, one think not of this
punishment which hangs over, and is ready to fall upon them, which so have
falsified the name of God, or have dishonored him, must we not needs say, that
this proceeds of some beastly drunkenness, and that men are altogether
without sense, and understanding: and that Satan has altogether blinded them?
Alas yes: and yet notwithstanding, this thing is so common, as nothing more. If
some master should say in his house, I will be obeyed in all things: but
lo, one thing which I desire above all to be done, and I will not suffer any
one to fail herein, but I will put him out of my service, or I will correct
and chastise him as he deserves: If some master (I say) should give such a
charge of some one thing, although in the rest a servant would not be over
diligent, yet in this would he have some fear. Now behold God curses them
which transgress and offend against his law in any article. Cursed be he
which honoreth not his father and mother, Cursed be he which steals, Cursed
be he which commits adultery, Cursed be he which observes not all the
things which are contained in the law. But here, by some specialtie, he
manaceth a general threate on them which shall abuse the name of GOD. By this
he declares, that although he will that we observe his law, in all points,
and that our life be ordered thereby, notwithstanding he reserueth this
article to this place, as if he would his name should have an especial
privilege. Now if for all that, this threatening slip out of our mind, and
that we consider not of it, and that it staieth us not, but we ventur still
over boldly to sport our selves so with God, and his majesty, must it not
needs be said, (as I have already touched,) that the devil has carried us
away headlong, and beereaued us of all sense and reason? Yet if this threatening
awake us not at this day, we shall in the end know that God has not
published his warnings in vain. Let us therefore learn to be touched to the
quick, when God so preciselie sets himself against us, and protests that
he will be adversary party to them, which have abused his name. For let us
consider what it shall cost us, if we abstain not from rash and superfluous
oaths, and above all, from blasphemous periuries. Now the greatest excuse they
have which would diminish their faults, is this, that they can not choose, but
swear: because they have been so accustomed thereunto. O seely and miserable
excuse. And yet see how if every one would be his own judge, and speak the
truth, it is certain he might very soon forget his oaths. For when question
is of taking the name of God, if one would well consider of the thing, and take
good heed thereof, he would not take it without great reverence. And when one
should come to swear in judgment, he should have there as present the
majesty of God, he should behold him as judge, when he calls him to
witness. This might very well be done. But what? Our tongue is so lavish,
that we utterly despise and set at naught the name of God, as I have
already said, how ever a man cry and call on us for the contrary, and
hammer us never so much with warnings. For in very deed, the warninges and
admonitions, which for this abuse are made in holy scripture, are as great
strokes of maules and hammers where with God strikes us, and yet we continue
still the same we were, and the name of God has no greater honor and majesty
among us, than it had before, when we were in ignorance, and wanted the
admonitions contained in the word of God. Howbeit they which have any
understanding and feeling of his name, ought well to weigh, and consider that
which is here said. And withal (as I have declared) when we have been warned
of this, whereof we have before considered: namely, that he which speaks is
the everliving, and our Creator, that it is he which has redeemed us, and
declared him self more than a father and savior toward us, if this remain
well imprinted in our memory, it is certain we shall easily forgette all
oaths. But if we follow on still our wickedness herein, that which is said
to the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 12. 1^.
shall be fulfilled upon us, that is to wit this: They shall feel him whom
they have pierced: that is to say, him whom they have wounded. For though men
flatter one another, and make their oaths but a laughing game, and think that
this shall easily be pardoned them, God cease not to be wounded, and he will
in the end show, that he ought not so to have been set on, and warred against.
Moreover, we have to note, that God would in this place by one special kind of
abuse, show briefly what reverence we ought to bear generally to his name. It
is true that in express words here is mention made of oaths, but yet this
doctrine ought to be further extended: namely, that when we think on God, or
speak of him, we do it with all reverence, that we be awakened, not only to
honor and praise him above all, but to have a feeling of his inestimable
glory, before which the Angels tremble, that we which are poor and frail
creatures, as nothing more, may at least do homage to the sovereign majesty
of our God, when soever mention is made thereof. Behold one point which we
ought well to observe in this sentence. True it is, that this doctrine is easy
of it self, but yet obscure unto us, because it is so evil practiced. When
we think of GOD, what vain thoughts come into our head? Our nature verily
is much inclined hereunto, as we are full fraughted and stuffed with fancies
and lies, and there is nothing but darkness in us. But when men nourish in
them selves those evil and wicked fantasies, which they conceive against the
honor of GOD: this declares that they have conspired and made an agreement
together with the devil. And yet how many are there which take care for this,
when there shall arise in them any wicked fancy, or such thoughts and
imaginations which in their conscience they know to be wicked, and against the
glory of God, to repress and keep them under? Who use any forcing of them
selves to resist them? Nay rather men take pleasure in them, and bath them
selves with much delight in such imaginations. And when the mind, that is,
the understanding of men, is so defiled, the rest is easily corrupted. And
that this is so, consider we by our words which follow. For how speak we
of God for the most part? What opinions hold we of him? It seems men seek
nothing more busily, than to be altogether corrupted. There needs but
little leven, to leven the whole lump of dough, says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5. 6.
handling the same matter of wicked speeches, which defile and infect us with
evil vices. Gal. 5. 9.
Now that of other is the worst, when men speak of God in mockery, when one
will scorn and sloute him, when one makes a jest of him, not only after a
fashion fond and vain, but villainous and execrable: Is not this even of
purpose and wilful malice to violate the majesty of God? And yet
notwithstanding this is done, and commonly used, so that there shall scarce
be any long discourse made, or great matter maintained, which has not I know
not what intermingled, whereby God shall be contemned and set at naught. Show we
not then hereby, that we never knew aright what it is to worship him? Well,
we shall say every day, Thy name be hallowed, but we do all the contrary.
Shall there then any other sentence of condemnation light on our heads than
that? When we come to the Church, we will confess with our mouths, that we
desire that the name of GOD be maintained in his due honor: we will say as
much at the table, and every one, when he rises and lays him down to
sleep: (I speak of them which are not altogether brutishe, for there are some
which know not what it means to make prayer unto GOD:) But they which
shall have so much honesty as to pray unto God, they shall well say with the
mouth, Thy name be sanctified, but this is scarce gone from the tip of their
tongue, and behold a false oath in their mouth, and they will toss the name
of GOD hither and thither. And whither tends his wickedness, but to the
violating of the majesty of GOD, and to the despiting of him, as if we would
give him a blow with a dagger, or spit in his face? And (as I have said) there
needs no other Judge to condemn us in our false oaths than this protestation
which we make; when we desire of GOD, that he will maintain the holiness
of his name. And yet in the mean time, we seek to deface it as much as lies
in us. Now it rests that we must speak of the majesty of GOD in all
reverence, especially, when we talk of his works. As how? When we speak
of the time, whether he sends fair weather, or rain, ^oe these are marks
of the majesty of GOD. If he send us contrary seasons, be shows him self
as a Judge, to the end to make us feel his wrath and indignation, that we
might enter into the examination of our sins, to bewail them, and to be led
to repentance. Now, if in stead of humbling our selves before God, and having
a displeasure with our selves for our offenses, we are wayward and overthwart,
(as we see that some men are wont despitefully to say, And must this season
continue in this sort, and thus long?) and have not recourse to our God,
beseeching him to pardon our faults, this shall be to take the name of God in
vain. As much is to be said of all the rest. I bring this example only to
show, that when we are to speak of the works of God, it behooves that either
we perceive him to be a Father in his goodness, or feel him to be a Judge in
his rigor and severity. Therefore when God shall do things which shall not
fall out to our mind, and which shall be contrary to our wishes and desires,
let us know that he grieueth and chastises us, to the end we should enter
into the acknowledging of our sins, to condemn them, and to be displeased
with them. If then we glorify not God in this thing, we unhallow his holy
name. And again, when God on the contrary side draws us to himself in all
gentleness, as a loving and pitiful father, this is to the end we be led unto
him, and that we honor him so much the more. And if our unthankfulness is to
be condemned for not honoring him in the first word which he shall have
spoken, what shall be said when we shall be vpbraided of all these things,
that by all the ways GOD shall have sought to draw and allure us, he might
win us to himself by none? But contrariwise, we shall have showed our selves
contemners of his majesty, and shall have trodden his works under our feet,
or shall have cast down the groine as hogs, and repine against him, I pray
you shall not this be an horrible condemnation if we be condemned hereof? Now,
although God has imprinted some mark of his majesty in all his works, and
that he ought to be known of us in rain, in fair weather, in heat, in
cold: briefly, in all the order of nature, yet has he especially imprinted
his mark in his word. True it is, that this is an intolerable and
inexcusable vice, when we reknowledge not God in the benefits which he has
bestowed on us. We hold our life of him, that is, in him we live, (as S. Paul
speaks) Acts. 17. 28.
so that if we have not a remembrance of God in all his benefits: this is
already a wonderful unthankfulness. But (as I have above said) God above all
would imprint his mark in his word. Let us behold the heaven and the earth,
and we shall see God declared fully in them. For what is this world, but a
lively image (as S. Paul speaks) Romans 1. 20.
in the which God shows and declares himself? For albeit he be invisible in
his essence, yet shows he himself by his works, to the end we should
worship him. But when we come to the holy scripture, in it shall we see an
image wherein God opens and declares himself much more plainly and in more
familiar wise unto us, than he does either in the heaven, or in the earth: in
such sort, that neither Sun nor Moon, although they give light unto the
world, do so set forth the majesty of God, as do the Law, the Prophets, and
the Gospel. Now for all this, how speak men of the scriptures? With what
wicked boldness and presumption? Do not men I pray you at this day give
themselves to lawless liberty, to speak of the word of God according to
their own fantasies? And when men enter into a dispute of the holy scriptures
over the pot, in tauernes and alehouses, is there any question of humbling our
selves under it, and that all knowing their own rudenes and infirmity, desire
of God his holy spirit, to the end, his secrets and mysteries be handled of us
as it behooves? No, but these disputes are as in way of mockery to sport our
selves. And by this a man may see, more than were to be wished, how few there
be truly religious and godly in the world. We see some make themselves game
with the scripture, drawing it into Prouerbiall sentences to move laughter,
that they make no other account than to jest and play with it, as if it were
but a nose of wax, which one may fashion as he lists, and turn any way it
should seem good unto him. Others are in their wandering and flitting opinions,
reasoning why this, and why that? And when we come to the high mysteries of
God, if they mislike us, we could wish that all were put out and abolished. And
this is all one, as if we would pluck God out of heaven. So then let us
learn, that above all, God commends unto us the honor and authority of his
word, as if he did say, I will that you receive all that which is contained in
the holy scripture, that is in my word, with all humility and reverence. I
will that you yield your selves tractable, although that which is there said,
agree not with your sense and reason, and that you could wish I had spoken
after your, manner and fashion. I will you do me this honor, as to imprison all
your senses, and submit your understanding to my word, and to say: Lord we are
thy disciples, we receive without gainsaying whatsoever it has pleased thee to
teach us, knowing that it is for our profit and salvation. Without exception
therefore, let all that which is comprised in the holy scripture, be received
with reverence, and when any question is of the holy mysteries of God, let us
not give judgment according to our own wit and understanding. And albeit the
things be not convenient and agreeable with our reason, let us notwithstanding
be held back in a short bridle, that God may always have his whole entire
authority over us, and his word a full course and liberty. And when we read
the holy scriptures, when we come to the Sermons, let us always bear in mind
to say, Behold our God declares himself unto us: he sits as our Judge, we
are not to make toys and gambaldes of those things he shall speak. As we see,
many will come to the Sermon: But what? They have their hearts empoisoned
against God and his word, so that they can carry nothing thence which they
pervert not with their wickedness: yea, they will be further enuenomed to spue
forth their blasphemies at table or else where, when men shall speak any thing
to their lust and appetite. Lo how these men honor and sanctify the name of
God. Let us learn then, that whether we read the holy scripture, or hear it
handled in a Sermon, to have always the name of God in reverence, and to yield
unto him such majesty, that we tremble when one speaks unto us hereof. And
above all, when his word is preached, Esaias. 66. 2.
as God speaks by his Prophet Esaie. For let us know, that so we shall
declare our selves, not only by words, but also by our deeds, that we are
his true faithful ones, and he shall take and auowe us for his people, and
shall gather us in the end into the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with at
knowledging of our faults, praying him that it will please him not to impute
those we have already committed, unto us: but that it will please him to
reform us in such sort unto himself, that we desire no other thing than to
honor him, and to dedicate our selves unto his service, to the end he may dwell
among us, and that our Lord Jesus Christ may reign in us both by his holy
spirit and by his word, and so let us say, Almighty God and heavenly father,
etc.

The. 5. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 12 Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God
has commanded thee.

13 Six days thou shall labor, and shall do all thy work:

14 But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, thou shall not do
any work therein, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manseruant,
nor thy maid, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, neither any of thy cattle, nor
the stranger that is within thy gates, that thy manseruaunt and thy maid, may
rest as well as thou.


AFter that it has been spoken of the pure and sincere worship of God, of
serving him, and glorifying his name, without vain taking of it, either in
oaths, or other things, but reverently, and to the honor of God: now here is
mention made of the service of GOD, according to that he has required in his
law, touching the order he appointed for the exercise of the faithful. As the
Sabbath day, or day of rest was in part a figure, to declare, that men could
not rightly serve God but by mortifying all that which is of their own nature,
and afterward by dedicating themselves in such sort unto him, as if they were
wholly separated from the world. Secondly, the day of rest had this ceremonious
use, to cause the people to assemble together, to hear the law, and to call
on the name of God, to offer their sacrifices, and to do all that which should
concern spiritual order and policy. We see then now in what sort mention is
made of the Sabbath day. But this cannot be well and sufficiently understood
without some plainer and more distinct handling: namely, except both these
parties should particularly be entreated. We have therefore first to note, that
the Sabbath day was a shadow under the law, until the coming of Christ, to
signify, that God will that men rest themselves from their own works. And
this is that which I have said in a word, that we must mortify our whole
nature, if we will be conformable to our God. And that this is so, S. Paul
has also declared. Col. 2. 17.
Yea besides, we have sufficient testimony hereof in the new testament. But it
shall suffice to have alleged him at this time, which speaks more fully
hereof: namely, to the Colossians: when he says, That we have the substance
and the body of those things which were shadowed under the law. We have it
(says he) in Christ. And therefore it was expedient, that the ancient fathers
should be exercised in this hope, as well by the Sabbath day, as by other
ceremonies. But ^ithence the thing is now given us, we ought not to stay our
selves on these shadows. True it is, that the law is so abolished, that yet we
ought to keep the substance and truth thereof. As for the shadows and
figures, they are done away by the coming of Christ. If one demand how the
ancient fathers knew of this sense and meaning? Moses has made declaration
hereof, as it is sufficiently showed in the book of Exodus. For God, after he
had published his law in the 20. Exodus 20. 13. 17.
Chap. he reuealeth it to Moses, and declares to what end this serves, and
says, That he has ordained the Sabbath day, as a sign, that the people of
Israel should be sanctified unto him. This is (says he) the mark of my
sanctification, which I have justified among you. Now when the scripture
speaks of our being sanctified unto God, it is to separate us from all that
which is contrary to his worship and service. But where shall one find such
purity? We are in the world, and we know that in the world there is nothing
but peruersenes and wickedness (as says S. John in his Canonical epistle.) 1.
John. 5. 19.
Yea men need not go forth of themselves to have battle with God and his
justice. For all our senses and reason, and all our affections (as says S.
Paul to the Romans) are enemies against God. Romans 8. 7.
When men loose the bridle to their thoughts and imaginations, to their desires
and lusts, then make they open battle with God. And we are not ignorant of
that which is declared in the sixth of Genesis, Genesis 6. 5.
That all that which man can think and imagine, is nothing but evil
continually: and all that which man forgeth in himself, and frames in his
own shop, is untoward and corrupt before God. So then we see well, that we
cannot be sanctified before our God: that is to say, we cannot serve him in
holiness and pureness, being not yet separated from that uncleanness, and those
defilings, which are contrary thereunto, and not having first abolished all that which is of our own nature. It behooved then that this should be
represented in a figure to the ancient fathers, for that Christ was not yet
fully revealed unto them. But at this day we have in Jesus Christ the
accomplishment and the performance of all things. In this wise s. Paul
speaks of the old man, Romans 6. 6.
understanding by this word, all that which we have of Adam, that it ought to
die, and be eleane abolished: namely, not the nature of our body or of our
soul, but the malice which is within us, and the blindness which makes us
err, the lusts and evil desires which are altogether rebellious to the
justice of God. It behooves that all this, in as much as it is drawn from Adam,
be beaten down, and clean taken away. And how is this done? This is not by our
own industry and labor, 1. Cor. 15. 3.
but Jesus Christ dying for us, and to wipe out our sins, Romans 6. 4. 5.
that they might be no more imputed unto us, has gotten unto us also this
prerogative, that by the virtue and power of his holy spirit, we might renounce
the world and our selves in such sort, that our carnal affections to more
reign in us. And albeit they be full of rebellion, yet notwithstanding shall
the Spirit of God bear rule ever them, to repress them, and to hold them
back as it were with a bridle. Therefore it is said, That we are raised with
him: And S. Paul declares the same also in the Chap. which I have already
recited to the Colossians. Col. 2. 12.
Now this was not yet manifested under the law. It behooved therefore that the
fathers which lived in that time, should have some aid herein, as they had the
sacrifices, which nourished them in the hope of the death of Christ, to the end
they should know, that their sins were purged by the blood of this Mediator.
So had they also the Sabbath day for a testimony and witness, that the grace
was obtained us to mortify our thoughts and affections, to the end that God
might live in us by the virtue of his holy spirit. Now we have some entrance to
the understanding of this which has been shortly touched: namely, that the
Sabbath day was as a figure to represent this which in very deed has been
accomplished at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And so let us note that
the Sabbath day extends it self to the whole service of God, to declare
that men could not purelie and sincerely honor him, but by renouncing of
themselves, and by being separated from the defilements of the world, and of
their own flesh. Ezech. 20. 13. 16.
And for this cause the prophet Ezech. reproves the Jews that they kept not
the Sabbath. For this is said unto them as if they had in general broken the
whole law, and not without cause. For he which sets at naught the Sabbath
day, has cast under foot all the service of God as much as in him is. Esaias.
56. 3. 2. 6.
And if the Sabbath day be not observed, all the rest shall be worth nothing, as
is spoken to the prophet Esaias, That men must bereave themselves of their own
proper virtues, that they must humble themselves: otherwise, that this is not
the rest of the Lord, which is agreeable to him, or allowed of him. By this we
perceive, that it avails nothing to keep the ceremony only. For albeit the
Jews had well observed the ceremony, albeit they should have assembled
themselves together on the Sabbath day without putting a finger to their
household affairs, and yet in the mean time should nourish in themselves their
wicked thoughts and affections, and after put them in practice: this would have
been but a mere mocking of God, an abusing of his name, a defacing and
perverting of the whole order he had instituted, as he also reprocheth the^.
For the principal point was to have respect to the truth of the figure: namely,
to the spiritual service of God. And yet notwithstanding it behooved also, that
the Jews should keep the ceremony, which was commanded them. For God held
them in this bridle, as not content that they should have only the substance of
things, but also the shadows and figures of them, until the coming of Jesus
Christ. Now hereby understand that which S. Paul says, That now we are not
tied unto this bondage of the ancient fathers, to observe in this sort the
Sabbath day. For we must do this honor to our lord Jesus Christ, that we
content our selves with that which he has brought to us in his own person,
without reteining any longer that which was exterior and ceremonious under the
law. Now the^ it is easy to gather how this observation pertains unto us at
this day. Touching the ceremony (as I have said) it is past and done away. We
must then come to the substance, that is, that to the end we may serve God well
and sincerely, we learn to withdraw our selves from all our own wills, and
all our evil thoughts and affections. And why? For otherwise when we will
serve God, we mar all. It behooves therefore that all our own wisdom be laid
aside, and that we hear God speak, not following our own wisdom and fantasies.
Thus ye see the beginning and first step to the right observing of the Sabbath
day, as we ought: namely, not to trust to that which we think and imagine to be
good. For we must rest. And how rest? For sooth we must abide still and quiet.
Our thoughts must not stir to wa^der and devise this and that. We must (I say)
remain quiet in the obedience of our God. And when we shall be pricked and
stirred up by our lusts, Romans 8. 7.
let us call to mind that these are enemies against God, and that all our
affections are wicked and rebellious. We must then quietly rest in that
behalf, and yield our selves over unto God, to the end that he only may work
in us, that he may conduct and govern us by his holy spirit. By this we see,
that GOD has omitted nothing, when he appointed the Sabbath day. For if it
extend so far as unto his whole service, what is wanting unto us for a
perfect doctrine of sanctimonie and holiness? Seeing then we have the holy
ghost which preseuteth unto us all that which is requisite, there is no further
question, but of walking holily in the obedience of our God. And how is this
done? Verily, when with all reverence and humility we receive his holy word,
seeking to conform our selves unto his justice. But because all that which is
of our own, is contrary hereunto, we must begin at this end: namely, to
renounce our selves. When this shall be done, have we not all that which is
requisite for the service of God? But this is very hardly done, and therefore
let us take the more diligent heed to awaken and stir up our selves, when we
hear that God commands us to observe the Sabbath day, knowing that this is
not in sporting our selves, but that we ought herein to use force with our
selves, considering that for all our life we shall have well profited, if we
come to observe this day of rest, that is to wit, by renouncing all that which
is of our own, and by dedicating our selves wholly unto our God. And by so much
the more ought we to be inflamed to observe spiritually this rest of the Lord,
seeing we are franchised from this servile subjection of the law, and that God
has given unto us a greater privilege, than unto the ancient fathers: in as
much as he is contented that we be mortified in our old man, to be renewed by
his holy spirit, so that we are no more bound to the observing of that
ceremony which was so straightly kept under the law. Therefore when God
handles us so lovingly, this binds us so much the more to have respect unto
the principal, to the end we may duly observe it. And we may not allege
that the ancient fathers have had the ceremony to stir them up, and that
this served as a spur to prick them forward, for we have much more than the
outward and exterior sign: for our Lord Jesus Christ is appeared, Col. 2. 17.
that in him all this which has been figured under a shadow might be
fulfilled. Wherefore we are not to desire these smaller things which have been
under the law. Ye see then how this which has been ordained concerning the
Sabbath day, is accomplished at this day touching the truth of the figure,
whereof the fathers had a sight under a shadow. And in deed we must note, that
this which was commanded of the Sabbath day, is common and belonging unto ve,
as well as unto them. For let us take the law of God as it is in it self, and
we shall have a perpetual rule of justice, seeing it is most certain, that
under the ten commandments, God would give a rule which should endure for
ever. So let us not think that this which Moses recites touching the Sabbath
day, is superfluous, and not apperteining to us. Not that the figure yet
abides, but we have the truth thereof. Heb. 4. 10.
See to this purpose why the Apostle applies to the instruction of Christians,
and of the new Church, this which is said of the Sabbath day. For he declares
that we ought to conform our selves unto our God, and that this is our full
and perfect felicity. So, for as much as the chief happiness of man
consists in this, that he was created to the image of God, what ought we now
sithence this image is defaced and blotted out by sum, but to study to renew
and repair it? See then how me ought to march on forward to our perfection:
namely, that in conforming our selves to our God, and to his will, we enquire
and seek after his works, to the end to endeavor to do the like. Let us know
therefore that at this day, to the end we may the better serve God, our duty
is, to bestow all the pains we are able, to tread under our own thoughts and
affections, that God may reign and bear rule in us, that he may guide and
govern us by his holy spirit. And so all hypocrites may well mask and
disguise themselves, they may well paint their doings, and show fair
countenances: yet nevertheless, as long as their wicked lusts shall be closed
up, and hid in their hearts, as long as they shall be full of envy, of
rancors, of ambition, of cruelty, or of deceit, it is certain they shall do
nothing else but violate the Sabbath day, or day of rest. And therefore we may
conclude, that they pervert all the service of God, according to that we have
already alleged out of Ezechiel: and as it is also spoken hereof in Jeremy.
And mark we why the ceremony was so straight under the law. Think we that
God ever took pleasure in the idleness of men? Certain it is he has not.
And yet he punished as grievously him which brake the day of rest to labor
therein, as if he had murdered a man. And why so? It seems that it is extreme
cruelty, that for gathering of sticks on the Sabbath day a man must die, as
if he did commit murder. Number. 15. 32.
Yet the Lord condemns him to death which gathered sticks in the Sabbath
day. And why? Because that under this figure was comprehended the whole service
of God. Iere. 17. 21.
And see why in Jeremy it is said, that they have carried burdens on the
Sabbath day. And why? It seems that God stays himself to much on a
trifling and childish thing, but he has respect unto this which was signified
by the Sabbath day. And therefore when it was so neglected of the Jews, this
was as open sacrilege, whereby they did declare that the whole law was of
small account amongst them. So then, to come to our selves, forasmuch as at
this day we have not this figure so precise, and so straight, but that God has
given us a greater liberty, obtained unto us by the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, let us learn with all diligence to bequest our selves unto
him, and to know (as I have already touched) that how fairelie so ever we
shall have traveled in all the rest, it shall be to small purpose, except our
affections be held brideled, and that we bestow all our pains to renounce
and take leave of our lusts and desires in such sort, that GOD alone may rule
and govern us, and that we may protest that we desire nothing else, but to rest
and repose our selves on him. And see how God proposes himself for an
example. For he is not only content to command men to rest, but he has
also showed them the way hereto. Genesis 2. 2.
For after he had created the world, and all therein contained, be rested:
not that he was weary or needed any rest, but this was to lead us to behold
his works, and that staying our selves thereon, we might be fashioned unto
him. Will we then observe the spiritual rest? Even as it is said, that he
ceased from all his works. So must we also be quiet and still, leaving to
do that shall seem good unto us, and which our own nature desires. If this
example of GOD stir us not up, we declare sufficiently, that we seek not
to obey him, and by this means we search not after, in any respect, the true
felicity, but desire willingly to abide in our poverty and wretchedness. The
sovereign goodness and chief felicity of men (as I have said) is this,
that they cleave unto their GOD. Behold, our Lord calls us to himself, and
shows, that we can have no true and holy conjunction with him, but by
resting our selves from our own works. So then, if we be still flitting in
our fancies, if we labor hand and foot to put that in practice which shall
seem good unto us, it is certain, this is as if we would break the bonds
which lincke GOD and us together, and withdraw our selves from him as much as
in us lies. And by this may not a man see, that we desire nothing else, but to
be set forth as a prey unto Satan, who drives us on headlong, and makes us
to wander, forasmuch as we remain no longer under the guard and protection of
our GOD? But what? Few there are, which consider of this aright. We see the
liberty every man yealdeth unto himself. When one warns a man, that he
ought not to walk after his own hearts lust: What? I know (will he say)
how I ought to rule my self. Verily, a man knows not how to despite GOD in
more open manner, than by such a rebellion. This is as much, as if we would
say, that we will not that GOD have any superiority over us. It is true, men
will not openly protest this, but the matter is so. For (as I have already
said) there is no true worship, except we hence take our beginning, to
withdraw our selves from our own lusts and affections.

Now then, when men will be so wise in their own conceit, when they put such
confidence in their own wit and reason, when they give themselves all
liberty to do what so ever seems them good, when they follow their own
affections and fancies, when they will take no pain to repress them: Nay, are
grieved when any would daunte and tame them, it is a sure sign, they never
knew wherein consists the true worship of GOD, never understood the chief
and principal point of the law. And so let us note well, that when GOD
alleges his own example, it is to allure us with all mildness and
gentleness to the observation of the law, and keeping of this spiritual
rest. And withal let us note (as I have already touched) that we are
wretched and miserable, when we are separated and removed from him. And behold
the bond of our conjunction: namely, that drawing near to his truth and
religion, we suffer our selves to be guided and governed by him. Now a man
may demand, for what cause the Jews were commanded to rest only the seventh
day: for we ought not for one day in the week renounce our lusts and
affections, but we must continue in that mind all the time of our life.
Briefly, the rest which the Lord commands is perpetual, and without any
ceasing or intermission. How then is it, that he has chosen one only day in
the week? It was to show, that when we shall have applied all our studies to
abandon our false opinions; our wicked concupiscences, all that which proceeds
from our perverse and corrupt nature, that yet we cannot come fully to this,
until we be wholly rid of our flesh. In deed, the faithful ought their whole
life time to observe the Sabbath day, they ought to give over their own
desires, forsake their own works, seek to offer up themselves wholly to God
in all humility, to order themselves after his will, they ought to continue in
his obedience: (I say) we must do so: or otherwise, all the service we shall
do unto God, is but feignednesse and hypocrisy: and as for him, he will
disallow and reject it. Nevertheless, we cannot acquit our selves wholly in
this, to renounce our affections in such sort, Gal. 6. 14.
that there be no blame found in us. Saint Paul glorifieth in this, that the
world was crucified unto him, and he unto the world. Yet in the mean time, he
cease not to say, that the flesh fights with the spirit, Romans 7. 19.
and have no agreement together: yea, he confesses also in the seventh to the
Romans, that he always perceived in himself this strife, that he did not the
good which he would: that is to say, he accomplished it not with so fervent a
desire, neither was he so resolved to walk according unto God, but that he had
always many stoppes and hinderaunces to stay him in such sort, that he seemed
to halte, in stead of strong and upright running. Sithence then it is so, let
us note, that not without cause God ordained the seventh day for the Sabbath
day, signifying thereby, that we cannot neither in one day, neither in one
month, come to this perfection of sanctimonie and holiness which he requires
of us. And why? Because that when we shall have manfully fought against the
lusts and affections of our flesh, against our evil thoughts and desires: yet
shall there be always a residue and remnant in us, until we be fully joined
and associated with our GOD, and that he has gathered us into his heavenly
kingdom. Until that time, there shall be always some temptations in us,
there shall be always some troubles, some unquietness, we shall always
feel (I mean those which seek to please God) that we are yet subject to many
temptations, and that there remain in our nature many pricks, by the which we
are stirred up and provoked to this and to that. And are not these so many lets
to hinder the spiritual rest? If a man did repose himself and rest so in God
as he should do: he should conceive nothing in his fantasy which might turn
him from the right way, he should have in him no evil affections or desires.
All these things should be far from him. Therefore, when we conceive so many
wicked fantasies, lo, Satan comes to assail and to shake us with so many
disquietings. When we shall have thought to do well, there arise some things
in our mind which tickle and flatter us: and so albeit we hate that which is
evil, yet by such temptations we are provoked to pursue after, and to follow
it. And by this a man may see, that it is no easy thing to be without all
wicked concupiscences, and to cast them off, so that they bear no rule at all
in us. So then let us continually follow this study and desire of celebrating
the spiritual rest of God, because we shall not come to the perfection
thereof, until the end of our life. Now hereby we are admonished of two
things: The one is, that we be in displeasure with our selves, and mourn
perpetually for our sins. And although it seems that we have bestowed great
pain to make our selves obedient unto GOD: yet let us know that we are
always but in the way, and that we lack much of accomplishing that which God
commands, and requires of us in the law. And this one thing may occasion
us to humble our selves, seeing that GOD shall always find in us overmuch to
condemn us for his service, and that this spiritual rest of ours comes not
near by many degrees to that which he commands. On the other side, having
this occasion of humbling and bewailing our selves in true repentance, let us
know this for the second point, that we ought so much the more to be moved and
pricked forward to make our further profit, when we may say, How now? It is
true that God has given me the grase that I desire to serve him. But how do I
behave my self herein? Alas, I am yet far wide, and far off from it. For
when we perceive this imperfection in us, ought we not to enforce our selves
forward in the service of God? So, betesting the evil and wickedness which
is in us, let us be pricked so much the more forward always to profit in
this rest, and let every one call himself daily to account for his going
forward herein. Ye see then how GOD, having given us occasion to humble our
selves under his hand, all the time of our life, shows us that we ought to be
inflamed hereby to correct the vices which are in us, and to mortify more and
more the lusts and desires of our flesh. Therefore let us know, that it is
not sufficient, that our old man be in part crucified, except we be wholly
buried with Jesus Christ (as Saint Paul speaks in this seventh of the
Romans which we have already alleged.) Romans 7. 4.
Ye see then what we have to note touching the seventh day, of which it is here
spoken.

It remains now, that we speak of the second point, wherein we have before
in a word said, that the Sabbath day was a civil order to exercise the
faithful in the service of God. For this day was appointed to assemble them
together to hear the doctrine of the law preached, to receive the
sacraments, to call on the name of God. And touching these points, it is
common to us with the ancient people of the Jews. For although the figure is
ceased, (I mean that whereof Saint Paul speaks in the Epistle to the
Colossians:) yet notwithstanding, this which apperteineth to civil order,
abides still, and has his use. And this policy what is it? It is to assemble
our selves together in the name of God. True it is, this ought to be done
every day, but for because of our infirmity, or rather slothfulness, it was
expedient that one day should be chosn out. If we were so seruent in the love
of God as we should be, it should not need to ordeine one only day in the
week, but all would both evening and morning assemble themselves together, to
the end we might be edisted more and more in the word of God. And in deed
this exercise were more than needful for us, considering that we are all so
inclined unto evil, that we need not any thing to lead us on further in
wickedness, and to loose the bridle more loose unto us. It is needful then
that we assemble our selves together on every day in the name of GOD. But
what? We see that with much a do men will assemble themselves together on the
Sunday, and that many are to be holden to this order by force and violence.
Having then such an infirmity in us, let us know that this order was not
prescribed only unto the Jews, of observing one certain day, in the which
they should come together: but to us also as common with them. But yet
herewithall we have to note, that this is not all: and that this were a very
bare and naked thing, that our hands only, and our feet should rest, and
that nothing else should be done. What must we then do? We ought to apply
this rest to a more high and excellent thing: we ought to cease from those
works which might hinder the works of GOD, let us from calling on of his
name, stay us from exercising of our selves in his holy word. If we employ
the Sunday to make good cheer, to sport our selves, to go to games and
pastimes, shall GOD in this be honored? Is not this a mockery? Is not this
an unhallowing of his name? When our shop windows are shut in on the
Sundaie, when we travel not after the common order and fashion of men, this
is to the end we should have more liberty and leisure to attend on that
which GOD commands, that is to wit, to be taught by his word, to assemble
our selves together, to make confession of our faith, to call on his name, to
exercise our selves in the use of the sacraments. Lo then to what purpose
this policy ought to serve us.

But now let us consider, whether they which call themselves Christians,
acquit themselves in this point, as were requisite. A great part of men
think they have the Sundaie the better to attend on their worldly affairs,
and they reserve to themselves this day, as if they had no other to deliberate
for the whole week to come. Now, if the bell shall ring to a Sermon, they
think they have no other thing to do, but to think on their business, and
to make their accounte of this, and of that. Others glutte themselves by
riotting, and are shut up in their houses, because they dare not show a
manifest contempt of their duty in the open streets. So that the Sundaie is
to them but a retreat, to withdraw themselves from the Church and
congregation of GOD. By this one may see, what affection we have toward all
Christianity, and the service of GOD, seeing that by this which was given us
for an aid and help to draw nearer unto GOD, we take occasion to withdraw
our selves so much the further from him. And whither wander we? Go we not so
far, as to recule and flee back wholly from him? Is not this a diuelishe
wickedness of men? And yet this is so common, as it is pity to behold. And
would to God we stood in need to search for examples herein further off, and
that they were more rare to be found. But we see how all is profaned and
violated, that the most part are nothing careful for the right usage of this
day, which was ordained to the end that we should be retired from all worldly
cares, and drawn back from all other business, to yield up ourselves wholly
unto GOD. Moreover, let us know that the Sunday is not ordained for us only to
come to the Sermon, but to the end we employ the rest of the time to laud and
praise GOD. Note we this. For although he nourish us every day: yet
notwithstanding, we meditate not sufficiently of the benefits he bestows on
us, to magnify him in them. True it is, that this should be but a poor thing,
if we should consider of the benefits of GOD but on the Sunday. But on the
other days, because we are occupied overmuch about our worldly affairs, we
are not so given to God as in that day, which is altogether dedicated unto
this. The Sunday the refore ought to serve us for atowre, to make us mount on
high to view the works of God from a far, when we are neither hindered nor
occupied with anything, but that we may apply all our senses, and our whole
understanding to reknowledge the gracious gifts and benefits which he has
bestowed on us. And when we shall well have practiced this on the Sunday:
namely, shall have deeply considered of the works of God, it is certain,
that all the rest of our time, we shall be given hereunto, and that this
meditation shall so fashion and polish us, that the Monday, and all the rest of
the week, we shall be led to thank our GOD, when so before hand we shall
have premeditated on his works, to make our profit therein. But when the
Sunday is spent not only in games and pastimes full of vanity, but in things
which are altogether contrary unto God, that men think they have not
celebrated the Sunday, except God therein be by many and sundry ways
offended: When men (I say) vnhallowe in such sort this holy day, which God
has instituted to lead us unto himself, is it any meruell if we become
brutishe and beastly in our doings all the rest of the week? What is to be
done then? Let us all know, that this is not sufficient, that we come to the
Sermon on the Sunday, to receive some good doctrine, and to call upon the name
of GOD: but we must digest those things we hear and receive, and apply all
our senses to the better understanding of those benefits which God bestows
on us, and that by this mean we be so formed and fashioned to this thing,
that the Monday and all the rest of the week beside, cost us nothing, to
aspire and to come to our God: and that we need but to call to mind, that
which we shall have learned before at good leisure: when our minds be as it
were vnwrapped from all those things, which hinder us to recount the works of
God. And this we have to note touching the order we are to observe at this
day, which is not in keeping the ceremony so streightlie as it was observed
under the law. We have no longer this figure. But this rest day is to assemble
us together, to the end that, according to our infirmity, we be better
exercised to apply our selves to the service of God, and to have this day
wholly consecrated unto him, to the end we be drawn altogether from the
world, and that this may serve us the better, for the rest of our time, as we
have said. And withal we must note, that this is not enough, that every one
in particular and alone think on God, and call to mind his works on the
Sunday: but we must meet together one certain day to make public confession
of our faith. It is true, that this ought to be done every day (as we have
said:) but because of the rawnesse and sloth of men, it is behouefull to have
one special day, which may wholly be dedicated and appointed to this use. I
confess well that we are not bound to the seventh day (as indeed we observe
not the day which was commandes the Jews, for this was the Saturday,) but to
show the liberty of Christians the day has been changed to the Sunday,
forasmuch as Jesus Christ in his resurrection has delivered us from the
bondage of the law, and has cancelled the bond thereof. This was the cause,
why this change has been made in the day. But yet we ought to observe this
order of policy, to have some day in the week, be it one, or be it two, for
this is left in the choice and liberty of Christians. But that the whole
people may be assembled, it is convenient that one certain day be ordained,
to receive the Sacraments together in common, to have the invocation of the
name of God, and to show an unity and concord in faith and religion. It
suffices not then, that every one withdraw himself into his own house,
either to read the holy scripture, or to pray unto God, but it behooves we
come into the company of the faithful, and there declare the concord and
agreement we have with the whole body of the Church, and celebrate in such
wise this order, as the Lord has commanded. But what? We may see here the
unhallowing of the service of God. For as I have already touched, are there
not many which will show them selves herein despitefull unto God, and that
will be exempted from the common law and order? True it is, that they will
happily come five or six times in the year to the sermon. But what to do?
Even to make a mockery of God, and of all his doctrine. These are indeed in
the number of those hogs, which came to defile the temple of God, and
deserved rather to be in stables: and better it were they held them selves in
their stinking dens: to speak briefly, it were better that such knaves were
altogegether cut off from the Church of God, than to show them selves in the
company of the faithful. But yet how many times come they among them? The
bell shall ring long enough, before a man may epsy them in any place. So then
we ought with more diligence to take heed to our selves, and quicken up our
selves to make such a confession of our faith, that God may be honored with
one common accord among us. Moreover, we must abolish all superstitions. For
we see how among Papists men think to serve God by sloth and idleness. This
is not the manner, after which we ought to celebrate the Sabbath day: but to
apply it to his right and lawefull use, we must know (as we have above said)
that our Lord requires nothing else, but that this day be employed to hear
his word, to make our prayers in common, to make confession of our faith, and
to use the Sacraments. See whereunto we are called. And yet we see how all
has been corrupted and brought to utter confusion in Popery: for as they
invented days to honor their he and she Santes, and have forged to them
selves idols, so have they thought they ought to serve them in all idleness.
Now seeing the world is so corrupted, we ought so much the better to note this
declaration of the Sabbath day, as is here touched by Moses. And withal let
us know to what end our Lord has commanded the ancient people to have one
day in the week to rest themselves. And at this day, understanding how this
outward ceremony is abolished by the coming of Christ, let us give our selves
to the spiritual rest: that is, to dedicate our selves wholly unto God,
renouncing our own desires and affections: and further let us retain the
exterior policy, as far as it apperteineth unto us: namely, to cease from
our earthly affairs, and all worldly business, to attend the better on the
meditation of the works of God, that we may be exercised to know the
benefits he bestows on us, and above all, that we may bestow all our pains
in acknowledging his gracious favor, which he offers daily in his Gospel,
to be confirmed and established more and more therein, and when we shall have
employed the Sunday to praise and magnify the name of God, and to meditate on
his works, let us show all the rest of the week how we have profited herein.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, praying that it will please him to make us feel
them better than we have done. And because we can not in any respect serve
him, until this wickedness and perverseness which is in us be abolished: and
because he has shown that we shall not cease to make war against his
justice, as long as we shall lose the bridle to our wicked thoughts and
concupiscences, pray we, that it will please this good God, by the power of his
holy spirit, to give us this grace, to be fully conformed unto him, which is
dead and risen for us, to the end he might mortify and quicken us, that we
may bear the marks of our Lord Jesus, even in renouncing our selves, and
ordering our whole life so to his will, that we desire nothing, but to be
conformed to his justice, to the end his law may be accomplished in us, as it
is spiritual: and that we be reformed both in flesh and in spirit, to live
under his obedience. And forasmuch as we so often return unto our selves, pray
we that it will please this good God to bear with us in our infirmities, till
his rest be truly accomplished in us, and that he has gathered us into his
heavenly kingdom. That it will please him to grant this grace, not only
unto us, but to all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 6. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 13 Six days thou shall labor, and shall do all thy work:

14 But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, thou shall not do
any work therein, thou, nor thy son, not thy daughter, nor thy man servant,
nor thy maid, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, neither any of thy cattle, nor
the stranger that is within thy gates, that thy man servant and thy maid may
rest as well as thou.

15 Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord
thy God brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm:
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to observe the Sabbath day.


WE handled yesterday, in what sort, and to what end the commandment of
observing the Sabbath day was given to the Jews. It was said in general, that
this was a figure of the spiritual rest, which the faithful ought to keep,
the better to serve and woorshippe God. And seeing our Lord has brought us the
full accomplishment of this, it has been said, that we must no longer rest and
stay our selves on this shadow of the Law, but be content that our old man be
crucified by the virtue of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
the end we may be renewed in our minds wholly to serve our God. Withal we
noted, that we stand in need of some order and policy amongst us, and
therefore it behooved that some certain day should be appointed to assemble us
together, to be confirmed in the doctrine of God, and to make our profit
therein every day, even all the time of our life, that we be also exercised
to call upon his name, to make confession of our faith, and that the rest of
this day be spent in considering the benefits we receive at all times at the
hand of God, to the end he be the more glorified in them. And now have we to
note this which follows in the text of Moses. Six days thou shall labor,
(says the Lord.) This ought not to be understood, as if God commanded us
hereby, preciselie to labor. Howbeit, it is true, that we are borne to this,
and we know that God means not we should be idle as long as we live in
this world. For he has given men hands and feet, force and strength, to this
purpose. Yea, before sin entered, it is said that Adam was placed in the
garden of Eden, to dress it, and keep it. Albeit the labor and travel which
men are now enjoined, is a chastisement for sin. For it is thus denounced
them, In the sweat of thy face, thou shall eat thy bread. This is a curse
and malediction laid on mankind. For we are not worthy to enjoy the condition
which was given to our father Adam, that he might live at pleasure without
troubling or tormenting him self. But yet, before that sin entered into the
world, and that we were in this sort condemned of God to this painful and
weariesome travel, it was requisite, that men should exercise themselves with
some labor. And why? Because this is contrary to our nature, that we should
be as logges and blocks unprofitable. So then it is very certain, that we
ought to apply our selves to some labor all the time of our life. But yet
here in this place it is not simply commanded, that we travel six days.
For indeed there were other solemnities under the Law, besides the rest of
the Sabbath. There were feasts, which might happen in the midst of the
week: but because the number of them was small, being only four days in
the year, there is no mention made of them, but only of the Sabbath.
Therefore, when it is said: Thou shall labor six days, our Lord would
hereby signify unto us, that we ought not to complain of yelding unto him one
certain day, when he leaves unto us six for one. As if he did say. Shall the
cost and charge be great unto you to choose one day which may be wholly given to
my service, that you do no other thing in it, but read and exercise your
selves in my law, or hear my doctrine which shall be preached unto you, a day
to come to the Temple, to the end you may be there confirmed by the sacrifices
which are there made, a day to call upon my name, to declare and protest, that
you are of the number and company of my people? Ought this to be grievous and
burdensome unto you, seeing you have six days free, to traffike, and to do
your business in? When I use such gentleness toward you, that I demand but
one day of seven, is not this an over great unthankfulness on your part, if
you complain of this time, as being evil employed, and if you be such
covetous and niggardlie wretches, as not to spare me one seventh part of the
time? I have given you your whole life. Whenever the Sun shines upon you,
you ought to acknowledge my goodness, and how that I am a liberal Father
toward you. For this Sun, which I make to shine, is to give you a mean to
go and walk by, to the end that every one may do his business. And yet for
all this, why is it, that I shall not have one day among seven, in which every
one should withdraw him self from his labor and travel, that you be not
wrapped in the cares of the world, and so have no leisure to think upon me?
Now then we see, that thus sentence of traveling sire days is not placed as a
commandment, but is rather a permission, which God gives, and that to
reproach the unthankfulness of men, if they observe not the Sabbath day, and
sanctify it in such sort, as we have spoken thereof. And here hence we have
to gather a good and profitable admonition: namely, that when we are slow to
obey God, we ought to consider of the benefits he bestows upon us. For
this ought to make us rest with a more fervent zeal in the practicing of those
things, which God commands us, when we shall well consider that he handles
us not rigorously, neither presses us overmuch. Lo our God might use a
streighter bridle if it pleased him, he might force us to things so hard, that
there were no mean nor way to set us forward therein: but he considers of
us, and conducteth us as a father would do his children. Sithence then it is
so, that he in such sort bears with us, ought not we to be stirred up so
much the more to do this which he commands us? So then, as often as the
commandments of God are hard, or seem so unto us, let us know that he
presses us not by many degrees, so much as he might. For we should be
tormented out of measure, if the Lord would use the rigor of extremity. Know
we therefore, that he bears with us, and that he uses here toward us a more
than fatherly goodness. True it is, that the law of God is in it self
impossible unto us, not only to observe it in most perfect manner: but when a
man by his natural virtue and strength will endeavor to acquit him self
toward God, he shall not be able to move one finger, nor to heue one good
thought to know how he ought to begin: yea, so far are we from being
meet and able to obey God, and to put in practice, that which is contained in
his law, that all our thoughts and affections are so many enimities against
GOD. Romans 8. 7.
If men, by their own power, could accomplish the law, it should have been
said unto them, Travel ye. But contrary wise it, is said unto them, Rest
ye, to the end that GOD may work. So then the law may well be impossible
touching us, but yet it is possible for GOD to imprint it in our hearts, and
to govern us by his holy spirit, in such wise, that this yoke shall be easy
and sweet unto us, and that it shall have no hardenesse in it to grieve and
trouble us. So then, when men shall have well considered of this thing, they
shall be convinced that God bears with them as a father, which should show
him self pitiful toward his children. And therefore let us take diligent
heed we be not ungrateful, but be provoked and allured to serve our GOD, so
much the more, seeing he commands us not those things, which might seeine
over bitter and painful unto us, but has a due regard to our power and
ability. Thus ye see what we have to note out of this place, where our Lord
declares that he leaves unto men their commodity. It is true (as it was
yesterday touched,) that we ought to be so spiritual, as every day to
assemble our selves together to call on our GOD, that we ought to mount up to
the heavenly life, leaving all our wordlie affairs. But what? GOD sees that
we are environed and enclosed with our flesh, that we creep and traile on the
ground, that our infirmities over bear us, in such sort, that we can not
lead an Angelical life. GOD therefore seeing such rawnesse and weakness in
us, having pity, that we can not acquit our selves fully in this which were
our office and duty to do, he releaseth us, and shows not the extremity of
his rigor, but says, that he is content if we dedicate one day unto him, or
if this day serve us for all the rest of the week. And why? For (as I have
said) he deals not extremely with us, but considers that we are over
weak and frail. Therefore, when he bears with us after this manner, and
leaves unto us our profits and commodities, so much more dissolute, wicked,
and inexcusable are we, if we be not inflamed to yealde our selves wholly
unto him. Now, it follows immediately, that neither our man servant, nor
maid, nor ox, nor ass, nor any of our cattle, shall labor on the Sabbath
day, nor the stranger, which is within our gates. Touching the cattle, one
might think it strange, that God has comprised them under the observation of
this rest, Exodus 20. 13. and 17.
seeing it is so high and heavenly a mystery, as it was yesterday entreated.
And does such gear apperteine to oxen and to asses? God says, I have given
you the Sabbath day to be a sign that I sanctify you, and that I am your
God, which reigns in the midst of you. This is not belonging as common to
all mortal men: For God grants not this grace to Painims and unfaithful
ones, to sanctify them: he speaks only to the people which he chose for his
inheritance, and which he adopted. Now, when the Sabbath day is a sign that
God has separated the faithful of his Church from the rest of the world, why
is this extended to oxen and to asses? But note we, that this is not done for
the brute beasts sakes, but to the end that men should have a monument before
their eyes, to be so much the more touched therewith. This commandment then,
is not applied to the beasts, which have neither understanding nor reason,
but this is directed unto men, which ought to make their profit of it. We see
that the sacrifices were made of brute beasts, we see what furniture there was,
what vessels of gold and silver, and other like things: and when all these were
hallowed, is it to be understood that God put his spirit into these corruptible
metalles, and into things which had no sense and feeling? Nay: but all this is
belonging to the use of men: as all creatures are made for our use and behoof.
And God not only ministers unto us in things apperteining to this present,
frail, and brickle life, but he gives them unto us as tokens of his grace, to
be means and aids to draw us up on high to heaven. Therefore when God would
that the oxen and the asses should rest them selves this seventh day, this is
not that he makes them partakers of this spiritual rest, whereof we have
above entreated, but this was to the end the Jews seeing their stables closed
up, should be put in mind to say: How now? God sets here before our eyes,
this sign and sacrament visible even in the brute beasts, and this is to the
end that we on our part should be the better kept and holden in his service:
that we should know that this were to break the whole law, if we have not
regard unto this which is the chief and principal point of all our life,
namely: that we learn to renounce our selves, and follow not our own
lusts, reason, or wisdom: but that we suffer our God to rule and govern us,
and that we be as dead creatures, that he may live in us, and not follow our
own swinge, which is altogether corrupted. Thus it behooved the Jews deeply
to weigh, even in the brute beasts, this visible sign, which was given to the
end this might restreine them so much the more, and that they should be
admonished by this mean, to observe the Sabbath day, with all reverence.
Withal we see, how in all times God handles men according to their hardness,
and that he has provided them of meet and convenient remedies, for as much as
they are not inclined of them selves, before he draws them in this manner.
And this is not only for the Jews, but for us. Let us therefore acknowledge
the great goodness and mercy of our God, which forgets not nor omitteth
any thing of all that which might remedy our vices. And withal let us
acknowledge the perverseness which is in us, that we flatter not our selves,
nor give the bridle to our affections, sithence we have need to be
constreined, and that God give us many pricks with the spur, as to dull and
restie iades. And when God pricketh and spurreth us in such sort, know we that
it is not without good cause, but that he does it, because we are so crooked and
perverse to be ruled, because we are so froward and rebellious. Let us then
begin to displease our selves in all our lusts and affections, and learn to
imprison our selves so far, that nothing hinder us to follow the way which
God would lead us in. And although our nature always resist, yet let us
enforce our selves to walk after his will, until we be fully ruled and
ordered by our God. Lo what we have to bear in mind upon this place: besides
that which shall be by and by touched of man servants, and maid servants:
namely, that God puts the Jews in remembrance that they were servants in
the land of Egypt, and therefore that they ought with all gentleness, to
entreat them, which are under their rule and authority. For he says, Thy man
servant, and thy maid, shall rest them selves. And why? For thou wast sometime
in bondage: the time has been thou could well have wished that one had
given thee some rest and release from thy labors. Thou ought then to use
such gentleness toward them, which are under thy hand. But here it might
seem, that God has ordained the Sabbath day, not for a spiritual order, (as
it has been above said:) but that it might serve as a mean unto charity. For
he says, If thou were in bondage, would thou not that one should give thee
some release? Would thou always be oppressed with labor and travel?
Surely by thy good will thou would not. It behooves then that thou be are
also with others. Now this is not for the service of God, but rather instituted
for common charity, which ought to be extended toward our neighbors, how
ever in degree they be underlings unto us. But for as much as this
commandment is contained in the first table of the law, it is certain that
this which is here touched, is but as accessarie. I say the first table of the
law, for it is not without cause that God has so divided his law, which he
wrote in two stones. Might he not have wrote them in one stone, if he had
would? Why then has he made of them two several parts? This is not without
great reason. For in the law of God there are two principal articles. The one
concerns our duty toward him: the other our duty we owe to our
neighbors, which live and are conversant with us. As our whole life, if we
consider well, ought hereunto to be referred. That is, that first in knowing we
have a God, to whom we are to live, we walk in obedience: seeing we hold our
life of him, we do him homage and reverence therefore, seeing he has created
us into a far better hope, and has adopted us for his children, we glorify
him for so great mercy and goodness: seeing he has redeemed us by the blood
of his son, we beecome his* endeavoring to withdraw our selves from the
defilements of the world, to be unto him lively and unspotted sacrifices, we
call on him, having our recourse unto him alone, we render him thanks for all
his benefits bestowed upon us. Ye see then the first point of our life
consists in the honor we ought to give to our GOD. Again, seeing it
pleases him further to prove our obedience, by living with men in all
uprightness, none be given to his private profit, but that we seek to serve
to the commodity one of an other, that there be mutual honesty between us:
so as we abstain not only from fraud, violence, and cruelty, but that our
life be sober and modest, that we be not dissolute, wicked, and brutish in
our living. And this is the second point of our life. Now seeing it is so,
that this commandment of the Sabbath day is contained in the first table: it
follows that it apperteineth to the spiritual service of GOD, and that here
is no question to be made of the charity we owe unto our neighbors. And why
then is this matter here treated of? It is as much as if our Lord. did say,
This day of rest, of some super abundance and overplus, shall serve you to
this, that your men servants, and your maids, have a release with you from
their labors. Not that this was the chief and principal end whereunto GOD
tended. For this was not his principal meaning, that there should be one day
in the week, in the which a man should cease from his labors, to the end he
might breath for that day, and not toil so continually, as to faint for
weariness. This was not the cause which moved God to ordeine the Sabbath day,
or day of rest: but it was to this end, that the faithful should know they
ought to live so holily, as to rest from all their affections and desires, that
God might wholly work in them. For the rest, it serves as a benefit of
supere^ogatio^, as we say. Behold our Lord says, Consider ye that since you
have this warrant among you, that I sanctify you, that you seek to give up
your selves wholly unto me. Yet, lo one thing which shall serve you further,
and this is for your profit: namely, that your family shall not toil, and
ouerworke them selves continually. For there must be some rest for your men
servants, and your maids, and your cattle: you shall have then this as of
superaboundance. Now therefore we see why here is express mention made, that
the Jews were servants in Egypt, and that it behooves they have some regard
of them which are held as captives and bondmen under their hands. For Moses
speaking of men servants and maids, understands it not after the common
order and fashion among us. For with them, the servants were slaves and
bondmen, they burdened them, and held them under, as the oxen and the asses,
they had so vile and barbarous a condition, as was pity to behold. God then
shows that the people of the Jews observing the rest, shall receive profit
and commodity by their family. You ought to be so far (says he) from
complaining of the time which I have reserved unto my self, that of seven
days there should be one dedicated to my service: that if you be not over
cruel and vumercifull, if you use not tyranny toward them which are under
your authority, such a day would seem convenient unto you to be chosen. For
if you should have no other regard, but this policy: namely, that in this day
your servants shall have some rest, this ought to leave you hereunto: but
understand you always, that I have not ordained it only for your family,
but for this end, you might advise your selves, considering of this which I
have showed, that being separated from the unfaithful, you be unto me a
royal priesthood, that you desire nothing else but to serve me in all
uprightness, and in a pure and sincere conscience. When you shall have this
consideration, then shall you know that this day shall further serve you for
some earthly profit and commodity, albeit in the mean time, this is not
that you ought to seek after. To speak in a word, our Lord in this place
declares unto us that which in like manner has been pronounced ^^ Jesus
Christ, Matt. 6. 33.
that when we shall seek the kingdom of God, all other things shall be cast
upon us. For we are of that mind, that if we endeavor to mount on high to the
heavenly life, and bestow our studies herein, we shall die for hunger, and
this shall be to turn us from all profits and commodities. Briefly, the devil
comes always to persuade us under this shadow and wiliness, that if we
employ our selves to the service of God, we must needs, die of famine, and
that we shall live to be pitied of others for our misery, that we must
needs quit our selves of the whole world. But of a truth we can not serve
God, except we be rid of all our affections, and cast from us these
worldly cares, which press us down overmuch. Yet nevertheless, we must
rest upon this blessing which is promised us: namely, that if we seek after
the kingdom of heaven, we shall be blessed in these temporal and transitory
things, that our Lord will have pity upon us, and will give us all that which
he knows to be needful and convenient for this present life: only, let us
but wait for from him those things which we by our industry and labor can
not obtain. That then is the thing which is declared unto us in this place.
Now this sentence ought to serve us as a prick to stir us up to follow that
which God has commanded us. For the chief thing which staieth us from ruling
and ordering our life to the obedience of God, is this, that being to much
wedded to our selves, we think this shall be against our profit, and we will
always provide, howsoever the case stands, for our commodities, in those
things which apperteine unto the world. Behold how men can not follow God,
but rather forsake him, and draw clean backward from his law: for that they
think, if they serve God, they shall never thrive. Now this is so wicked an
unthankfulness, that it serves to aggranate an hundred times more our
rebellion. What must we then do? Let us note well, that we shall not be able
to serve God with a frank and free courage, except we be resolved, that he
provides for our whole life, and that he will not forgette us, as it is spoken
in the person of Iosue. Iosu^. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 5.
For the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews applies this doctrine to all
the faithful. Yea, to draw them from overmuch care and carcking, he says,
Thy God will not fail thee, he will not forget thee. So if once we can be
persuaded that God watches over us, and that he will liberally provide for our
necessities, it is certain we shall not be so ^usied in our earthly
affections, we shall not be so easily turned from serving of GOD, we shall
not be hindered to meditate and think on the heavenly life, we shall so pass
through this world, as to use the creatures thereof, as if we used them not,
because we know always, that we ought to make our race further. Lo, in
sum, what we have to bear in mind of this doctrine, wherein our Lord
shows, that albeit this which he commands of observing the Sabbath day
be spiritual: yet notwithstanding, that men shall perceive herein their gain
and profit, (...) that God will bless them, when they shall have a respect
unto him, and shall not over busily and gredilie seek after that which
belongs to their temporal and earthly commodities. Now withal we are
warned, that if any bear rule over others, they ought not to despise their
neighbors, although they be inferior to them. And this extends it self
very far. For we ought not only to expound it of men servants, and of
maids: but of the poor, of them which are neither in authority, credit, nor
estimation: of all subjects, of them which in the eye of the world are not
worthy to be compared with us. For we see what the pride of men is, although
we have no occasion to advance our selves above others, yet every one will
desire, and seek after some preeminence and superiority. Seeing then there is
such an hautines in us, that every one wishes to be lifted above his
neighbors: yea, though he have nothing in him why he should be advanced, to
what outrage will we grow when we be exalted? Behold them which are in the
seat of justice, they would bear them selves in hand, that the world were
created only for them, if God held them not back by his spirit, and showed
them, that they ought not to oppress them which are under their charge: but
rather that it belongs unto them to execute the office of fathers, to hold
their neighbors as their children: and that forasmuch as GOD has so highly
honored them, they ought to walk in so much the greater humility. They which
preach the word of GOD, and have charge to guide and conduct others, if they
think they ought to be exempted out of the common rank, and despise others,
woe come to them. For it were better they brake their neck going up into the
pulpit, if they take not pains them selves, first to walk after God, and to
live peaceably with their neighbors, and to show that they are sheep of the
flock of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, for all this it is true, that the rich
may well be served of the poorer sort, and when a man hireth men servants and
maids for his money, he will not set his servant above him self at the table,
he will not have him lie in the same bed with him. Yet notwithstanding,
though he have some superiority over him, yet ought we always to bear in
mind this point, that we are united together as it were in one flesh, and that
we are all formed to the image of God. If we consider that they, which are
descended from the race of Adam, be our flesh and our bone, this ought to
frame us to all gentleness, although we are as brute and savage beasts one
set against an other. When the Prophet Esaie would put men in mind of their
base estate, Esaie. 58. 7.
to induce them to relieve their poor brethren, he says: Thou shall not
despise thine own flesh. See where I ought to view, and behold my self as
in a looking glass: namely, in as many creatures as are in the world. Mark
we this for one point. But yet there remains more, that is, that the image
of God is imprinted in all men. Then I despise not only mine own flesh: when
I shall oppress any one, but I violate the image of God as much as lies in me.
So then let us diligently note, that God would in this place declare unto them
which are in authority, and credit, to them which are rich, and to such as be
in some degree of honor above others, that they ought not to abuse those
which are under their hands, that they ought not to trouble and torment them
above measure, that they ought always to think on this, that we are all
descended from the line of Adam, that we have one common nature, that the
image of GOD is imprinted in us all. Lo, what we have to note, and above all
other things to bear in mind, seeing Jesus Christ is descended hither below
to be made of no reputation, to condemn our pride and loftenesse, and to
show us, that there is no way to serve GOD but in humility, and that he has
made us all members of his body, as well servants, as those which are
masters and superiors, showing that there is no difference, when the question
is of coming unto GOD, and having respect unto him, and his service. We must
therefore be folowers of him. And because we are all, both small and great,
members of his body, and that he is our head, there is great reason, that
every one apply him self to his neighbors. And sithence GOD has declared
him self our father, in more familiar wise than he did unto them which lived
under the Law, let us be so much the more persuaded to maintain a
fraternity and brotherhood among us. And this have we further to bear in
mind upon this place. There rests yet one point to be observed touching
this, that GOD has ordained a memorial and remembrance to the Jews, that
they were sometimes in Egypt as poor slaves and bondmen. Now we know, that
in that place they were evil and cruelly handled. But for that, they then
sighed and cried unto God, and he heard them, for that they then desired to be
borne withal, and to be released from some of their misery, GOD shows that
they ought also to do the like. And this contains a good and profitable
doctrine: namely, that when we look unto our selves, we may the better be
induced to acquit our selves of our duty: and contrary wise, when we become
cruel toward our neighbors, this is because we are beecome dronken with
our own ease, and consider not the poverty and misery we have been in, or
happily may come unto. He which has been hungry and thirsty, in such
sort, that he has desired that some one would succor him in his necessity,
when he sees a poor man, and thinks: Well, I have been in the like
necessity, when I could have been willing to be aided and relieved: yea, me
thought some should have had pity on me to succor me: he (I say) which
thinks of these things, when he sees a poor man in need, shall he not
have his heart mollified and softened? But what? When we are at our ease,
there is no talk of remembering our ^eede and poverty, but rather we imagine
and suppose, that we are herein exempted, and not to be numbered in the common
(...) of men. And that is the cause why we forgette our selves, and take no
pity and compassion upon our neighbors in any misery they suffer. With so
much greater heed then we ought to bear in mind this place, wherein the
Lord seeing us so blind, so given to the love of our selves, so well contented
to be plunged in our own delights and pleasures, so careless of them which
endure penury, and are in necessity, expostulateth with us in this wise: And
what are you? Have you never been in any necessity? And when you ouerflowe
your banks in your wicked dealinges against them, have you no care to think:
Behold, these creatures are formed to the image of God, if we commit any
outrage against them, shall God take pity of us? Let us then practice this
doctrine in our whole life: and as often as we shall see any oppressed with
misery, let us remember to say, Go to, have not I been in necessity as well
as they? And if now I were in the same estate, would I not desire to be
succored? Seeing then it is so, ought we to exempt our selves out of such a
condition? At least let us do to an other as we would that one should do
unto us: for nature has taught us this, and we need not to go to schole to
learn it. There shall need then no other evidence to condemn us, than this
which our Lord has already shown us by experience. When we shall bear in
mind to commen thus with our own hearts, without all doubt we shall be
touched with some pity to help them which stand in need and necessity: and
that we shall be moved to compassion, seeing them endure misery: so that if we
have the power and ability to succor and relieve them, every one of us will
employ him self herein. Ye see then what we have to note upon this place,
when it is said, Thou wast a stranger in the land of Egypt: It behooves
therefore that now thou also ease them which are under thy hand: for when
thou wast a servant, thou could have been very willing that one should have
borne with thee, and released thee of some part of thy misery. But now let us
come unto them which were not of the people of God, but did only traffike, and
had intercourse of merchandise among them. GOD wills that they also as well
observe the rest: and yet they were not sanctified of GOD, and this sign could
not apperteine unto them (as we have already said.) It seems then that GOD
vnhalloweth the sacrament, when he communicates it unto the unfaithful, and
those which were not circumcised, to bear the mark and sign of the
covenant, to them which had neither the law nor the promises. But we are to
observe, that this which God speaks here of strangers, extends it self
only, and belongs unto this people which he had chosen and adopted. For we
know that if things contrary to the service of God be permitted, although
one shall happily say, These which offend, are not of our society and
company, we shall notwithstanding be induced by their evil examples to follow
them. If the strangers had been permitted to labor among the people of the
Jews, what might have happened hereby? The Jews would have had dealings with
them, and so have defiled themselves: they would have made small difference
between this day and others. For when examples are set before our eyes, we are
easily led away to that which is evil. And albeit there should be no great
occasion of turning us aside, yet is our nature so inclined unto evil, that we
are easily induced hereunto. And how would we resist them when we should be
altogether drawn forward into wickedness? Thus if liberty should have been
permitted unto strangers to labor, and to do their business among the people
of Israel, they would soon have been corrupted, every one would have
dispensed with himself for this liberty to violate the Sabbath day, utterly
neglecting the observation thereof. So then, to the end all such occasion of
transgressing against this rest, might be removed, and that this day might be
observed with greater reverence, as God willed that the beasts and cattle
should rest: so commands he that the strangers do the like. Now this ought
to serve for our instruction. For it is to teach us, that vices ought not to be
tolerated among those which make profession of Christianity, but that men
ought to punish the offenders: yea, though they be but strangers and wayfaring
men. As how? When blasphemies are condemned among us, if a man hear a stranger
to blaspheme, to make a scorn of God, and yet he suffer him and dissemble the
matter, is not this to suffer a stinking sore to fester, to the corrupting and
rotting of all the rest? See I say, what is done when blasphemers shall be so
borne withal, when they shall have their flote and full sail in their
wickedness, and that men will not repress them, albeit they be so open and
manifest, that men may hear and see them. But it is to evident, that we are so
far from punishing the blasphemies of them as they deserve, which are not of
our religion: that it is to be seen how we suffer them in those, which are
together among us, and make profession of Christianity. And this is to our
greater confusion. For when we suffer among us either Papists or Jews, or
other like (as at this day the world is full stuffed with contemners of God)
when we suffer them (I say) to rail on the doctrine of the Gospel, and to
blaspheme the name of God, shall we not breed up so dangerous a disease, as
after short time shall be incurable and past all remedy? If we suffer wicked and
dissolute strangers to make here an open sale of their outrages and dissolute
behauiours, must it not needs be that we be drawn with them into the like
wickedness, and so be altogether corrupted? So then let us diligently note,
that God will have his people exercised in such purity, that not only they
which make profession of being Christians abstain, and keep them selves from
evil, but also that they suffer not, as far as shall lie in them, others
among them, to live inordinatelie. For we must remember that the earth is, as
it were unhallowed and defiled, when the service of God is defiled, and his
holy name dishonored: the earth (I say) in the which by his pleasure we dwell,
is defiled and accurssed, or at least is nothing beholding unto us, if it be
not. So then when God has given this privilege to his children, that they may
remove all idolatry out of the land wherein they dwell, without all doubt if
they do it not, they shall provoke the anger of God, and his vengeance upon
them selves. If now we would permit, that the abominations of Popery should
be mingled among us, if by some special privilege one would grant a mass to
obstinate Papists, which would live here, if one would yeald them some corner
of the land to commit their idolatries and superstitions therein, can it be,
but we should draw on us the wrath and anger of God, and kindle the fire of
his vengeance against us? And why? Sithence God has given to them which have
the sword of justice in their hand and the administration thereof, seeing that
he has given them (I say) all power and authority to chase, and put away from
out of the land all idolatries, and infections of Papistrie, certeinelie if
they allow and maintain them, this shall be even to drive God away, that he
dwell not, nor bear rule among them. So then let us note, that not without
great cause our Lord would, that the strangers which dwelt among the people
of Israel, although they were of an other faith and religion, should be
constreined to observe the seventh day. Not for any cause touching them selves,
or for their instruction. For they were not capable hereof, but because they
should not be an occasion of offense to draw the people into sin, and
because the service of God should not be violated, and that the land which he
had given to his servant Abraham for an inheritance, might be wholly dedicated
unto him. We are therefore hereby warned, not only to sanctify our selves by
Gods word, but also not to suffer any disorder among us, but that all such
things be removed clean away. Now further note, that when our Lord will that
we have such a zeal to maintesne his service, that even they which profess
not themselves to be of the Church, should be constreined to order and
conform themselves to us when they live in our company, that we shall want all
excuse, if we on our part be not wholly given unto him, and be as mirrors and
spectacles to draw and allure the unfaithful, and to win them unto God. For if
we, when they shall err, will reprehend them, and in the mean while they may
perceive the like or greater vices in us, shall they not have just occasion to
mock and despise all our admonitions? So then, seeing it has been commanded,
not to permit strangers to do things contrary to the service of God, let us
know that we are in double manner commanded to walk warily and in all
carefulnes, and in such humility and sobriety, that strangers may be
compelled and forced to confess, that our chief desire is willingly and
unfeignedly to honor God, and that we cannot suffer any reprochfullie to abuse
his majesty. Thus ye see what we have to bear in mind upon this place, which
we ought at this day with all diligence to observe, albeit it be preciselie
given in commandment to the Jews: for in substance and truth it belongs
unto us. For as in old time our lord brought this people out of Egypt: so at
this day has he drawn us out of the gulf of hell, and has delivered us from
eternal death, and from those deep and dark dongeons wherein we were plunged,
to bring us into his heavenly kingdom, having redeemed and purchased us to
himself by the blood of his well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ. Now let us
cast our selves down before the face of our good God with acknowledging our
faults, praiing him to make us feel them better than we have done, that
laboring to reform our selves more and more to his justice, we fight daily
against the lusts and desires of our flesh, and continue so long in this
combat, until he has fully freed us from it, and reformed us unto his
image, in the which we were first created. That he will grant this grace not
only to us, but to al people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 7. Sermon, wherein it is entreated of the second Table.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 16 Honor thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee, that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may be well with
thee in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
WE are now come unto the second Table of the law, wherein God shows us, how
we ought all to live here together. For (as it has been above touched) there
are two principal things required in our life. The one, that we serve God
purelie and sincerely: The other, that we live with men in all integrity and
uprightness, rendering unto every one that which apperteineth and belongs
unto him. Now as the honor of God is more excellent than all that which
concerns men, so it behooved that in the first and principal place, the rule
of honoring God, as we ought, should be given. And this is handled and
dispatched in the first Table. Here then God begins to declare unto us, in
what sort our life ought to be ordered, if we will apply our selves unto the
duty we owe unto men. Now we have also declared, that God requires no honor
of us for any need he has of it, or for any profit it brings unto him, but
it is for our welfare and salvation, that he requires it. So then he will
prove our obedience, and the love we bear him, when he commands us to walk
in all equity and uprightness with our neighbors, and that we live together
in such concord and fellowship, that any one be not given unto himself, but
that we communicate together, and that every one according to his ability and
power to do well, employ and force himself thereunto. This say I, is the
proof which God makes, to know whether we worship him unfeignedly and from
our heart. For we might make many fair countenances, and use great ceremonies,
but God shall not content himself with it. And this is the cause why our Lord
Jesus Christ says, Math. 23. 23.
that the principal point of the law is justice, judgment, uprightness,
faith, which word imports here fidelity or faithfulness. Therefore when we
live with men without hypocrisy and dissimulation, when we are not given to
our subtle sleightes, nor malicious practices, we study to minister unto,
and to serve every one in his commodity: we maintain right, and resist wrong
as much as lies in us: lo the chief and principal part of the law. Not that
the service of God ought in the mean while to be forgotten, or that it is of
less importance, but because it is impossible, that men acquit themselves in
their duty toward their neighbors, except they be led hereunto by the fear
of God. Now let us handle this commandment last recited, which concerns the
honoring of father and mother. And here, although expresselie mention be made
of the father and the mother, there is no doubt but GOD meant to deliver a
general doctrine, of having all superiority in honor. For grant we, which
must needs be confessed, that the law contains a perfect rule of doctrine,
wherein nothing is wanting: and this which we have said, must needs be so. For
if it has not touched any thing of the duty we owe to other superiors, as
princes and magistrates, and those which have the sword of justice: if it has
delivered nothing concerning masters, it should have some default in it.
Therefore we must conclude, that God has commanded that all they which are in
any degree of honor and authority be honored and obeyed. Moreover, seeing all
preeminence and superiority comes from God, and that this order is
established and appointed by him, without the which the world could not stand:
what might be thought if God made no account of this, when he gave forth a
certain form of living well, and in all holiness? Neither ought we to
account it strange, that under one special kind of obedience to be yielded to
all superiors, the whole is comprised. For we have already touched, how this
ought to be observed in the law, and we shall see it more plainly hereafter.
And this was not done, because God could speak in no other manner, but for our
better profit and instruction. For we know, that albeit men desire to seem
subtle and sharp witted, yet cease they not always to cover themselves with
the buckler of ignorance. If we might epsy that the law of God presses us
over sore, we would feign have some excuse to exempt our selves from the
subjection of it. And if the law of God were not apt and convenient to
instruct the rude and ignorant, many would allege that they are no great
Clerks, that they never went to school. It should seem then, that the law of
God might not bind them. But when we see that God abaseth himself to our
rudeness, and that he speaks grossly according to our capacity, this
takes from us all excuse, this remoueth all pretenses whatsoever: and every
one is bound to order him self aright, and we all must confess, that there is
nothing which hinders us from doing our duties, but that we be rebellious
against God, and will not bear his yoke. Lo, why under one kind God
comprehends the whole, that he might instruct and train us up like young
children, which are not capable nor apt to be taught after some absolute and
perfect manner. This therefore is the true and natural sense of the place, as we
shall see hereafter. For as God delivered the ten commandments or words, as
he calls them, so he annexed also the exposition of them, to the end nothing
might be obscure, and that men might not doubt or dispute of that which they
had understood. We see then that God has fulile declared himself, and showed
that not only his will is we obey father and mother, but all superiors
without exception. And let us note that God speaks here of honoring fathers
and mothers, because he would draw and allure us by such means as were most
convenient and agreeing with our nature. We know that there is such pride in
men, that willingly they bend not the neck to be subject to others. Every
one thinks he ought to be a master. How ever it be, it is hard for men to
live under, until God order them to this humility, to submit themselves in
all simplicity of obedience unto them, which have any authority over them.
God then seeing nothing more contrary unto our nature than subjection, that he
might win and allure us hereunto after a most mild and loving manner, names
in this commandment of obedience, the father and the mother. Now this is an
execrable thing, and contrary to all nature, if the child forget his duty
toward them, by whom he is come into this world, and by whom he has been
nourished and sustained. Therefore, when the child knows not his father and
mother, he is taken for a monster, every one holds him for execrable and
accursed. And why? Though GOD says nothing hereof, though we had no holy
Scripture to this purpose, though no man preached this unto us, nature has
already taught us, that this duty which the child owes to the father and
the mother, without detestable wickedness cannot be broken off. We see then
the intent and meaning of our GOD: namely, that in proposing unto us the
terms of father and mother, he might win us to himself, that we might not
be as wild and untamed horses, to draw back, but should in all gentleness
come unto him, to receive the subjection which he lays upon us. And forasmuch
as all authority which men have, proceeds from him (I speak of that which
is according to lawful government) let us give all diligence to yield him the
honor which is due unto him, and let every one in his order obey them which
have superiority over him, let every one consider of his estate and
condition, let children honor their father and mother, let all the people
honor them which sit in the seat of justice, let servants do the like
toward their masters. Briefly, let there be an harmony and consent of
agreeing in duty among us, according to the order our Lord has appointed,
which ought to be inviolable. Moreover, when here is mention made of honoring,
this is not that children only use some courteous embracing of their fathers
and mothers, that they put off their hatte before them, bend the knee unto
them: God staieth not himself on this, but the honor he requires, imports
much more: namely, that children follow the counsel of their fathers and
mothers, that they leave them selves to be governed by them, that they bestow
all pain to discharge themselves of their duty toward them: briefly, that
the child know he is not at his own liberty as long as he has father and
mother. Ye see in effect what God meant by this word of honor. To prove this
to be so, can we have a better and more faithful expositor of the law, than
the holy ghost, which speaks by the mouth of Moses, and of all the Prophets:
and namely, by Saint Paul? For we shall see hereafter, that GOD has declared
the summarie and contents of this sentence: namely, that it suffices not
that the children yield some reverence to their fathers and mothers with cappe
and knee, but that they be subject unto them, and emploie themselves to serve
and obey them, as much as they shall be able. And Saint Paul alleges not
this, to exhort us to some ceremony of duty, but he says: Let the children
be subject to their fathers and mothers, 1. Tim. 3. 4.
where purposelie he places this word of subjection. So then we see, what
this imports, and what is the natural sense and meaning of the place. Now
return we to that which we have shortly touched, to make our profit thereby,
and to gather thence some doctrine and instruction, which may be for our
commodity. First of all then, let children know, that seeing God has given
them fathers and mothers, it is great reason they obey them, or otherwise they
show, that they are contemners of GOD. And this rebellion they make, is not
raised against men, nor against creatures: but this is as much as if the
majesty of God and his glory were trodden under foot. It is said, that we
have but one father which is in heaven, Math. 23. 9.
to speak properly: and this is not understood concerning the souls only,
but touching the bodies also of men. This honor then is proper to God alone,
to be called father, neither can it agree unto men, but so far as it pleases
him to communicate this name unto them. Now seeing this title of father is as a
mark which God has imprinted in men, we see, that if children make no account
of fathers and mothers, they do wrong and injury unto God. As much is to be
said of them which obey not their princes and magistrates. Of servants likewise
which would all degrees were confounded, and that they might bear rule without
all order. And see why the Ethnikes and Painims have applied this word of
Piety or Godliness, to the honor which we give to fathers and mothers, and
to all them which are in authority over us. Piety or godliness, to speak
properly, is the reverence which we owe unto GOD. But the Painims, albeit
they were poor blind wretches, knew that God will not be served only in his
own majesty, but then also, when we obey those which bear rule and exercise
authority over us. In sum, he will prove our obedience in this behalf. And
therefore, seeing parents and magistrates are lieftenantes of God, and all
those which have any maistership represent his person: it is certain, that if
one set them at naught, it is as much as if he declared that he will not
obey GOD. A man may make some fair protestation to the contrary, but the
thing notwithstanding is so for all that. If the poor unfaithful and
vnbeeleuing ones knew this, and that GOD left unto them such an affection, what
excuse shall there be left for us, if we understand it not much better? When we
hear that all parentage or fatherhoode proceeds from God (as Saint Paul
pronounces) Ephesians. 3. 15.
and that by this union of Jesus Christ, we are put in mind hereof, have we
not a more express and manifest declaration of it? Must the Painims be yet our
doctors and teachers? But when they which name themselves Christians shall here
be ouerblinde, or shall stop up their ears not to hear and know that
which God has declared by poor ignorant wretches, woe be unto them: for their
condemnation is so much more horrible and grievous. Let us therefore briefly
note, that we cannot like here together beeneath, except this order which God
has ordained be holilie kept and observed: namely, except those which have
superiority be had in honor, be had in estimation, and be obeyed. For
without this, there shall be an horrible confusion. All they then which cannot
submit themselves unto Magistrates, they which are rebellious to fathers and to
mothers, they which cannot bear the yoke of Masters and Mistresses, declare
sufficiently, that (as much as in them lies) they pervert and overthrow all
order of nature, that they mingle and confound the heavens with the earth, as
we say. For behold the only mean by which God would maintain and preserve
mankind. Let us add further to that we have said, the consideration of this
which is elsewhere mentioned, that when God sends Magistrates and Princes, he
brings the fear of them, not only upon men, but also on brute beasts. For
so speaks he hereof in Daniel: Dan ^ 38*
and of this we may gather that they which lift themselves up against the rule
of government appointed by God, are worse than the brute beasts, and deserve
to be sent to such a schole as theirs. For our Lord, to make men ashamed which
are reasonable creatures, says: That the fear of Princes and Magistrates
ought to be extended even to the brute beasts. May not a man then see that the
devil possesses also them which cannot order themselves in all modesty to
the subjection which God has established, and without the which it must needs
be that all come to ruin and confusion in this world, as we have already
declared? Yes. And therefore if we feel and perceive in our selves such an
hautinesse as makes us worse subjects to them which bear rule over us, let us
fight against this pride of ours, and let the authority of God suffice us for
a bridle. For were we more wild and savage by nature than we are, yet this
ought (as I may so say) enchaine and fetter us herein, that God declares that
he is dishonored by us, except we do him homage in the persons of them, whom
he has placed in his room, and in whom he has imprinted his image. To speak
briefly, we see that charity begins at this end, that we be humble and
modest, and that none lift up themselves arrogantlie and presumptuously, that
none esteem of themselves above mesure, but that we be ready to humble our
selves, to the end we may be ruled and governed in whatsoever it shall please
God to require our obedience. Romans 13. 7.
See why in this sort S. Paul leads us to charity, when he expounds this
commandment of obeying magistrates. For he shows that if we have not this
mildness and gentleness in us, to bow the neck when our Lord puts on the
yoke, we bear no charity toward our neighbors. If we desire such a confusion
and meddlie in the world, that we would that rules and superiors have no duty
and reverence done them, it must needs come to pass that all be set out to the
spoil of the robber, and it were much better that every one lived apart and
without company, than in the society of men, to see such a confusion as
should be, if we keep not the rule of government which God has appointed. Let
us then well remember, that to the end we may live with our neighbors, it
behooves every one to correct in himself this hautinesse and presumption, and
not retain and keep it in our hearts. But let us learn to be humble and
lowly, knowing that this is to order and make our selves equal to them of the
lower sort (as S. Paul speaks.) Romans 12. 16.
That we may so do, let us consider our selves what we are. For behold what
abuses us: even this, that every one would have greater preeminence than God
has given him, and being (as we are) blind, we forget our selves, and know not
our own poverty, our own faults and vices. Every one will think himself a
marvelous man when he is nothing. And herehence issues this, that we make no
account of our neighbors: yea, that we despise all the virtues and good gifts
which God shall have bestowed on them. It is then spitefulnes and unthankfulness
which stirs us up unto pride, in such sort, that every one yields unto
himself more than apperteineth unto him, and this is the cause why we cannot
frame our selves unto obedience, as we ought. But in steed of this let us
learn by our dutifulnes to do homage unto God, when we see that he has
commanded us to obey our superiors. And besides let us know, that such as they
are, he has placed them over us. If a child have a father or mother, he must
not say: O, lo my father is not at all such a one as he ought to be, I have
just cause to withdraw my self from his obedience: yea, but if he be thy
father, it behooves that this word content thee, if thou will not abolish and
bring to naught the order of nature, either this which God has ordained must
be made of no value, or thou must honor thy father what a one so ever he be*
And why? Because even he which has communded thee to honor thy father and thy
mother, has given thee such a father as thou have. As much is to be said of
masters, of Princes, and all other superiors. For they came not at all
adventure or by chance, it is God, it is God which sends them, (as S. Paul
hereof speaks) Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. 4.
as all the holy Scripture gives sufficient testimony. Yea, precisely we are
also led to know by experience the providence of God, and the fatherly care
which he has of us, when he appoints Magistrates. Let us learn then wisely
to consider Gods goodness in all those which are in superiority over us, that
we may thereby be moved to orderour selves to their obedience. Thus ye see what
we have to bear in mind in this place. Now seeing it is so, that God has
comprised in a word, and set down unto us in a short summarie, the rule of
obeying all superiors, let us note, that by this he resigneth not his own
right, nor bereaueth him self of that which is proper and belonging unto him.
It behooves therefore that God be honored above all others: yea, and so, that
the honor we yield unto mortal men hinder not, but that we give him the
service we owe him, and that every one study to acquit his duty
principally toward him. Shall not he (think you) discharge his duty of
obedience fairly, which obeys an under officer, and in the mean while
spitteth in the face of the Judge, or the Prince? What madness were in this?
Now the like is done when we will debar God of his preeminence, and so obey
men, that we make no account of him which is above all. For this is against
nature, that the authority which is given unto men, should darken and diminish
in any part the glory of God. Let us therefore diligently note, that when we
are commanded to obey our superiors, there is always this exception under it:
so that this derogate nothing from the right which apperteineth unto GOD: of
which it has been already handled in the first table. For we know, that the
service by the which God is worshipped, ought to go before all other things.
And see why Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6. 1.
also willing to give us the exposition of this place expressly, adds, that
the children ought to obey their fathers and mothers, howbeit in the Lord. And
we have said, that the foundation whereupon we ought to build, is, when we
will be obedient, humble, and subject to our superiors: namely, to know
that almighty GOD is represented in their persons. Now take away the
foundation, and must not the whole building totter and fall unto the ground?
But all they which have not respect unto God, take away the foundation of this
doctrine. So then the going forward is perverse and wicked. Now this ought to
admonish as well them which be in authority, as those which are subject unto
them. If then men and women have children, they ought to know, that no
subjection is due unto them, except God bear rule above all. What is then
behoofull and necessary to be done? It behooves a father diligently to
instruct and bring up his children in the fear of God, and that he begin
himself to show them the way hereunto. The mother must do the like, that God
may have his honor above all, both small and great, old and young. Let
Magistrates in like manner seek by all means they may, that God be served and
honored, let them maintain as much as lies in them, all that which
apperteineth unto this end: and since he vouchsafes to do them this honor
which they deserve not, to sit in the seat which is dedicated to his majesty,
and to carry the sword, which as a thing sacred and holy apperteineth only
unto him: let them show that they are in deed his officers. Seeing then it is
so, that he has lifted them up unto such a dignity, of which they were in no
respect worthy, let them at least show this, that in his name it is, that they
have all authority, and that they refer it unto him. Ye see then how Princes
ought to discharge themselves of their duty, every one ought to do the like
in his family and household. Let those unto whom God of his goodness has
granted to have men servants and maids, consider well that there is a
Master above them all, who ought so to be obeyed, that his right always be
reserved unto him wholly and entirely. Lo what instruction al superiors, in
what degree soever they be, ought to learn, the instruction, I say, which they
are taught and commanded of obedience to God. Moreover, when fathers and
mothers, and Magistrates will raise up themselves against God, and be lifted up
with such tyranny, as to challenge to themselves that which pertains unto
God alone, when they will turn us from his obedience, ye see an exception
which before we have put down, which makes that they ought not to be obeyed.
It behooves therefore that God go before, and then that the creatures follow
after in their subalterne, as we may say, that is their several and
successiue order. And in very deed the cause why, for the most part, that
meekness and humility is so little regarded in the world, that the children
arm themselves against fathers and mothers, and behave themselves as wild
beasts, that the people are full of wickedness and rebellion, that servants
also are full of disloyalty and disobedience, that there is no dealing with
any of these to reclaim them in what sort soever, is the just punishment of
God upon them, which abuse the dignity which he has given them. For
oftentimes we see that the Princes bear not rule to magnify and set forth
the name and glory of God, to cause that he be honored as he deserves: but
they draw clean backward herein, they will set up and make themselves idols,
even to pluck God as it were cut of his seat, to place themselves therein.
One shall see this, at the least, one shall see the Princes reign and bear
rule licentiously, even with all the raines of the bridle loosed: and God
therefore must needs revenge himself of them. As for fathers and mothers what
zeal have they to instruct their children in the fear of God? All is one with
them, so they may advance and set them up in the world: yea, it seems they
are disposed to bring them up in all impiety and ungodliness, in all contempt
of God and of this word. If the fathers be wolves themselves, they would have
their children wolves whelps: if they be old foxes, they would have young cubs
to their children: if they be serpents themselves, they would have also a
serpents brood. We see this to be so. It is therefore good reason, that God
aduenge himself, when the creatures of forget themselves, and especially, when
men know not, and acknowledge that God has stretched forth his hand to lift
them up, and to communicate unto them part of his honor, even in a degree
right underneath him. It behooves we bear this always in mind. But what? Is
not this a wicked and villainous unthankfulness, when a man, which is in
authority of justice, knows not to say, Who am I? Lo I am a poor worm of
the earth, and yet God vouchsafes that I bear his name, as in his behalf:
withal, that I execute the authority which he has given me. When a man
forgets thus to reason with himself, is he not overmuch unthankful? Again,
when fathers consider not to say: Lo, God which is only father of all mankind,
yet notwithstanding he yeldeth unto me this so honorable a title, it is then
great reason that I advise my self well to render an account hereof. When
masters and mistresses know not to think thus, We are no better than others,
yet God has honored us, not only in creating us after his own image and
likeness, but in giving us this preeminence above them which are under our
subjection, when I say men will not know and think thus, must we not say,
that they are become altogether brutish and beastly? Let us therefore
diligently note, that rebellions often times proceed from them which are in
authority, which know not their office: namely, that they ought above all to
procure that God have his honor, that he be served, and worshipped, that men
yield subjection and obedience unto him. True it is, that the rebellious
children, people, and servants, shall not be excused for all this: but yet we
see that this is a just vengeance of God, and by so much the more we ought to
be stirred up to follow this which is declared unto us, both in this place,
and in all the holy scripture, where this commandment is alleged. Let every
one of us then have a respect unto his vocation, and consider to discharge our
duty in our state and calling. Let them whom God has honored so much, as to
give them the scepter of justice, and to place them in his seat, take good
heed they rule and exercise their authority in the name of God, and procure
that he be served and honored of all: let them be as mirrours and spectacles
to show good example, let them hold their subjects in such good awe, and rule
them in such order, that the name of God be blessed, and the mouth of all evil
speakers closed up and stopped. Lo one point for them. Let fathers and mothers
have the care of well instructing their children, let them study to make them
to know God for their only father: and touching their men servants and
maids, let them so serve themselves with them, that God have always the
principal place. Let them not do, as accustomablie men are wont, who, so
they be served to their own profit and contentation, care not if God be
forgotten. But let masters know that God must bear rule over them: as also
over those, which are under their subjection. And this is spoken and noted
touching them which are in authority. Now on our part let us consider, that
when we have Magistrates set over us, if we be rebellious, if we presume to
arm our selves against the rule of government, if we seek to subvert the
order which God has set, that we commit not this outrage against men only,
but that we assail and bid battle unto God. And what can we win by
warring with him? Can we he the stronger in this conflict? No: but he will
revenge himself without striking any blow, so that we shall be astonnished to
behold how he shall maintain that which by his own mouth he has ordained,
even by a power admirable and wonderful. Thus much touching the first point.
And again, let children also consider and take heed they be not over arrogant
and presumptuous, they be not headstrong and given to their lusts and
appetites: but that they order themselves quetly to the obedience of their
fathers, knowing that they are in combat against God, when they cannot subject
themselves under the yoke which God puts upon them. Let men servants and
maids know, that if they refuse to be subject unto men whom they serve, that
God is thereby offended, and that they in the end shall be found guilty of so
great a fault as this, that they would not be governed by his hand. Now in the
mean time let us note, that God must be obeyed first of all, that the people
so obey their princes and magistrates, that this derogate and take away nothing
from the right which God reserueth unto himself, as he is also worthy thereof.
If Princes will induce us to do evil, if they will overthrow the pure doctrine
of God (as we see overmuch in the world that this fury and madness is in many,
which would have religion bended at their lust, making it but an image of wax,
which would have the service and worship of God ordered according to their
fantasies) it pleases not God that we be obedient unto them in that behalf.
For who are they? They have lost all authority when they revolt from the
obedience of him, who has the chief and sovereign empire. Must the devils be
forced to bend the knee before God, Phil. 2. 10.
and our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall there be men found which would usurp such
maistership, that in the mean time the honor of God shall be overthrown,
and all religion cast down to the ground? So then let us learn so to obey
both Princes, fathers, and mothers, that God retain his entier right, fully
and wholly: and that we be not hindered, to yield him the honor which
apperteineth unto him: but as far as we may, without wounding our conscience,
we must obey them in all quietness. And though they which have authority over
us, acquit not themselves of their duty: yet we owe them obedience, so that
the children ought not despitefully to behave themselves, when their fathers
shall be over sharp and bitter unto them, and shall exercise too great rigor
against them. True it is, that fathers are forbidden to use cruelty against
their children: yea, forbidden to discourage them. But yet, although the
fathers consider not to govern their children by gentleness: Ephesians. 6. 4.
yet ought the children to bear with it patiently. Briefly, we ought to bear
the injuries quietly and patiently of all those which have authority over us
And thus ye see what God would give us to understand in this commandment. Now
he adds also the promise: That thy days, says he, may be prolonged, and
that thou may prosper upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. But
there rests yet a clause in the commandment, which for that we are hardly
ordered to humility, God places for a spur to quicken us forward, saying:
Thy God commands thee this. And it serves to the confirmation of the
doctrine we have above touched: namely, that these shall be vain and frivolous
shifts, to call into question, whether they which are in degree of honor
above us, deserve so or no: whether they discharge their duty in ttah office
and authority whereunto they are called, all this shifting to excuse our
disobedience must be laid aside. And why? For we must content our selves with
this, which God has appointed, we must rest altogether upon his good pleasure.

Lo, for what cause Moses here adds in express terms, The eternal or
everliving, thy GOD has so commanded thee: As if he did say: True it is, that
men will kick and fling, when they shall be rained with any bridle of obedience,
one shall never have their good will and leave, to have them in subjection.
Again, their pride and arrogancy always stirs them up to a desire of
lifting them selves over high. So then there shall be no voluntary
subjection, before God begin to work, and to put thereunto his hand. But
will you be rebellious unto God (says he) when you enter into these disputes?
Must he bear rule over me? And must I obey him, when he is no better than I?
If you so envy at men, see God opposes him self, and he will know whether he
shall be obeyed and served of you or no. And when he sends you his lieftenants,
and you will not receive them, it is a sure and certain sign, that you refuse
also his yoke, in such wise, that his justice is violated, and he perceives
that he is despitefullie entreated of you. Sithence it is so, know ye (says
Moses) that the children which are rebellious to fathers and mothers, shall
have happily to allege this or that: and the people which are occasions of
seditions and troubles, shall well have some fair tale for their defense, but
this shall serve them to no purpose. And why? Because that God, which has
established rules and superiorities in the world, will also that we maintain
them. He has pronounced the sentence herein which cannot be called back and
retracted. When God has given forth his ordinance and decree, we must make no
question of our duty, but rest therein, and have our mouths stopped. Now
besides all this, our Lord uses much goodness and kindness toward us, to
win us the better to our duty, and to allure us to obey our superiors, when
he adioyneth in the end a special promise. It is true, that we have above
seen, that God shows mercy in a thousand generations upon them which love
him: and this was annexed unto the commandment, where God declared unto us,
that he would his service should be kept in all purity, that we decline not
to idolatry and superstition. But the promise which is there, is extended to
the whole law, as we have seen: but this is belonging only to the
commandment of obeying of fathers and mothers. Therefore when we see that
this is a sacrifice agreeable unto God, let those which are under subjection
hold themselves therein, let them not show themselves outrageous and rebellious,
but let them bend their neck to be ordered in all obedience, and let them show
that indeed they are willing to yeald obedience unto God: forasmuch as they
refuse not to be subject unto mortal men, whom he has seen and set over
them in his own name. Ye see then to what purpose this promise is given:
namely, that God seeing how hard and dull we are at spur, would hereby
mollify our hearts, and win us by all mildness and gentleness, that we
take it not in evil part to be in subjection, and that it seem not an hard
and grievous thing unto us to obey our superiors. But because the whole can
not now be dispatched, let us briefly bear in mind, that for to serve God
the better, we must beat dawne all pride and presumption which is in us. And
albeit by nature we have this cursed root of desire to be lifted up above
others, though ambition reigns both in small and great: yet ought we
notwithstanding for preparing of our selves to the service of God, remove this
wholly from us. And why? Because humility is the first and principal step to
all true obedience. Now touching men, let us note well, that we can not live
together in unity and concord, except they whom God has placed in dignity
and authority be obeyed, except they be received in his name, except men be
subject unto them. Otherwise, it must needs come to pass, that all order and
policy being perverted and overthrown, our condition become worse than the
state of brute and savage beasts amiddest the wild forrestes. And so all they
which are rebels, and resist lawefull authority, are enemies of GOD, of
nature, and of all mankind: these are monsters, whom we ought to abhor and
detest. Now when we shall have showed our obedience in subiecting our selves
unto them, whom God has set over us, let us learn also, that we have great
reason to humble our selves under him, and that in such sort, that he be
served and worshipped of us, not by ceremonies, but in truth, and in a pure
conscience, with the honor which apperteineth to him. And hereunto are we
lead by all the rules and principalities in the world, knowing that God ought
to have his authority and preeminence so far above them, as his seat above
the heavens, is higher than theirs upon the earth. So then, as we are to
remember that the children must obey their fathers and mothers, that the people
must yeald all dutiful subjection to their magistrates, that in every family
and household, such order as God has established, must be observed: as he will
there be such degrees among men: so let us bear in mind, that this ought to
draw us higher: namely, to know that God, who has sovereign empire and
authority over the world, ought to bear rule over all creatures: briefly,
over our whole life. And by so much the more we see how this cursed Papasie
ought to be detested of us. For see there an hautie empire lifted up over the
whole world, but to what other end, than to thrust God beside his throne, and
to bereave him of the honor which pertenieth unto him? For the Pope will
readily allege us, that men ought to be subject to their superiors. But
what? Makes he any account either of the order of God, or of nature? None at
all, but contrariwise, spitefully raging against all authority of holy
scripture, he overthrows all order and rule of policy, which God has
commanded us. He will call him self, The vicar of Jesus Christ: and yet we
see how he plucketh God out of his throne, and will not suffer him to be head
of the Church. Let us therefore learn to have in detestation this rule and
authority, which the devil has set up in this world, opposite altogether
and clean contrary to that which God has commanded. And in the mean time,
albeit we see that things have not the course they ought to have, so that
superiors abuse their power, let us know, that they can not pervert, and take
away this, which God has instituted, concerning empires and kingdoms. As for
the authority of justice, it must be maintained and preserved: for it has
his foundation of God: it is not with it as with this devilish Papasie, which
had no foundation: but let us know, that GOD will always have in this world
Kings, Princes, and other Iusticiaries. This order therefore must be kept and
observed, and when they acquit not them selves of their duty, when fathers
shall use tyranny toward their children, let us bewail our selves, being
certeinelie persuaded, that this proceeds from our sins: and when God
suffers, that the order which he has instituted be not observed, but that
all is confused and disordered, let us know, that with so much greater
diligence we ought to have recourse unto him, praying him that he will restore
things to such an estate, that all may see that we desire no other thing than
to be governed by him, as by the which mean he procures our salvation.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our God, with
acknowledging of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better than we
have done, to the end that in true repentance we learn to displease our
selves for to return unto him, profiting herein daily more and more, until
the time, that being rid of all our vices, we be fully reformed unto his
justice. And so let us all say, Almighty God, etc.

The. 8. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 17 Thou shall do no murder.
WE have alredie seen how, for the better ordring of our life with men, we
ought to yeald obedience to those which have any superiority over us. For this
is the first thing which God commands us in the second table of the law:
and even coming from him self unto men, he places this as the mean between
both, to honor them, whom he has appointed over us. It is true, that when we
speak of men, we understand some like and equal fellowship. For we are all
descended from the stock of Adam, we are of the same nature, and all this
imports that men are of like equality. But this notwithstanding, seeing it
has pleased almighty GOD, to appoint certain degrees, we must return unto
this point, and observe this order, that he which has any preeminence, be so
esteemed and accounted of amongst men. And we ought not here to make this
allegation: Why? Is he better than I? For this difference of degrees proceeds
not from this, that one is better than another: but this is, because it
pleases God to give preeminence unto some, whom he will also have honored. Now
this is not sufficient, that children honor their fathers by bearing some
reverence to them: but they must succor them, they must employ them selves for
their behoof and commodity, as much as shall be possible. And in very deed
Jesus Christ shows, Marc. 7. 11*
that there is nothing but mere hypocrisy, when the children shall only make
some sign of love or honor to fathers and mothers, and in the mean while
leave them helpless in need and necessity. This is to defraude parents of
their right, this is to mock the law of God, when men will so observe it by
way of outward ceremonies. As much is to be said of all subjection. For it is
required that we make not some sign only of honor, but that we render all the
right of dutifullnesse which apperteineth unto him, which is in any preeminence
above us: yea, and that we do this of our own accord and goodwill. Men
truly would be exempted from all kind of bondage and subjection: but seeing
God has ordained so diuersse an order, we must frame our selves thereunto, and
that not by force and constraint. For what account shall be made of this, if we
obey God in despite of our teeth, and our heart drive always the contrary
way, and draw clean backward? Our will therefore must be present in this
behalf, and we must account it as sweet and pleasant, whatsoever our Lord
has commanded us. You see then wherein consists the first step and degree
of honest and upright walking with men: namely, that we know, that fathers
and mothers, and all others which are lifted up to any dignity above us, must
have the honor and obedience which apperteineth unto them, otherwise God is
dishonored in their persons: and this is as much, as if we refused to do him
homage, and to yield our selves subject to him. Now in the next place after this
fifth commandment, Moses adds, That we commit no murder. It is true, that at
the first sight it would seem, God should prescribe us no great perfection in
forbidding us murders. But we have to note that God would comprise in some
short sentence, all that which were requisite to the well ordering of our
whole life. And therefore it was not for him to forget or leave any thing
behind. Now we must know, that the life of men shall then be well ordered,
when they abstain from doing of evil, from all wrong, and violence: again,
when they walk honestly, in all chastity, when they do no hurt one to an
other, when they shall keep their tongues also from harming their neighbors,
by lying, or any slanderous speaking. All these good properties ought to be
in us, if we will conform our selves to the will and justice of God. So then
we ought not to marvel that God speaks here expressly of murders. For this
is the better to bridle us, that we presume not to commit any outrage, or
attempt any way to harm our neighbors. But for all this, let us bear in
mind, that which before we have touched: namely, that God has spoken after
a gross and rude manner, to apply him self to all sorts of men, and to be
understood even of the most idiotes. For we see how every one excuses him
self of ignorance: and if a thing be somewhat hard and obscure, it seems to
us, that we may wash our hands as innocent and guiltless, if we shall have
failed in our duty: and if we can say, Oh this was over high, and to profound
for me, and I could never come to any understanding of the matter: we think
all is cocksure. To the end therefore that men might no longer have such
shifts, God would speak in such sort, that even little children might
understand what he says. That is the cause, why in so short and plain wise
he says, Thou shall do no murder. Moreover, let us note, that God, to bring
us by little and little to live well, proposes unto us those things, which
are most detestable, and most to be abhorred: that we might learn thereby to
take heed of doing evil. For example in this place, he might well have said:
Ye shall do no injury, ye shall use no violence with your neighbors. He
might well have spoken thus. But he would rather speak in this place of
murder. And why? Because this is a thing contrary to nature, when men advance
them selves to deface the image of God. We must then needs have murders in
horror and detestation, except we be altogether brutish and beastly. How ever
it be, this teaches us, that the thing is over enormous and outrageous, and
which we ought to detest and have in execratio^, which is as murder. God
therefore, to the end he might hold us in more strong and sure bonds, and the
better withdraw us from all harm doing, and from all wrong and injury,
shows us, that we ought not to pollute and defile our hands in the blood of
our neighbors. Well then: when one absteineth from murder, is this all which
is required? Nay, there wants yet very much, as anon shall appear, when we
have more fully declared this matter. For God will hold both our hearts, and
our thoughts in subjection he will be served in such pure and sincere manner,
that we nourish within us no evil will against our neighbors. Therefore, when
he speaks of murder, it is as if he said: Mark ye, and be heedfull in this
matter: If you had not the written law, if you were altogether as the Painims:
yet should you have this imprinted in your hearts, that murder is a thing
wicked and detestable. Now I declare to you, that I hold and condemn for
murderers all those which commit any outrage against their neighbors, all
those which devise any thing against them, all those which nourish within their
hearts hatred and rancour. Lo how God interprets him self. Now let us
diligently note, that not without great cause, our Lord has forbidden such
murders. And why? Because we can not dwell with men, but in absteining from all
injury and violence. Howbeit, under one special kind, he has forbidden the
whole. And why? For if he had used many words, and made some long discourse,
one might have said: I remember not so long a lesson, and it was to hard for
me. Lo why God would speak in one word, even to the end his doctrine might by
and by be learned, and that his law might easily be imprinted in memory. We
need not turn over many leaves, we need not have any great registers, and
volumes: this suffices, that God has in ten words comprised the rule of
well living. What shall he now be, which may allege, and say: I have forgotten
such an article, I have not understood it. For can we not bear in mind ten
words? We see then now, how God would hold men convicted of shamlesnesse,
when they have not well understood that, which they ought to do. Ye see then
why God has spoken after so brief and short a manner. Moreover, he has so
chewed these things, as the Proverb is, that digesting of them, we might
learn to order our selves peceably to him: yea, that the most idiotes might
know, that it needs not to be any great Clerk to understand the law of
God, seeing he has descended so low, and framed him self so to our
capacity, that there is no poor wretch so ignorant, which may not comprehend
and understand that which is contained in the law. Lo, what we have briefly
to bear in mind. Now seeing it is so, that God has forbidden murder, as a
wicked and detestable thing, we have to know first of all, that he which
lifts himself up to kill and murder his neighbors, is not worthy to be
nourished on the earth, as being worse natured than the brute beasts. For we
see how the Bears, the Lions, and other wild and savage beasts, spare those
which are of their own kind, and are like them selves. And why? Although they
want all reason to discern good from evil, albeit they have neither law nor
equity: yet notwithstanding, even this acknowledging of a common and like
nature between them selves, withholdeth them from all cruelty. Shall then the
brute beasts know well, how to live without hurting of their own kind: and
shall it not be an ouergreat shame, that men may not be withhelde by some
consideration, seeing that God has imprinted in their hearts, how wicked and
execrable a thing murder is? They see they are all of the same nature, every
one does behold the image of GOD in his neighbor, and should not this serve
them for a bridle to withhold them from all violence and wrong doing? Whither
might our fury further lead us? So then let us remember, that albeit God had
not spoken, we are already convicted by the testimony of our own
cons^ience, That who so armeth him self against his neighbor, despiteth
nature, and is not worthy to be accounted in the number of men. But now, since
the authority of GOD is matched with that, which already we know, by the
guide and direction of nature: and seeing he shows us, that the blood of men
can not be shed, but we shall be accountable thereof unto him: when we
hear this, let us learn to walk without iniuring of any: or otherwise let us
know, that GOD will be our mortal enemy, as having already declared, that
all men are under his guard and protection. It is true, that this threate is
not here expressed: but it is sufficient, that he has spoken hereof in other
places. For when he says: That man is created to the image of GOD, Genesis 1. 27.
it is not lawefull to make any assault upon him. For it is as much, as if our
Lord did say, You wage battle with me, when you do thus seek to hurt one
an other. For I have imprinted mine image and likeness in you.

If one deface the arms of some Prince, it is an injury so great, that it
shall be revenged and punished as murder. And why? For this in like sort tends
to the confusion of all order and policy. But lo the image of God, which is
imprinted in men, and one despises it: must not such an outrageous villain
be double punished? So then note we, that God, in declaring that it is against
him that men arm them selves, when they do injury to men, would show us,
that this ought to withhold us from doing them wrong, except we be beereaued of
all sense, and beecome mad and furious. And further, to the end we might better
advise our selves in this thing, our Lord declares, there can not be a
murder committed, but the earth therewith must needs be polluted and defiled.
As it is handled hereof in an other place, where it is said, That the effusion
of man's blood in it self imports a filth, Number. 35. 33
and uncleanness and such a blot, which scarce can be wiped out. 1. Chro. 22. 8
When mention is made of killing, even in a battle allowed and approved, yet
is it said: That a man thereby is become unclean. And why? Because we might
learn thereby, to have in greater horror and detestation the effusion of
blood. If an enemy be killed in open battle, although God pardon this,
because he which staieth him, has just and lawful cause thereof, and does it
for necessity: yet notwithstanding it is said, That the man which has slain
him is polluted and made unclean. And why? To the end we might know, that God
has created us to live together in peace, and that we can not give one
fillippe (as they say) but that we defile our selves, and we beecome by and
by unclean before the face of God. Therefore, when the holy scripture uses
all these forms of speaking, ought we not so much the better be withholden
from doing of injury to any of our neighbors? Yes verily. Now withal, seeing
God has handled these things according to our rudeness and infirmity, let
us note, that albeit we shed not blood: yet this suffices not, except we
abstain from all outrageous and violent dealing. Briefly, let us understand,
that the persons of men must be accounted dear and precious in our eyes. For,
until we be come to such perfection, God shall always account us for
murderers. If any one strike his neighbor, albeit he slaie him not, lo he is
already a murderer before God. And why? We have already said, that God has
purposely used that word, to the end he might declare to us, that how ever we
esteem them as light and little faults, to be the occasion of tumultes, and
seditions, to have given some crosse-blowe, that he notwithstanding shall not
account so of these things, as we do. Wherefore? They are all as weighty as
murder. Ye see then why God has thus spoke. Therefore, as he has forbidden us
murder: so let us know, that he has interdicted us to do any injury, or use
any violence toward our neighbors. When we have done nothing, but lifted up
our dagger against any one, and have touched him in anger and indignation,
behold a murder is committed in the sight of God. If we would well consider of
this, should we not be much more sober in our dealinges than we are? We
shall see some so cholerike, that if one displese them, but with a word, lo
forthwith the dagger is drawn to strike and to beat him. For it seems unto
them, that so there be no blood drawn, the matter is not great: but how easy
soever they be in their judgments, the sentence of God can not be
retracted, when he declares, That all murders are mutinies and seditions, and
all mutinies murders. So then let us learn to lay aside our own fantasies,
when we will be judges of our own faults, and let us quietly and peaceably
receive the sentence which God has given: and know we, that all those which
violently attempt any thing against their neighbors, are already guilty of
murder before God. Lo what we have briefly to bear in mind. But now, to make
a trial whether we abstain from all harm doing, from committing any outrage
against the persons of our neighbors, we must come to the examining of our
hearts and secret thoughts. For God has not given some civil law only, to
cause us to live honestly: John. 4. 2^.
but he has given a law convenient and agreeable to his own nature. We know
that he is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth. Seeing it is
so, it behooves us to know, that he has prescribed a rule, not only for our
hands and feet, but for our thoughts also and affections. It is true, that
men, as they are carnal, when first the law of God is pronounced to them,
they think they have well acquitted them selves, when they are faultlesse
before the world. On the other side, they are very ready, by enlarging their
conscience, to dispense with them selves, and to take all liberty of doing
evil. And this is the cause why even the Jews, which ought to have been
nourished from their infancy in the law of GOD, Mat. 5. 2^.
they took this commandment, Thou shall not kill, over grossly,
understanding that they offended not GOD in this point, if so be they had not
openly set on their neighbor, to wound and to hurt him. Therefore, except
the fault were evident and apparent to the eyes of men, it seemed unto them
that it ought not to be imputed unto them before the face of GOD. But our Lord
Jesus reproves them of this, showing them, that the law is spiritual, and
expounded of them very sottishlie. When it is said, Thou shall not kill: you
think (says he) that you shall be absolved as guiltless before GOD, when men
can not bring you to the bar for it: But I tell you, that whosoever shall
call his neighbor Fool: that is to say, does but declare any token of
indignation against him, is worthy to be punished with hell fire: Whosoever
iniurieth an other, is culpable of a Council and constitution from heaven, so
that GOD and all his Angels shall arm them selves against him: Whosoever
murmureth against his neighbor, who so muttereth and grummeleth (I know not
what) between his teeth: although he do not open injury, is in danger of
judgment. We see to what point our Lord Jesus leads us: namely, to show
that albeit we shall be able to protest, that we have committed no outrage,
that we have not lifted up our fist to give one blow, much less drawn our
sword against our neighbor, and that we have not wounded him, that yet this
is not enough: But know ye, says he, that GOD will bear rule over your
tongues, over your thoughts, and over all your affections, as by good reason
he ought. Seeing it is so, who so ever shall have spoken evil of his
neighbor, the same is already a murderer: for the tongue is as a sharp
swoorde. Therefore, albeit you should have neither sword nor dagger to strike
withal, when the tongue is so armed, to speak evil against your neighbors,
when you abuse their persons, it is a kind of murder in the sight and
judgment of GOD: and although you have done no open and manifest injury, yet
think ye not to be quited for all this: for when you shall have but muttered
and mumbled something between your lips against them, it suffices to make
you culpable and guilty before GOD, you shall be condemned from the high throne
of the heavens, albeit you be absolved before men, and that earthly judgment
proceed not against you. When we hear this, let us know, that it is he, whom
GOD the father has given to judge the world, who speaks unto us. We ought
not therefore here to dispense more largely with our selves: 1. Pet* 4. 5.
for we shall gain nothing by all our cauilling shifts: but let us learn to
have respect always unto GOD, to have a right and true exposition of the law.
For what is he which speaks? He which bears rule over our hearts and
thoughts, he which will not be served of us with eye service, he which is not
contented that before men we abstain from doing of evil, but will be
worshipped in spirit and truth: who will have that our consciences be chaste
and pure, that we be purged from all wickedness. Thus when we shall have
respect unto the nature of GOD, we must no longer extend the law of GOD to
the outward works: but we ought to conclude, that when God speaks of
murders, he understands all enimitie, he speaks of all anger and
indignation, of all rancour and malice against our neighbors. And in deed, 1*
John. 3. 15.
that is the very cause, why expreslie S. John says, that he which hates
his brother in his heart, is a manstear. As if he did say: You may make many
fair countenaunces, but albeit the hatreds you conceive, be very hidden and
secret, and that you dissemble so deeply, that you show no token of malice
against your neighbors: think ye not for all this, that GOD has his eyes
shut and closed up. Well it may be hidden and privy from men, which you have
not made open and manifest: but when you hated your neighbors in your hearts,
that is to say, most secretelie, in such sort, that none be able to perceive
it: yet lo notwithstanding a murder committed before God. And in very deed,
the reason of this is most evident and manifest. It is true, that when the
Princes and Magistrates of this world make laws, it is not after the manner
and fashion of GOD: but to this end only, that every one rule and govern him
self according to outward order and policy, that none be openly iniuried,
but that every one have his right, and that peace and concord be maintained
among men.

That is the intent and meaning of Magistrates, when they make their laws. And
why? They are mortal men, they can not refourme the inward and hidden
affections: Act. ^. 24.
this apperteineth unto GOD, they sound not the heart: for this is the proper
office of GOD, as the holy scripture attributes it unto him. But yet this
notwithstanding, when a civil law is made, although one shed not one drop
of blood: yet is he adjudged worthy to be led to the gallows, if it shall
be known and proved, that he endeavored with all his might to have murdered
one. If a man has drawn his sword upon one who wardeth off the blows, in
such sort, that he touched not his skin: yet notwithstanding, the laws, even
of the Painims, condemn such a man to the gibbet, as well worthy thereof. And
why? For the law regards not what is happened, but respects the counsel
and purpose of men. Seeing then earthly Princes and Magistrates punish him,
which endeavors with all his might to do evil, although being hindered, he
be not come to the full end of his enterprise, what shall be thought of God?
Shall he have less authority than a mortal creature? Behold (I say) to what
point we ought to come, if we will know, that of good right God condemns
all them, which hate their neighbors. And why? Consider we (I say) what his
nature is. Will we therefore observe this commandment? We must begin in
short and summarie wise with murder. And why? For God would have us prevented
and foretaken with some fright and horror, that when we think of hurting our
neighbors, of committing any violence, of doing any injury, we remember that
this is an horrible and detestable thing, which he can by no means be able to
suffer. And why? Because this is a kind of murder. Ye see then how GOD at
the first would daunt us, and this is the point whereat we ought to begin.
And if we think it a strange thing, that God condemns one box on the ear
for murder: nay, one verbal injury, as we may term it, which is done but in
a word: yea, one wayward grudging, be it never so secretly hidden within us,
if we account it strange, that this be condemned as murder before God, let
us consider what his nature is, and that he deserves to have more yealded unto
him than unto mortal men. But earthly Judges punish an evil and wicked
affection, when it shows it self: what shall then God do, unto whom nothing
is hidden? And again, we have to note that, which the Apostle says in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 4. 12.
That the word of GOD resembles him which is the author thereof, so that it
must be as a two edged sword, which pearceth even to the marrowe of the
bones, that there is no thought in us which it searches not. And why? For
nothing is hidden in the presence of God. Seeing it is so, that nothing is
hidden before GOD, it behooves that this word prove and sound the depth of our
hearts. So then it is necessary, that all that which is secret and unknown
unto men, come into account before God: and by this we be admonished to walk
in such sort, that we bear no enimitie nor evil will unto our neighbors.
But yet notwithstanding, we must proceed further. For this is not enough,
that men abstain from doing of evil, seeing they are created to aid and help
one an other, and to maintain and defend one an other. God therefore, in
forbidding of murders, shows on the contrary side, that the life of our
neighbors ought to be dear unto us, that we ought to employ all our travel
and pain, to preserve and maintain it, as much as in us lies. But he would
begin at the negative point, the better to declare unto us, that which he
commands. And why? For we see how vicious and wicked we are: as many
thoughts as are in us, so many thorns and briers are there within us: as many
affections as we have, so many brambles and thistles: and such like things
grow in us. GOD therefore, not without great cause, would pluck out of our
hearts, and out of our thoughts, the wickedness and the vice wherewith they
are ouergrowen: yea, he would correct every evil and corrupt part of us. For
without this, Iere. 4. 4*
it is not possible to move one finger to that which is good, nay: it is
impossible to have one good thought. This is the cause, why the Prophet says,
That men must break up their fallowe ground, and not sow among the thorns,
as if he said: I see well what you do: when one tells you, that you have
offended God, you counterfeite some fair countenance, and it seems that you
be as it were reformed, and yet you always continue the same you were. But it
is not enough to sow in a field, but one must rid the ground of roots and
thistles, and first break up the ground, which has lien fallowe. But while
you do nothing else, but endeavor to appear fair unto the eye, the thorns,
the brambles, the nettles, and such other like evil weeds remain still
within. Ye shall not therefore have any good seed, so far shall ye be
from bearing of good fruit. And for the same cause our Lord says here, Thou
shall not kill: in steed of saying: Take ye heed ye defend and preserve the
life of your neighbors. And verily we see, by common experience, how men
would acquit them selves before GOD, with some fair show and appearaunce,
when notwithstanding they retain still their vices and corruptions, according
to that which we have alleged of the Prophet. For if one exhort us to do
well unto our neighbors, true it is, we know not how we might altogether
contradict and gainsaie him. We would therefore acquit our selves in some
sort, but yet our filthy corruptions remain still within us, and we do but
plaster and white lime them over, as they which would be at no great cost do,
when their houses are ruinous and full of cleftes. For what do they? They stop
up the holes and creuises with mortar, and plaster them over, and all this
while the runious and decaide places of their houses remain still vurepaired.
So is it with us, we plaster and parget over, and so we would lightly
discharge our selves in our duty. And yet nature teaches us the contrary:
for if one will sow a field, will he cast his corn among briers and thorns?
No: but when he sees his ground, after it has been laid fallowe, to be
covered with thistles and thorns, he breaks it up with the plough, he
grubbeth up the brambles, he manureth and tilleth it.

Let us then learn, that not without great cause GOD condemns first of all
the vices which are in us. For he sees well, that they have taken deep root,
and that he shall never be able to hold us in such a stay, as to cause us to
walk according to the rule of his justice, except he first pluck up this
cursed root of evil which he knows to be within us. Lo, why he says:
Thou shall not kill, as if he said: Will you live in mutual love and charity
one with an other? It behooves that every one enter into himself, you must
all diligently examine your own hearts, whether you bear any hatred, any
enimitie, any evil will against your neighbors, which may occasion you to
attempt any one thing against them.

Let us then bear in mind all these things: and let us know, that when we
shall be purged from all anger and choler, from all hatred, from all injuries and
wrongs, we must then come to this point, to understand, that it suffices not
that we abstain from all harm and injury, from all violence and oppression,
that we have attempted nothing against the persons of our neighbors, that we
nourish no hatred nor malice in our hearts, against them, whom we have borne
evil will unto: but we must live in all love and charity, we must be as
brethren joined and united together, to woorshippe GOD as our common father.
Ye see what the point is whereunto we must come in this commandment.

So then let us note, that when we will profit in the law of GOD, we must
have respect unto the vices and imperfections, which are within us,
displeasing our selves in them, and endeavoring by all our might and power to
root them out of us. Have we done this? This is not yet all: for GOD will not
have us to be idle in this world, he has created us not only to abstain
from all evil: (for the stones, and blocks, and other insensible creatures
do so much as that is:) but he has made us to do well, and therefore men
must apply and endeavor them selves hereunto.

Know we therefore, that when our Lord will, that the life of our neighbors
be dear and precious unto us, he teaches us withal, that he which shall
not aid and help his neighbors in their necessity, slaieth them, as much as
in him lies. And so let us remember, that we shall not only then be guilty
of murder, when we bear some privy rancour and evil will against our
neighbors: but that then also, when we shall not have relieved, and succored
them in their needs and extremities, when we shall not have employed all our
pains for them when they stand in need of our help: we shall be culpable of
manslaughter before the face of GOD. Seeing it is so, we must not in this
place seek how to flatter our selves: for we see what the rigor of the law
is, albeit in no point excessive. For can we so refuse and take our leave of
GOD, as not to be knitte and united together with men, whom he has created to
his own image and likeness? Shall we not bear this reverence to him, who is
our father, that we live in a fraternity and brotherhod one with an other,
seeing he has lincked us together in such a bond? Shall we say that God
presses us overmuch, that he lays upon us to heavy a burden, when he
leads and directs us to such equity and vprightenesse? Howsoever the case
stands, let us take heed we flatter not our selves, when we have
intelligence of the mind of our Lord, who will have us employ our selves, and
bestow all our aides to aid and help one another, seeing the life of our
neighbors ought to be so precious unto us, as it is dear unto him. Now have
we the exposition and meaning of this commandment, Thou shall do no murder.
What rests then, but that we pray unto God, so to guide and conduct us, that
we may as we ought, frame and conform our selves unto his will? For it is to
no purpose to allege that his words are obscure and hard, or to allege that
there are so many commandments, that we cannot bear them in mind. For God
has spoken and declared his mind in one word, and used such brevity, even
for this cause only, to bereave us of all excuse. Again, that we might not
allege that we know not at which end, or where to begin, the better to
understand the meaning of this commandment, he teaches us this point also:
namely, that we must not, as our wont is, give our selves leave to do evil
under this color of persuading with our conscience, that it is no mortal and
deadly sin which we attempt: but we must always think the contrary, to
say thus: If I do the least harm a man may possibly name unto my neighbor,
I am a murderer before God. This we ought to think: for when we are willing to
do evil, lo the devil is at hand to blind us herein, to be willing at the
first to kill, and to cut a man's throat. This (as I have said) seems unto us
a fearful and cruel thing: for nature withholdeth us from such rage and
fury, as to say: I will kill and murder. But when one shall have grieved and
angered us: well, we fume and fret with him, and this seems nothing. But are
we despitefullie handled? We will endeavor, as far as we are able, to quite
him with the like: and if we use no extreme and violent stercenesse, we think
we may well be pardoned. Are we more abused? We draw our dagger, and we
strike our neighbor: but it shall be but one blow, and no deadly wound
given, and then we think there is no murder committed. Behold how men
dispense with themselves. And why is this? Because they think of no other
thing, but how to diminishe their faults. But it behooves us, as God has
taught and instructed us, to follow a contrary order to this: that is, that
when we think of doing wrong, of striking and beating our neighbors, of
conceiving any hate or despite against them, we set murder always before our
eyes, and think: Poor and wretched creature, whither runnest thou, whither
do thou cast thy self headlong, when thou seek to be culpable and
guilty of murder before God? So then let us not make this vain allegatio^,
that we know not how or where to begin, for God teaches and shows us, and we
cannot be ignorant of any thing, but wilfully and wittingly: and it cannot but
appear manifest in the end, that we would not cast aside our eyes to see and
know that which might have been visible and apparent unto us. Lo what we
have to bear in mind in this place. And withal let us remember, that God has
first forbidden murders, not mentioning any thing of charity, and not showing
us before that we are bound to succor one another as need and necessity
requires. And why? For we are full fraughted with wicked lusts and
affections, which of necessity must first be rooted out, as a ground which is
full of thorns and briers, must first before it can be sowed be ploughed up,
and rid of all his weeds, as we have above said. So is it behoofull and
expedient, that we be purged of the vices which by nature are in us, or
otherwise we shall never be disposed to walk in true and perfect love one
with another. So then now it remains, that every one consider of his own
ability and power, and so bethink himself of discharging his duty toward
his neighbors. If I shall have wherewith to aid them, I must conclude and
resolve my self on this, that whatsoever God has bestowed on me, it is not
for my self, that is to say: that I should only love and tender mine own
person, but I must have an eye unto others: and when I have the means whereby
to succor and help them which stand in need of mine aid, I must diligently
employ my self herein. For there is a community and fellowshippe between
men. God would not create so many several worlds as persons, but he has
lincked us all together. Seeing therefore it is so, that God has placed us one
so near another, we must observe and keep this communion wherein God has
joined us, and not forget that it is against nature for us to hate our own
flesh. But now between the faithful there is another greater regard and
consideration to be had, than this we have spoken of. For they ought to know,
that they are not only formed to the image of God, but they must also
consider, Ephesians. 5. 3^.
that they are all members of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there is a more
straight and surer band wherewith they are coupled, than this of nature which is
common and apperteineth alike to all mankind. And by so much the more ought
we to detest those which so forget all the union and conjunction which God
has set among his people, and all those which desire nothing else but to bring
to utter ruin and destruction that which God has united and coupled, and to
tear asunder the body of the Church. As we see the ministers of Satan do,
which are wholly set on evil and mischief, that it seems they would despite
God, how they separate themselves from them by whom they think they can
receive no profit, and who serve not for their lust and fancy. When so brutish
and enormious an affection shall be in us, is it not a sign that the devil
possesses us, and that the spirit of God dwells not within us: yea, that we
have not one drop thereof? Now therefore let us learn so to rule our selves
to this commandment, that being purged from all rancour all malice, and evil
will, we have diligent consideration of employing our selves to serve and
minister to our neighbors, and to acquit our selves of our duty toward
them, according to the mean and ability which God has given us. And if evil
thoughts and affections, although they be very secret and hidden, are accounted
for murders before GOD: what shall be said of the violent dealinges, of the
oppressions, and excessive demeanours of them which ouerflow their banks so
far, as that they are ready to beat and to kill their neighbors, as much as
lies in them? Must we not account them worse than all the Painims in the
world? But how ever it be, let us on our part consider, that we shall have
evil pro^ited in the school of GOD, if we keep our hands only from doing
of evil, and our hearts in the mean time be not corrected and reformed. And
further, they which will show what is the true perfection of Christians, must
not only abstain from nourishing any secret malice and evil will in their
hearts, 1. Pet. 2. 17.
but they must declare themselves to be brethren truly, and in deed, by
employing themselves for the behalf and commodity of their neighbors, as
much as shall be possible for them. Now if it be not lawful to nourish any
secret evil will, much less is it permitted to behave our selves so
inordinatelie, as to strike, and to kill, and to exercise any violence. And who
so order themselves so, are as wild and savage beasts. And if this affection
and desire of evil doing has been condemned by man's laws, what shall this
be, when the law of GOD condemns us? Let us therefore learn to have an eye
unto him and not consider of our faults but according to his nature. And
because he is a spirit, and will be served of us in all integrity and
uprightness, Ioh. 4. 24.
let us remember, that when we shall have withhelde our hands and feet from
doing of evil, we must also have our hearts pliable unto him: yea, and that in
such subjection and obedience, that we desire nothing, but by our deeds to show
and prove, that we are truly and in deed his children, living in true
fraternity and brotherly love, with all them which are called with us into
the same conjunction and fellowship.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, praying that it will please him to make us feel
them better than we have done: and that knowing how he has bound us to our
neighbors, and will have us make proof of the fear we bear him in
withdrawing our selves from all evil, from all injury and violence: let us
pray him to grant us the grace to walk in such brotherly love and charity
one with an other, that we all shoot at this especial and principal mark:
namely, to honor him as our father, and to leave our selves to be governed
by him and his holy spirit, according unto his word: and pray we that we
be more and more confirmed in this, knowing that he has reached forth his
hand, even to conduct and hold us under his protection. That it will please
him to grant this grace not only unto us, but to all people and nations of
the earth, etc.

The. 9. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 18. Thou shall not commit adultery.
SAint Paul speaking of the life of Christians, Tit. 2. 12.
having exhorted them to the fear of God, adds that they must walk
righteously and soberly. Now, there is no doubt, but that this apperteineth to
the second table of the law. Will we then observe that which God commands
us in the second table? It suffices not that we do not any wrong or injury
unto any, either in his person, or in his goods: but besides this doctrine, it
is further required, that we live in all temperance and honesty. And to this
purpose mention is made hereof, in this former place which I have alleged to
Titus, where it is said, That we have been redeemed by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to the end we should live in this world in the fear of God, and
soberlie and righteouslie. In another place to Timothy he says, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
That if there be a good policy and rule of government observed, we shall
walk justly and honestly in all godliness. Now, touching the fear of God,
this is that spiritual service whereof we have spoken heretofore, that God
be purely and sincerely worshipped of us, that we put our whole trust and
confidence in him, that we call upon him, that we bear him the reverence
which he deserves. But come we to our neighbors. Will we learn how we
ought to be conversant with men? Lo two articles or points to be observed,
which he places to this purpose. The first is integrity and uprightness,
that is, just dealing, that we use no violence, no extortion, no deceit in
the goods of our neighbors. The second follows: that we be not dissolute
in life and conversation, that we show no villainous and unchaste behavior,
that our living be not inordinate. And this is that which he understands by
honesty or sobriety. We have seen, when God did forbid murder, how in
expounding this word we said, that God meant thereby to deter us from doing
any outrage or injury: and not only this, but he would warn us thereof, that
we should seek to live in peace with our neighbors, and not suffer any to
be troubled and molested by us. It shall be further handled hereafter
touching the goods also of our neighbors, that we ought not to bear false
witness against them: and this apperteineth in like sort to the justice and
uprightness which must be in us. So then, if we will reserve unto every one
his right, we shall use no violence or injury in the persons or goods of our
neighbors, we shall not attempt to spoil any one of his substance. But here
God enterlaceth another precept, That we commit no fornication, which is
comprehended under the word of sobriety or temperance. For, albeit we rob
not any one of his substance, although we be no murderers nor barreters: yet
being unchaste, dissolute, brutish, and beastly in our life, we may not think
that God is pleased with us. For no thing is so inseparable as uprightness,
and sobriety, seeing God has joined them together in his law, and that we
see how he has confirmed the same by his Apostle, expounding by him this which
is here briefly touched. And therefore, if we will have the natural sense and
meaning of this place, let us know, that God here commands us to lead such
an honest and chaste life, that there appear no filthiness, no looseness of
behavior, no uncleanness in us. Lo what is the sum and contents of this
precept. It is true, that expressly he forbids us, in this place, to be
adulterers, that is to say, to violate and break the faith plighted in
marriage, that none entise and allure the wife of another: but let us
diligently note that which already we have touched, that God under one form
or kind comprehends the whole, and sets before us that which by nature
ought to be abhorred and detested, to the end we might the more abhor all
fornication and uncleanness. We declared yesterday, that when men are tempted
to do evil, they seek to beguile and deceive themselves, thinking the fault
shall be but light. And so from the lesser they proceed to the greater: God
contrariwise, to hold us in a streighter bridle, sets down unto us the
sins which are more enormious, to the end that being prevented with a greater
fear, we might not so easily be induced to commit any fault. As if he
said, Take heed how you fall, for this might be to break your neck.
Persuade not with your selves that you shall slide but a little aside, for you
shall have a deadly fall: and therefore take ye diligent heed. Lo in effect
why God proceeds after this manner in his law, and why now he speaks not
in general of all fornication, but of adultery, which is to break wedlock.
Now we know, that if any thing must be kept holy and inviolable in the whole
life of man, it is the faith which the husband plighteth unto the wife, and the
wife promises unto the husband. True it is, that all contractes and promises
we make, must faithfully be observed: but if we make comparison, we shall
find that marriage not without great cause is named the covenant of God. Pro.
2. 17.
Solomon shows by this word, that GOD bears rule over marriage, having it
under his guard and protection. And for this cause, if the husband break his
promise which he has made unto his wife, he is not perjured only toward
her, but toward GOD. As much is to be said of the woman, that she does not
only wrong unto her husband, but to the living GOD. For unto him is she
bound, in as much as God also will have the care of mainteining marriage,
whereas it is ordained by him, and he himself the author thereof. Therefore,
when we hear this word of adultery, we ought to hold it as execrable and
accursed: as if men would in express terms despite God, when they will as
enraged and furious beasts, break the holy and sacred bond which he has
established in marriage.

Now then we see how highly God estemeth of honesty and chastity. And why?
When he will that we be sober, continent, chaste, and modest, he says unto us,
Except you be honest and sober, you be as adulterers: that is to say, What so
ever excuse you shall pretend before men to make your faults light and little,
I have you in great hatred: for all your life is infected before me, you are
corrupt and stinking in my sight. We see then, as I have already touched, that
here is a straight commandment to hold us in all honesty and modesty. And
by this we see, how the excuse of them which say, They do none any wrong, when
they are inordinate in their living, and full of many outrageous enormities,
how vain (I say) and frivolous this excuse of theirs is. For our Lord knows
well why he used this manner of speaking. For it is not because he is tongue
tied, and cannot speak otherwise, or that he knew not in what order to set and
digest his matters: but because he would show, that albeit men will make the
matter very small, when they are dissolute and disordered in living, he has
an other balance than so, wherein to weigh their offenses, and will condemn
all of them as adulterers which abuse themselves to all villainies and unchaste
dealinges. So much the more therefore ought we to weigh this word which is
here mentioned, when it is said, Thou shall not be an adulterer. But all this
notwithstanding, we must consider of the degrees which are contained under
this commandment.

In the first place then let us know, that God will have the holy conjunction in
wedlock kept pure and undefiled. For if our persons are counted precious, and
our lives held dear in his sight, he will also that the loyalty and mutual
faith which ought to be between the husband and the wife, be in price and
estimation, that such an holy thing as marriage is, be not set forth to all
reproach and villainy. And this ought to teach us, that GOD will not have a man
cast an unchaste eye on the wife of his neighbor. And why? For our Lord has
already coupled her unto her husband. He will that her husband be her
shadow: and that when we think on evil, and set our minds on any vile lust,
we ought to stand in fear of that which is declared unto us: namely, that
God will wreake himself on all them which violate and defile the holy
conjunction which he has set forth in his own name. And this in like sort
pertains unto wives touching their husbands: namely, that the wife ought
not to give her self over to wicked desires, when she beholds a married
man. And why? God himself has assigned unto her her mate. It behooves then,
that except we will bid battle to our Creator, every one live in his
household, as he is matched, that this order be inuiolablie kept, seeing God is
the author thereof. This is one point to be observed.

Moreover, we must always return to this point, to consider of the nature of
God, that he is not an earthly Lawgeuer, that he forbids not only the
exterior act, and permits us in the mean while to be given unto our
wicked lusts and affections. For GOD will not be served with eye service, and
forbids not only the act it self when marriage shall be broken and
violated, but he interdicteth all wicked desires and affections. And this is
the cause why Jesus Christ says, Math. 5. 28
That he which looks but awrie on the wife of another, that even he is an
adulterer before God: and albeit he be not culpable by the laws of men, and
that he may be accounted chaste, as not having committed any whoredom: yet
notwithstanding, before God he is already condemned, as if he had committed
fornication. Therefore, when we hear this word of adultery, which is so
condemned, let us learn to abstain from all fornication, not only touching
the act thereof, but to keep and retain all our senses chaste, that chastity
and continency be both in our eyes and in our heart. 1. Cor. 7. 34.
For behold how S. Paul has defined true chastity when he says, That all
which are unmarried, ought to study how they may obey God, by keeping their
bodies and their minds pure and clean. He says not, That they who have not
defiled their bodies with fornications, remain chaste: but they which took
pains to keep both their bodies and souls undefiled. And when we shall have
considered, how God abhors and detesteth all adulteries, we must yet go
further, applying and extending the same to all fornication and uncleanness.
True it is, that he which breake^ the faith and truth of marriage, commits a
double offense, and much more enormious (as I have already said:) but we must
always remember this, that God will not have men only, not to attempt any
thing against marriage, but he commands also that men lead not a brutish life,
that they suffer not fornications to have their full flote. He forbids them
which are not married, to wander hither and thither in their concupiscences, and
to abandon themselves to all lustful meetinges, willing them to be pure and
clean both in bodies and minds. For he says, That not only their souls, but
also their bodies are the temples of the holy ghost, as it has been already
recited. And these are the words of S. Paul, when he warns the Corinthians,
that this were a wicked and infamous thing for them to suffer, as they had
already suffered fornications among them. 1. Cor. 6. 15.
Know ye not (says he) that your bodies are the temples of the holy ghost?
Lo then, seeing God does us this honor, to choose our vile bodies, which are
not only britle vessels, but carions, even earth and rottennes, and yet
notwithstanding God honoreth them so far, as to make them temples of his holy
spirit, to dwell therein, and shall we venture so to moil them in all filth and
infectio^? Shall we make them as stables and sties for hogs? What a treachery is
that? What an abominable wickedness? Neither is this all. For let us consider
whither S. Paul leads us. 1. Cor. 6. 15.
Our bodies (says he) are the members of Jesus Christ. This is then all one,
as if a man should rent in pieces the body of Jesus Christ, when he
abandoneth his body unto fornication and uncleanness. For it is certain that
we cannot intermingle the son of God with our filthes and abominations, he
being the fountain of all purity. So then, when a man yeldeth himself unto
fornication, he does as it were tear in sunder the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as much as lies in him: not that we may do it, for the son of God is
not subject unto us, to be so dishonored, but we notwithstanding shall be
culpable of such a blasphemy as this, we shall be guilty of such an injury
done unto him. Therefore let us learn that God will, that not only every one
for his part observe the loyalty and faithfulness required in marriage, but in
general, that we be sober, and chaste, to walk in all purity of life, and not
to give the bridle to all filthiness and uncleanness. The reasons which I
have already alleged ought well to move us hereunto: and this also which I
have already touched of adulteries, being applied of us to this purpose, may
lead us to all sober and chaste living. Let us therefore have all our senses
tied under such temperance and sobriety, that when the devil shall solicit
us to any uncleanness, we may always give him the repulse, that he find
no access unto us, being excluded from all enteraunce. Cicero. off.
A certain Painime knew well to say, That it is not enough for a man to have
his hands abstinent: that is, that he be not given to rapine and spoil, to
wrong and injury any one: but he must also have his eyes continent, that is
to say, he must not be given to unchaste and wanton looks. If this has been
taught by those poor, ignorant, and blind wretches, what shall become of us,
if we remember it not, when we are warned (as I have already said) that God
has showed us this honor, not only to refourme our souls unto him, but our
bodies also, although they be mortal, and that we see they have nothing in
them but rottenness and corruption? Seeing then it is so, that God accounts
our bodies as his, and that he will dwell in them, let us learn to walk
warily, that we commit no uncleanness, and be given to no kind of
filthiness, to drive God from out of us, who would possess us for his
dwelling place, and for his holy Temple. And withal we must remember that
which Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 6. 18.
That other sins which a man does, are committed without the body, but
fornication is committed in the body. For it is certain, that by thefts and
oppressions we defile our bodies, and our hands (as the holy Scripture in
this sense speaks) that when we violently oppress any, we have our hands
full of blood, as the Prophet Esaie speaks. Esaie. 1. 15. and 59. 3.
But Saint Paul considering well, that fornication is more shameful and
ignominious, and that men ought specially to keep themselves from it,
declares that fornication leaves a mark behind, which remains imprinted
in the body, whereby it is open to all infamy and reproach. We are very
desirous to conserve our honor and estimation unspotted, it would grieve us
much that any one should stain us with some evil and infamous note: why then
will we run hedlong into such uncleanness, as to draw on us a mark and
impression of infamy and reproach in the sight of God, before his Angels, and
in the face of al men? So then let us diligently note this, and we shall the
better be withheld from such corruption and filthiness. For albeit our
frailty be such, that the devil tempts and allureth us hereunto: yet shall
this serve us for a bridle, to restrain us to this purity which I have
mentioned, not only of body, but also of mind. And moreover, let us
heedfully note that which Saint Paul annexeth to the threat he remembers of
wicked persons, when he says: Let no man deceive you with vain words: for,
Ephe. 5. 7.
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the unfaithful and disobedient.
For men flatter themselves at this day, as they have done heretofore: and it
seems unto them, that fornication is not so great and deadly a sin. Yea,
see some ieasters and scoffers which scorn God, and call whordome but a
natural sin, and say that fornication is but a small matter. There are such
filthy swine which will speak thus. Now for this cause Saint Paul says: Let
no man deceive you. These scoffs and floutes were even in his time very rife,
in the mouth of the contemners of God, and many blinded themselves, as we
know the world is much inclined to flatter it self. Let none deceive you,
says Saint Paul, by such lying words. And why? For fornication is a
detestable thing in the sight of God, as he shows by the punishment which he
has sent upon fornicatours: as Saint Paul notes in the tenth of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, 1* Cor* 10. 8.
where he brings in an example of a mighty army which was slain for this
sin. And by this, is it not manifestly known, that God can not tolerate and
bear with fornications? For the life of man (as we yesterday declared) is
dear and precious unto him, they are creatures made and reformed to his image
and likeness. Now, when there are one, two, three thousand men dispatched, so
that God destroys so great a number of his own images, that is, of creatures
which he has formed, must we not say that there was kindled some terrible fire
of his vengeance? And what? Fornication was the cause hereof. Conclude we
therefore, that we must no longer seek to deceive our selves, as if our
faults were light and easy to be pardoned, seeing our Lord which exceeds
not, or passes measure in his judgments, has revenged it with so sharp a
punishment. But rather let us know and remember, that we shall be called to
our account before the heavenly Judge, when happily men have absolved and
pardoned us, and that when we have thought there is in us no infection and
filthiness, God shall put unto his hand and declare it. So then let us have
an eye unto him, and the examples which he gives us, that we may remain
under his fear, and endeavor with greater diligence to abstain from all
pollutions and spots of filthiness. Ye see in effect how we ought to
understand this seventh commandment of the Law, that we defile not our
selves with any uncleanness or intemperaunce. Now, if we ought to keep our
bodies and souls undefiled, must we not withal warily avoid all the
occasions which might induce and lead us unto fornication? Yes verily. Let us
therefore note, that they which abandon and give over themselves to any
looseness, seek nothing else than to entrappe themselves in the lines and
snares of Satan: and although they are faultlesse in the eyes of the world,
and none reprehende them: yet are they fornicatours in the sight of God. If
this were well considered, we should not see any longer such dissoluteness
in apparel, in gestures, and in words, as the world herein at this day uses
an enormous and outrageous liberty. What if men and women so attire themselves
to seduce and deceive one another, and to lay their baits for fornication:
are there not so many bawdries and fornications wrought? It is true, they will
allege: O, as for me, I have not played the fornicatour or adulterer. But yet
notwithstanding, they will make them selves a preie for Satan, and will draw
others, as much as in them is, into the same case. All these enormities
therefore, and superfluities, which are committed in apparel, which are used
as snares to entrappe others, are reckoned for fornications, and are contained
under them before God. The like is to be said of unchaste gestures and
behauiours, of ribaldrie, and filthy speeches. When a man and woman shall so
frequent one the other, that they give place unto Satan, and so tame themselves
to his subjection, as to be held snared in his ginnes, and that they yield
themselves bond and thrall unto him: lo fornication committed before God. And
albeit there has been no act committed, no through promise made thereof, yet
shall not God leave to punish these things: for he is manifestly tempted.
And hereby we see how childish and frivolous the shifts and escapings of
them are, which will excuse this or that not to be evil done, sobeit there be
nothing meant or intended: as they which would that daunses, and such other
disorders be permitted. What? So, that no fornication be committed, is this
evil and wicked? This is, as if in plain terms they would mock God, and
hoodwinke him, to buffette him, and cause him to prophecy who did him the
harm. We know well that daunses can be but the forerunners of fornications,
that they are to open the gate wide unto Satan, and to call him to come and to
enter in boldly, and without all fear. Lo, what daunses do always bring
with them. If one say, I meant no evil thereby: he makes God a lier. Saint
Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 33. Menander.
That evil speakings corrupt good manners. And ^oe why he alleges this from
a Painime, that we might have so much the greater shame. If we accept not of
the doctrine and instruction which is given us by Saint Paul, let us be
taught in the school of poor unfaithful ones, and of idolaters. For they
knew well to allege, That evil words corrupt good manners. Now, when the
tongue shall be infected with wicked and unchaste speakinges, that in gestures
and words there shall be nothing but signs and marks of all wickedness and
villainy, if men say (as above we mentioned,) They have no evil meaning: is
not this to lie openly and manifestly unto the holy Ghost? So then, let us
note, that when all fornication is forbidden, it is to the end that we should
walk modestly, and behave our selves soberlie, both in our gestures and
speakings, and that no dissoluteness, and unruly behauior be found in us,
which may tend any way unto fornication. I grant that all things are pure to
them which have their conscience pure, Tit. 1. 1^.
but this notwithstanding we must take heed, that Satan by his wiliness
prevent us not, and make some breach in us. Ye see in what sort this
commandment ought to be considered, that we take heed, not only of the act
of fornication, but of all that which is linckt thereto, of all that which
hangs on, and is accessarie thereunto: of all that which dwells near it,
of all that which may induce and lead us unto it. Briefly, we must bear in
mind that which lately I touched out of Paul, that as we ought not to do
any wrong unto our neighbors, touching their persons and their goods: so must
we also walk in all hones^ie, and sobriety, cutting off, and removing far
from us all those behauiours and intemperancies. Now, as all filthy speakings,
as daunses, and other like unchaste disorders are condemned before God, as
contained under fornication, so are other intemperate and riotous demeanors.
Ye shall see these dronkards which glut themselves as brute beasts, when they
are well whitled, not stick to give them selves over unto all uncleanness and
filthiness: they are then so besotted, that they know not their own shame.
Therefore, when men lead so brutish and beastly a life, drinking
excessiuelie, and ouercharging them selves with meat, and after this prostitute
their bodies, and abandon them to all filthiness and villainy, albeit they
commit not fornication in act and deed, think we that they shall escape the
hand of God, and not have a malediction and curse fall on them as upon
fornicatours? Ye see then how the sobrtetie whereof Saint Paul speaks, is so
to be understood, that if we will be chaste and continent before God, we must
not only abstain from fornication, and from all wicked lusts and
concupiscences: but we must use our meat and drink soberlie for our
nourishment, and not to excess and intemperance, so that hereby all modesty
and sobriety be laid aside and neglected. Lo what we have further to bear
in mind. Now, if one object and say: And how shall we be able, seeing the
frailty of our flesh is such, to abstain from al pollution and uncleanness?
For we see the incontiuencie which is in men, and in this thing as much as in
any: so vicious and corrupt their nature is. In deed it is true, that men
shall not be able to be continent, for our Lord will that even in this behalf
we feel the malediction and curse of the sin of Adam: namely, in this
unruliness of our flesh, except he by an especial gift uphold and presarue
us, as it is said, all have not this gift, so that every one must consider of
that which God has given him. But how ever we feel our selves disposed
herein, God has appointed a remedy for them which can not abstain. God
therefore, albeit his pleasure is to leave this mark and sign of infirmity
abiding in us, yet in the mean time has he assigned us a convenient remedy.
Shall some man perceive this frailetie in his flesh? Shall some woman feel the
like? It can not be denied but that this is a sin: and although it be an
inclination as proceeding from nature, I mean from this corrupt nature which
we have of Adam: yet is it in it self to be condemned. For, all such
unruliness of the flesh, is far from so excellent dignity, as GOD gave
unto mankind, that we should now bear such marks, in stead of being as we
should have been, as Angels of heaven. So then, all unruliness of the flesh
is a we: but yet so the Lord bears with us, that he has ordained such a
mean, as whereby this vice shall not be imputed unto us for a vice, whereby
this unruliness of the flesh, being in it self vicious and damnable, shall
not be imputed before GOD, when it shall have this cloak and couerture. And
when a man, seeing that he can not abstain, after he has prayed to God, and
recommended himself unto him, takes a wife, to the end he lead not a
dissolute life, to exercise his lusts here and there as chance serves, as
dogs, and bulls, and other like brute beasts do: when he shall (I say)
have his recourse unto marriage, as GOD has ordained: lo, this vice is hidden
and covered, and comes not to account. And in this we see the inestimable
bounty and goodness of GOD, that when he leaves in us this vice, such a one
as ought to shame us: yet notwithstanding, he ordeineth a good mean, whereby
it is buried and appears not. And albeit men be incontinent: yet are they
not accused before God, nor brought before his throne of judgment, if so be
they keep them selves within the bounds of marriage: for all unchastity is
not lawful, as if a man would grant him self an outrageous liberty herein,
and a wife likewise toward her husband: for we must take heed we make not of
our house a stews. But when a man shall live with his wife in the fear of
GOD, albeit the company of the bed be shameful: yet before God and his
Angels it wants now all reproach and infamy. And why? The couerture of
marriage sanctifies that which is polluted and unhallowed, it serves to purge
and make clean that which in it self is filthy and unclean. Therefore, when
we see that our Lord is so bountiful and gentle unto us, that he has
ordained such a remedy, are we not by so much the more wicked and unthankful,
if we use it not, and if all excuses which men allege, be not hereby removed
and taken away? As who should say, That GOD had not provided for their
necessity, and that he had not showed him self so loving a Physician, to
heal that evil disease which was in us, as though he had not at all
interposed him self for our health, as we see now he has. Therefore, let us
lay aside all those excuses of frailetie and weakness, seeing that our Lord
would aid us in this behalf, and has ordained this holy estate of marriage,
that all they which have not the gift of continency, give not them selves over
notwithstanding to any filthiness and uncleanness. Ye then see what we have
to bear in mind, and withal let us further note that which the Apostle
says, That the bed of marriage, as long as men and women keep them selves
together in the fear of God, Heb. 13. 4.
and in all modesty and sobriety, that even this bed is honorable. So
that, albeit by great reason it be in it self shameful: yet God turns it
all into honor. It is not lightly to be considered, that the Apostle calls
that honorable before God, which except he did pardon it, were shameful even
before men. But he pronounces malediction and vengeance upon all adulterers
and fornicatours. When we hear such a sentence pronounced of marriage, let us
learn to shrowde our selves under so honorable a shadow, if we have need
thereof, that our lustful desire be not condemned before GOD, and before his
Angels. And they which shall be able to abstain from marriage, let them so
consider of their absteining for a time, that if need shall require, they
reject not, but have recourse unto this remedy, which GOD has appointed: and
let them so love out of marriage from day to day, that they be always pressed
and ready to order themselves to the rule of GOD, when he shall call them
unto this estate. But now, here we may see, how Satan has euerthrowen the
whole order which GOD has assigned: yea, (even under the color of holiness
and religion) we see what abominations are hereof proceeded: as among the
Papists it seems that it is the most Angelical virtue that may be, to live
single and not to be married. Lo, an estate of all perfection, will the Monks
say, when they are not married. The Priests will say, that having sollemnized
their vows, they are dedicated to God. Again they will say, We are of his
Clergy, we are as the flower of his Church, we must be separated from the
common filthes and pollutions of the world. So then among the Papists one
shall be thought to come near the state of the Angels in heaven, when he is not
married. Now in the mean time we see how God is mocked with so wicked and
devilish a presumption: for consider we what beastly abominations have
followed of this, that marriage has been so contemned and despised. See these
Priests, these Monks, these Nonnes, which despitefullie reiecte this benefit
which God presents unto them: namely, that if there be any infirmity in
them, they may matrie: but they despise and disdain it as a thing filthy and
defiled. And this is even to war against nature. And therefore was it not
necessary that God should revenge him self of so presumptuous a pride, when
men so despitefully trample under foot a remedy which he gives them? Shall
we not think that diseased person out of his wits, which in stead of
receiving the potion which is given him for his health, tumbleth it to the
ground in despite of his Physician? so enraged are al these angels of hell of
the Papasie, all this pestilent vermin of Priests, of Monks, and of Nonnes,
which have rejected holy marriage: in which deed of theirs, they bid
battle openly to God. And not contenting them selves with this, they
ouerflowe their banks in such sort, that they dare utter with full mouth
those blasphemies, which ought to make the hairs of all men, which hear them,
to stand on end. Were there no more but this, yet hereby might we see, that
the devil has gotten there all the rule into his hand, and that this is the
use of Antichrist, and of this Apostolical seat of Rome, to spue out such
blasphemies: as when it has been there pronounced, That they which are in the
flesh, can not please God: that we must be separated from all uncleanness, and
therefore that Priests must be forbidden to marie. Lo, Syricius.
the very words of a Pope, which notwithstanding have bin registered to
posterity, as if it had been an oracle coming from heaven. Now, if the
devil should have all the swinge he might wish: yea, should be unchained and
let loose in the world, could he speak after a more detestable manner, to
despite God, for instituting of marriage, than to say: That they which are in
the flesh can not please God? This is, as if he did condemn all mankind: for
in this he condemns, not only them which live at this day, but all the
holy fathers which have lived under the law, all the holy Patriarchs, all
the Apostles, and the holy Martyrs: so behold a devil of Rome, which will
banish out of the kingdom of heaven, both the Apostles, the Martyrs, and all
the holy Fathers. Thus he which will be in the Paradise of the Pope, must be a
companion of the devil of hell: for albeit this be an enormous and outrageous
thing, that this miscreant Syrice has pronounced such a blasphemy, as thereby
to exclude the greter part of the holiest personages, which ever have lived
from the kingdom of heaven: yet would GOD never have suffered, that such an
horrible blasphemy should have been pronounced, but that thereby he would make
manifest this abominable seat of Rome, when he would permit these devils so
far, as under a color of holiness, to reject marriage, and suffer them for
a just vengeance, to loose the bridle to all wicked and infectious lusts, and
to insect the world with their detestable Sodomitries: in so much that they
exceed in that wickedness, which the Painims (men without God) have had in
horror and execration. Now, by this we are warned (as I have already said)
not to set light by the gifts and benefits of God, but to use them with all
sobriety, so that they which cannot contain them selves, bend their necks,
and receive with all gentleness, the yoke of marriage, subiecting them selves
thereunto: knowing, that when the husbands shall bear with the wives, and the
wives shall seek to live in peace and good quietness with their husbands,
this shall be a sacrifice acceptable unto God. If they have a great charge of
children, let them take heed to nourish and bring them up, be they poor or
rich, knowing that God accepts and receives in good part, this service. Let
women also, when they shall have much trouble and grief in caring for their
household, know, that these are so many sacrifices acceptable unto God. And
albeit marriage be contemned by these devils, which (for to despite God)
imagine it an Angelical perfection, to abstain from it: let them
notwithstanding, which are in this holy estate, know, that God accepts of
them, that he receives them, that he gardeth and protecteth their house and
family. For, seeing he says, That he is the author of marriage, he will
bless it, when we shall proceed therein, according to his will and pleasure.
Let them which are not married, take diligent heed notwithstanding, to walk
in the fear of God, and to esteem and honor marriage as it behooves. Let
both the one and the other endeavor to keep them selves in all purity, both
of body and of mind, as S. Paul hereof speaks, 1. Cor. 7. 34.
in the seventh of the first to the Corinthians, where he condemns not the
widows and the rest which abstain from marriage, but he exhorts them to
do their duties. For, the virgins, and widows, and such as are not married,
ought so much the more to cleave unto God, and to walk in his fear, as being
less hindered to dedicate them selves wholly unto him. And why? For they are
not distracted with so many cares of the world. They which are married have
more incomberances: howbeit, they must also take heed, that they permit not
themselves to much liberty, but that they walk in fear, and in all
carfulness of their duty. Lo then, how in all estates we must have
sobriety and honesty in our persons, in such sort, that we may present and
offer up as lively sacrifices unto God, both our bodies and our souls, seeing
he has redeemed them so dearly with the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that he would have them dedicated unto him self, to dwell in them, as in his
temples.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults: praying him, that he will make us feel them
better than we have done: yea, in such sort, that vnfeignedlie displeasing our
selnes in them, we learn to have recourse unto him, acknowledging the faults
and offenses whereof we are culpable, that we desire nothing else but to give
our selves over unto his service, and to please him in all, and through all,
until we have accomplished this course of ours, and ended this earthly
pilgrimage, to come to that salvation, which he has prepared for us, and
reserueth unto us in the kingdom of heaven. That it will please him to grant
this grace not only unto us, but to all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 10. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 19. Thou shall not steal.
IF we well understood but in one word the will of God, which he plainly
enough declares unto us, we should not need to study much for the right
knowledge of ordering our selves, and of leading an holy and righteous life.
But no such ignorant person, as he who will not understand: none so deaf, as
he which will not hear (as we say in common proverb.) And this is the cause
why we are so blind, albeit our Lord Jesus Christ has shined before us with
his brightness, and has made us privy of his will and meaning, as well in
this precept of the law, as in all the rest we have above handled: for if
every one would enter into his own conscience, to make a just and true
examination of his faults, should he not find that it is easy to judge, that
when we do our neighbor any wrong, when we deceive him in his goods, what
couerture soever and cloak we have for it, that we be culpable of theft before
God? But what? If so be we may hide our shame before the world, it suffices
us: and the judgment of God in the mean time is trodden under foot, and we
care not for it: but yet all these fig leaves, with the which we cover our
selves, shall serve us to no purpose, we must in the end come to our account
before the heavenly Judge, and then shall we find, that it is not spoken in
vain which he has pronounced by Zachary, Zacha. 5. 3.
That his malediction and curse shall come upon him which swears, and upon
him which steals, that is, that in what matter soever of the law, and in
what point soever we shall have offended, he shall not fail to take vengeance
thereon. Men therefore may well justify them selves, or flatter them selves:
yet God in the end shall displaie and show forth his indignation, both
against swearers, and against thieves. But the better to understand the will
of the Lord, let us know, that he has used this word of theft, or stealing,
to make us have in greater hatred all deceit and all rapine, in all kind of
wrong which we are able to devise against our neighbors: as we have already
above declared of murder and adultery. If one call a man thief, he will be
grieuouslie offended, for this is a word of infamy and reproach, and
therefore he will not suffer him self to be so dishonored in the face of the
whole world. God then, to the end he might induce us to hate all
deceitfulness, all harm doing, all extortion, that we might use in the goods
of our neighbors, uses this word in stead of all other. He might well have
spoken after some other manner: he might have said: Take heed how you do pull
unto your selves the goods of an other: take heed you make not your gain by
the loss and damage of your neighbor: take heed of using any such violence:
but in a word he says: Steal not. And why? Even to this end, that deceits,
rapines, and pillages, and all harm doing, be had of us in greater
detestation: that we be ashamed to do wrong unto any, that we stand (I say) in
great fear hereof, when we see that we are guilty of theft before God.
Moreover, let us note, that there are many kinds of theeueries: for some use
privy and secret sleights, when they draw to them selves by subtle means and
practices, the substance of another: others use open force or violence, and
this is properly called rapine, pillage, extortion: others use yet more sly
feats, and closer conueyance: yea, a man shall think they move not a finger
to touch any thing of their neighbors, a man shall not be able to accuse them
before the world: and yet because they walk not in all simplicity and
uprightness, they are thieves before God. Ye see then, how we must consider of
the kinds of the every, when we will understand what is forbidden in this
place. But in the mean time we have to note, that God judges not of theftes
after the manner of men: for they which live in great credit and reputation
before men, shall not cease to be condemned before God: yea, albeit none
accuse them, but that the poor whom they have eaten and devoured shall cry
for vengeance: and although none of them speak one word, yet the afflictions
which they endure, cry alowde in the ears of God, and sue process against
their oppressors, without sounding one word. So then, we must not bring our
own fancies to judge of theftes, thinking to escape the hand of God when we
shall not be condemned of men, nor punished by earthly judgment: for God
proceeds in this much further and higher, Let us therefore briefly bear in
mind, that touching God, all kind of harm doing, when we desire to pluck
unto us that which is not ours, is named theft throughout the holy scripture.
And in deed, when God manaceth a woe by the prophet Esaie, Esaie. 33. 1.
that he which has pilled and spoiled others, shall be rewarded with the like,
he speaks not of petty thieves, which we lead to the gallows: but he
speaks of great Princes and Monarchs, which bare then the sway through out
the whole world. And again in the first Chapter, when he addresseth his talk
against the holy people, which was the Church of God, Esaie. 1. 23.
Thy princes and governors are companions and Princes of thieves, says he.
Now certain it is, that none charged these of theft: nay these sat as Judges
and condemners of other petty thieves, and yet failed they not to be condemned
before God. And thus the thieves which are honorable here below on earth, are
notwithstanding accursed by the law of God, and he has pronounced on them his
determinate sentence, in this text. We must therefore humble our selves under
the judgment of God, and know that we shall gain little, albeit our theueries
be excusable before men, although we cover them and color them. For in the
mean time, the law of God shall have his full course, and the execution
thereof shall be ready at hand for our condemnation. God has forbidden
nothing which he will not call into account. Ye see then, what we have to bear
in mind, concerning this place. Now it rests, that that which we have
briefly touched, we handle more amply, and as we may say by peecemeales,
specifying it by examples, to the end it may be better understood, as I have
already said: if we were diligent and attentive to hearken unto that which God
declares unto us, we need not make here any long exposition. But what? We
seek nothing else but to cloak and hide our selves with some dissimulation:
and albeit the thing be clear enough to be known, always to make some doubt.
And this is the cause why we must be so precisely charged, and more nearly
pressed in all things. We have alredie said, that there is more than one kind
of theft. For some rob openly, as when one spoileth so manifestly, that one may
put out his finger, and say, This man has stolen an horse, he has robbed one
of so much money, he has stolen a bed, a dish, or such like things. Well:
these theeueries are sufficiently judged of the world. But when a merchant
has counterfeite wares to sell, and knows not how to rid his hands of them,
lo a simple man, whom he will entrap and deceive with them. Now happily this,
men count not theft, and yet such a man is a thief for using so evil a
conscience, albeit no man condemn him. It is true, that he whose profit it
shall concern, will be a good and upright Judge in this matter: and if he know
the deceit and couin which is used, he will say, Such a one does me wrong. We
need not go to any great Doctor or Clearke, to show us that one has done us
wrong, every one knows it himself well enough, and yet we think not on
this kind of theft, and we know it not sufficiently. But God shall not fail
to judge and condemn him for a thief, which has so abused a simple man, and
shall have delivered him counterfeite merchandise, seeing he has deceived him
which wanted all skill and judgment. He in like manner which shall ouersell
his ware to him which is altogether ignorant, is in like fault, and both these
are thieves and robbers. Again, a lewd and wicked man makes a counterfeite
piece of work, and the fault thereof is not espied, or how ever it be, he
takes for it as much as he may possibly catch, without any reckoning of
selling it, as it is worth: notwithstanding, being charged therewith, he will
say, Tush, I had to deal with a rich cobbe, the matter is not great, he has a
good purse to bear it. Well, the man which uses this, albeit he have his
shifting windlaces before men: yet the judgment of God has always his
course. If one demanded every man his opinion herein, and all answered, We
hold not this for theft: God notwithstanding shall not retract his judgment
after our fantasies. Ye see then the theeueries which shall be accountable before
God, which we notwithstanding let slppe: and no thank to them which have
granted them selves such a liberty, if the evil be not pardoned. But what?
Behold, the law of God is inviolable, as we have said: and it shall be hereafter
declared, that it always brings his execution with it. It rests then, that
seeing we must not walk deceitfully, nor use any subtle practices, we return
unto this equity, which nature prescribes us: namely, that we do not unto an
other that which we would not have men to do unto us. When we shall have such a
rule, it shall not need that we have any great volumes, to learn what it is
to steal. For in one word, every one shall be able to know how to walk with
his neighbors: namely, that he undermine not his neighbors maliciously, that
he seek not to enrich himself at the cost and charges of an other, that he
pull not unto him the substance and goods which are not his own. There shall
not need then but this word, and behold all the fair couertures, and best
appearances we have, shall vanish away, and come to nothing. For when we shall
have deceived men, we think we have also forthwith blinded Gods eyes. Let us
take an example in this place, whereby this point shall be fully and perfectly
understood. He which by law shall have gained the goods and possessions of
another, thinks that he is the iustest possessor in the whole world. And why?
Forsooth justice has passed on his side. Now, not to say that justice was
perverted (as it is to true that many by their corruptions and wicked
practices, make of justice a mere spoil and robbery, overthrowing all right
and equity) that Courts of justice shall be ofttimes as Faires to sell the right
of an other, and to pervert all equity. But be it that no such thing has been
in this case, but some man by his craft and subtlety has found the mean so
to draw unto him the goods of an other, that he will boldly say, All justice
and right has judged me this, so that there is no better or more just title in all the world, than is this. Lo a double thief before God. It had been better
by many degrees that he had spoiled and robbed the house of his neighbor,
than by law so unjustly to have gaind the goods of an other. And why? There is
theft committed: and again, this theft is done under the color of justice,
which is a sacred and holy thing. Verily God can not be able to suffer such a
treachery. Sure burglarie is worthy to be more grievously punished than other
theft: but when we approach unto the feate which God has dedicated unto his
majesty, there to overthrow and confound all equity, behold, is not this an
heinouser offense than any robbery? So then, let us diligently note, that
what cloak soever we may take to cover our selves before men, the law of God
always shall have his foree: that is, if we use deceit or malieious witness, if
we use extortion and violence, we shall be condemned for thieves and robbers. If
a man under this shadow, that he is in authority, shall use any violence
against his poor neighbor, and that by this means he oppresses him, this
man is a thief, and half a murderer: so that he is no simple thief, but
qualified beside with manslaughter: and yet notwithstanding, this is passed
over and pardoned. It is true, that one sometime murmureth hereat, but it is
but between th lips. And all this while this outrageous oppressor ioyeth in his
doings, pleasing himself well in them: and which worse is, the greater thief
he is, the more he shall be honored. For as a man by scraping all unto himself
becomes very wealthy and rich, so shall he be preferred and advanced
higher. Behold then, how by theftes one shall come to great honor, touching
the world. So then let us not take these bands to cover our eyes withal, but
let us rather know that which is contained in the holy Scripture, that is:
that we shall always be thieves, when we shall not do unto an other, which we
would that one do unto us: and when we render not unto every one his right.
For we must define a vice by the opposite and contrary virtue. If we will well
understand what it is to steal, we must consider what it is to do right to
our neighbors. But when we spoil them of their goods, when we rake them to
our selves in what manner soever, when we use any close deceit, or open
violence, we are sufficiently convicted of theeuerie. By this we see, that
theft is not committed only by hands, when one steals away another money,
or some part thereof: but theft is committed, when a man has not that which is
his, and that we seek not to conserve and keep unto him that which God has
put into his hands, and will that a man keep that which he has. For example:
If a servant riottously consume the good of his master, he is a thief. If a
laboring man, or if one of occupation seek nothing but to have his days
hire, and in the mean time loy^ereth, and could wish his work done, and his
potage supt (as we say,) it is certain he is a thief, and we shall well judge
him so. But we must proceed further to other the like kinds of theft, and
make this comparison. When we render not unto a man that which of right
apperteineth unto him, let us know that this iniquity shall be accounted as
theft before God, and we shall be condemned therefore. But now it remains,
that we consider how we shall walk in such sort that God accuse us not as
thieves. This shall be, if first of all we love our neighbors, as Saint Paul
declares in the 13. Romans 13. 8. 9. 10.
to the Romans. And this is to be marvelled at, that we account the matter so
small, to spoil another of his goods, seeing that if one should demand us
this puestion, whether this is to love our neighbors, and whether it be an
hard thing to love them, we would say no. For nature would knit men together
in this unity, and God has formed them all unto his image and likeness, and
therefore this ought not to seem a thing over hard and grievous to love
together. Now so it is, that if we have charity, we shall never steal, as
Saint Paul says: yea, if ye would consider of that right and duty which we
owe unto men, and how we are bound unto them, we needed not all these
admonitions and warnings, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not murder, as S. Paul has declared in that place. But
what? There are very few which think hereon. But contrariwise, as I have
said, we are full of vain excuses: when we have pilled one of his goods, when
we have used any fraud, any malicious dealing, any extortion, we have one
excuse or other ready at hand to serve us. But yet it appears by our deeds,
that we have no charity, that we are as brute beasts: briefly, that we are not
worthy to be numbered among men, seeing we break the bond of union, in the
which God would couple together all the children of Adam. Lo then, for the
first note let us learn this lesson of charity, if we will not be thieves.
For the second, let us note, that we covet not to be rich. For as soon as
this desire of gain shall be in us, it is certain we shall play the
thieves: it can not be otherwise. One shall at first sight think it strange:
but yet, when every one shall have awakened his understanding, nature shall
teach us, as the Ethnikes knew well to say, that it is impossible to desire
to be rich, but we shall forthwith be inflamed to scrape unto our selves
by hook or by crook, the goods of an other. Will we then fly and avoid
theft? We must lay aside all covetousness, that is, all desire of enriching
our selves, that there be found no longer any cavil in the word. And how
shall we do this? Let us learn to content our selves with our estate and
condition. For he which shall not have a certain rule, but shall be always moved
by some covetousness, his affections shall carry him from one side to
another, in such sort that he shall never have any rest to say: I must hold my
self within my bounds. I say, the condition and estate which God has given
unto every one, ought to be as a list and border to keep him in, as if it
were said unto him: Lo, thy God will that thou pass not this which he has
given thee. Hold thy self content, otherwise thou not only troublest all
humane order, but thou despisest God, as if thou did make war with him.
Behold what we have to note: that is, when we shall have this rule of charity
to conduct us, that we ought to learn to content our selves with our
condition. And why? Let us know that this is the will of God, and that herein
he will prove our obedience. Now this cannot be done unless we observe
withal the rule of S. Paul, Phil. 4. ^^.
that is, that we have learned to be rich and to be poor, to hunger and to
thirst, as well as to have abundance. Saint Paul says, not only that we
ought to be patient in poverty, and protests that he has had his part
herein, (and therefore has given us an example hereof, and has showed us the
way) but he says that we must learn to be rich, and to live in plenty and
abundance. And what means this? It seems a needless thing to tell us so
busily of patience. When we are poor, every man knows well that we have
need thereof. And why? For we shall be tempted to many inconveniences. It is an
hard matter and grievous, when a man shall not have bread to eat, and albeit he
has brown bread, yet would he full feign have his ease and commodity
further. So touching poverty, every one will confess that we have need to be
comforted, and to be warned, that we must not be tempted to do evil. But when
he says, it behooves that we know how to be rich: a man will scorn this
saying, as grounded upon no reason: and yet this doctrine is more necessary
than the first. And why? Let us consider a little what these rich are: even
bottomless gulfes, which can never be satisfied, and which are harder to content
than any poor man, If we make comparison between the rich and poor, we
shall find among the poor many which vex and torment themselves, which are
froward and waywardly bent, many which are induced to pilfering, and to
exercise many wicked sleights and practices: and again, we shall find also a
great part content themselves with that which God has given them, and keep
themselves within their limittes and borders. But when we come to consider of
the rich, even as far as unto Kings, and Princes, we shall find that they are
so inflamed and set on fire, that they burn with such a desire after the
goods of this world, that they are never contented: yea, they are as it were
grieved that the Sun shines upon the poor. Briefly, we shall see, that the
most part of those rich men, to whom God has given the whole earth in
possession, not yet to be satisfied, and to account it enough. For (as I have
said) they are yet grieved that the poor have one common light of the Sun
with them, and that the poor drink water. And albeit the poor travel, and
labor, and do the best they are able for them, yet a rich man will envy and
also spite at them, although he enjoy the sweat of their brows, and has even
the fruit of their blood: and it seems him, that a man plucketh his heart
and guts out of his belly, when he eareth one morsel of meat at his cost
and charges. Such miserable covetousness, or rather such brutish cruelty a
man shall see in the rich: and this is a thing over rife and common. So then
it is not without cause, that Saint Paul says we shall have profited
exceeding much, when we shall have learned to be rich: that is to say, that we
shall not be stirred up continually with a desire of getting more and more. If
God gives us any abundance, let us learn to keep our selves within our
bounds, without further coveting, to say: O, such a piece of ground would be
good and commodious for me, I must adioyne this to mine, and that other also.
And again, this is not yet all, that a rich man desire not to grow further in
wealth: but it behooves that we be poor in heart, that is to say, that we be
puffed up with no such pride, as to repose our trust and confidence in our
riches, that we take not an occasion by them to oppress such as are feeble
and weak, such as have no credit to underprop and stay them up in this
world: lastly, that we be pressed and ready to be impouerished when it shall
please GOD. He which at this day is very rich, which has his garners, and his
sellers full, which has his bags fraughted and full stored, which has lands
and possessions, which has a rich trade of merchandise: let him, when it shall
please God to bereue him of all, not think it strange: let him not be ever
much grieved for it, but let him mind the patience of Job, to say: Job. 1. 21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the
Lord. Ye see then how it is a very har^ thing to be rich: yea, except we come
to this point, to order our selves to the will of God, to receive peceably what
soever he gives us: that is to say, to bear patiently the poverty which he
sends, and to content our selves with that which he shall have given us into
our hand, without setting our heart thereon. For otherwise it must needs be,
that we be always thieves, whether we abound in riches, or be in poverty. For
the poor shall be provoked to do evil, and it seems them that God will
dispense with them for their wickedness: yea, oftentimes they will use this
cauillation: O, I see this man seeks nothing else but to devour me, even to
tear the flece from my back, he would destroy me altogether, if it were
possible: and why shall it not be permitted me to revenge my self on him? Lo
how every one would pay himself. But it is not for us to take from him that
which he has spoiled. So then if we be poor, we shall incontinently be
driven to stealing, except we take unto us this bridle, to say, Well: our Lord
will exercise us, and for this cause we want the goods of this world. We have
not that we could wish, and this is to this end, that it pleases God so to
humble us. Lo one thing to be noted. And let a man labor diligently to
surmount this temptation. For we see that even Solomon desires of the Lord not
to be poor, Prou. 30. 9.
for fear of being provoked to steal. When such a personage fears yea, and
makes this request unto God in the name of all the faithful, ought not we to
stand upon our guard? So then they which are in need and necessity, both of
bread and of drink, and know not on which side to turn them to be releued:
they which lead so poor a life that ofttimes they have not so much bread as to
slake half their hunger: others which have not their eases and commodities as
they could wish and desire: let all these in this case take heed they commit
themselves into the hand of God, and pray him to give them grace to walk in
such sort, that they be not induced to wrong or injury any one under this
color, that necessity presses them over sore. And let them which have wind
and tide with them, which flote in prosperity and wealth, which have their
purses full of money, take heed they oppress not the poor: as they have
always their nets laid to this purpose. For see how the rich behave
themselves herein. If they see a poor man falling into decay, they are as
greedy hunters, they come incontinently to overthrow and cast him under
foot, and they turn themselves hither and thither, and make many circuites,
until at length they shall have entrapped the poor man. Let them therefore
which have whereon to live, take heed how they ouerflowe their banks: but let
them hold themselves rather back, so that they abuse not their plenty and
abundance. Let them which are of greater wealth take heed, they lift not up
themselves to oppress those which have little. Behold how we ought to proceed
in our degree and calling. Yea, when we have occasions offered of doing wrong
and injury, albeit we are of our selves subtle enough to seek them out from
far, let us beware we repel all such wickedness. And whereas rich men think
that they have made great gain by the loss of an other, let us know that
they have cut the throat of poor men, and that they have made many widows,
and orphans, though they think little hereof. But because our wits are so
sharp and subtle to d^uise all occasions of harm doing, let us have an eye
unto our God, who would make a proof and trial of our obedience in our
vocation. We shall happily have the sword in our hands, but let us take heed
of doing any hurt: and let us consider, that if we were in the same state that
poor men are, we would gladly wish to be relieved and succored. Briefly,
if we will abstain from theft, let us not be either cruel wolves, nor wily
foxes. For all they which walk deceitfully and maliciously, are as wily
foxes. Truly poor men, what need so ever they are in, when they are led to
do evil, they show themselves no longer men, if they unjustly rake unto
themselves the goods of another. But they which commit their theeueries by
violence and oppression, are as brute beasts, which seek nothing else, but to
consume and devour al. So then, that we be not thieves, let us not be cruel.
Above al let us learn to wait for all that, which shall be necessary for us
in this present world, from the bounty and blessing of God. If we hold fast
this rule, it is certain that all covetousness, and all pillages, and all
deceites, and all such like things, shall soon be removed. We shall not need
then any other medicine than this to heal all our vices: namely, that we lift
our eyes from ground, to say: God is our father, he will provide us of all that
we stand in need of, it is he from whom we must look for all that
apperteineth to the maintenance of this present life: briefly, it is his
blessing which is the fountain of all riches. If we were well and thoroughly
persuaded of this, we should not need more precepts in the law to forbid
stealings, we should not need any more admonitions, we should not need any
more aduertisements, this only word would suffice.

But what? We demand of GOD our daily bread, and while we protest that he
sustaineth and nourishes us, we exercise our rapines, our pillinges, our
deceites, and other such wickedness. Is not this even to mock God, when I say
with my mouth, Give me my daily bread, and in the mean while I go to seek it
of the devil? For if we use such unlawful means, if we deceive one, if we
spoil an other: from whom is it that we take our goods? Is it from the hand of
God, or rather from the hand of the devil? Are we not companions of thieves
and of robbers? It is certain therefore, that we would the devil enrich us,
when we are given so to deceit and extortion: and which more is, it is a sure
sign of our infidelity and unbelief, and that we attend not any thing at
all on the blessing of God, and think not, that he is rich enough to sustain
and enriche us. Lo, how wickedlie we are herein disposed: and yet this we
ought to profit our selves, when we hear that our Lord accurseth stealings,
and that he teaches us, that they are detestable in his sight, to let us have
them in greater horror and detestation. Therefore, let us first of all bear
in mind, that God judges not according to the fantasy of men, but that his
will is, that we walk in all integrity and uprightness, that every one have
his right, that none be molested and troubled for his living and substance,
that we streightlie withholde our selves from all injury and wrong doing. And
again, because we are so inclined unto evil, let us consider of those means
which may hold us under the obedience of GOD, and hinder us from stealing, of
which we have already spoken: and let us know, that God has joined us
together, that we should keep this law and rule of equity. Moreover, let us
not desire to be rich, but let us practice this doctrine of bearing poverty
patiently, that we be not inflamed with a desire of getting, and aduauncing,
and promoting our selves further. Again, let us abhor and detest all
cruelty and deceit: and above all, let us learn not to be so brutish as to
think, that when we have scraped together on this side, and the other, this
may be to make us rich. Let us beware how we deceive our selves in this
behalf. And why? For true riches (as I have said) proceed from the blessing
of God. We must therefore drink of this fountain, and be satisfied, if we
will abstain from all kinds of theft. But now, let us also enter into
consideration of the threats which God sets before us. When he has
sufficiently showed that this precept is of great equity, and that he has
given us the means also whereby to walk in all integrity and uprightness,
without hurting or wronging any one: seeing us yet over hard to be brought to
the observation hereof, and that always our wicked affections carry us away
headlong altogether backwarde from our duty, he adioyneth his manaces and
threats to fear us, and to keep us in greater awe. And is this a small
thing, and lightly of us to be considered, when he says, That thieves and
extortioners shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven? 1. Cor. 6. 9. Ephe.
5. 5.
Lo then, how he expresselie declares and pronounces unto us, that if we
make so great account of this present life, as that for to pluck unto us some
commodity, the better to pass through this present world, we will
wittinglie provoke the wrath and indignation of God, we shall be exiled and
banished his kingdom. If we had but one only drop of faith, should not
this threat be even to pearce us to the heart? But yet our Lord passes
further: for seeing us so carnal: and so given over to the world, he shows
us that even in this world, he will make us go backward; and he which shall
think to lift up and advance him self by subtle shifts, by robberies, by
extortions, that even he shall be consumed, he shall have a secret curse and
malediction, which shall undermine him, and consume him to nothing. As in that
place which we have alleged of Zachary it is said, Zacha. 5. 3.
That the curse of GOD shall come upon the house of thieves and robbers, and
shall remain therein, until they be wholly consumed. We see further, how he
has spoken hereof by all the rest of the Prophets, by whom he has declared,
that when men shall think to enriche them selves, when they shall make their
reckoning of, Mich. 6. 12. 13. 14.
I know not what great wealth, GOD shall blow on them: yea, with such a
breath, that all their pomp shall vanish, and that so soudeinlie, that a man
could not perceive their fall and consumption. But God passes yet further.
True it is, that we may read often and in many places, that our Lord scorneth
and derideth them, which so torment themselves to gather together great
substance, when in the end all shall decay and fall away like water. But we
shall see further, that great richesse shall be the cause of their destruction
which have lived in credit and reputation. Behold, a father which shall have
pilled one, and spoiled an other, which shall have the whole time of his life
provoked and plucked on his head the vengeance of God: well, he dies: it
seems unto him that his children shall be young Dukes, Now, if he had left
them but some small portion, to have bestowed them selves painfully in some
trade: if he had learned them honestly to travel for their living, his
children might have had wherewith to have lived a contented life: but lo, the
father has twisted the rope to hang his heirs. For when they repose their
trust in the richesse which shall have been wickedlie gotten, it must needs
be, that either they be led to the gibbet, or otherwise perish unhappily. And
what is the cause hereof? Even the anger and indignation of God, which lights
on them, to consume all that which shall have been evil gotten by pillings and
extortions. The house must needs be accursed, God must needs show that he is
a just Judge, both upon thieves, and upon all such as make a scorn of his
divine majesty, when one speaks unto them thereof: as we hear these iesters
and hickscorners will say: when the latter judgment is denounced them: Well,
well, it is long time thither, when they oppress a poor man, who shall have
neither ability, nor credit, to maintain his right against them. Now, in the
mean time they bath them selves in their iniquities, and welter in their
wickedness. But what? When God sees that men are so senseless, and that he
can not win them to everlasting life, and that they account it nothing to be
banished and excluded the kingdom of heaven: Go to (says he) I summon you to
appear before my throne, behold, I will now begin to put in execution my once
determined sentence: I will give you to understand, that my curse is upon evil
gotten goods: I will show you that they, which for a time possess them, must
in the end forgo them, and that they, their goods, and all their race and
posterity be consumed. Now, when we hear all these threats, ought we not to
be moved with them, except the devil have altogether bewitched and enchaunted
us? What rests then? Let us keep so good and upright a conscience as God
requires of his, let every one travel faithfully in his vocation, let us not
seek to grieve and molest our neighbor, let our whole study be how to
pass this life over, without offending God: and albeit we have no great
revenues, although we have not much to dispend, let sobriety and moderation
serve us for a double portion. Lo how we are to behave our selves. But now,
if theftes are so condemned of GOD, what shall this be, when we rob him of
his honor? For we must make this comparison between theftes and sacrileges.
Behold, God has forbidden us to be thieves. And why? Because he will that we
observe all equity and uprightness one with another: he will also that the
goods he has dedicated to our use, be so ordered among us, that we possess
them not by wicked practices, that he which has store of them, dispense and
bestow them so, as having but only the use, and not the propriety of them:
that he which has little, content him self therewith, as we have said. Now,
if God will that we observe such an integrity and uprightness toward our
neighbors, as to conserve and keep unto them all the goods they possess, if
those things he has created for our use, be so dear unto him, that he will
not we defile and make them unclean by deceites, by oppressions, and such like
things: what shall be thought of this which he esteems by many degrees more
precious? So then, when we shall have walked with our neighbors in all
integrity, when we shall have sought to give unto every one, that which
apperteineth unto him: let us render also unto our God his right, that is to
say, let us glorify him, let us take heed that he always remain in his
entire majesty: and let us not usurp more than he has permitted unto us. As
we see how this rash boldness is in men, that when they have showed them
selves mad and furious, in oppressing their neighbors, they will forthwith
sharpen their horns, and arm them selves against God. When they have spoiled
men of their substance, they would also that God should be subject to their
outrages, and they will not obey him, but when they list, and in that seems
them good: we must therefore beware of all these things. And for conclusion,
let us also take heed, not only to abstain from all injury and harm doing,
but withal, not to permit or suffer, as much as shall lie in us, that any
one be molested or indamaged. For these are two things which God commands
us, Justice and Judgment: Justice, to give unto every one his right: and
Judgment, to the end we be not consenting unto evil, and suffer not that the
poor, which have no mean to sustain and uphold them selves to be trodden
under feet. For when I shall with mine eyes see one oppressed, and shall not
seek to aid and help him, behold I am consenting to the thief: Psalm. 50. 18.
so that the sentence of the fifty Psalm may be verified of me, When thou
saw a thief, thou did run with him. For is not this to run with
them which steal and rob, when we seek not to repress them, or close up
our eyes not to see them, or give them the bridle in their necks to pass
further? We are consenting to a theft which is committed, and therefore we
must render an account thereof before God, as guilty of theft, albeit this be
nothing esteemed of among men. Let not any therefore think, that it is lawful
for him only to keep his own: but let us consider, that we must employ our
pains also to conserve and increase the good of our neighbors, as our own:
and so the rule of charity exhorts us. Lo, how we shall not be thieves,
neither before God, nor before men. Lo, how the goods which he has put into
our hands shall be blessed of him, when he shall make us prosper, and that we
shall have such a contentation, that we always aspire unto, and have our
minds set on our heavenly inheritance, knowing that there we shall have all
fullness of riches in perfection.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better than we
have done, and that more and more we may profit in the observing of his holy
law. And because we are so wicked and perverse, that all our thoughts and
affections draw altogether backward, pray we that it will please him to
reform us by his holy spirit, and draw us so near unto him, that renouncing
the world, and despising all earthly and transitory things, we may aspire
to his heavenly kingdom, where we shall have all contentation and
quietness. And so let us say, Almighty God and heavenly father, etc.

The. 11. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 20 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
WE have heretofore seen, that it is not lawful, after what manner soever, to
molest and grieve our neighbors, either in their persons, or yet in their
goods. But because there is yet an other kind of hurting by the tongue, God
would also make mention hereof in his law, as we see in this place.
Therefore, as before he has forbidden us, to commit any outrage against our
neighbors, which thing he has comprehended under this word of murder, not to
trouble or annoy them in what sort soever, or to hurt them in their goods: so
here he shows us, that we ought to speak no evil of them, that we must
use no talk which may be to stain them with any blot of infamy, or any
evil and wicked note. True it is, that expresselie he speaks of bearing
false witness, but this is, according to the rule we have before set down:
namely, that he proposes those things, which ought to be most of all
detested: for this end, that we should abhor those sins, which any way
come near them. If we therefore speak evil of our neighbors, if we
slander them, albeit this be accounted no grievous sin before men: yet God
shall esteem it as heinous as bearing of false witness. But one may make here
a question, why God has in this place spoken of bearing false witness, and of
periuries, seeing he has said before, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain? For it seems hereby, that this is but a superfluous
repetition. And in one so little summarie of the law, where there are but ten
sentences, to reiterate, and put down one thing twice, it seems not good or
convenient. But we must note for answer hereunto, that the commandment which
we have before expounded, of not taking the name of God in vain, was in the
first table, where God had respect unto the majesty of his name, to the end
we might have it in greater reverence. Therefore, when we speak of God, let
us consider of the infinite glory which is in him, that we open not our mouth
at any time, but in fear and humility. So then, be it we are to swear, be it
that we are to speak of God in any manner, we must always think, that his
name ought to be had in reverence, that we must not use it at randon, rashly,
or unadvisedly. Thus much then touching that we have before seen. Now God
speaks of an other thing: namely, of not hurting our neighbors, of not
doing them any injury, or working them any damage, by our wicked tongue. So
then, seeing these commandments have two diverse ends, we see how these two
sentences are different, and that there is nothing superfluous or more than
needs. Let us therefore diligently note, that forasmuch as it is in this place
handled and entreated, how men ought to be conversant together in all charity
and uprightness, that although the name of God be profaned in false
witnessing: the law notwithstanding is not superfluous, when it is commanded,
That we bear no false witness against our neighbors. Now we have in this
place to declare, that God would in this commandment generally condeme all
slanders, all false reports, all defamations, and such like things. And to
show that this is so, it is said expreslie in an other place, Thou shall not
walk about with tales against thy neighbor, Leui. 1^. 16.
thou shall not speak evil of him to defame him. And if the law of God
contain a perfect rule of well living, it follows that this is therein
comprised. Now where shall we place it, but under this sentence? We must
therefore conclude, that albeit GOD has here specified the name of false
witness, that this notwithstanding, he would extend this doctrine to all
slanders, to all false reports, to all by tales, which tend to the
discrediting of our neighbors, or to the hurting of them in their good name
and estimation.

We see then how God would here join us together in love and friendship, in
as much as he permits not any to be hurt in his good name, no more than in
his person, or goods. Wherefore, he which defameth his neighbors, he which
slaundereth them, in what manner so ever, as much as in him lies makes as it
were war with God, and breaks the bond of charity, which ought to be
between men: and when we shall have well considered all, it is certain, that
false reports, slanders, and backbiting, do more harm oftentimes, than do
theftes. And so let us know, that if we will obey GOD, we must maintain the
honor and credit of our neighbors as much as shall lie in us. For when he
has forbidden us to hurt his good name, he wills also, on the contrary
side, that we maintain the honor and estimation of all. Now it is not
sufficiently maintained in his estate, when we harm it not, except we withal
procure the good thereof. Now, we ought to proceed by the degrees which God
would here signify, when he speaks of false witness bearing. The first is
therefore, that when we shall come into judgment, we take heed of hurting
those by any false report, any lying, any forswearing, whose honor and good we
are bound to procure. For he which shall bear false witness against his
neighbor, he slaieth, he robs him as much as in him is, and he does all
the evil which proceeds from perjury. True it is, that oftentimes we shall
not think hereof, Deuteronomy. 17. 7.
but the thing notwithstanding is so. And this is the cause why GOD commanded
in his law, that the witnesses should be the first which should lay hands
to the execution of him, which was punished for any evil deed, to the end it
might be known, that by their voices, and by their tongues, they had put him
to death, and that the witnesses should be put in greater fear of speaking
otherwise than the truth, when every one should think he has to render an
account unto God, if he shall have been a witness against any. So then, when
question is of being a witness, every one must deeply consider of the
matter, and take diligent heed he enlarge not his conscience, but that he
speak in pure simplicity, that which he knows to be true before God. And
here we are to think not only of false witnessinges, which shall be against
the life of a man: but of such also, which concern their goods and
estimation. So then we are warned in all respects, to procure the honor and
profit of our neighbors, when we are to bear witness: and yet not so, that
under this shadow of covering the injury of him which has offended, or of
preserving his goods, we lie before God. For if the honor of men be dear
unto us, what ought the honor of God to be, if we will make comparison? When
he forbids me to bear false witness against my neighbor, it is, because
God will that there be love between men, that none be iniuried either in his
good name, or in his goods. Now, if God have a regard and care of us, which
are but poor worms of the earth, think we that in the mean time he will
forgette him self? But if by false witness I seek to bear out, and bolster
him which has done evil, if I cover the fault, if I dissemble it, certain
it is, that I blaspheme God as much as in me is. And why? For I protest that I
will speak the truth, and in the mean while I come to lie. And is not this
to vnhallowe the name of GOD? Is not this to deface his glory? So let us not
think, that God in this place would gratify evil doers, to cover the
iniquity and wickedness of men, when he says, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor: but he would briefly show us, that we ought,
as far as we shall be able, to procure the credit, and maintain the good name
of our neighbors: so be it, this may be done in truth. Moreover, let us
note, that GOD has respect here rather to the wicked affections and desires,
which proceed from rancour and malice, than to the deed it self: as we
shall better perceive in that which remains to be handled. For we have
already touched, that God speaks not here only of those false witnessinges,
which are given in judgment, when a solemn oath is taken: but withal, of all
slanders and defamations. So, in what sort soever I backbite my neighbors,
this shall always be accounted for false witness before God. If I shall go
and blabbe a tale in ones ear, to defame my neighbor, lo a false witness.
It is true, that I have not been called before the Judge, I have not put forth
my hand to the book, I have not used any of these ceremonies: yet we see how
GOD speaks hereof; and therefore behold how we shall be culpable of so great
a fault as I have said. But now, if I shall advertise one upon no evil will
that I bear the man, that there is such and such a wickedness in him, shall I
for this be accounted a false witness before GOD? No. For God has respect
preciselie unto the enimitie and evil will. If then I hate one, and shall
upon this go about to discredit him by false reports, if for the evil will
I bear him, I shall seek to slander him, lo, in what I am condemned for a
false witness. If I be led with a desire of evil speaking, to defame my
neighbor, if this vice reign so in me, that I endeavor with all my might to
stain his credit, behold I am a false witness. And lo for what cause it is
said, That charity and love covers a multitude of sins, but hatred
discovers a multitude of faults. See how Solomon has briefly touched in
this sentence, Pr^. 10. 12.
what the root is of such false witnessings, as GOD by the law has forbidden
and condemned: namely, that we are led hereunto by hatred. And why? For if
we loved one an other, without all doubt, we would endeavor to live together
in all love and friendship. We know full well, that when we speak evil of
one, to hurt his honest name, we can but kindle a fire of dissension: for be,
for the maintenance of his credit, must needs be forced to chafe and fret
against us: and then behold, all love and friendship is broken. So then, as
long as we shall have a care to maintain charity, we shall cover, as much
as we may, the faults of our neighbor. But be we at variaunce? Our tongues
shall forthwith be ouerlauish to speak evil of them, with whom we disagree:
and as our hearts shall be empoisoned with malice, so must it needs have his
vent in the tongue, that the evil will we have smoking within us, may be set
on light fire abroad. Let us therefore diligently note, that GOD in this
place has condemned all slanders, which proceed from enimitie and evil
will. When we hate one, we could with him hanged: and if we are not able to
hurt him, neither in his person, nor in his goods, by spoiling him of his
substance: yet we will seek to shame him with some malicious scoff or
other: we will endeavor, by all the means we may, to defame him. Therefore,
when we bear such haired against any, this is sure an evil root, and it
must needs bring forth like fruit. Ye see what the point is, whereunto we
must come, if we will have the right understanding of this commandment of
GOD. Now withal, let us note by the way, that when it is said, That charity
covers the multitude of sins, that this is not so to be taken, that we
must flatter one an other, and by lying nourish the vices which are in us: but
this is spoken for this purpose, that we blabbe not forth the faults of
others; as desirous to defame them: whereby we might happily discourage then,
and be an occasion (peradventure,) that they shall abandon all shame, and give
them selves over to utter impudency: as we see many desperate persons do.
Let us note then, that the holy Ghost means not to make us flatterers, or
mainteiners of the vices which are in our neighbors, or to make us liers:
but he will that we endeavor, with all our might, to correct and amend the
faults which are in them: and yet so, that we bear charitablie with them,
without driving them to despair, when they shall be spotted with many vices.
For when a man shall see that one disgraceth and shameth him, and that
despitefullie: he will desperately give him self over unto all mischief, and
harden him self therein. We are therefore the cause, that those which have
heretofore followed some evil trade of living, harden them selves therein, and
in despite of God and man, persist in their wickedness, if rudely and
vndiscretelie, without any affection of charity, we reprehend them. Wherefore
let us take great heed, that when we reprehend the vices of any, we do it
with such mildness and gentleness, that they which are reproved may know,
that for a love we bear them, we would withdraw them from the way of
destruction. Iam. 5. 2^.
And lo why S. James has applied this place to them, which by gentle
corrections, by sweet and amiable words, seek to draw and allure their
neighbors to God. Therefore, when I shall see one led away unto witkednesse,
if I warn him of his faults, and by admonishing of him, can win him into
the right way: lo (says he) how this sentence shall be accomplished, That
charity covers the multitude of sins. I grant that Solomon speaks
hereof unto an other end: but Saint James has not evil applied this doctrine:
signifying, that when we would cover sins, it must not be by closing up our
eyes, or by not speaking one word of them. Therefore, when one shall have
offended GOD by drunkenness, we must not dissemble the matter altogether, to
cover it by charity: for this were to practice this doctrine very ill: but we
must rather use gentle and brotherly correction, and withal procure, that the
vices being buried before God, they be not called to remembrance before men.
We must then content our selves, to have put our neighbors in mind of their
faults, holding always this measure in our reprehensions, that the faults
being corrected and amended, we defame not (if we may possibly choose) them,
who must have some shame for their repentance, but in no wise be cast into
despair. But this doctrine is evil practiced. For we see how we err
always in both these extremes, and that the mean is never kept: namely, to
correct the vices by mildness and gentleness, which we see in others, and to
seek so to hide them, as yet to remember the offenders of them: howbeit in
such sort, that it be not to their reproach and infamy. But what? We seek the
love and favor of men, and this we will win by flattering of them in their
sins. We shall perceive, how they offend GOD in one thing or other: this
we let pass. As we would they should spare us, so we will wink at and bear
with the evil we see in our friends. Ye see then a wicked couerture,
wherewith Satan blinds the eyes of wretched sinners. And we are the cause
hereof, because we dissemble the faults which ought to be reproved of us. But
yet, as if this evil sufficed not, the world at this day is proceeded so
far herein, that we shall be thought not to be good friends with them, with
whom we are joined, except we will consent unto all wickedness for their
sakes. And if those, which shall offend herein: yea, so far that they will
not doubt to lend their friend a false oath for his commodity, shall be
reprehended and punished for their perjury: What (will one say) would you
have me to hurt my neighbor? Am I not bound unto him? And would you have me
depose against him? How should I do so? See, see, at what price we set the
verity and truth of God, see how we turn it into a lie, see also how we
abuse the ordinance and commandment of God, by the which he has forbidden
us to defame our neighbors. So let us learn that this is a wicked extreme,
into which we fall, when we will bear with that which is evil, when we will
nourish and maintain vices: and above all, when called to give witness, and
required truly to declare, and to open the wickedness, which is to be
amended, we will be culpable thereof, and partakers as far as we may. If I
keep close murder or theft, if I conceal treason, behold I am accounted
accessarie unto all these crimes both before God and before man. So then this
which we have said, that we ought by charity to cover the sins of our
neighbors, this I say hinders not, but that we may declare the evil we know
by them, if it be needful, and that we shall be required thereunto: yea, it
shall be good for us so to do. But there is in this thing an other vicious
extreme, wherein we offend: when we are overmuch given to blabbe forth those
faults, which ought quietly to be amended and corrected by us, without making
any great proclamation of them: and this shall proceed oftentimes from evil
will, oftentimes from ambition, and oftentimes from a foolish desire of
vaunting our selves. From evil will (I say) when oftentimes under a color of
zeal we will seem to have to punish vices, pretending that we can not suffer
that God be offended, we come to pry into the life of them whom we hate, and
if we find any thing we may grate upon, any thing we may snappe them up
for, behold, we have an accusation ready: and thus we falsely abuse the name
of God, protesting our selves zealous, men, when we seek nothing else but to
catch our enemies, tripping and failing in some one point of their duty. And a
man may easily epsy our malice in this, that having sharply reproved a vice
in some one, whom we shall have hated: we will bear with it and hide it, as
much as we may possible, in some one of our friends: such an unequal measure
we will use. Now by this, is it not evident, that there is no good affection
in us, and that we war not with the sins and vices, but with the persons
in whom they are? Verily, this case is clear and easily to be judged. Let us
therefore learn, that when we are to discover the faults and vices which are
in others, that our hearts must be clean and void of all evil will, that we
may protest before God, that we desire both the profit and welfare of him whom
we accuse. Lo, one note to be observed. And again, we must take heed of all
foolish ambition, as I have touched, that is, that we make not our selves
monsters before men, as we see there are some which would make themselves
Saints in crying out upon, and rattling up others for their faults. As soon as
they shall see any thing amiss, they must by and by charge a Quest on it, and
all the world must know he is a zealous fellow: and in the mean time, there
is nothing in him but a foolish desire to show him self. For this cause God
oftentimes will punish such a price, in as much as men think, that if so they
have sharply reproved others, O they are Saints, and in a manner Angels: and
in the mean while, they dispense with them selves for much wickedness: and
when they shall have offended more grossly than they whom they have
reprehended, they will (forsooth) that men pardon and forgive them. And why?
Because they have reprehended others to the quick: yea, a man shall see some
of these which blushe not to say, What? Have not I reprehended evil? And when
I have behaved my self so stoutly, is it not sufficient? Namely, that when
this wickedness was committed, I reproved it, I would not suffer it? Well, and
if thou could not any thing tolerate it in others, how would thou that
one should suffer it in thee? If thou had in thee but one drop of good
affection, would thou not hate the vice in thy self, as well as in another?
So then, when we shall cry out against our neighbors to reprove them, let us
beware we be void of al ambition, if we will open and discover the wickedness
we have perceived in another. And let us observe this rule. First to begin
with our selves, before we condemn the vices of others, and when we have
diligently sifted and examined what is in us, then let us come unto our
neighbors. This is the order we must observe in our reprehensions, if we will
proceed herein according unto the will of God. And note we, that in general
God has in this place condemned all injuries, all slanders, so that if we do
but open our mouth to speak evil, in what sort soever, of our neighbors, we
are condemned as false witnesses before God. But by this it is not meant, that
we should hide and keep close the wickedness which is manifestly known: for
as we have before showed, that under this color of covering of sins, we must
not nourish and foster them by flatteries or lies so we must not under this
shadow, that we are forbiden to hurt our neighbors by word, say, that black is
white: and this is diligently to be noted. For there are some which would have
nothing condemned what ever it be: yea, they would have men frame their speech
so to color and disguise things, that if they saw theft committed, they should
call it by some other name: they would in no wise, that vices should be
condemned by their proper titles. A man shall set this in many: yea, when one
shall sharply reprove such wicked livers, as shall not only have offended
God them selves, but shall be the cause, that the rest, with whom they live,
shall be drawn unto a lose and dissolute life, which shall be as pestilent and
infections sores to rot and corrupt all the rest: when one (I say) shall
reprove them, if he touch them as he ought, to the quick, incontinently
there shall be some of these nice and delicate fellows, to say, O Sir: should
you so speak in the pulpit? A man shall see blasphemies to reign, a man shall
see manifest impiety against God and his word, a man shall see such
villainous rebellions, as none more, a man shall see such enormious and
outrageous offenses, that it is not possible to bear with them, except a man
will be a traitor to God. And well, one shall cry out against these things, and
ye shall have this reply made: What? Does not the Gospel teach you to win
all the world by mildness? Has not Jesus Christ called sinners unto him in
all leave and gentleness, pardoning them their trespasses? Must they then which
preach the Gospel use such rigor? Lo, what shall be said: as if Christ would
that his grace should be abused, that vices should have their flote and full
sail, that men should dissemble and cloak them, and that they should not be
reproved and condemned. Nay, contrariwise, it is said, that by the Gospel he
exercises an authority and jurisdiction to condemn the whole world: and
behold to what purpose this is: namely, that we should be confounded with
shame, and as it were overwhelmed with confusion, when our sin shall be opened
and declared to us, that we have no other refuge but to his mere grace and
only mercy. Let us therefore diligently note, that we are forbidden to
defame our neighbors of harred and for ill will. But for all this, on the
contrary side, we are commanded to blame the evil we see in them, and to
reprove them with sharpness, when they shall over grossly offend,
endeavoring with all our might (if we may be able) to win them to do well:
and withal, not ceasing to advertise others, not to be corrupted by wicked
examples. This shall be better understood, if we shall take on the one side the
sentence of Jesus Christ, where he says, Who soever shall have called his
neighbor Fool, Mat. 3. 22.
shall be culpable of hell fire, who soever shall have only groined against
him, is already damnable: and on the other side, that sentence where it is
said, Ephe. 5. 11.
That we must reprove the unfruitful works of darkness, that we must detest
and abhor evil: as Saint Paul speaks hereof also, when he says unto the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 14. 25
That if the Gospel be preached, as it ought, they which shall hear it,
having the secrets of their hearts made manifest, shall be constreined to give
glory unto God, casting them selves to the earth, that is to say, being
ashamed of their sins. And why? Because they are brought to light, whereas
before they were hidden, when their sins were not known: they see that they
are defamed before God, and there is no talk of hiding them selves any
longer. Therefore when I shall have groined of evil will against my neighbor:
yea, albeit so closely, that one can not say, that I have called him knave or
fool, but shall only have wagged my head, or bit my lips at him. Lo, a
false witness bearing before God. And why? For I despise my neighbor, I
desire also to put him to reproach and infamy. And what has stirred me up
hereunto? Some grudge I bear him, some evil will I have conceived against
him. Now contrariwise, when I will advertise my neighbor, so that I shall
seek to do him good, that I shall be led by no evil affection, but that I would
procure his salvation as far as lies in me, I may say, Unhappy man that
thou art, take heed to thy self, it seems thou would sell thy self unto
Satan, it seems thou would captive thy self under his cursed servitude
and bondage: thou show well that thou art past all sense, and enraged, when
thou will receive no admonition, regard no warning: will thou needs perish
mischievously and miserably? Go cayt^e: thou art worthy to be hated and spat
at of all men. I may use to say all these words with a man, and yet do him no
injury. And why? For I can not otherwise bring him to him self, to amend him.
Therefore, when I see that Satan has so hardened him, that I must hammer him
with great blows to awaken him, I may here proceed with such vehemency of
words: and behold also, how I shall seek hereby to cover his faults. For what
other end and purpose have I? What other thing shoot I at, but that they
should be pardoned him of God, and that before the world he should no longer be
defamed and made a reproach? It grieueth me that men point at him with their
fingers, that he is become a reproach and byword to all, that he is as it were
on a scaffold or stage exposed to all ignominy and shame. This grieueth me (I
say) and therefore I seek to bring him into the right way, so that I use no
injury toward him, in this manner of proceeding which I observe. Now, in the
mean time we must take heed, that we loose not the bridle to any excessive
bitterness of reprehending. For albeit we have a good zeal, and are not moved
with any ill will: yet notwithstanding, we shall very much offend, when we
shall be over bitter in reproving. Gal 6. 1.
Lo, why Saint Paul expreslie warns us of this, that we reprove with all
gentleness those which have offended. Consider says he, that thou may also
fall and offend. Let us therefore use such mildness and gentleness toward
our neighours, as we would be used toward us in the like case. But how ever
it be, let us speak of vices so, that we disguise them not, to make them seem
nothing, and let us seek roughly to reform them which have offended:
reproving them in such sort, as they are able to bear, and as we see them
disposed: regarding always, that we be moved hereto by charity and brotherly
love. And so, when we shall pray God to conduct us in this thing, and to
govern us by his holy spirit, a man shall not be able to count it an injury
done to him, when we shall have told him of his faults roundly, and yet
charitably. Ye see then what we have to observe touching this commandment:
namely, that we must not open our mouth to speak one word slanderously, and
maliciously, against our neighbor: and yet in the mean time, that we reprove
simply and plainly, such as shall have offended, as we would men should have a
care to correct and amend us in the like case. When we shall use such equity
and discreet dealing: behold, we shall not be false witnesses. Moreover, let
us note, that when mention is made here of falshoode, we are not only forbidden
to forge and invent a lie, in such sort, that that we shall say, be falsely
contrived and devised without any color at all: but if we maliciously deprave
that which in it self is not evil, we bear herein false witness. As it is
said, that they which deposed against our Lord Jesus Christ, that he had said,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will build it up again, Mat. 26. 6.
were false witnesses, and yet it is certain, that Jesus Christ had so spoken:
that is to say, had pronounced these very words with his mouth. They then
which recite them, why are they called false witnesses? The reason is, because
they turned the words of the son of God into an other sense than he had
spoken them: and so sought to bring him into hatred, charging him with so
wicked a slander, as if he had spoken of the material temple of Jerusalem,
when he spoke of his own body, which was the true temple, in the which dwelt
all the fullness of the God head: 1. Tim. 3. 16.
for he was God manifested in the flesh. So then, we see that the falshoode
which God here condemns, is not then only committed, when we contriue a lie,
when we forge that which was never said or done, when we devise a tale never
known or heard of before: but then also, when we shall have maliciously
disguised and altered a matter which might be well interpreted, turning it to
an evil sense, when it might be well meant: and herein we be false witnesses.
For example. There are some so wayward and overthwart, that as soon as they
perceive any thing which displeases them, albeit it have no evil at all in
it, neither against God, neither against man: yet are they ready to make an
accusation thereof, and to say, O see such a man has spoken or done such a
thing, so that a man shall not have given, I know not what the smallest blotte
that may be, but that which was a virtue shall be taken for a vice. So then, when
we shall have wrested and depraved for one only word, that which has been
well said: lo, we charge a man with evil, we hurt his good name, and harm
him in his reputation. Let us therefore note that we are false witnesses, not
only when we forge and invent that which has never been done or spoken: but
when by any subtle cavil, by any evil and sinister interpretation, we shall
turn that to evil which might have been well taken. Now, as I have said, this
is oftentimes done, when men are too reprehensiue and over captious, when they
are wayward and frowardly bent: for then will they turn all to ill. It is
said, That charity is not suspicious (as S. Paul has spoken hereof) and that
we must know the evil before we condemn it. 1. Cor. 13. 5.
It is very true, that we may be often times deceived in judging of that
which is good, and that which is evil: but when there shall be such signs and
marks, that the things shall be so manifest, that we may be bold to say: Behold
a wicked thing, yet if we be overmuch bent to snatch at it, we may offend. And
above al, when we have so malicious a nature, as to backbite and to slander men
for we know not what, know we that we are condemned as false witnesses before
God. Now if those which on some occasion given, have shown themselves hardy
and bold in reprehending, are yet to be condemned, because they have proceeded
therein over rigorously: what shall be said of them, which of manifest hatred
will pervert that which has bin done or spoken, which ought notwithstanding to
have been well taken, and wherein there shall be no manifest vice? If they will
pervert and deprave it by their ill and wicked handling, are they not false
witnesses before God? So then, let us learn, so to procure the honor and profit
of our neighbors, that always we have a regard unto it in our talking. Be it
then that we reprehend them, be it that we speak of their vices, to the end
they may be punished for them, and that they which might be seduced and led
unto evil by their wicked example, be not perverted: let us nevertheless
always have this regard, to procure their profit and welfare as much in us
lies. And let us always observe this measure in reproving, that we defame not
men in such sort, that they be wholly discoraged to return to do well. For we
ought rather to bury their vices as much as we may, both before God and before
men, that they may call to mind their duty, and not lose all shame to give
over themselves inordinately unto all wickedness. Thus ye see in what sort we
ought to procure their good. Now, if we will, as we ought, observe this which
is here contained, we must come to an higher point and principle: namely, to
consider why God has made our tongue, and for what cause he has bestowed on
us the gift of speking, knowing he has granted it us to this end, that we
might communicate together. Now the communication which is between mankind,
what other end ought it to have than to maintein us in charity? We must
therefore briefly learn, so to bridle our tongues, that the unity and peace
which God commands that we have among us, be always kept and nourished as much
as is possible. John. 13. 6.
And lo why S. James uses such vehemency when he mentions evil speeches:
he says that the tongue which is but a small portion of the body, and a little
morsel of flesh, kindles notwithstanding such a fire, as might burn the
greatest and thickest forests in the world. Let us therefore return to this
principle: namely, to know that God has bestowed on us a singular benefit, in
giving us the mean to be able to common and confer together. Lo the thoughts
and affections of men are secret and hidden, and the tongue which opens and
displayeth the secrets of the heart. Let us therefore consider diligently how to
use well so great a benefit, let us beware how we defile our tongue with our
vices and wickedness, seeing God has given it to nourish a love and brotherhood
among us: let us take heed we abuse it not to babble and prattle of this and
that, so as to turn our speeches to ill purposes, to be empoisoned one against
another. Behold what is the point whereunto we must come. Now seeing we have in
general known how we shall avoid this vice of being false witnesses, because
this is an hard matter to bridle our tongues, let us travel herein with so
much the greater diligence. We see how many ill speches easily escape us, and
when we have spoken at rouers, without any thinking what we say, because we are
so accustomed hereunto we think it no vice before God. But let us note, that
the more we are by nature inclined to speak indiscreetly, to reproach and
backbite our neighbors, the more pains we must bestow to repress, and
bridle our tongues. For if we be given to any sin, this inclination and
accustoming our selves unto it, shall not serve us for an excuse before God.
Nay, when we shall have known any vice to be in us, we must be so far
off from flattering our selves herein, that we ought to sigh and say: Alas, I
see this vice reigns over much in me, I must therefore more manfully war
against it, and force my self, through the grace of my GOD, so far as to
repress in me, that thing which I see God condemns. And to be the more
heedfull in this thing, let us think on the manace and threat he gave against
it. 1. Cor. 6. 10.
For when Saint Paul says, That neither fornicatours, nor dronkards, nor
extortioners, nor murderers, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, and
numbreth also among them railers, evil speakers, banishing them in like manner
from all hope of everlasting life and salvation: when we hear this, is there
any talk to be had of covering us with leaves, to make our selves believe there
is no ill done, when we shall have slaundered our neighbors? Think we that
the threat which God has pronounced by the mouth of Saint Paul, is only to
fear little children, and that it shall not be executed upon them, which
would exempt themselves from it in despite of him? So then let us labor with
all our diligence, to observe this commandment. And above all (that we may
conclude herewith) let us make this comparison, that if God will that the good
name of our neighbors be kept and esteemed dear of us, and if he so
straightly forbid us all ill reproaches and slanders, which might disgrace and
discredit him, how ought we to behave our selves toward him? Are we not an
hundred times more bound to maintain the honor of God? And because we cannot
profit him any way, are we not much more bound hereunto, than to conserve in
his entire estate the honor of men? So then let us beware of being false
witnesses against God: as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 15
That they which corrupt the purity of the Gospel, are false witnesses
against God, and not against men. What must be done then? The truth of God must
be maintained by us, we must proceed therein roundly and uprightly: when we
shall see a good doctrine, we must defend and sustain it, knowing that God
appoints us as his Proctors and Atturnies. Shall I then see a truth borne
down and oppressed? I must not suffer this as much as in me lies. And why?
For God calls me to procure in his name, that an untruth be repressed, and
borne to the ground. And this ought to be observed, especially when the
question is concerning the doctrine of salvation. So that when we shall see
that this doctrine shall be falsified, and that men would herein mingle their
leven, to corrupt others with their falshoode and lying, we must here show our
selves truly zealous, not to suffer false witnesses against God, to have their
sway: except we will be consenting with them, and partakers of their
wickedness, as I have already declared. And so let us learn, that when we
shall have lived with men in such simplicity, that a man shall not be able to
charge us, that by backbitings, lies, or slanders, we have discredited any
one: we must also have this zeal toward GOD, that his truth remain in his
entire and perfect estate, and that it be maintained so, that it may reign and
bear rule among us. Ye see in effect what we have to consider upon this
commandment.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledging of our sins, praying him to make us feel them better than we
have done, that we may be led further and further unto such a repentance, as we
may learn to consider of our vices, to be sorry for them, and to be displeased
with our selves, to the end, that having obtained forgiveness of them, we may
learn to order our life after his commandementes, that he may be honored of
us in all true obedience, and not only by confession of mouth. That it will
please him to grant his grace not only unto us, but to all people and
nations of the earth, etc.

The. 12. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 21. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, neither shall
thou desire thy neighbors house, nor his field, nor his man servant, nor his
maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.
IT might seem at the first sight, that this commandment is superfluous,
because that God having condemned theft and adultery, would there also
repress all wicked concupiscences and desires. For we have said, that these
commandments must be expounded of us, according to the nature of God. And we
know, that the proper office of God is to sound our hearts, that he only
knows the thoughts which are secret and hid: and therefore it follows, that
when God forbids men to be thieves and adulterers, he would bridle their
affec^^ons and desires. And in very deed if this were not, God should have no
more power in making and prescribing of laws than mortal men. For an earthly
man, if he condemn adultery, he will also condemn the act and deed thereof:
yea, if an evil intent and meaning appear, it shall be punished. If the law
of God were such, it should import no great thing. For it should be but a
policy, that is, a rule of order to govern us honestly before men. But there
is in it much more. As we see that S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
That the law cannot be kept and observed without a pure conscience and a
faith unfeigned. If it be then required, that we have such a soundness for to
observe rightly, and as we ought, the law of God: it follows, that under
the name of adultery, all wicked lusts and desires are forbidden, and so
likewise under the name of theft. We might also allege to this purpose the
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is a faithful interpreter of the
law. For it is by his spirit that. Moses and all the Prophets have spoken.
Why then is it now added, that we must not covet or desire? If mention has
been already made of all wicked desires, was there any need that this should
be again repeated? We must therefore note for answer hereunto, that God in
this place would not repress such wicked affections and desires as are
already resolute and concluded upon of us, but those affections which do first
prick and stir us up, albeit we cleave not, nor consent unto them. This
requires a more ample and familiar exposition. Sometimes to covet, imports
the will which is in a man, as when I shall cast mine eye on the goods of my
neighbor, if I shall be tempted to covetousness, and that I nourish such a
temptation in me, and give my self the bridle: lo sin has won so much,
that I have a resolute will in me, that I could wish well that this should be
mine. Lo then one kind of desire which imports withal a will, when a man
shall consent unto sin, and if he had the mean, he would put in practice
his wicked will and purpose which he has conceived. Now such wicked desires
have been alredie forbidden, when it has been said, Thou shall not steal:
Thou shall not commit adultery. For God has not only forbidden the act of
fornication and stealing, but to desire and lust after, either the wife of an
other, or his goods and substance. But there are other desires and lusts, to
the which we cleave not at all, to consent unto them, which oftentimes tickle
and stir us up, and we perceive some motion in us which is against God, and
is rebellious to the integrity and vprightnes which is contained in the law,
and such desires are forbidden in this place. So we see, that God, not without
cause, having condemned all evil desires and affections, annexeth, that this
is not yet such a perfection as he requires: but we must know that every
affection which stirs us up unto evil, albeit we conclude not any thing
within our selves, neither rest our selves on it, that if only a concupiscence
forcibly break forth in us, and we strive therewith, that this is a sin
committed: we are culpable before God. And thus we see what integrity is
required in this place when our Lord having forbidden wicked desires, adioineth
that both our senses and minds must be locked up in such sort under his fear,
and inflamed with such a love and desire, to walk in all holiness, that we be
not moved or driven either on one side or other by any wicked passion, to
desire either the good or the wife of an other. Now seeing we have the intent
and meaning of God, let us diligently consider whereunto he binds us. For the
law ought to serve us for a looking glass, to behold the poverty and misery
which is in us: and after that we shall have understood what our duty is, let
us know that we are to be condemned, if we come not near that perfection, to
the which God has called us. Ye see whereupon we must slaie to make our
profit of this last commandment of the law. And to the end that we may be
so much the more attentive, and that we may know that this is a doctrine which
requires, that we apply our whole studies therein, let us bear in mind that
which S. Paul says, That being reputed a great and exceeding wise Doctor,
Phil. 3. ^.
having been nourished in the law of God from his infancy, yet was he so
blind, that he understood not what the law of God meant, until he was
converted, and that our Lord Jesus Christ had enlightened him by his Gospel,
to the end he might know whither the law of God ought to lead us.

Behold then Saint Paul, who was instructed in such sort, that he was in
great reputation among men, not among the Painims, to say, that he was some
great Philosopher: but he was taught and brought up in the law of GOD. And
touching his life, he protests, that he lived irreprehensible, as without
all fault before men: Lo, I say, Saint Paul an holy and learned personage
after the common estimation of men, but yet a poor beast touching the law of
God. And why? He says he esteemed himself living, and that he thought
himself just before God, and knew not that he had need of the mercy which
GOD offers unto all sinners. For he absteined from theft, from fornication,
and such like things: he had no wicked desires in him which one might
perceive, and which might be known unto men, so that he justified him self in
his own fantasy. Now in the end, when God had taken pity on him, he opened
his eyes, and made him to understand that which is contained in this last
commandment, Thou shall not covet. Behold how S. Paul began now first to
understand the law, in which before he was a doctor, making profession
thereof, wherein he had been taught and instructed from his first age. Until
he had well considered and medicated of this, he tript over the quick coals, he
learned his lesson (as we say) by rot, he never tasted nor understood the
force and power of the law, he never knew that this was sin, to condemn
himself before God, and to have his refuge to his mercy, in the which the
hope of our salvation lies, and whereupon it ought to be grounded. Seeing then
S. Paul knew not the law, and had no right understanding thereof, but by this
word: let us labor herein with so much the more diligence: and seeing that
all the time of his life, until his conversion, he was so blind, that he
understood not this word: by so much the more ought we to be attentive in
this place, for we are of no greater ability than he: but God by his holy
spirit must reveal to us what this concupiscence is, which he has in this
place condemned. Now beyond all this, we must have an other admonition which is
very needful and necessary for us. For the devil has sought in such sort to
cover and hide this precept, that a man should not know the intent and meaning
of God, but that one should lightly content himself, to condemn only those
evil concupiscences for sin, which appeared manifestly, and whereof a man
were plainly convicted. So that many have restrained this word of concupiscence
to those evil affections and desires, which importe a resolute will and full
consent. Now this is against the natural sense and meaning of Moses: and yet is
this a doctrine fully concluded on in papistrie. Although the Papists cannot
deny, that to be pricked and provoked with an evil and wicked desire, is a
damnable vice, and which proceeds from original sin, and from this
corruption which we draw from our father Adam: yet they imagine that after
baptism this is no more a sin. As if such a fantasy come into the mind of
man, to doubt of the promises of God, to murmur against him, to be angry with
him: when a man shall be afflicted, if it come into his fantasy to accuse God of
injustice and cruelty, this is not a sin say the Papists. Neither are these
of the rudest and ignoraniest sort among them which speak thus, but this is a
general resolution and doctrine universally concluded on in all their devilish
Synagogs. There is not a Synagog among them, where this has not been received
as an article of faith: namely, that a man being provoked and stirred up with
some wicked desire sins not, that if he be tempted in himself to commit
murder, to empoyson any, to commit fornication: and briefly, to be guilty of
all the crimes and enormities in the world: if so that he consent and assent
not thereto, (for lo the words which they use) that is to say, if he resolve
not himself herein, to say, I will put in practice my wicked conceit, and
that he stay not himself hereon to please himself in this wicked affection,
all this is no sin. This is, say they, but to exercise us in combat and
fight against sin, and we then declare that we are valiant champions, and
that sin bears not rule over us, or reigns in us. Now I grant it is
true, that the faithful show well that the spirit of God reigns in them,
when they repel and beat back such temptations, when they bridle and captive
themselves so, when they resist and withstand such things, knowing that they
are contrary unto God, and that he condemns them. It is certain that hereby
it is showed, that God has given us victory over sin, and that the virtue
and power of his spirit abides in us, and that we are stout and valiant
champions to bid battle against Satan. But this is not to say, that we are
exempted and freed from all fault, and that we may so pluck out of us all
sin, and ransom our selves so fully, as if it might not stain and spot us
no longer. Alas, we are far wide from this. For on the one side it is true,
that we have great cause to praise God, that he bestows this grace on us by
his holy spirit, to surmount and overcome all wicked affections. But in the
mean time, we ought to bewail our selves, knowing that we are on our part
ouerweake, and that if he take not pity on us, forasmuch as we have within us
an evil and wicked conscience, which is to provoke his vengeance against us,
we should well deserve to be thrown down of him into the bottomless pit of
hell. But let us note how God would here open and discover the shame and
reproach of the Papists, and how he would show that the greatest Clerks among
them, are more rude and ignorant than the poor unbelievers which never heard
one word of the holy scripture. And why? For let us consider of that which is
contained in the law. It is said, that the sum of the law is, That we love
God with all our heart, with all our mind, with all our understanding, with
all the faculties and powers we have. If it were said, Thou shall love God with
all thine heart, a man might with some color conclude, that there is no sin,
but when the will is certain and resolute. For the heart in the Scripture,
although it signify sometime the understanding, yet is it taken for the will.
Now then, one might use this cavil: Deuteronomy, 6. 5.
It is said, That we must love God with all our heart, Mat. 22. 37.
if so be then our will be not contrary: well, it is enough, we have quited
our selves before God. For one might happily restrain the will from
consenting to this wicked affection, and so it should seem that the wicked
desires which first incite and stir us up, and yet hold us not captives, be
not comprised under sin. But God adds, With all thy heart, with all thy
understanding and thoughts, and with all thy powers.

Let us now consider, if I conceive any thing against God, if I conceive any
evil lust or desire of fornication or stealing, albeit I cleave not at all
unto it, whether one part of my soul and understanding be not already
corrupted, and whether I love God with all my heart, when one part of my
understanding is bent against him? There is no question of the heart, but of
this apprehension and conceiving of the mind, which is in the soul of man.
Now I show well that there is vanity in this, that the fear of God
withholdeth me not as it ought. It follows then, that I am culpable and
condemned, because I discharge not my self in loving GOD, as he has
commanded me. And again, is there not some virtue and power of my soul which
applies not it self to think on this or that, which is contrary unto GOD
and his justice? So then, we see that evil and wicked thoughts are
condemned, and that we cannot so excuse them, but that GOD shall worthily
punish us for them. And let us know, that albeit men never consent unto evil,
to have their will resolutely bent thereunto: yet cease they not to be
accursed before GOD, if he would use his severity against them. Now therefore
we have the true sense and meaning, and we see withal, that we must take
diligent heed to this place, that we be not seduced and abused herein. And
the example of Saint Paul ought to prick us forward so much the more, seeing
that he confesses that he was ignorant of the law of GOD, until our Lord
Jesus Christ had enlightened him by his holy spirit, to the end he might
know what this word of concupiscence imported. It remains that we now
apply this which has been touched to our use and profit.

In the first place therefore let us learn, that to serve God well, and as we
ought, we must not only desire to do well, neither is it sufficient that we
profit herein, and proceed effectually: but we must purge our selves of all
evil and wicked affections, and of all corrupt thoughts, in such sort, that
all our senses and understanding tend to this end, to give over our selves
fully and wholly unto God, that we may show we have not been so distracted,
as to bend on one side or other: but that we be held up so straight, as to
run without being hindered or stayed: yea, to run in that way, which God
shows us, so that there be in us nothing, but all purity: and when we
shall have well and thoroughly understood this, we shall be advertised to be
watchful, and to stand on our guard. For we see how men wander, and lead
them selves astray. And what is the cause hereof? Because they reckon (as we
say) without their host. For they expound the law of GOD after their own
fancy, and they think it sufficient, if their will be not wicked, and that
they rest not them selves on their evil thoughts. Well, God will not impute
this unto us, say they: and herevppon they walk on in their wicked
concupiscences, and they have an headband which they put before their eyes,
that they might not know how closely they deceive them selves. Now when men
speak thus, yet this will not serve them to escape the hand of the heavenly
Judge. Let us therefore take diligent heed, we restrain our selves in our
concupiscences. For God has not only condemned wicked intentes and purposes,
but all desires also, which provoke us to evil, and drive us thereunto. Let us
therefore walk in so much the greater fear, let every one hold him self, as
it were under lock, forasmuch as there is no part in us, which is not infected
with sin. For let us examine all the faults of our soul, and we shall find
sin dispersed over all: as when a poison has entered the body of a man, so
that every part thereof is infected. There is in us such an universal
leprosy, as possesses both the bones and the marrowe, the thoughts and the
affections, and all which is in us. Seeing then it is so, that our nature is
thus corrupted, ought we not to be so much the more vigilant and watchful to
hold our selves in bridle, seeing God by the law has condemned all wicked
thoughts, which tend to incite us unto evil, seeing he has condemned the
smallest motion which flattereth and tickleth us, and when we only feel our
will a little pricked and stirred, albeit it be not at all held captive? When
we see this (I say) have we not great occasion to awaken us to walk under the
hand of God, in so much the greater heedefulnesse? So then behold how this
precept ought to awaken us, when we are so sleepie and southfull, and would so
easily acquit our selves of our duty toward God. But let us know, that
no such shifts will serve us to escape. And why? God follows on always to
condemn wicked desires, having condemned wicked counsels and purposes. Now
this doctrine ought to serve two ways to our use and profit. First, it may
teach us more fervently to pray unto God to govern us by his holy spirit,
and to purge us from all our corruptions and vices. And again, having made our
request and prayer unto him, that every one force himself, that we use
violence with our nature, with all our senses and appetites, seeing there is in
us such a rebellion against the law of God. As S. Paul also speaks not only
of the wills of men, when he says, Romans 8. 7.
That through their perverse and crooked nature, they are enemies unto God: but
he mentions the affections and thoughts, for he uses a word in that place
which signifies the thoughts which we conceive. Seeing it is so, let us know,
that when we shall have bestowed our labor well, to hold our selves snaffled
with the bridle of God, that yet some evil desires shall escape us, for which we
ought to lament and bewail our selves before God. Lo what the first use of
this doctrine is: namely, that we have this zele to call upon God to govern
us by his holy spirit, and that we employ all our pains herein, and use such
force with our selves to be retained from all evil, that Satan have not his
entrance into our hearts, that he may not make any breach into us, to win
possession of our bodies: but that we keep him aloof and far off. And as
soon as we shall perceive any thought in us, which shall tend unto evil, let
us come forth to oppose our selves against it, let us make this bar, to say,
What? God must bear rule wholly in thee, he must possess not only thy mind,
but all thy senses and thoughts. For the second, we must learn to condemn our
selves, and give all glory unto God, in confessing that we are all culpable
and guilty, and that if he call us to account, and shall use severity with
us, lo we all perish and are cast down to the bottomless pit of hell. We
must come unto this point, otherwise we shall not profit in the law of God,
as we ought. But here a man may demand, seeing that God knows the frailty
and weakness of men, Why he either strengthens not them better, or why he
makes a law so strait and so austere? For it seems that God would oppress
us, when he forbids wicked desires, and that he is not content that we
render him obedience in our wills, enioyning us no further thing by adding
this word. And lo why these ieasters say, That God would spite and anger men
in his law, and as it were forbid them to scratch themselves when they itch.
But we must come to know this misery and wretchedness which is in us:
namely, that we have neither thoughts nor affections, which are not rebellious
unto God. Let us not therefore marvel, if there be such a strife and combat
between the law of God, and our lusts and appetites. And why? For when we
have diligently sifted and examined what soever is within us, we shall find
there is nothing but all manner of corruption and damnable wickedness. For we
cannot conceive one only thought which tends not unto evil. Seeing it is
so with us, and that God has given us a perfect rule of all goodness and
upright living, has he not as it were thundered against us? And is it not
manifest, that the fire and the water are at less strife, yea, agree better,
than the nature of men, and the justice of God? Let us not therefore think it
strange, that God has so reproved our appetites and lusts: and when we hear
the blasphemies which these ieasters spue forth, let us detest them as
monsters. For in stead of glorifying of GOD in his justice, they fling
themselves and spurn against him, as savage and furious beasts. Lo what we
have to note touching the frailty and weakness of men: that albeit it be so
great: yet he condemns it in his law. And why? For when GOD orders our
life, and shows us how we are to walk, he has not respect what we can
do: but he considers of that we owe him, he respects what uprightness
and innocence of living is, though it be not found in us. We are the creatures
of GOD: ought we not then to give over our selves wholly to his service?
Without all doubt we ought: for this is a percemptorie reason: and can not be
gainesaide. And men may well mutter and murmur hereat, yet shall they always
be convicted with so manifest a proof, that having their being of GOD, and
for him, they ought to dedicate unto him all their senses and affections, and
whatsoever there is either in their body or their soul. Now withal let us
note diligently, that we cannot acquire us of our duty toward him. But
where is the cause hereof, but in our own nature? But this we draw from Adam.
It follows not, for that we are held captives under sin, and that this
cursed servitude and bondage hinders us from doing well, and makes us give
our selves altogether unto that which is evil, what ever other cause be
hereof, the root is in us, and every one shall feel himself culpable. Iam.
1. 13.
And we must not say, that we are driven hereunto by any external force, but
every one is led and driven unto this by his own proper concupiscence, and
so there remains no excuse for us. And hereby we see that we must not measure
the law of God by our own faculties and powers. And why? God respects not
what we can do, or what our power and ability is: but he respects how
far we are bound unto him, he respects this integrity and perfection,
which is without us. Behold what we have to observe. And this is that which
abuses and deceives the Papists. For they have this principle among them,
That the law of God is not impossible unto men. It is wonderful how they have
been so mad, how the devil has enchanted and bewitched them in such sort. For
this doctrine is most clear and manifest throughout all the holy scripture:
namely, that men shall be always condemned by the law, and must always have
recourse to the mere grace and mercy of God. When Saint Paul will prove that
men are accursed being sinners, Gal. 3. 10.
and that there is not at all one just man, what argument or reason is it which
he uses? He alleges the place of Moses: Cursed is every man that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do
them. Now it might seem at first sight, that Saint Paul has evil argued,
and that this reason is impertinent. For let it be granted, that all they
which have transgressed the law of God, are accursed: yet it follows not,
that all mankind be curssed. For if one man observe the law, and acquit
himself herein: lo he is exempted out of this condemnation. Some then shall
be found which shall have observed the law of GOD, and therefore all are not
curssed. But Saint Paul presupposes that the law is impossible, and if he
had not took this as granted, he might seem to have proceeded in his
argument without sense or reason. Thus we see that the Papists have taken and
grounded themselves upon a principle and ground, altogether contrary to the
spirit of God: yea, they are so rude and ignorant, that they have not yet
learned and understood the ABC of faith, and of Christian religion. So then,
let us diligently note, that when question is of the law of GOD, we must not
measure it by our strength and power, to respect what we are able to do: but
we must consider what we owe unto God. Yea: but what then shall be the mean
to deliver us from the curse of the law? For it seems unto them, that all
the world must needs be damned. I grant it well, and it behooves it be so,
that is, that we be all damned, if we will have salvation in Christ Jesus. For
how shall we seek unto the grace and mercy of God, except we know the want
and need we have thereof? Men would not seem beggars by their good will. But
as long as we shall think any justice to be in us, we shall never have any
care to seek it elsewhere, than in our selves, and therefore we must be wholly
rid of all opinion of our own virtues, we must perceive the wrath of God which
is bent against us, we must feel the weight and burden of death which lies
on and presses us. For without this, it cannot be that we shall be able to
prepare our selves to obtain mercy at the hand of GOD. But this thing
requires a more large and ample declaration. Let us therefore first of all
bear in mind, that when we feel any evil thought to arise in us, and that
our appetites and lusts, with any pleasant motion, shall tickle and stir us
up unto evil, that we be culpable and also guilty of sin before GOD. But
here one may demand this question, Whether, if when a man conceiueth a wicked
thought, and he be so far from resting on it, that he detesteth it before
he feel any prick and provocation thereof, whether this be sin? As there
are many thoughts, which touch not our heart, which move us not at all,
which engender and breed no wicked lust in us: yea, a man may have some
thought arise, being as it were half a sleep: and well, this flitteth from
him without moving the heart, or drawing any lust after it: and yet for this
we must lament and bewail our selves before GOD, and know, that except God
stayed us by his grace, we have opened the door to Satan, whereat entering in,
he might incontinently win us unto farther wickedness. We must therefore
be sorry for this thing, albeit GOD imputes it not unto us for sin. But
there is now a second degree, when not only we conceive some wicked thing
in our mind, moved hereunto by some present object: but when we shall be
thereby something moved, that we shall feel some prick of Satan which
stirs us, then is sin conceived, that is to say, although there be no
consent given: and albeit the will be not resolute herein, yet is sin formed
before GOD, and it is d^mnable in his sight. for to have this better
understood, we must allege examples hereof. It may so happen, that a man
beholding either the house or the land of an other, conceiueth some flying
fantasy, and yet his heart is nothing moved herewith, he has no such desire
bredde in him, as to say, I would this were mine: but he passes from this
thought, and sees it is but a vanity: he could not withstand it from arising
in him.

But albeit there be not here in any wicked affection and desire, yet
notwithstanding, GOD does hereby warn us of our insirmitie and weakness. And
we must hereupon humble and bewail ourselves, and acknowledge that this is
already a sin, for which we were to be condemned. For let us consider
whether this shall be found in the Angels of heaven. It is most certain it
shall not be seen in them. And yet the justice and righteousness of Angels,
shall hardly suffice to satisfy and answer the law of GOD. True it is, that
there is in God an other justice, as we have seen in the book of Job, which
surpasses and exceeds this of the law: but if the Angels of heaven apply
them selves to fulfill the law of GOD, without doubt it is all they are able
to do, to conform them selves to the rule which he here prescribes us. We
see then, that this is a vice, for which men ought to condemn them selves: not
when they shall have had any occasion offered, whereby some wicked affection
might arise: but when they shall have bredde in them such a desire, as to say,
I could wish this or that. Although a man incontinently repelleth such a
desire, and stays nothing at all upon it, yet is he culpable of this
covetousness which is here mentioned. Now, seeing this is so, let us learn
altogether to condemn our selves: and again, let us beware we fall not into a
double condemnation, when we shall not only have coueted something to provoke
us unto evil, but shall have nourished this desire: as when a woman has
couceiued, she nourishes her child until she bring him forth: for when we
shall have loosed the bridle to our wicked lusts and desires, so far, as
that our will be won, in so much that we rest our selves on wickedness, to
give our full consent thereunto, behold how we incur a double condemnation:
and then must we with more and greater tears bewail our misery: for we see
we have brought two condemnations upon our heads, except God of his infinite
mercy and goodness bear with us. Lo, what we have here to note touching
evil and wicked thoughts. Now withal we must return to consider of the
remedy we have herein: for we were in a desperate case, as being utterly
confounded, if we had not this grace and mercy of God, whereby we are
succored and relieved. Therefore, when we shall have understood and confessed,
that we are in all sorts that may be culpable, behold, God calls and
shows us, that of these so many wicked desires which are in us, although in
their own nature they are sin: yet will he not impute any of them unto us
for sin. Is then a wicked desire reputed sin in the faithful? No. But here
two diverse things are to be considered. For if we respect the nature of the
vice, it is always sin. But does God pardon it? Why then behold, he
calls none of these evil concupiscences unto account, forasmuch as by his
free mercy and goodness he pardons them unto the faithful. We know also,
that by the blood of Jesus Christ, all our spots are washed and wiped out:
and baptism is hereof a sure testimony and witness unto us. For by it have
we been washed from all the filthes and pollutions which are in us, that we
might appear pure and clean in the sight of God: yea, which more is, those
mortal and deadly sins which are acuiallis committed, shall not be imputed
unto us, because (as I have said) that God has buried our sin, and will not
regard it: but we must notwithstanding have respect unto it, and beware
diligently how we offend. But if any abuse and deceive them selves, to be
persuaded, they conceive no wicked ked desires, this shall occasion GOD to call
them to their account. And why? For, when men flatter them selves they must
needs be condemned. And lo why the devil has so much ende-uoured to blind
the eyes of men, in making them believe that none of all these things are
sin: yea, we see how the Papists think that the grossest faults that may
be, are soon wiped out with one sign of the cross, or with one Asperges of
holy water. They think these things are nothing, and they sport them selves
with GOD, as with some little child. But let us contrariwise remember, that
when we shall not only slugge in sin, but shall be greatly inclined to
flatter our selves in our vices: let us (I say) remember to take unto us this
glass of the law, and to behold our selves in, that we abuse not, nor deceive
our selves. A man may have his face foul and dirtie, every one shall mockee
him, and yet he shall see nothing thereon: but when het looks in a glass,
and sees all his face soyled, then he withdraws him self, and goes and
washes it: so have we need here to do. It is true, that the whole law of GOD
is as a glass, to show us our filthiness, that we might be confounded and
ashamed of our wickedness: but we must have to consider of our condition a
most clear and bright glass. If we read this only, Thou shall not steal,
Thou shall not be a murderer, nor adulterer, every one will make him self
believe, that he is guilty in nothing: but when we come to this
commandment, Thou shall not covet, lo GOD sounds not only the depth of
our heart, but all our thoughts and imaginations: there is nothing which he
tries not and examineth? and those things which we shall account for no
faults, shall be condenmed before GOD, and he shall be Judge of them, if we on
our part will not judge them. Now, in the mean time we are to magnify the
mercy of our God, that when we are so many ways culpable, he yet receives
us as just and righteous. Let us compare together the justice we obtain by
the means of faith, and the malediction which is on us, wherein we are
plunged. Are we culpable before GOD of one offense, of three, of any number?
Nay rather, are we not plunged into such bottomless gulfes, that when we
shall begin to make our account, we shall be overwhelmed and confounded with
the multitude of our offenses? An hundred millians of faults are the hundredth
part of them which we have committed in the sight of GOD, we are guilty in
so many, that there is neither end nor measure in our sins. Yet for all
this, GOD receives us so to mercy, that we are accounted just before him, as
if there were in us all integrity and perfection, and that we wanted nothing
of fulfilling the whole law. Therefore, when God bestows on us this gift of
faith, whereby we apprehend and take hold of the grace and mercy, which has
been purchased us, by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we
will now do him this honor, to say: Lord, it is in thy mere goodness and
free mercy, that our salvation consists: when GOD (I say) pardons us such
an infinite number of sins and offenses, and clotheth us with his own
justice: see we not how far we are bound unto him for this inestimable
goodness? So then, when the law of God shall have utterly confounded us,
seeing not only our concupiscences exceed all number, but that we are buried
in them, as under great and huge mountains, if GOD would severely deal with
us for them, let us know, that God will not leave us in despair, but as soon
as we are beaten to the ground, he helps us up again: when he sees our
weakness, he reaches us out his hand, and calls us unto him, and wills
us to be of good comfort, when he for his mercies sake, will impute none of
our sins unto us. Lo, in what sort the faithful continue in glorifying of
God, although they be in them selves condemned. And at this end we must
always begin, to be veterlie confounded in our selves, that our Lord may
deliver us from the deepest dongeon of death: seeing that our only salvation
lies and consists in his mere mercy and grace. Now withal, let us walk
in all heedefulnesse, let us diligently look unto our selves, knowing that
when we shall have employed great pains to serve GOD, when we shall have
shunned all occasions which might lead us unto evil, when we shall have
subdued our lusts and affections, when we shall have further endeavored to
repress wicked thoughts, we are yet to condemn our selves, and to stand in
great fear of the anger and displeasure of GOD. For, although, (through the
virtue and power of his grace) sin reigns not in us, yet does it always
dwell in us, and staineth us still with some blot of filthiness and
uncleanness. Let us therefore bewail our selves hereof, and lament in such
sort, that we be hereby incited and pricked forward to do our duty. We
see in what sort Saint Paul speaks, after that he had profited so far, and
was come even to an angelical holiness: O wretched man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? And why is it so, that he
desires death in him self? For no other reason, but because he saw sin
abiding in his body. Now, moreover we must know, that we ought not,
although every day we see a millian of faults in us, to be discouraged.
Lo, why Saint Paul exhorting the faithful to flee from vices says not, Let
not sin dwell in you: but he says, Romans 6. 12.
Let not sin reign in you. I grant it were to be desired, that sin dwelt
not at all in us: but although we be not altogether rid thereof, yet must we
not be to much dismaide. But when he says that sin dwells in us, let us
know that this ^s first to warn us of our miserable condition: and again, to
admonish us, that we must be exercised continually in combat and fight with
sin, to the end we should more feruenthe desire the aid and help of our
God, praying him to fortify and strengthen us by his power, and by the grace
of his holy spirit, which he has given us, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better than
we have done, and that we may learn to conform our lives to his obedience,
who respects not only the outward works, but regards what our wills,
our affections, and all our thoughts are. And because we can not in one day
come to such a perfection, pray we him that this may be an occasion to humble
us, and to stir us up more manfully to fight with sin, that every one
awaken him self to correct the vices which are in his nature, until God
ridding us of this flesh and corruption, cloth us with his justice, and reform
us altogether to the image of his glory. That it will please him to grant
this grace, not only to us, but to all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 13. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 22 These are the words, which the Lord spoke unto all your
multitude in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the
darkness, with a great voice, and added nothing thereto: and wrote them upon
two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.
BEcause we find no better excuse for our loose behavior, or for our
rebellion against God, than to allege ignorance, we could be very well
content to have always this cloak and couerture, to say, that we understand
not those things which God speaks unto us, or that he directs not his
talk, unto us, or that his voice is over far for us to hear it. But God
perceiving such a malicious wickedness in us, has sought to preue at all that
which men might allege for their defense, to the end they might no longer have
any excuse for them selves. And therefore when he published his law, see why
he would that the doctrine therein contained, should be pronounced with an
high and clear voice: and that it should be spoken in the ears, not of
three or four only, but in the hearing of all the people, both of the
smallest and greatest: briefly, of all without exception. Again he would that
the law should be written, that it might continue, and serve for the use, not
only of one age: but that even to the end of the world it might have his force
and vigor, his rule and authority. Lo, why in this place it is said, That God
spoke with an high and mighty voice. Whereby Moses gives us to understand,
that the law is no such secret and hidden doctrine, that any one need to
allege, that he is not so great a scholar as to understand it. For God, not
without great cause, has so exalted his voice, when he would prescribe a rule
for the ordering of the life of men. And he adioyneth this of purpose, that the
Lord spoke unto all the multitude and assembly, as if he should say: True it
is that God has chosen some among you to be your governors, and has given
them of his spirit, yet will he that his law be known of the most rudest
and ignorauntest, that it may be a common wisdom unto them all: that is one
of the points we have here to note. The second is, that God had added nothing
after these ten sentences or sayings. Whereby Moses admonishes the people,
that such brevity and shortness, as GOD uses, ought to encourage them, to
receive what he shall speak. For he proposes to them no great volumes, which
might occasion us to reply, that all our life would be to little to study
them. God therefore has not been over long, when he delivered his word, he
has instructed us in ten words, and no more: count we them on our fingers,
and we shall have instruction touching all that which is required for the well
ordering of our life. Withal, Moses hereby would have us understand, that
seeing GOD has given us so certain a rule, and that himself would add
nothing whatsoever, to that which he had said, that we ought to hold our
selves content therewith, and that it is not lawful for the creatures, to
adioyne any thing thereunto. And this is the second point we must note. For
the third point he adds again in this place, that whereof he had before
spoken: namely, that God when he published his law, spoke out of the midst
of the cloud, that the mount smoked, that there were flames of fire, that the
lightenings flew abroad. And whereunto tends all this? Even to this end,
that the doctrine of God might have the greater majesty, and that men might
be induced to humble them selves in all reverence before GOD, to subject them
selves fully and wholly unto his word, and to yealde all dutiful obedience
unto it. Lo then three notable points recited here by Moses, before he
proceeds to the rest which folioweth. Now touching the first, let us bear
in mind, that which has been touched: namely, that GOD has spoken with an
high and clear voice, and that not to one handful and small assembly of men,
but in general unto all the people, and that this is for no other end, but
that we might know, that the word of God shall sound loud and shrill enough
in our ears, for us to hear and understand it, except we will willfullie
play the deaf men, and stop our ears at it. I grant all our senses are so
weak, that we shall never be able to comprehend one word of that which God
speaks unto us, except he inligh^en us by his holy spirit. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
For the natural man perceives not the things which are of God: they are to
high and profound for us. But where of comes this default and blindness, but
from our own corruption and wickedness? For it is most certain and true,
that the verity and truth of God in it self, and in his own nature is easy
enough, and plain to be understood. Let us not then allege, that it is to
dark and obscure. But how must we behave our selves to profit thereby? If
we will that God make us to profit in his word, let us be humble, and
obedient, and little in our own eyes. For it is not for naught that he
promises to teach and instruct such as are humble. Let us not then trust unto
our own wit. Let us not come to the hearing of his word with such an
hautinesse and presumption in us, as to think we are of sufficient capacity
to judge of that which shall be said: but rather let us desire of God, that he
will open our eyes, that he will reach us out his hand to lead us: and let us
confess, that we are not of such dexterity of wit, to profit under him in
his schole, except he bestow it on us. When this humility shall be in us, doubt
we not but the word of God shall be easy unto us, and that we shall know,
and understand, whatsoever is therein delivered unto us. Hereby we see what
misery and wretchedness has been heretofore in the world, that the common
people, and in a manner all, have foreslowed, and even withdrawn them selves
from being taught by the holy scripture. For they thought this belonged only
to the Monks and Priests. And in the end such a foolish and beastly opinion
was conceived, that men thought all divinity ought to be cloistered in their
dens and cabins. Now for all this, this testimony has always remained, and
must endure to the end of the world, that God has spoken with a loud voice,
that he has not hid, or drawn him self back into some little angle and
corner of the earth. So this has been a most wicked unthankfulness in men,
that they have left the word of God as clean cast off and forsaken of all. And
so much the more heedfullie ought we to note this place, wherein it is said,
that God directed not his speech only to some great Doctors, but has
communicated his voice to the whele people, even to the most simple and least
among them. And withal let us, to whom God has restored his world, praise and
magnify him for so inestimable a benefit, whereof the greatest part of the
world have deprived them selves by their own malice and retchlesse
negligence. Let us, I say, praise and extol his goodness, that his word at
this day sounds in our ears, that we may read it, that all both
privately and publikelie may be partakers thereof, that this heavenly
treasure is laid open unto us to use and to enjoy it. Behold an inestimable
benefit, and above all, he bestows on us, for which we ought to magnify
our God, as priceing this benefit above all the rest. Moreover, let us be
attentive to hear our GOD speak. Let none allege here any excuse to exempt
him self from this duty. For seeing that GOD speaks to the whole company of
the faithful, to all them which are baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, let every one in his degree and calling apply his study to profit
in the word of GOD: and let us all in general take God for our Master, and
let us be ready to hear him always, and as often as it shall please him to
speak unto us, as he cease not daily to do. And thus much be noted
touching the first point: wherein it is said, that GOD has spoken to the whole
multitude and assembly. Now let us come unto the second point we noted:
namely, that he added nothing. And this is said, that we might with better
courage hear that which is contained in the law. It is true, that all that
which Moses has written, apperteineth to the law, all that likewise which the
Prophets have left in writting: finally, whatsoever has been adjoined in the
Gospel, all this (I say) contains one substance of doctrine, and the Bible
is big enough: but yet, because we should not need to wander far, or make
any great inquiry after that, whereunto we ought to tend, GOD has proposed
us one certain scope and mark, at which in ordering our whole life we might
aim, and shoot at. For all is referred to these ten sentences, as I have
said. Let us then but count over our fingers, and we shall have the ten
commandments of GOD, all is concluded in a short sum, which we ought to
bear in mind, to be good scholars under GOD. Therefore, when God uses such
brevity, are not men to to wicked and untoward, if they refuse such a
doctrine, if they will not for all this be at so much leisure, as to profit
in the word of GOD? How therefore let us lay aside all such vain and
frivolous replies, to say: O, the holy scripture is a deep sea, it is a
bottomless pit, if a man enter into it, which way shall he be able to get
forth? Let us allege no such things. It is true, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
that God shows in the holy scripture, that which the Angels desire to
behold. It is true, that we can have but some small taste thereof, while we
dwell in the world. It is sufficient, that we know in part, 1. Cor. 13. 12.
as Saint Paul speaks, and in darkness, beholding as it were in a glass,
that which we can not see as yet face to face. All this is very true: yet so
is it notwithstanding, that God has so conformed and abased him self unto our
rudeness and s^endernesse, that these things are easy unto us, or at the
least we shall be able to understand so much, as is profitable for our
salvation. If with all there be things doubtful and obscure, let this
sobriety be in us, that we advance not our own judgments, but that we
first ask counsel at the mouth of GOD, knowing that we are yet far from
our perfection. And yet, according to the measure, which he has given us, we
may always glory in this, that our Lord Jesus Christ will not leave us in
doubtfulnesse and ignorance, but that he will give us so sure and certain a
way, as wherein we shall be able to walk with great assurance: knowing that he
has not called us in vain unto him self, when we shall not have any
uncertain, and wandering course to run, but so certain a mark proposed, as
whereunto if we shall direct our race, we shall not need to fear any
erring, as destitute of some good guiding and direction. Let us therefore bear
in mind, that our Lord has not spoken according unto his own nature. For if
he would speak in his own language, should he be understood of mortal
creatures? Alas no. But how speaks he unto us in the holy scripture? Verily
he lispeth and stutteth for our better understanding. Saint Paul says, that
he became as a nource of little children, when he preached the Gospel. Now
when he spoke it of himself, 1 Thessalonians. 2. ^.
there is no doubt, but that he would show thereby the goodness of God, which
so governed him by his holy spirit. And this which is in S. Paul, we shall
find likewise in Moses, and in all the Prophets. Let us then diligently note,
that God is made as it were a nource, which will not speak unto her infant,
as she would unto a man, but will have respect unto the capacity of it. So God
abaseth him self, forasmuch as we could not understand what he said, except
he submitted him self to our understanding. Lo, for what cause he is like a
nource in the holy scripture, that men might not perceive his great and
infinite majesty, to the which we can not come, nor approach any thing near
unto it. Seeing GOD has been so gentle unto us, as to open himself unto us in
most familiar manner, so much more grievous a condemnation shall fall upon our
heads, if we bestow not pain to profit in that doctrine which he has, as
I may so say, showed unto us, that there rests nothing for us to do, but to
swallowe it, and digest it.

Let us therefore note, that when Moses says, That God added nothing to these
ten sentences, it is to this end, that we should show our selves more easy
to be taught, and be the more encouraged, knowing that God will not make us
to wander, and take endless labor, as in a thing which has neither bank nor
bottom: but he proposes unto us only ten sentences. True it is, that he
has expounded these ten commandments by Moses. And again, consequently
by the Prophets. Lastly, we have had the final declaration of them by our
Lord Jesus Christ, as it is at this day delivered us in the Gospel. But what?
We have yet this mark, whereunto we must always order our selves. We have
but ten words for our lesson, and seeing it is so, ought we not to judge
our selves very froward and perverse, if we despise so great grace of God,
and if we come not unto him, when he handles us after so gentle a manner?
This we have then briefly to bear in mind of this easiness and plainness
which Moses shows us to be in the word of GOD. And withal let us also
note, that he would hereby warn us, that we learn to content our selves with
the simplicity of the law, that we advise our selves how we come to
control GOD, to cloute our patches and pieces to his word. For when he spoke,
he spoke once for all, and will that men hold themselves to that he has said.
As we shall see hereafter, how he has streightlie forbidden us to bend either
to the right hand, or to the left, or to add any thing to his doctrine. And
in very deed, seeing GOD has adjoined nothing thereto, who are we, to
enterprise and take in hand any thing above him? Think we, that when GOD
delivered his law, he had lost his memory, and knew not what was profitable
for us? Can a man bethink himself of that which has been unknown unto GOD?
And again, beside all this, when our Lord has so applied himself unto us,
think we he would instruct us by halfes, and leave us in the midst of the
way? Let us therefore bear in mind, that seeing GOD having pronounced these
ten sentences, added nothing unto them: we must so wholly apply and rest
our selves simply on that doctrine which is contained in his law, that we
ventur not to enterlace any thing of our own whatsoever? but let us know,
that this is our perfect wisdom, to be obedient unto our GOD. It this had
been in all times well observed, we should not have been at this day so
incumbered, to amend the corruptions which reign throughout the world. For,
from whence comes it, that men have corrupted all religion, and the service
of GOD, as we see it is come to pass in Popery? The Papists will vaunt and
boaste themselves of serving GOD, when they shall have their solemnities, their
ceremonies, and other like trash. And whence is this? Even from this, that they
have presumed to add some thing to the word of GOD, when they thought it not
sufficient, that GOD should be served after his own manner and fashion: but
men must rear up some new devises in their brains, and fancy whatsoever they
should think good. So then, all this which they call the service of God in
Popery, is nothing else but a fardell of trumperies, which men have made up
together, and not only this, but that which has been spoken by the Prophet,
Esaie, 29. 18.
has been accomplished in them: namely, That they have despised and set at
naught the commandments of GOD, while they have been given to their own
inventions. And men see the wickedness and mischief which is happened by this
devilish boldness and presumption, when men have gone about to disguise the
word of GOD by their lies, and dreams, and dotages. So much the more
diligently therefore ought we to note this place, when it is said, That GOD
having once spoken, added nothing to that which he had said. And in very
deed, as I have alredie said, this is an horrible blasphemy, when men will
attempt to find out, I know not what, some thing better than that which is
contained in the law of GOD. This were to reprove him of a lie, or to think
that he was not well advised, or happillie that he forgot to give in
commandment that which he ought. And shall men find out some thing better
than he? Nay verily. Then let us learn to order our selves in such forte
unto God, that we have this always imprinted in memory, that God having
spoken, he made a full end and conclusion, to say, These are my limits and
borders, whosoever will presume to go beyond, shall but ventur further to
break his neck. And in deed it can not otherwise be, but a ruin and
destruction shall follow upon us, when we will not keep us in that high way,
which God has made, and hedged in for us. Now, albeit GOD speak not at this
time in so visible manner, as he did then to the people of Israel: yet ought
we often to call to mind this lesson, which is contained in the law. True it
is, that God has not spoken twice, but he has spoken once for all, as we
say: but we on our part must again and again call it to mind, as it is also
said in the Psalm, The Lord has spoken once, I have heard him twice. For
hereby we are admonished, Psalm. 62. 10.
that it shall not suffice to have understood for one day that which our Lord
will have pronounced and published in his name: but we must often and sundry
times meditate thereupon. Let every one therefore exercise himself herein all
the time of his life, and let us not cease evening and morning, to call this to
mind, and to consider well that which our Lord shows us. For when we have
employed all the time of our life herein, we shall hardly come so far as the
midde way. True it is (as we have already said) that even at the first entry
God teaches us so much as is expedient to be known for our salvation. But yet
for all this, we shall always find wherein to make our further profit in the
word of GOD. Let us therefore be diligent, and let us not think it is labor
lost, which we bestow herein: no, not when we apply our study day by day
herein, and shall not give over to search and inquire after that which God
teaches us. Behold in what sort we must apply this to our use, and practice
it: wherein it is said that our Lord has added nothing.

Now let us come to the third point, which is, that God spoke out of the
midst of the fire of the cloud, and of the whirlewind. It is true that this
has been before expounded already: but seeing it is repeated again unto us
by Moses, let us note that it is not any thing superfluous. And in very deed,
we cannot be to often put in mind hereof, that the word of God ought to
bear a great majesty with us, to humble us under it, that we may yield all
subjection and obedience thereunto. And why? First we see what pride and
arrogancy is in men, that they can hardly stoop and bend their necks to be
pliable in such sort as they ought. I grant, a man shall not hear them say
plainly and in express words, they will resist God, and make open war with
him. But what ever they protest herein, are they so tractable to be taught, so
humble and modest as were requisite they should be? Nay, they are far wide
from this. Again, there is in us such a dullness and insensibleness, that
being so nous^ed, as we are, in these earthly things, and so charmed in them,
we can not raise up our understanding to hearken unto GOD, we can not come
near this spiritual wisdom, for as much as our minds are sore possessed
with the cares of this world, we need not any thing to make us rest our
minds here below on the earth. It is therefore very needful and necessary,
that our Lord touch us to the quick, to the end we may bear such a
reverence unto his word, as that it die not altogether in us: partly by our
rebellion, partly by our stupiditie and dullness, that is to say: because we
are so lumpish, so earthly, so gross and worldly minded: and partly, for
that we are already fraughted with so many vanities, that we never mind
such things as are on high, but lying still groueling on the ground, we are
held occupied in these transitory and corruptible things. Therefore, GOD (not
without cause) spoke out of the midst of the fire, and of the cloud, and
whirle wind, when he would publishe his fame. For it behooved, that the people
should be touched with some great fear, to say: There is no talk of sporting
our selves with God, when he appears unto us so terrible, and in such
majesty: what rests then, but that we tremble under him, and show, unto
him such subjection, that he govern us as his sheep, that we all bend our
neck, that we sloope with our head, suffering him to order us to his will,
that every one give himself wholly thereto, and that we be all confounded,
when he speaks, and have no other affection and desire in us, but to serve
and honor him, and to subject our selves altogether to his guiding and
direction. Lo, why God has so magnified his law, when it was first
published. He might well have spoken without casting out flames of fire,
without making the mountain to smoke, without having so dark and obscure a
cloud: but he would use these miracles, that the people should tremble,
being stricken with an exceeding great fear. And therefore let us note, that
he would hereby lead us unto that, Esaie. 66. 5.
which the Prophet Esaie speaks, That his spirit shall not rest, but upon
them which tremble at his word. For this is the thing wherein he will prove
our obedience toward him: namely, that when he speaks, we receive without
any contradiction or gainsaying, what soever he shall say, that we account it
good for us, and agree thereunto, and say, Amen: not only with the mouth, but
also with the heart, that in our whole life we serve and obeie him. For this is
the service which GOD requires, and wherewith he will be honored: namely,
that we declare what obedience we bear unto his word. But because we are
herein so hard and so heavy, that rather we draw clean backwarde, than
bend the neck to carry his yoke, it is needful that we be aided and set
forward by such means as are here mentioned. And therefore, let us note, that
this flame of ^ire appeared not then to serve and instruct them only, which
saw it: but that at this day the law of God must by this testimony and
witness be authorized, and made authentike: and that the remembrance hereof
should remain so fresh in our memory, that when we shall call to mind this
which happened for one time, we be humbled under the majesty of our God, and
that when we would proudly and presumptuouslie lift up our selves against him,
this fire which then burned to fear the people, the thick and dark cloud
likewise come before our eyes, that we remember also, how the mount was seen
to smoke, and that all this may be to hold us in such a fright and fear, that
all loftiness and hautinesse of ours be beaten down, that we may bethink us
to come and present our selves to our God, to be led by him whither he will,
and that we may follow, most willingly, whither soever we shall be called of
him. Ye see then whereunto we must refer this which is here touched, of the
smoke, of the flame of fire, and of the thick cloud. And withal, let us note,
that when God appeared in a whirlewind, and in an obscure and dark cloud, this
was to repress and keep down the curiosity of men. It is true (as we have
already touched) that GOD speaks to be understood, that he uses no
doubtful and ambiguous words, that he fetches no long circumstances (as we
say) but manifests and opens his will so clerelie and plainly, that the
fault shall be no where but in us, if we be not perfectly instructed therein,
if we will but lend our ears to hear him. But in the mean time, we must
not bring with us such a foolish curiosity, as to inquire, beyond measure,
of what we list: as we see men inclined to such a foolish ambition, that
their ears are always itching, and they will say: I would know this and
that. Now, behold how our Lord God opposes him self contrarily, and
says: Will you know this and that? Lo, a thick cloud which hinders you:
consider of this obscurity and darkness which you see. So let us learn,
that if we will be good scholars under God, we must not loose the bridle to
our own fantasies, to be inquisitiue after that which ought to be hidden from
us: but let us content our selves with that, which shall be spoken unto us in the
name of God, and let us wait for that day, wherein we shall have a full
manifestation of the rest which is now incomprehensible: briefly, let us be
ignorant of that which God will not declare us. For this ignorance surmounteth
all the knowledge and wisdom of the world: namely, when we desire to know
no more, than our Lord permitted and granted unto us. Now let us come unto
that which Moses adds: he says, That the law was written in two tables of
stone, and that it was delivered to him. When mention is made of two tables, we
must call to mind that which has been said and handled heretofore: that is,
that God could well have written the whole law in one stone, but he would write
it in two, that this distinction being made, we might so much the better
comprehend that which is contained in the law. For we see, our Lord has so
chewed those things for us, which are there contained, that we might not
allege that he speaks in to high a language for us to understand. For as
much as there are two principal points in our life, our Lord has divided his
law into two tables: namely, that we might know, how we ought to govern our
selves toward him: and then, how we are to live and to be conversant with our
neighbors. Will a man order his life in all perfection? It behooves first that
he give him self to the service of God, that he know what God requires and
approves: and after this, we must live in such uprightness and equity with
our neighbors, that we sheire hereby, that we are the true children of God.
First therefore we must know how God will be honored and worshipped of us.
Secondly, we must render to our neighbors, that which apperteineth to them:
observing this indifferency of nature, not to do to another, which we would
not have done to us. So God has declared in two tables, in what sort he will
be served of us: as we have above declared, that he proposes him self
only to be worshipped, that men should forge no new Gods. Again, he has
declared, that he will not be represented by images normoppets that he is a
spirit, and will be spirituallie worshipped of us, and not as men shall fancy,
to rear up this or that kind of worship: but he will be served in spirit.
Again, he will have his name sanctified, he will that men exercise them
selves in his word: and above all, that every one withdraw him self from
his own thoughts and affections, that we rest us to be ruled and governed
only by GOD. And this is contained in the first table of the law. Touching
the second, we have seen how he commands us to obey father and mother,
how he forbids us murders, adulteries, theftes, evil speakings, all
wicked lusts and concupiscences. Ye see then, why GOD has divided his law
into two tables. Will we therefore order our life well, and as we ought? Let
us first learn to honor GOD, and after that, to live with our neighbors in
all integrity and uprightness. For there are some, which will abstain from
iniuring of others: but in the mean while, they have little regard of GOD: and
they think they are quited and absolved, if so be none indite them, nor
complain of them in this world. But (I pray you) what shall this be, not to
be thieves, if we commit sacrilege? Is it not a greater and more enormious
crime, to rob GOD of his honor, than to spoil a man of his goods, to cut
his purse, or to pick his chest? So let us not think we have fully
discharged our duty, when men shall sue no process, nor make any complaint
against us: for God must also have that he requires, and is due unto him: for
we are bound to do him homage all our life time. We must therefore bestow
so much the more study to observe the first table of the law, that we lead
not a Philosophical life, as did some of the Painims, to live honestly and
vprightlie with men: but let us have in greatest price and estimation, the
honor of GOD, and let us begin first of all at this point. Now again,
there are some which would seem very devout toward GOD, as having some
great zeal to serve and honor him: but when they be conversant with men,
they fall to pilling and spoiling, and beating of them, they are full of
cruelty, of envy, and malice. But let us note, that GOD has not separated
the two tables of the law: he has made a distinction of them: but he has
not given to some the first table of the law, and to others the second table.
He has said: Behold my law, and that which I have joined together, must not
be severed, but must remain inseperable.

It is true, that you ought to be warned to follow that charity which you
owe to your neighbors: but yet, when you have discharged your duty in one
point, you must conform your selves unto the other: and you must not
retchlesly neglect to walk in all equity and uprightness, when you shall
have showed some great devotion of honoring and serving of me. There are also
many, which will serve God: but how? As there own blind devotion shall teach
them: as do the Papists. But God meant to bridle us herein, when he gave unto
us the first table of his law, that we might learn to serve him as he
commands, and that we accept of nothing as good, which he approves and
likes not. See then whereunto this apperteineth, which is said, That God wrote
his law in two tables of stone, to the end it might remain and continue. For
it has not been given to remain for a certain time, it is not transitory. I
grant that the ceremonies have an end, as this is a reason, why the law is
called temporal, for as much as this order which had been established among
the ancient people, to endure until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
was then taken away and abolished, and the things were perfect: so that we are
no longer under these figures and shadows of the law, which served for that
time. But the truth and substance of the law was not to remain for one age, but
it is a thing which endures, and shall never cease or have end. Let us
therefore learn, that God in such sort published his will, when the people
came out of the land of Egypt, that he so spoke in the mount of Sinai, that
withal he delivered unto us there an order which we should observe, and so
prouidedst, that his doctrine should always have his full force and vigor. And
for this cause he has written his law in two tables of stone. He has not
written it in bark, as at that time the manner was, or as we might now say in
paper, or in parchment: but he would that it should be engraven in stone: that
there might be a memorial thereof to endure, to the end we should be confirmed
in this which he has spoken. For he was not contented to have spoken for one
time, but having engraven his law in stone, he would we should have attentive
ears to receive it all the time of our life. Now withal let us note, that it
is true that it served to no great purpose, that the law of God should be
engraven in stones. If this were all, what is then further required? We must
know that the doctrine of God proposed unto us, is indeed necessary and
profitable for us, but yet that it should serve us to small purpose, except God
should add thereunto a second grace: namely, that this which he has
pronounced, should be imprinted in our hearts and inward parts. Therefore, as
God with his finger, that is by his divine power, has written his law in two
stones, so must he now by his holy spirit write it in our hearts, which are
of stone, and full of hardness: Eze. 11. 19.
as the Prophet declares, when he says, That God shall give us hearts of
flesh, which shall be loft, pliable, and apt to be taught, and to receive
whatsoever he shall command us. So then, seeing God has visiblie declared,
that it is he which must write the law, to have it well known and
understood, let us make our request, that it will please him, by the virtue
and power of his holy spirit, to write it at this day in us, that we may
hold it within us, and that how soever the devil labor herein, he may
never wipe it out of our remembrance. Now withal Moses concludes, that the
law was delivered unto him, to conserve, and to keep it, and to be also the
minister and dispenser of it to the people, that he might be acknowledged of
them for a Prophet, for otherwise he could not have executed his office, he
could not have edified the Church of GOD, except men had known that this
charge was committed unto him. As at this time, if we were not persuaded that
GOD would that his Gospel should be preached by the mouth of men, that there
should be pastors in the Church to carry abroad his word, which of us would
daine or vouchsafe to hear a minister? I am not, nor ante creature beside, of
such dignity, as that I might persuade the world to receive what I say. But
when I speak here in the name of God, that men hearken to his doctrine, to
rule and order them selves thereto, and to do him homage: behold, this is of
more force than all the laws, than all the statutes, than all the edictes of
Kings and Emperors. Has a mortal man done this? No. But when we know that
God would that this policy and rule of order should be in his Church, and that
men should inuiolablie observe it, that is: that there be Pastors which may
bear his word abroad, which may be expounders of it, which may be as his
messengers to announce and declare the remission of sins in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which may reprehend, which may reprove, which may comfort
and exhort, when (I say) we understand that God would such a regiment should be
in his Church, then are we ashamed to resist and withstand him, which has
formed and created us. Lo why Moses in this place says, that God delivered
him the law. It is true, that God delivered it to all the people in general,
as we have said. Why then is Moses now the only possessor of it? It seems
that God would deprive the whole world of it, and that Moses only were
priuileged therein, as if the law were written for him, and all other (as it
were) excluded and shut out from it. But this is nothing so. And yet, albeit
the law was given for the whole people, Moses is appointed the garder and
protector of it. And this which God has pronounced of him, we must extend
further, as we see the Prophets were appointed in the self same charge:
namely, that they were as stewardes and dispensers of the treasure of
salvation, of this covenant of God, and that this office was given unto them,
always to declare the will of GOD, and to preach it unto us in his name. And
this is the general rule which Saint Paul has delivered, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
That men ought to esteem us as the ministers of God, and dispensers of the
secrets which he has sent the world. Now, when Saint Paul says, That we
are disposers of the secrets of GOD, he shows hereby, that it is not enough
that we have the holy Scripture, that every one read it in his house: but it
is further required, that it be preached unto us, that we retain among us this
order, to be taught by the mouth of men, that there be pastors and teachers,
whose ministry God uses, to the end that when we shall hear them, we may
profit more and more in the doctrine of salvation. And this is the cause why
Saint Paul in an other place says, 1. Tim. 3, 1^.
That the Church is the pillar of truth, and as it were the safeguard and tower
thereof. The Papists allege this very foolishly, to yield unto themselves a
licentious liberty of making new articles of faith, and of establishing laws
after their own fancy: for Saint Paul has understood the clean contrary.
He says therefore, That the Church is the pillar and sure prop of the truth of
God: because that when GOD published his truth unto men by the law, by the
Prophets, and the Apostles, he would, that this ministry should endure and
be perpetual: that is, that there should be some deputed and appointed to
this office and charge, to expound his word, to edify the Church in this
sort. Let us therefore know, that it is by means of the Church, that the
truth remains in his perfect and entire estate. For when GOD raises up men,
which are endued with his spirit, to confirm us in the faith, to enlighten
us, and to show us the right way. Lo how the truth of God remains unto the
world, how it is not extinguished, how it perishes not. Let us then note,
that Moses meant not here to make himself the only possessour of the law,
to exclude the people from it, and to shut them out of doors: but he speaks
as thus unto them: Well-beloved, it is very true, that the law is common unto
us all, we are all the children of God, I challenge nothing unto my self
above you: yet for all this, if I will discharge my duty in the office wherein
God has appointed me, I must be a faithful expositor of the law to you, I
must be the keeper of it, that you tread it not under foot, I must put you in
mind of it every day, that you never forget it. Seeing then it is so, let all
them which are here appointed ministers of the word of God, take heed they be
pressed and ready to serve and minister unto the ignorant: and let all consider,
that it is not enough to read the holy Scripture, but we must be diligent to
profit therein, and to come with all humility to hear them, which are
ordained ministers of the word, to deliver unto us the meaning and
understanding thereof. Thus ye see whereto this text is to be referred.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgement of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better than
we have done, and to lead us to such a repentance, that we desire only to
serve and please him, without seeking after any thing of our own. And because
we are so given to the things of this world, pray we him the sooner to draw us
hence, and in the mean while, to give us his grace to order our life to his
will, and to conform it to his justice. And for the doing hereof, pray we him,
that his word may bear such rule over us, that we be governed by it, and
conform our whole life thereto, until that being despoiled of all our carnal
affections, we be clothed with his heavenly glory, when we shall have need,
neither of scripture, nor of preaching. That it will please him to grant this
grace, not only to us, but unto all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 14. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 23 And when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the
darkness, because the mountain did burn, ye came to me all the chief of
your tribes and your elders.

24 And ye said, Behold the Lord our God has showed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire, we
have seen this day that God has talked with man, and he remains living.

25 And now why should we die? etc.


WE think if God in stead of preaching his word by the mean and ministry
of men, should in his own majesty speak, or that some Angel sent from him
should appear unto us, that we should be more lively touched than we are,
and that the whole world incontinently would be converted, that every one
would yield obedience without any either contradiction or rebellion. But alas,
we know not what is convenient and profitable for us. For if we considered of
our own frailty and weakness, we would soon understand that it is not
possible for God, to touch us with his majesty and power, but he must needs
altogether ouerwhelme and confound us. Therefore, when men desire that GOD
would manifestly show himself with some visible sign, or that he would
descend from the heavens to teach them, they know not what ones themselves
are, neither consider they how weak and frail their condition is. For if
they would well consider and bethink themselves hereof, the infinite glory of
GOD would strike them with a wonderful fear and trembling, knowing full well,
that they are not able to bear it. Therefore let us know that GOD procures
our profit and salvation, when he declares unto us his will by the mouth of
men, when he ordeineth and appoints ministers of his word, to be
messengers unto us of such things as he knows to be meet and convenient for
us. And yet so is it, that for once he would by evident proof hold men
convicted, that it were not good and profitable for them to hear his voice
thunder from heaven. And that is the cause why he would publish his law, not
simply by Moses, but descending in his own person, as we have already
handled. And yesterday we said, that the lighteninges, the whirlewinde, and
the flaming fire, and all that we read of in the 19. and 20. of Exodus, that
all this (I say) was done, to the end the people of Israel should learn to
bear greater reverence unto the word of God.

Now this instruction apperteineth also unto us. For God would that the memory
of these things should last for ever, and that the use of them should be
perpetual. So then, behold GOD has once displaied and laid open his glorious
majesty, to the end we might learn to receive his word in all fear and
humility. But withal he would also that the people of themselves should be
constrained to say, It is not good that God speak unto us again, only let
us have a man to bring us such doctrine as it shall please him to send us. And
this rule is for to condemn us, if we follow not the example of this people,
which hastily put forth themselves to speak in this sort. Now if any one
allege, that this which was then spoken cannot bind us, he is easily thus
answered: That if at this day God would do the like he did then, that is,
would pronounce with his own mouth that which we now hear by the mouth of
mortal men, it should be impossible for us to abide his glory: and not to be
altogether overwhelmed therewith, and utterly confounded. And so let us
learn, that this is here recited unto us, to the end that, in the person of
the people of Israel, we know that God applies himself to our slenderness
and infirmity, when it pleases him to send us his word to be preached by
men like unto our selves, which might be his messengers, respecting herein
what is behoouefull and profitable for us. And know we, that this is an
inordinate and foolish desire, to wish that God would appear unto us from
heaven, or show us some apparent and visible miracle. For we cannot comprehend
his majesty and glory. And although it be the proper nature of the law to
fraie us, yet apperteineth this as well unto the Gospel. For we must take
this as a general rule, that as soon as we feel the presence of God, we
must needs be confounded. We see how the Angels hide their eyes, because the
glory of God is greater than they can bear, and they are constrained to
confess, that they are ouerweake to behold it as being creatures. What shall
then be said of us? For we are far inferior unto the Angels. And there is
beside in us an other thing, which makes our infirmity the greater: namely,
that we retain not that integrity and innocence of our first nature, we
are not such as God created us, that is to say, earthly men only as was our
father Adam: but we are altogether corrupted, and there is nothing in us but
sin and wickedness. And therefore it must needs be, that God be made our
enemy, and that we fly from his throne, as malefactors will keep themselves
as far as they can from the judgment seat of their Judge: briefly, we are
poor miserable worms and stinking carions. So then, as soon as GOD shall
approach and come near unto us, we must needs be frighted with so great a
fear, as to be beaten therewith down to the ground. Therefore it is profitable
for us, that God declare himself unto us in such sort as has been already
touched: namely, by the mean and ministry of men: that he ordeine and
appoint men to expound us his will, as if he himself spoke, and that his
word be received of us in such reverence, as if we heard him to thunder from
the heavens. But it shall be profitable for us more fully to understand that
which in a word we have here touched, and else where more largely handled:
namely, that the law in comparison of the Gospel frighteth and fraieth us
with a wonderful fear. And why is this? Because that in the law, God
requires of men that which is his due.

Now consider we, whether we are able to discharge our selves herein. Nay
contrariwise, whether we be not as poor and miserable debtors, which have not
one farthing to pay. Ye see then in what a desperate case we are. For howeuer
the case stands with us, God discharges us not, but declares that we are
worthy to beaccursed and condemned of him. And for this cause having showed
how the life of men ought to be ordered, he adds this curse and malediction
as thundering on us, Deuteronomy. 27. 26
Cursed are they which observe and accomplish not all those things which are
here contained. As if he said, All men must pass here under condemnation,
from the greatest to the least, all must know they are indebted unto me, and
that by right I may cast them down to the bottomless pit of hell. If I
pronounce this sentence, there is not one may be able to reply against me,
for all are utterly lost and condemned. Behold the language and speech of the
law, behold the style which God uses, and now must not all needs tremble
hereat? It is not then without great cause said, That the law fraieth us: and
if withal it should please God severely to require of us that which we owe
him, we must all needs perish and be confounded. Now in the Gospel there is
no such thing: for there GOD bears with us, and not only pardons us our
faults, but he writes also his will in our hearts. Moreover, albeit we
serve him but by halfes, yet he pardons us our default, and (as I may say)
winketh and closes his eyes when we are halting in our duty. And as a
father deals not over streightlie and preciselie with his child to oppress
him, so God in his Gospel vleth a fatherly gentleness toward us, that we
should not fear to come unto him.

And this is the cause why the Apostle in the epistle to the Hebrews says,
Heb. 12. 18.
That we are not come to this mount which smoketh, that we are not come to
Sinai, to see the bruning fire which might astonnish us, to see the
lightenings, and all those other things which were to amaze and confound the
people: but that we hear a sweet and pleasant melody, by the which we are
accompanied of the angels of heaven, with the souls of the holy Patriarchs,
and of the fathers, which lived in the hope of eternal life, (although they
had yet nothing but obscure shadows) that God now coupleth and joins us with
them which in old time have waited for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Seeing it is so, we must not draw back, but every one must set himself
forward, to come with a bold courage to hear our GOD, forasmuch as he
speaks so gently and lovingly unto us, and uses so fatherly a speech, as
which serves not to fear and amaze his children, but sweetly to entise
them, and to win their hearts unto him. This difference therefore is worthy
to be noted, that in comparison of the law, the Gospel may seem sweet and
amiable unto us. But for all this, we must return to this general principle:
namely, that it is much better that the word of GOD be preached unto us by
the mouth of men, than if GOD him self should thunder from heaven. And why?
For hear we only this natural thunder, and behold we are taken with a
great astonishment, and yet here is nothing expressed. God only makes a noise
with a confused and imperfect sound. What should be then, when he should
speak unto us, and when he should show us his glory? We can not look on
the Sun, which his a corruptible creature: and how then shall we be able to
behold the majesty of GOD, if it were fully showed us, and in his perfection?
And therefore it is said, that a mortal creature can not see GOD and live, can
not behold his glory, and not be utterly confounded. I grant that GOD
appeared unto Moses, and that not in such sort only, as to other of the
Prophets, as it is said in the book of Numbers, That he gave him this
special privilege, Numb. 12. 7. 8.
to be seen of him face to face, even plainly as of his friend, that he
appeared not unto him, either by dream, or by vision only, but after such an
especial manner, that Moses seemed to be exempted from the company of men,
to be made more familiar unto GOD. But what ever be said hereof, yet God
manifested him self unto him in portion and measure. For if he had showed him
his infinite being, Moses must have needs (what grace soever he had received
of the holy spirit) been overwhelmed therewith, and utterly confounded. Yea,
when at one time being yet among the living, GOD showed him his glory in more
ample and plain manner than ever he had done: yet saw he him not, but as it
were by the back and hinder parts. In this similitude it is declared unto us,
Exodus 33. 2^.
that as in beholding a man in the back, we have not the plainest sight of
him (for the plainest sight of a man, and the principal view is in the face:)
so, albeit Moses had an especial familiarity with GOD, yet this
notwithstanding, in this sovereign and principal vision which was given him
in the mount then when he was separated from the condition of this mortal and
transitory life, when he was as an angel of heaven, yet he saw GOD but in
part: as when we see a man by the back. So let us learn to content our
selves when GOD uses this order toward us: namely, that his word be
preached unto us by men: and let us so receive it at their mouth, as if we
saw his majesty face to face. For it is profitable for us to have pastors,
which be appointed for ministers of the word, forasmuch as we could but perish
and be brought to nothing by the appearaunce of the glory of God, if it should
be manifested unto us. And to the end that none might take any occasion to
complain, as if the word of GOD were not sufficiently approved, and that
men might not doubt whether they ought to hold them selves unto it or no, in
publishing his law he showed himself. And we have here the testimony of the
people, which say: It is the Lord, he has made us this day to feel his
glory and greatness, we have seen that it is he which speaks, he has
interposed none to be his spokesman unto us: but we have heard his voice with
our ears. This then has been done for once. Withal let us take this which is
here recited for a testimony and witness, that Moses spoke not of him self,
that he has not forged and devised of his own brain, the doctrine we hold
of him: but that he has been a faithful steward of GOD, who aduowed and
approved him, and not only ratified and confirmed by miracles this which
Moses taught, but in his own person declared, that it was he who was the
author of all this doctrine. Now, forasmuch as by great reason the Gospel
should be as authentike, and as well authorized as the law, we have had also
a witness from heaven, that this is no humane doctrine, but that it proceeds
from GOD. And this is that which S. Peter touches in his second canonical
Epistle, ^. Pet. 1. 18.
saying: That he and his companions heard the voice from heaven, by the which
the father declared his son to be the sovereign master, and doctor of his
whole Church: Behold my well-beloved son, hear him. Therefore, when this voice
thundered from heaven, GOD declared that we ought not to take the Gospel for
a doctrine bredde and borne here beeneath: but that we should always have
this majesty before our eyes.

As at this time, if we will be true disciples of GOD, when we come unto the
sermon, we must call to mind this which Moses recites, That the Law was
published in such sort, that it was God himself which spoke and pronounced it.
And again, we must adioyne in the second place, the witness we have
alleged, that this sentence of God resound and ring again in our ears, when
he has pronounced: That our Lord Jesus Christ is he, whom he will have men to
hear. Lo an authentike and sure seal we have, that the word of God,
albeit it be brought unto us by mortal men, should be of full and perfect
authority with us, as it deserves. And to the end that men should not think,
that Jesus Christ only ought to be heard in his own person, Luc. 10. 16.
he says: He that hears you, hears me: and he which refuses or despises
you, he refuses both me, and him which has sent me. Indeed the Pope and his
sacrilegious adherentes, usurp this sentence for to establishe their tyranny:
but it appereteineth as much to them, as to the devil of hell. And why? For
they should first of all bring us the pure doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ:
seeing the son of GOD has not so resigned his office unto men, as to
despoile himself thereof: he will not have us governed after the appetite and
lust of men, but he will always have that preeminence over us, and that rule
and empire, which has been committed into his hands. So then, when it is
said, That in hearing of them whom he has sent, we hear him, it is meant,
that if we obey the doctrine of his Gospel, not despising it when it is
published unto us by men, it is as much as if he spoke unto us: admonishing us
hereby, that we stay not our selves on the outward appearaunce we behold with
our eyes. And this is that which Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 4, 7.
That albeit we be brittle bessels: yea, broken pottes of no value, yet this
inestimable treasure, which is committed unto us, is not therefore of less
price and estimation, neither ought the dignity and worthiness of it for this
cause be diminished. True it is, that we are not able to procure unto the word
of God such a reverence as gladly we would and desire. And why? For there is
in us nothing, nothing I say of our own, which may make for the advancing of
the glory of GOD: and yet for all this, we must make proof of our obedience
in this behalf, that is, that we bear abroad the word of GOD, with such
great confidence and boldness, as knowing that he has made us his
Ambassadors, to declare his will: and withal let us beware we correct all
hautinesse and presumption herein. As for those unto whom we come, let them
receive in all simplicity the doctrine of the Gospel, and let them not
dispute, why and wherefore they are bound to subject them selves unto mortal
men. For seeing that men should despise, and set at naught the son of GOD:
yea: the heavenly father which has ordained him sovereign doctor, except
they hear him whom he has sent for his messengers, it behooves us with all
diligence to be ruled and ordered hereunto. So then let us learn to stoop
our neck, to bear the yoke of the son of GOD, receuing the doctrine of the
Gospel in all humility, although it be preached unto us by men. And as I
have already said, let us diligently consider the ratification it has, which
ought to suffice us to know, that the Gospel has been brought from GOD
himself, seeing it has been warranted and ratified from heaven, when GOD with
his own mouth pronounced, that he would that men should hear his son. Ye
see in effect what we have to bear in mind upon this place. And therefore
let us follow them of whom mention is here made: namely, that we desire not,
that GOD for our pleasure descend from heaven: but when it shall please him
otherwise to communicate his word unto us, let us be therewith sufficiently
contented. Now it might seem at the first sight, that there were in this place
some contrariety. For the people say: We have seen this day how God speaks
unto men, and yet they live. And afterward: We shall die if God speak unto
us. For it seems, that if we have once had experience, that God confounds
us not when he speaks, that this ought to make us more bold and hardy. And
why? For seeing we are remaining alive, albeit we have heard the voice of
God: when he has done this for once, why shall he not do it twice or thrice?
And here the people say, We have heard the voice of God, but if he speak
again unto us, behold we die, we are undone, we perish. It seems that
they trusted not to the bounty and goodness of GOD, and that they were also
very unthankful, for not acknowledging and remembering the benefit, which
GOD bestowed on them, when he left unto them their full vigor and strength. But
we must note that the people hereby declares, that they will not tempte GOD
any further, that it suffices them once to have known that the law was not a
thing forged and feigned by men, but that GOD was the only author thereof.
This sentence therefore ought thus to be taken, as if they had said: We have
this day seen that GOD speaks unto men, and they yet continue alive: this is
sufficient for us, we must take heed, we abuse not the patience of God. He
has spared us this day, but we must not hereupon conclude, that he will
always do so: he has tried us in this sort for one time; even because of
our malice, our stubbornness, and hardness of heart. For were we worthy
unto whom he should in this wise appear in his glory? But he knew that we
would not be sufficiently daunted and tamed to be ordered to his obedience,
except he should come unto us in his visible glory, and should amaze us with
such fear as to confound us. So then, if he should not have won us by such
force, he knew well we would have still continued as wild and savage
beasts. But seeing it has pleased him of his goodness to pardon us the fault
and offense we have committed, and that at this day he bears mercifully with
us, let us not return to tempt his patience any more. For this should be too
great an outrage, this should be to mock his gentleness, and to make a
scorn of his patience. So then this testimony suffices us, both for our
life, and for the life of our children: and for ever unto all posterities, even
to the end of the world. Wherefore let them which shall come after us know,
that they must not enter into this fond and foolish desire, to wish to draw
God unto them out of the heavens, as if it were convenient he should be our
fellow mate and companion Ye see then how the ^ two places agree very well
together. Now here we have to note, that albeit the word of God be of that
force and power, as to destroy and bring us to nothing, that he yet uses such
mercy toward us, that it is unto us to life, in steed of consuming and
destroying us. And when I say that the word of God is of such force as to
consume us to nothing, I understand not only the word as it is here
described by Moses, but if the Lord would make us feel the virtue and power of
his word, albeit it should be preached unto us by men, yet should it serve
utterly to confound us. But now we see that the Lord quickens us, when he
speaks unto us, and especially at this day, John. 5. ^^.
when the Gospel is preached unto us: for this which is spoken by Saint John,
is every day accomplished: namely, That all those which hear the word of
the son of man, are restored to life. For by nature we are aliantes from
GOD, we are exiled and banished his kingdom, we are dead, and as it were
en^umbed in some grave or sepulcher: and lo, our Lord Jesus Christ profeteth
unto us the remission and forgiveness of our sins: God his father adopteth
us for his children. Behold then the manifestation of salvation which is
opened unto us, and we are thereby quickened and restored unto life by the
means of the Gospel. And for this we have wonderful great cause to praise
and glorify our GOD, for that he makes his word to serve for to restore us
unto life, and to deliver us from death, whereas his word is of such force and
virtue, as utterly to consume us, if he of his mercy did not turn it to
work a clean contrary effect in us.

Now withal let us diligently note, that if our Lord has once bestowed on us
more than we any way deserve, we must not therefore take leave and license
hereby to tempt him, and to desire always to rule him after our own lusts
and appetites. As we see at this day the Papists will excuse themselves for
not receiving the Gospel, because they see no miracles done in our time. Yea,
but let them answer me whereunto the miracles which our Lord Jesus Christ
has done, and which he committed to his Apostles, served? Ought these to
serve nothing to our profit and commodity? Behold then what admirable virtue
and power GOD has declared at the beginning of the Gospel. The heaven and the
earth were then moved, there was no part in the world wherein GOD imprinted
not some work or sign of his majesty, that the Gospel might be authorized.
Behold the Angels, which descended at the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
bear witness unto him: behold the Sun which was darkened at his death:
behold the veil of the temple which was rent in two pieces, to show that the
holy Sanctuary was opened, and that freer and bolder access was granted unto
GOD than ever before. The raging and tempestuous Sea is appeased, the devils
themselves do homage to the glory of GOD being present.

Briefly, both by signs and wonders above and beneath, God has declared that
the Gospel proceeded from him, as we have already showed. So many maladies
and sicknesses healed, so great wars appeased, so many other signs and
wonders which were showed, were not to serve for one time only, but at this
day the memory of them ought to remain: and we must receive this witness
for a seal of our faith, that we doubt not, but that the dignity of the
Gospel ought to be as great at this day, and that the authority thereof is
as well now ratified and confirmed, as it was then, when Christ wrought his
miracles. And yet for all this, we see many of the vncredulous and unbelieving
sort, which allege, that if they did see any miracles, they should be
converted.

But it is certain, if they were now presently showed, they would still
remain in their obstinacy and stubbornness, and take thereby an occasion of
further enuenoming and impoisoning themselves against GOD. What remains then
for us to do? We must learn (as I have said) to content our selves with that
which GOD has once done. If GOD has given us more than he owed us, let us
receive it, and with giving of thanks let us learn not to provoke his wrath
and anger against us by an over presumptuous tempting of his patience. Behold
then what we have to bear in mind in this place, when the people says, Let
the Lord speak unto us no more, for it suffices us that were have heard his
voice, and yet have been permitted of him to live. And that this we have above
declared may be more certeinlie confirmed unto us, let us bear in mind that
which is here said, What flesh has heard the voice of the living GOD and
lives? For by these words in this place, it is plainly showed, that the
people of Israel spoke not in their own name, but even in the behalf of all
mankind. They say not only, What are all we to hear GOD speak? but, What
is all flesh? And in very deed (as I have touched in the beginning) it cannot
be, but men are either staring mad, or stark dronken, when they cannot
humble themselves: for there needed no other thing for them to do, but to
respect their own estate and condition, to say, What are we? There is
nothing, neither in our bodies, nor in our souls, but frailty. We are not now
remaining in our nature wherein we were first created: but being fallen
therefrom into that estate we now are in, what are we but as a water which
glideth away, as a smoke which passes and vanishes on a soudeine? And which
worse is, we are enemies of GOD, and he must needs be our adversary
party, forasmuch as there is nothing in us to be found, but sin and
wickedness.

Therefore, when we be entised and tickled with such foolish and vain lusts
and desires, as to wish that GOD would do miracles, that we might hear the
angels of heaven: let us return to think on this which is here said, and what
is all flesh? Let us, I say, enter into this consideration, to bethink our
selves what we are, and our own small ability shall sufficiently advise and
advertise us, to give praise and thanks unto God, that he makes us not feel
his presence to consume and utterly to confound us, but with an amiable
mildness and gentleness, allureth us to himself, when we hear men like our
selves, and our brethren, which speak unto us in his person.

And let us further note, that when the people of Israel say, What people has
heard the voice of the living God, and remained alive as we? It is to show
unto us, that God would not that this should be drawn into consequence, for
us to conclude any thing thereon. And therefore let us not allege this, to
say: And why speaks not God at this day unto us after a visible manner, as he
has done to his people in the mount? It pleased him then so to do, but we
must not impose him a law, or think to bind him to continue to do that
which he has done for one time only. So as I have said, let us not abuse
the graces of God, as despitefully to question against him in this sort, And
seeing God has done this at other times, why will he not do the like at this
day? When men lift themselves up in this manner against God, behold, what a
devilish presumption and ouerweening is in them. Let us then honor our God so
far as to grant him this liberty, to manifest and declare himself unto us
in such sort as it shall please him, and as he shall know it expedient and
necessary for us. Let us not bind him by constraint to any necessity, for
that it shall have pleased him for one time to use some especial grace, let us
not desire him to do the same again, but content we our selves simply with
his will, whereunto we must always be subject. In the end, it is said, Go thou
near unto God, and hear all which he shall say unto thee, and declare thou it
unto us, and we will hear it, and do it. We see here in the first place how
the people desire that Moses should be the messenger, to bring them whatsoever
he shall have received from God. And this is written for our instruction, that
every one submit himself to the policy and rule of order which God has
established in his church. For (as I have already said) he will speak unto
us by the mouth of men, that is the only purpose why he would there should
be ministers. This order is not invented by men, but our Lord Jesus Christ
has declared, that he would have such a regiment in his church. Ye see then
an inviolable order, and which proceeds from GOD, who will have Pastors in
his church to announce and declare his doctrine which we must receive to our
salvation. Seeing it is so, let none oppose himself against it, but let us
patiently bear it, that God raise up them amongst us, by whom he will be
served to bring unto us the embassage of salvation. And let us not murmur at
this, that every one of us has not such a privilege: for he will that his
body, that is, his church, be so governed. Ye see then what we have to
gather upon this place: namely, that sithence GOD has appointed ministers of
his word, we hear them quietly and contentiuelie, that there be no envying
or malicing for this, if all be not Doctors and teachers, and that GOD appoint
not every one unto this office. For we must be ordered according to his good
pleasure, as we have already said.

Behold one note to be observed. But withal, let us also note, under what
condition we must have and receive Pastors. For this place is to discern
between s^ductors and deceivers, which falsely abuse the name of GOD, and
attribute unto themselves the title of Prelates without time or reason, and
between the true Prophets and good seruitours of God, and ministers of the
Gospel. The Pope and all his pestilent vermin will say, that men must hear
them, and receive their doctrine, without any contradiction. And why? For God
would there should be Prelates in the church, and will that men hear and obey
them. All this is true. But in the mean while, is this title given
indifferently unto all, and without discretion? No. But God has withal
adioined that he will be chief, that we be subject unto him, and not in the
servitude of men. Seeing then it is so, we must know what Prelates and what
Doctors God sends us, as we are directed by this place: namely, such as
hear what God shall say unto them, and then deliver it faithfully to the
people. So they which would be heard in the name of GOD, and that men receive
their doctrine in all reverence, let them be the first to hear God, let them
not attempt to add any thing unto the word of God: but let then be tractable,
and easy to be taught of God: and when they shall have been instructed by God,
let them dispense unto others that which they have received from God. For none
are to be accounted good ministers of the word of God, but such as have first
been his scholars, and which usurp not a maistershippe over others, to bring
unto them whatsoever shall seem good to them selves. And we must not here be
to wise: for God reserueth unto himself this office, to declare that unto us,
which he will have us to know. It is not here simply said, Hear that which
God shall say unto thee, and then come and tell it us: but it is said, All that
which God shall say to thee: so that there is no point nor article which may be
omitted, in such sort, that Moses is here put beside all liberty of presuming
to declare any thing, but that which God appoints, and commands him to
declare. And now, what are these filthes of the world, which will dare
advance themselves above Moses? We shall in the end see, that there never
was any Prophet raised with so singular a grace as was Moses. And in very
deed, albeit we see an admirable spirit in Esaie, and in all the rest of the
Prophets: yet is Moses notwithstanding preferred before them all, when it is
said: Remember the law of Moses my servant, which was given him in Horeb. And
behold Malachie, which speaks after all the rest of the Prophets, and
refers all unto Moses, as if he were the principal Doctor and Teacher, as
if the law were the fountain wherehence all must draw.

Now sithence it is so, that Moses, who has in this sort been preferred, to
whom God gave so excellent a dignity: if he (all this notwithstanding) must
not enterprise to declare any thing of his own, but what he has heard of God,
that must he faithfully dispense unto the people: is it not now a devilish
arrogancy of lewd villains to presume to say, that it is in them to impose
and make laws for the consciences of men, and to bind them under the pain of
mortal and deadly sin? Is not this too barbarous a tyranny? So then, let
us hold this mean, that we fall not into two vicious and wicked extremes:
namely, that seeing God would govern his church by the exterior preaching of
his word, let every one rule and order himself thereto, let us be diligent
to hear sermons, and let this policy and rule of order be inuiolablie kept as
a thing sacred and hallowed: namely, to be taught by the mouth of mortal men.
And in the mean time notwithstanding, let not men have this authority, to
bring unto us what them lists, but let them be faithful stewards and
dispensers of the word of God. And that we may always protest, that our faith
is grounded on the will of God, let us not depend on the wisdom of men, but
let our Lord so hold us under his obedience, that we may say, It is he whom we
hear from heaven, albeit he use the ministry and labor of men, as a mean
to do this.

Now let us cast our selves down before the majesty of our good God, with
acknowledgement of our faults, praying him that he will make us to feel them
more and more, in such sort, that we may learn to displease our selves. And
because the sovereign and best remedy to deliver us from all our maladies and
corruptions is this, that we hear his holy doctrine, pray we that it will
please him to open us our ears, that we may learn to receive it in all fear
and humility, and that it may be so imprinted in our hearts, that we make it
avail to the use whereunto he has ordained it, that is, that we be thereby
quickened and brought to salvation, to the end we may with all our heart desire
it, and apply our study thereto more and more. And so let us say humbly from
our heart, Almighty God and heavenly father, etc.

The. 15. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 5. 28 Then the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye
spoke unto me: And the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the
words of this people which they have spoken unto thee, they have well said
all that they have spoken.

29 Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever!

30 Go lay unto them, Return you into your tents.

31 But stand thou here with me, and I will tell thee all the commandments,
and the ordinances, and the laws which thou shall teach them, that they may
do them in the land, which I give them to possess it.

32 Take heed therefore, that ye do as the Lord your GOD commands you, you
shall not decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

33 But you shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may go well with you, and that
your days may be prolonged in the earth which you shall possess.


FOllowing on that which was yesterday declared, God in this place shows,
that he agrees unto the request and desire of the people, and gives them
choice of that, which shall serve best to their profit and commodity. And
herein we see, that he would breed a sense and feeling of his goodness in this
people, to the end that he might the better win them unto himself. It is
true, that for the right of his rule and authority he has over us, we ought
to be under his subjection, and to yield him obedience, and he might force us
hereunto: but he chooses rather to handle us in all fatherly love and
gentleness. Lo then why he shows, that he is agreed with the request of
the people. And so let us diligently note, that GOD considers of that, which
is so good and profitable for us, that if we were to make our choice, we could
not wish any thing better, than that which he has appointed. It shall not
always seem so unto us, but the thing notwithstanding evidently declares it.
Moreover, he adds that he has not done according to the desire of the
people, but because he did approve and allow their request. For well it may be
that God sometimes will give unto men that which they require: but this is
because of their importunity, and in the mean time it turns them to their
condemnation. As when the people would needs eat flesh, it is very true,
they were satisfied therewith, but they paid their shot full dear: for God
was angry, that they desired to enjoy a thing, Number. 11. 33.
which was taken from them. And albeit God thensatisfied them which had
murmured, so that they had wherewith to fill their belly, yet had it bin much
better they had all died for hunger. Now in this request whereof Moses in this
place speaks, there is no such thing: for God expressly says, That they
have rightly judged. As if he did say: Follow this order, for ye shall see what
a pleasure and good turn I do you. Ye have requested of me a man which should
speak unto you in my name, and I am contented you have him. This therefore ought
the rather to persuade you to receive the doctrine, which shall be preached unto
you in my name: for as much as I have granted this at your own choice and
desire. And yet think you not that I would have pleased you herein, without
great reason, and for good purpose. For I assure you, you shall do well to
follow this order of profiting in my word. And always, and as often as Moses
shall come to you, when I shall have sent him, hear ye with all reverence that
which he shall tell you for your profit and commodity. And so let us note,
that when the word of God shall be preached unto us by men, that this is not don
according to their pleasure and fantasy, but because that God has here
delivered a doctrine, which is profitable for us. And this ought the rather to
stay us from being moved with any foolish affection and desire to change, as
seems us, what we unadvisedly shall mislike: as always ways novelties
delight and please us. Know we then whereon we are to stay and rest our selves:
namely, that all the time of our life we hear the word of God, which shall be
preached unto us by men. And why? Because not only the will of God is such,
but he has also declared that the thing is good and behouefull for us.
Moreover, God in this place awakeneth the people, better to consider of
observing the commandments of the law than they had done. For the people had
said, We will do them. And God says on his side, that he will give them the
will to do them, that he will breed in their heart such a desire. Now by these
words he gives us to understand, that it was a small thing for them, and it
cost them little to make a promise, as men will with full mouth make great
protestacions, but when the time comes to fulfill the things they have
spoken, they show full well how at randon and unadvisedly their promises have
been made. God therefore to make the people feel how hard a matter it was to
observe the law, says in this place, I would feign it might be so. For the
word he uses, when he says, he will give them the will and power,
imports in Hebrewe, this, which we say. And so be it: and, I could wish it
well. It is true, that GOD here speaks much after the manner of men, using a
very humane speech. For he needs not to wish any thing: all things are in
his hand. And therefore one might reply unto him: And this is in thee, O Lord,
to do: ask thou who will give them an heart and will? Who has power to do
this? For man of himself will never be inclined unto that which is good: but
he must be from elsewhere driven thereunto, and this can not be by any
creature, but by the holy spirit. So then seek to further who shall give
them the power to observe thy commandments, but show thou forth in them the
virtue and power of thy spirit, and then they shall keep them: as we shall
hereafter see that God says, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
I will give you the will and power to fear me. If this were in us, what
should he need to say thus? But he pronounces that it is in him to do this.
As he adds by his Prophet, Iere. 32. 39.
I will give them an heart to obey me. We shall see as much said to this
purpose hereafter, Eze. 11. 19. and 36. 27.
I will cause that they shall keep my commandments. God therefore
challenges this office unto him self of instructing men, and of governing
them by his holy spirit, to the end they may be subject unto him, and that
they order themselves to his justice. And wherefore then in this place seems
he to wish this? It is for that (as in many other places) he speaks after
the manner and fashion of men. And this is to the end, that we may better
understand, as I have already touched, that when men speak unto us of
walking in the obedience of God, that this is not done without great
difficulty, and that all our seuses may be more thoroughly awakened, to apply
our selves willingly and painefully unto such a study. Therefore in stead of
this, that men lightly promise without any long deliberation, that they will
work, I know not what miracles, that they will obey GOD, that they will
observe the law, let us know, that we must examine what power and strength
is in us, and then shall we perceive how weak we are, we shall see that we
are so far from being able to perform all that which is commanded us, that
we know not where to begin: nay, we know not how to conceive one good
thought, until GOD has reformed us, and drawn us unto himself, that he
gives us the will, and bestows withal on us the power to put in execution
and practice, that which we shall have willed. Ye see then what this word
imports, And who shall give them the will? Or, I would it might be so. By
this let us be admonished, not to presume on our own power and strength, to
be over hardy and venturous in matters concerning God.

For this is the cause of our ruin and destruction, when we think our selves
able to do all things whatsoever: and GOD by good right laugheth to scorn in
the mean time such arrogancy and ouerweening of men. But learn we to feel
our own weakness, how we are able to do nothing. And albeit that we are
bound to accomplish whatsoever GOD commands us, that this is not to say,
that we therefore have the mean to do it: yea rather, we want all power and
ability to perform it. For it is not so small and easy a matter to love GOD
with all our hearts, to love GOD with all our minds, with all our power, and
strength, and might, that we need but to say: Yea, we will go roundly away
herein: but let us know that this surmounteth and exceeds all the ability
which is in men.

Now, when we know that the law contains a justice over high for us to
reach unto, and that on our part we are so weak and feeble, that it is pity
to behold, then shall we learn to lament and bewail our selves before God,
and understanding full well, that we are bound to do whatsoever he commands,
we shall desire that he will give us the power, that he will aid us by his
holy spirit, and that not only he will support us in our frailie and
weakness, but that he will begin and perfect that which is in us, that he
will give us a will and desire, and confirm and continue the same in us, and
that afterward, when he shall have given us a constancy to persist in our
desire, he will give us also the power to accomplish all that which we shall
have well desired. Now withal GOD in this place shows, that when he sends
us his word, it is for this end, to join and knitte him self with us, that
we also may be united unto him: so that he demands nothing but obedience,
that when we shall become children unto him, he may show himself our loving
father. Behold then for what intent God will that his word be preached unto
us: namely, that we may be gathered under his wings, that he may protect and
defend us, that he may save us: yea, under this condition, that we come unto
him quietly, and that we suffer our selves to be governed by his word, and to
be subject thereunto. True it is (as we have already touched) that this is not
in our power, that God must bestow on us the grace hereto, and that he gives
not this grace unto all. But we are not here to inquire after the secret
counsel of God, what the cause is, that he reformeth and renews some by his
holy spirit, and that he leaves others to wander according to the corruption
and wickedness of their own nature, and never draws them back into the
right way. We must not entangle our selves in this Labyrinth: but let it
suffice us to know, that God would show that men are inexcusable, when he
says: O, I could wish it might be so: as if he said, That after that we
have been taught in his word, we have no excuse, GOD shall not be in
fault, if we be not saved. And why? For if we walk as he commands us,
we shall perceive that this is the way to come to all blessedness. And so let
us impute unto our selves the cause of all those evils which shall happen unto
us. And when we shall be afflicted, when GOD shall chastise and punish us by
adversity and sundry other afflictions, let us know we have no cause to
murmur or to complain against him. For our selves are in great fault, because
we have not followed his word. Ye see in effect, what we have to bear in
mind upon this place. True it is, that we must in the mean time have
recourse unto his aid and help, knowing that we are over weak on our part to
accomplish the law, and that we can not fulfill our duty therein: nay, not
come near unto it in what sort socuer. But yet, if we walk not as it behooves
us, we must always pass under condemnation, knowing that all the fault lies
in our selves, and that when we are beaten and chastised with the rods of
God, that we can not say that this is beside all merit and desert of ours. And
why? When we have the word of God, we have a testimony and witness, that he
desires to be united and joined unto us, and to execute the office of a father
toward us, and to preserve us in all prosperity: were it not that we on our
part did bury his grace, and hinder the course and proceeding thereof. Lo
then how men are by good right convicted, to have repelled, and despitefullie
refused the gracious goodness of God, and to have debarred him of all access
and entrance, by shutting up the door, when they have been taught and
instructed by his word, and yet they have not profited therein. And so this is
a very profitable admonition for us, when we see that God wishes in this
place, that we would do that which he commands us, to the end it might be
well with us. And hereby we see, that if we receive his doctrine in all
reverence and humility, if we seek to yield all obedience thereunto, it can
not be, but the end and issue thereof shall be prosperous and blessed, and that
we shall be certain of our salvation. Now, it is true, that we must always
return back to this point, to pray God to give us the mind and will to serve
him: but if thorough infirmity we fail in our duty, let us learn to
condemn our selves, that we may be absolved before him. And moreover, let us
rejoice when we see that he procures by all means our salvation, and seeks
to set us forward therein always, and as often as his holy word is preached
unto us: and let us call to mind that which is said in the Proverbs of
Solomon, That the solace and delight of the wisdom of God, Pro. 8. 31.
i^ to dwell with men. Behold, how God here protests, that when he sends
his word, it is to instruct us in all perfection of wisdom, as if he sent his
wisdom from the heavens. Yea, and to what end? For wisdom is brought in
here to speak, and to say: Behold my dainties and delites to dwell with the
children of men. And this is as much as if God did displaie and laid open his
heart unto us, and that he said: Behold, I will bind my self with an holy
and sacred bond unto men, when I instruct them by my word, and if they on their
part be not wild and unruly, they shall perceive, that I will always be in
the midst of them, and never withdraw my self from them. This ought well to
inflame us with such a reverence of the word of GOD, that we endeavor with
all our might, to profit therein, and not to suffer our selves to be at any
time turned from it, seeing the benefit thereof is inestimable: namely, that
by it our Lord unites him self with us. Now, it follows in the text of
Moses, how God commands the people, That every one go his way into his
tent, and that Moses abide there: and he adds, I will tell thee all the
commandments, and the statutes, and the laws, which thou must teach the
whole people. God again in this place shows, that he cease not to continue
in teaching and instructing the people, albeit he use the mean which has
been declared: namely, that Moses be as an expositour of the will of God, and
the messenger thereof unto the people. This is well worthy the noting. For it
serves unto this end, that we may understand, that God will always hold us
unto himself, and that he will not that our faith be grounded upon men, or
depend on them. And it is very needful and requisite, that we be warned
hereof. It is true, that those which follow their good meaninges, or which
say, that they hold and stick unto those things, which have been determined by
the Church, and by the ancient Fathers, may be for a time so besotted, that
if one tell them, they hold as it were by the air, that they have no certain
stay and assurance to lean unto, when they so rest themselves wholly one men,
they will be still headie and obstinate: as we see the Papists, whom the
devil has so bewitched, that they are content to stand unto the resolutions,
which men at their own lust and pleasure have made, and venturousie despised
the word of GOD: yea, albeit men bring manifest witnesses and testimonies from
it, to reprove their superstitions, all is one with them, they are so dull and
obstinate, that it skilleth not with them, whether GOD be contrary unto them
or no. Men I say shall have this presumptuous boldness for a time, to ventur
to go on whither their fond imagination carries them, they shall indurate and
harden them selves against GOD: but when they come to the trial, that GOD
thorouglie touches them with the virtue and power of his word, behold they
are so astonished and amazed, that they know not what may become of them. So
then let us note, that we shall have no certain and assured stay to rest
upon, except our faith be grounded on the word of GOD, and that we may
protest, that whatsoever we have, we hold from him, and account that this is
the only truth, that we wander not in our own weenings and thinkings, or
propose unto our selves the doctrine of men to lean unto, and to stay and to
rest upon. When we hear that GOD in this place says, I will tell thee the
things wherein thou shall instruct them: let us note, that we must also in
like manner lean wholly upon him, that our faith must not be wavering and in
doubt, being underpropped by the infallible verity of his word. And this is
that we are to seek after when we come unto a sermon, that we may have this
article fully ratified, and sealed up in our consciences, that we have the
word of GOD, wherein our life consists.

Withal let us also note, that GOD would bridle them in this place, which have
the charge of preaching his word, from all presumption of commending unto the
people any thing of their own: but that they content them selves to be
faithful dispensers of that which he commands, that they always protest
they have served God, forasmuch as they have executed that which he gave them
in commandment, and have delivered the doctrine they preach, from the mouth
of God, into the hands of men. Behold what we have to note, we (I say) whom
God has ordained ministers to declare his word, and unto whom he has
committed this office of teaching his people, that we add unto his word
nothing of our own, which we shall have imagined: but we declare simply,
and bring that only which we know to proceed from God. How, to the end
that the people should not think, that God instructed them by halfes, but in
most absolute and perfect manner, he repeateth in this place that whereof we
have heretofore entreated, The ordinances, the statutes, the commandments,
and ceremonies: as if he said, that nothing shall be wanting in his doctrine, and
that the people ought not to desire any thing besides whatsoever. This has
been before largely expounded: but always, when GOD uses so many and
diverse words, where he might simply and in a word have said the law:
let us note, that this is the better to withholde men, from attempting upon
any foolish curiosity to add any thing unto his law, as we see how by
nature we are overmuch given thereto, and our fleshly minds always stir us
up, to invent I know not what novelties and newfangled things. And lo how in
Popery every one has enterprised to clout unto the word of God his patch and
piece, and how many laws they have made one on the back of another. And
why? For it seems unto them, that it suffices not to walk vprightlie
according unto the word of God, but that it were further good and convenient
that their medlie should be made therein. How, God contrariewise says, That
if we have his law, we shall have his statutes, commandments, ordinances,
and rites: as if he said, That mortal men must not be so presumptuous and
ouerweening, as to desire to seem wiser than he. For when they shall have made
their longest discourses, they shall not find any thing which they can amend,
or whereunto they may make addition: yea, let them know, that all that they
shall seek to put unto of their own, shall not be superfluous only and
unprofitable, but shall mar all: as if one would mingle vinegre with wine.
And now God, having spoken in this sort, warns them further, that they beware
they observe that which he shall command them, without any turning, either
unto the right hand or unto the left. In these words our Lord declares, that
he will not that his law be honored of men, in approving it only with the
mouth, as if we would seem to be acquitted of all the duty we bear thereto,
when we do no more than this: but he shows, that for to retain us under his
subjection, and in his service, he has published his law, and at this day
will have it preached. For herein it is his pleasure to prove, whether he shall
dispatch and come to any agreement with us, as with a quiet and tractable
people, whom he has now lured to his train. Let us therefore diligently
note, that when we come unto a sermon, this is not to say, that the doctrine we
hear, is holy and good: God shall be much beholding unto us, when we have
pronounced that his word is worthy to be received. He will not that we be his
judges. I grant that we owe unto him this confession, that when we shall have
heard his word, every one acknowledge, that it is the pure and sincere
verity, that there is no other uprightness, nor justice, nor wisdom, beside
that which is there contained: but in the mean time we must proceed further:
namely, to order our selves unto the service and honor of God, Behold, one
profitable point which we have to gather upon this place. Again, we are
diligently to observe that which he says, Take heed ye do that I command.
For hereby God shows that we must seriously apply all our might and power
herein: for men shall not follow God by sleeping, seeing that when they use
the greatest force they may with themselves, they shall with much a do draw
their legs after them, their infirmity and weakness of nature is so great.
Let us not think then to acquit our duty toward God, without bestowing
much pain and labor therein: for the thing is of great difficulty,
considering what ones we are: namely, slow and ever lazy to bestirre our
selves about that which is good. Nay, I say yet further, that albeit God has
affectioned and moved us with some desire thereto, albeit he governs us with
his holy spirit, the thing will not be over easy. For if he leaves us to
remain such as we are, we shall not only be slow herein, but we shall draw
clean backward from that which he wills us: if he call us unto him self, we
shall recule and flee back from him: yea, we shall be forced to follow that
which is evil, so far shall we be from being able to desire any manner of
way, that which is good. But note we that which we have already touched, that
although God has given us some good affection, albeit he has set us in some
good way, yet are we still slothful, and loath to remove one foot: whereas a
minute of time ought to serve, we had need of an hour, we winch and fling in
such sort when we are put forward: and if happily we move one step, either
we stumble, or else we start back two paces for one, or we take so grievous
falls as it is pity to behold. So, it is not without good cause, that God
says here, Take heed ye do that I command you: as if he said, True it is,
that my law is given you that you should put it in practice, and to yield
obedience thereunto, but think ye not, that this is so easy to be done.
Therefore, let every one prepare him self with such diligence to walk after
my commandments, that ye think and meditate on them, that ye be diligent to
bestow all pain in them, that ye take a full taste and savor of them, that
ye be vigilent to stand on your watch, for fear that you be not turned
aside: be ye therefore attentive and heedefull herein. This we see briefly,
that our Lord exhorts us in this place seriously to travel and bestirre
our selves, when question is of walking under his obedience. And why? For the
things he requires of us, are not so easily performed. And moreover, we are
so evil disposed, as is lamentable to behold, that except we be pricked on,
and driven thereto, as by force, we can not set one foot forward as we ought
in our duty. If is needful therefore, that we awaken our selves better, to
be more diligent and attentive, and to stand always more warily on our
guard, to accomplish that which our Lord commands us. Now he afterward
adds, That this must be done without turning either to the right hand or to
the left, but that altogether they walk in that way, which he has showed
them. True it is, that this place shall be expounded more at large in the twelfth
Chap. of this book: but yet we must not so pass it over in this place, but
that we understand what God meant to say in forbidding us, That we be not
turned, neither unto the right hand nor to the left. For he shows us, that
his pleasure and will is in all things to be hearkened unto of us, nothing
whatsoever excepted. Now this imports two things: that is, we neither add
unto, nor diminish any thing from his law. To add any thing is, as if we
would turn on the right hand. For they which add unto the law of God, do
it as thinking that it is not enough to observe all that which is therein
contained, but that it were good to put somewhat more thereunto. Lo how men
would have some place for their fantasies, that if they can bethink them
selves of any thing, it seems them that God has forgotten it, and that it
were good to be observed. And behold what has been the cause of making so
many ordinances, so many laws, and ceremonies, in Popery. The Jews had the
like vice reigning among them as it is vpbraided them, that by their traditions
they had set at naught the statutes and commandments of God. So then let us
beware how we walk rightly, Mat. 15. 3.
I mean on the right hand, to turn our selves from the way which God has
showed us. And why? We turn then on the right hand, when we will be to
wise, and to just, and when we think it is good to do more than we are
commanded. But herein we are the servants and ministers of the devil, for GOD
disalloweth whatsoever we shall add unto his word, he will no such medlie.
Now we decline unto the left hand, when we diminish and take away any thing
from the word of God, namely, when we think we have done enough, if we
have discharged half our duty, and that for the rest he gives us leave to
follow our own lusts and desires: A man that shall not be subject to some
number of vices, will happily desire to acquit him self toward God so far
forth: but because he can not restrain him self from some one, he would that
God should notwithstanding be contented, and give him leave to condition with
him, to say: Well, if I miss in this thing, I will make a recompense in
another. But take we heed of walking on the left hand, that is to say, of
diminishing any thing from the word of God: for when he has forbidden men
murder, he has forbidden them also to steal, and to commit adultery. We must
therefore without any reply yield our obedience unto him in all things. For
as we ought not to add any thing unto the law of God, so is it not lawful to
take any thing from it: but we must walk in all the way he shows us. And
now, when he says, The way, it is to exhort us to hold our selves therein, as
we shall see in the end of the book. Behold the way, walk ye therein, Deuteronomy.
28. 9.
will Moses say: as if he said, Who soever turns him self aside from the
doctrine which I set before you, he wandereth, he runs but acrosse the
fields, and the further he runs on, the further he is from the end of his
journey. So in this place, Walk ye in the way, that is to say: Wander ye not
wilfully ye wretched ones, straie not from the way wherein your God leads
you, ye can not miss of your way by following of him: but if you give your
selves over to go whither your own head leads you, God must in the end
declare unto you, that you shall be but as straying and wandering beasts, for
that you have not kept forward your course in the right way. And so know ye,
that the word of God is your way wherein you must walk. If this word were well
imprinted in our minds, we should be held shorter, than to run wandering at
rouers, and ranging whither soever our flitting fancies and desires shall
carry us, as we accustomablie use to do: we should (I say) beheld back in
this way which is prescribed us: for our God shows us continually which is
the way. And yet for all this men enter into their disputes, and make long
questions: what is to be done? and what is not to be done? As if it had not
been said, That GOD never opens his mouth, but to show us the right and
perfect way: and when he shows it us, do not we him great wrong and
injury if we follow him not? And do we not accuse him, as if he had lost
all his time and pain he bestows to instruct us? We see now what this
word (way) imports: namely, that without the word of GOD, there is
nothing but error and deceit, and that men far abuse them selves, when they
shall think to do well, except they leave themselves to be governed by the
word of God, which shows us the best and the streightest way. And purposelie
he says, All the way. For he will not part stakes with men in this place, as
they desire he should that, is, they would always reserve some thing, I know
not what, unto them selves: they would serve GOD by piece meal (as we say:)
but behold, GOD on the contrary side says, I must be obeyed of all,
throughout all points, or else I renounce you, I will none of you. So then,
will we approve our life unto GOD? We must not think to yield him obedience
in part only, but we must take heed we order our whole life unto that which
he commands us, in such sort, that we may truly protest and say, That
we have held our selves in all the way of the Lord.

But here one might make a question, whether it be possible, that we may walk
altogether in the way of God? For contrariwise, seeing it is so, that men do
not the good they desire to do, it shall be much when we shall have endeavored
to come to the right way, and to go as far forward toward the end as we may,
though we come not thereto. Saint Paul him self complains, that he could
not do that, Romans 9. 17.
which he had desired for to discharge his duty toward God. But here is no
speaking of such perfection as is required in the law: but we must only
understand, that God will have men employ them selves with all diligence in
his service, and that they enforce them selves thereto, that they make their
race therein, albeit they can not atteine the end thereof. Therefore, although
for all our life time we go as drailing our legs after us, and that we come
not fully and perfectly unto God, yet must we proceed hereunto, and go on
forward, not in part only, but in all that which is contained in the law. It
is true, that we can not acquit our selves herein, in such sort, that there be
a full and correspondent agreement between the word of God, and our life:
but when we shall have this desire to order our selves unto God, and to
conform our selves unto his will, not in one point or article only, but in
all without exception: and when we shall have bestowed our whole travel and
industry herein, behold, how we shall hold us in all the way of GOD. For
he bears with us in such sort, that he accepts in good part such a desire,
when he sees us to go roundly to work in his service, and that we double not
with him, and that we reserve not to our selves our own lusts and desires,
nor yield us the liberty and leave to fulfill them, but that we labor to
please and to serve him as much as we may, and according unto the grace which
is given us. Now withal he also adioyneth, That they may prosper, and that it
may be well both with them, and with their children. Wherein he gives us to
understand, that (as we have already touched) all the miseries and afflictions
which we endure in this world, are so many chastisements and corrections for
our sins. And we cannot say that we are any other way miserable and
unhappy, but by our own fault. True it is, every one desires to be at his
ease, and in prosperity, we need not to be taught to wish this unto our
selves, for our nature leads us hereunto? but for all this, it seems that
we have conspired our own misery and wretchedness. For the mean to prosper
is this, that we be obedient unto God, and then he shall bless us, in such
for, that we shall feel the fruits thereof in all things. But what? We will
not yield him the obedience which is due unto him, and therefore we must needs
be deprived of his blessing, he must needs reject and refuse us, as if we
were not worthy to be in the number of his creatures. And so let us note,
that God would in this place reprove men, and show them that they are
themselves the cause of all the misery and wretchedness they suffer in this
world, and that they must attribute it to their sin and wickedness. But he
would moreover withal allure his unto himself, when he sets before them a
reward: as if he said: Go to, there is great cause why I should be served of
you, I deserve it full well at your hands, though you have small regard of me:
for seeing that you are my creatures, is it not good reason that you be my
subjects, and render all obedience unto me? Ought you not for the whole time
of your life to be given over unto me? But yet I will not request you to serve
me for gramercie? I will for bear mine own right in this behalf: so that
whereas ye are bound to do all that I command you, without looking or hoping
for any thing: lo, I yet tell you, that I am at hand to bless you, and to
make you prosper when you shall serve me. When our Lord speaks thus, he
shows that he will in most loving and amiable wise, win his unto himself,
that he will (as it were) break their heart, that they might be the better
affectionated, and more willingly disposed to serve and please him: seeing that
he comes not unto them, with such rigor and severity as he might: but
yielding of the right which apperteineth unto him, chooses rather to execute
the office of a Father, saying, That if we will be his children, he will be a
liberal and bountiful Father toward us: and albeit he owes us nothing of
duty, yet will he bestow a reward on us for the service which we shall
have done him. Now hereby we are admonished, that it pleases GOD, by so great
gentleness and liberality, to allure and win us unto himself. But we must
not hereupon infer, that men may merit and deserve any thing by serving of
God. As the Papists, when they hear such places, they run to their merits:
and it seems unto them that GOD is further bound and beholding unto them
than he has promised. But God contrariwise means to show us that he is
ready to apply himself to us, and to the fashion of men, that he desires
nothing else but to win us by all gentleness unto his obedience. And this is
not for any profit that he receives thereby: as in very deed, what profit
shall he receive when we shall have accomplished his whole law? Is this any
way to his gain and advantage? No. But it makes for our salvation. Ye see
then what the intent and purpose of God is, and what we have to note upon this
sentence. So let us learn that when we shall have obeyed our God, if he make
us to prosper, that this is not for that he owes us any thing, and that we
have deserved it, and that we may vaunt that he gives us no more than we
deserve: but it pleases him to display and lay open his bountiful goodness
toward us, even to call that a reward and recompense, which he of his mere
and free liberality gives us, without being therefore bound and indebted
unto us. Moreover, when he chastises us, and that we are subject to so many
miseries, let us know, that we do but gather in the fruits of our own
seed. Because we have led an evil life, our Lord must needs show some
sign and taken of his anger, that it may be known he is Judge of the
world. But he has also as well a regard unto our profit: that is, that we
might be sorry for our faults, and be in displeasure with our selves for
them, and that we should have our recourse unto him, in true and unfeigned
repentance. Lo how GOD, when he shows his anger toward us, cease not
to declare his love: for he seeks to win us unto himself. He sees that
we are brought asleep in our sins, and he awaketh us, knowing that it is
expedient and necessary that he should so do. Thus we see what we have to
note upon this place. Now in the end, Moses speaks of the land they were to
possess, and says, That thou may prosper in the land which I shall give
thee. And again for the second time, he places this sentence, That it may be
well with you in the land which you shall possess. Now it seems at the
first sight, that God promises no other reward than in this earthly and
transitory life. If it were so, the hope of the people of Israel had been
clean beaten down. But let us note, that our Lord has used toward this
people an other mean than with us: albeit it tends to the same end. for the
sacrifices which were ordained in the law, were not to withdraw the people
from the salvation which we have in Jesus Christ: Heb. 9. 8. 13. 14. 22.
but they served rather that GOD might signify that men are condemned, that
they have no other mean to be reconciled unto him, than this which they have
by our Lord Jesus Christ. Now for all this, men ceased not to kill brute
beasts for their offerings, and GOD said: Your sins shall be pardoned,
Leuit. 16. 1^. 16.
when you shall have killed for me a calfe, a lamb, or a sheep. It seemed
them that God would appoint the remission of sins by these sacrifices of
brute beasts: but he did not. This was to conduct the people, after such a
gross manner, to the redemption which in the end was obtained us in the person
of our Lord Jesus Christ. As much was signified by the land of Chanaan: God
therein would from the beginning propose the eternal inheritance of salvation
unto the children of Abraham, in saying to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1.
I am thy exceeding great reward. He promises not the land to Abraham, therein
to rest himself: but he will that Abraham put his whole trust and affiaunce
in him, that he raise and lift up his hope above all the world, and that he
wait for everlasting life for himself, and for his whole race. But it was
expedient, because our Lord Jesus Christ was not yet appeared, because the
veil of the Temple was not yet broken: it was (I say) expedient and needful,
that this land of Chanaan should be as it were a pledge thereof, because
this was fully promised him for his inheritance. Let us therefore diligently
note, when it it is said, That thou may prosper in the land, that God meant
not to busy his people in this present life, but by this mean it pleseth him
to conduct them higher: namely, to the hope of immortality which he had
promised them. Nevertheless our Lord promises his blessing in such sort unto
this people, that even in this life they shall perceive it, and have thereof
some taste, waiting to have the full enjoying thereof, when they shall be
withdrawn out of this world. And at this day we ought also to call to mind
the testimony of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
That when we shall fear God, we have the promises of the present life, and of
the life to come. For God will in this life give us some feeling of his goodness,
to the end we might thereby be led unto an higher hope, and that we also learn
to receue the benefits of God in such sort in this world, as that we be
persuaded we shall be satis^ied with them, when we shall be come into his
kingdom, where we shall enjoy them in all fullness and plenty.

Now let us cast our selves down before the face of our good God, with
acknowledgement of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better than we
have done, until we be sed to a true repentance, and that more and more
feeling our own wretchedness, we may learn to resist all the affections of
our flesh, and all our wicked and perverse desires, and not this only, but that
cursed presumption which is in us, of attempting to do that which we think
good: that nothing may hinder us to follow the pure and simple word of our
GOD, knowing that this is the true and perfect rule to order us by, that we
attempt to add nothing thereto, but simply rest in that which is therein
contained, to profit more and more therein, until that having achieved and
ended our course here on earth, we come unto that heavenly rest, whereunto he
calls us: and in the mean time pray we him to reach us out his hand to stay
us, when we shall seek unto him, and call on him, in all our needs and
necessities. That it will please him to grant this grace, not only to us, but
unto all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The. 16. Sermon.
Deuteronomy. Chap. 6. 1 These are the commandments, ordinances, and laws, which
the Lord your God has commanded me to teach you, that ye might do them in the
land whither ye go to possess it.

2 That thou might fear the Lord thy God, by keeping all the days of thy
life, thou, thy son, and thy sons son, all his ordinances and
commandments, which I command thee, that thy days may be prolonged.


WE have often heretofore seen, how Moses did put the people in mind of the
things contained in the law: and even yesterday we saw how to the same purpose
he made mention of them, and yet again in this place he does the like.
Howbeit, this is no needless or unprofitable repetition, seeing that men have
so soon forgot the things they learn in the school of God, except the
memory of them, for their better remembrance, be often refreshed. And we see
there needs nothing to turn us aside from our duty herein: for we are so
much inclined unto vanity, that there is nothing more harder than to retain
us under the obedience of God. As soon as we have conceived a fantasy, it
carries us away headlong, and we remember no more what God had said unto us.
Moreover, because he seeks no other thing than to win us unto himself, he
must root out of us those false opinions wherewith we are already
forepossessed. For it is with us as with a ground which has lien fallowe a
long time, whereon a man must bestow exceeding great labor, before he can
apply it to some profitable use. And that is the cause why Moses says again,
That these are the commandments, and ordinances, and laws, which the Lord
has committed unto him, that he deliver them unto the people, and that they
be observed. Now by these words he signifies, that God will retain the
people in his obedience: when he seems to say, What mean ye, ye wretched
ones to wander? Lo, I deliver unto you my law: when you shall hold your
selves in this doctrine you can not err: this is the way of salvation,
therefore keep your selves in it. Now for all this men are still wandering,
they are borne away headlong hither and thither, and God continues to rain
them with the bridle: as when an headstrong horse is hardly ruled, the rider
restrains him back with bitte and bridle, not for one time only, but so
long as he continues wild and untamed. Ye see then how God uses the same
order with his people. And hereby he shows, that the mind of man is full of
rebellion, or full of lightness and rashness, and that he can not wholly rest
him self on the word of God, wherein notwithstanding our whole salvation and
happiness consists. Seeing then it is so, let us note, that under the person
of the people of Israel, we are here warned, that when God has set before us
his word, we must not think on it for one day only, but that we ought to
exercise our selves therein all the time of our life. And when we hear this,
Behold the statutes, Behold the ordinances, Behold the commandments,
which I propose unto you, we must remember, that it is not for us to establish
laws and rules to govern our life by, but that this authority apperteineth
only unto God. Moreover he has also admonished us, that he has showed us the
right way. Let us therefore follow it, and walk therein, let us not make
further inquiry what we ought to do: for there remains no doubting when
our Lord has once spoken: we must no longer allege, I know not whether this
be good, I know not whether somewhat else be to be added. Content we our
selves with that which God has showed us: for he shall always be a good
master to teach us, if so be we be not perverse, and evil scholars to
learn under him. And for this cause here is again mention made of
commandments, statutes, and ordinances, that we might not think that God
would instruct us by halfes. There is then in his law comprised a full
perfection of all wisdom: so that there rests nothing, but that we yeald
obedience thereunto, that we be not so curious, as to desire more than God
shows us, that we have no foolish devotions, which lead us wandering hither
and thither: knowing that God has not envied them which were under his charge
the knowledge of any thing behouefull for them, but has taught them all that
which was profitable and necessary for them. Let us therefore govern our
selves according unto his will, let us apply all our senses thereto, let his
law suffice and content us, albeit the whole world scorn and reject us, the
matter shall not much skill, we have our Judge. And so, although the world
wander after vain fantasies, although every one forge unto him self, that
which seems him best, let us always consider of appearing before the
tribunal seat of our God, and that unto him we must render our account. Now
he has delivered us his law, and by that he will judge us. And therefore let
us leave all that the world imagines, and know that all is but vanity and
lying. Withal Moses adds that concerning his office he has delivered
nothing of his own. And this protestation is well worthy to be noted. For
we must remember what has been before said, that Moses was the most excellent
prophet that ever God raised, and yet notwithstanding he takes to him self in
this place no such liberty, as to teach any thing according to his own
judgment. For he knew well that he himself was a mortal man, subject to the
law, as were others. Behold why he protests that that which he brings, is
that which he has receued from God, and that he dispenses and delivers it
as it were from hand to hand. Sithence Moses does this, who will dare to say,
that it is lawful for him to pass further? And yet we see what is happened
herein. For among the whole rabble of Papists, is there any so given to hear
what God shall say, as to prefer his word before the doctrine of men? Nay:
But they have their holy mother the Church, as they term it, they have their
determinations, their decrees, their statutes: and they think it sufficient to
have this couerture of the Church, and in the mean time, they rob God of his
authority, to cloth men which are but rottenesse therewith. Behold an
intolerable sacrilege, when God shall no longer be a Lawegeuer to conduct his
people, and to hold them under his yoke, but that men will usurp and
challenge to them selves such an authority. So much the more heedfullie ought
we to observe that which is here contained: namely, that Moses albeit he was
as an Angel of heaven, although God had exalted him above all men, though he
had been in the mount forty days without eating or drinking any thing, to
show that he was no longer of the number of others: yet nothwitstanding, when
he came from this heavenly glory, and as it were from the company of Angels,
he humbles himself, and declares that he commends unto the people nothing
of his own, that he will not feed them with fancies and dreams of his own
head: but that he is contented to have heard what GOD has pronounced, and
that he recites it as a faithful servant, which adds nothing thereto,
which falsifieth not the commission which is given unto him. Ye see then what
we have again to bear in mind upon this place. There follows now the
exhortation which he adds, that is, That the people discharge themselves in
keeping of the law. As if he said, That it is not given for men only to
confess, that all that it contains is good, and just, and of great equity:
but to this end also, that men show whether they be obedient unto God, or no.
And that is the cause why he says, That thou fear the Lord thy God, and that
thou keep his commandments and statutes. Under this word of fear, he
signifies that God, by declaring his law, meant to make a proof whether we
will serve him, or no. For albeit we observe all the commandments, in such
sort that men can find no fault with us: yet if this fear of God be not
rooted in our heart, if we bear him not this reverence, to desire to be his,
all the time of our life, this outward observing of his commandments, shall
be but a friuosous show, and a pomp of great vanity. For we must not think
that God is contented with that which outwardly appears: although it be
highly priced and esteemed of men, yet is it but as a vapor of smoke before
him.

We ought therefore to begin at this point, if we will observe the law of
God duly, and in such sort, as our life may be agreeable unto God: namely,
that we bear him all reverence, that we seek to be under his hand, under
his guide and direction, that we seek to do him homage as our sovereign
King, we seek to dedicate our selves unto him, as to our Creator, we seek to
honor him as our Father. When this affection and desire shall be in us, then
have we the beginning of the whole law, and of all righteousness: and that is
the cause why it is said, Prou. 1. 7.
That the true wisdom is the fear of GOD. And when we will know whether we
have profited in the law of GOD, we must sound our hearts to make the trial
hereof, to feel if we have such a zeal and desire, that GOD be honored and
glorified of us. For if there be such a fear in the heart, the fruits
thereof will appear, both in our hands, and in our feet, and in all the
parts and members of our body: as God has also ordained this rule when he
published his law. So that they which boast themselves of the fear of God,
when their life is losed to all wickedness, their own tongues tell them they
lie, and they show full well, how impudent and past shame they are, when they
vaunt so much of the fear of God. We see then a place, which is well worthy
to be observed: wherein Moses first declares, that to serve God aright, it
behooves that our hearts be wholly given over unto him, that it suffices
not, that in outward appearance we have all the virtues that a man might
imagine, except such an affection, and inward desire of the heart go before.
Again, that the fear of God is no hidden and idle thing, although it be in
the heart of men, yet must it appear and show it self in their life. For it
is the heart, which governs both the hands, and the feet, and all the
other parts, and members of the body. We must therefore learn to show by
effect and experience, that we fear God, by ordering our whole life according
unto his will. Now hereby we may well gather, that God disalloweth althings
which men attempt beside his word: as the Papists are continual men and
religious (as they say) in the service of God: but in the mean time, what do
they? They travel much, and are never the near: for they profit nothing,
because in the whole woorshippe of God, which they pretend, there is nothing,
but the inventions and devises of men. To serve God, is to mumble a few small
prayers, and to crouch before their moppets and idols, to trudge from altar to
altar, to chaunt their Masses, to gad on pilgrimage, to fast such a day in the
honor of such and such a Saint, to eat no flesh on Fridayes nor Saturdayes:
briefly, it is nothing else, but a dongeon of such like trumperies, whatsoever
they have under this shadow and title of the service of God. But shall one
find that God ever sounded one word or syllable hereof? No, all this has
been devised by men. Let us now consider by this place, whether God accepts
such a service as good and lawful: nay contrariwise, he says, That thou fear
the Lord thy God, and that thou observe all his commandments. But when men
turn themselves aside from such a way, and follow their own fantasies, and
whatsoever shall have been forged by men, they sufficiently declare, that
there is no fear of GOD in them: for otherwise they would offer unto him the
sacrifice which he above all other prefers: namely, 1. Sa. 1^. 23.
obedience, as hereof it is entreated in the first book of Samuel the
fifteenth Chapter, That if men hearken not unto the voice of God, to subject
them selves thereto, but contrariwise follow that which shall have been
invented in their own brain, or forged and devised by men, it is as
idolatry: yea, as the sin of witchcraft, which is detestable in the sight of
God. Behold, how theholie Ghost speaks hereof, although mortal men are of a
clean contrary judgment. Now therefore we see how Moses has here declared,
that when we shall vnfeignedlie and in deed fear God, we will do him this
honor, to be governed according unto his will, we will not grant men this
leave to lead and conduct us whither it seems them good: but when GOD shall
speak, we will know that every mouth must be stopped, and that our ears
must be opened to hear and to receive whatsoever he shall say unto us. But yet
it suffices not that every one for his own part only employ him self to
serve and honor God, but we must procure and endeavor as much as in us lies,
that he be adored and worshipped of the whole world: yea, we must labor that
his service may endure and continue after our death, that the name of GOD live
not and die with us, when we shall be taken out of the world: but that it
remain and abide unto all posterity. And lo what is the cause why Moses
says, Their children and those which shall issue from their race, shall
continue to serve God, and too bserue his law.

Let us therefore diligently note, that Moses in this place not only
exhorts every one for his own time to serve and obey GOD, by conforming his
life unto the law which he has delivered, but he will that fathers bestow
all their pains to instruct their children, that we may leave such a seed
after us, if it be possible, as that God be worshipped of our posterity, that
his name be always purelie and sincerely called upon, and that by this mean,
they which shall be descended from our loins, may be blessed, and that the
covenant of God wherein our salvation is contained, endure for ever, and never
perish, albeit we are mertall and of small continuance. But we are so far
from discharging our duty in this doctrine, that we may see fathers give such
examples unto their children, that it seems they have conspired to abolish
and to take clean away the fear of God, and the whole observation of his
law. We ought not therefore to marvel, if GOD also withdraw him self from
us, and that it seems that he will cut off quite all the benefits and
blessings which he had bestowed on us. For are we worthy unto whom he should
continue them, seeing we are so retchlesse and negligent to procure that his
service and worship may continue in his entire and perfect estate? And yet this
should serve us to so good a purpose (as I have said) that it be not spoken in
vain. Let us therefore labor with all our might, to teach those which shall
come after us, in such sort, that the worship of GOD, and his service, may
continue for ever, and that men always know and acknowledge him for the
Father and Savior of all the world, and give themselves over fully and
wholly unto him. Withal Moses has adjoined that whereof he had before spoken,
that this is, To the end that their days may be prolonged, and that GOD may
make the people to prosper, according to the promise which he made unto their
fathers, that he would give them a land flowing with milk and honey. We have
already expounded what Moses has understood by this word: namely, that God,
albeit by one word he may constrain us to serve him, notwithstanding uses
toward us a most mild and amiable manner to win us to himself, when he
promises us a reward, when we shall have served him: not that our works
deserve any thing, or that he is any thing at all bound unto us. But when he
gratifieth us so, and is in such wise beneficial toward us, it is to this
end, that we may be so much the more lively touched, and that we may serve
him with a more ardent zeal and desire. For shall we not be over wicked and
unthankful, when we hear that God of his own good will binds him self
unto us, and that he will propose unto us a reward and recompense: shall we
not I say be over wicked and unthankful, if we apply not our selves wholly
unto his service? We are his, and whatsoever we are able to do, we owe unto
him: as our Lord Jesus Christ speaks plainly hereof: Who are you? says he.
I demand of you, when a man shall have a servant: yea, a slave, whom he shall
burden and press as an ox, or an horse, whether if this slave have done him
any service, he will rise from the table to serve him, when he returns from
his work? No: for all that which the bondslaue does, he owes of duty to his
master and superior. So you owe all unto God (says Jesus Christ) and he
owes you nothing. But yet God of his own free good will binds him self to
promise us, if we serve him, Luc. 17. 7.
we shall be well recompensed, and perceive our labor and pain shall not be
lost. And for what end and purpose does he this? This is even by gentleness to
break our heart. For (as I have already said) we are to to wicked, if we
be not altogether inflamed to serve GOD, when we see that it pleases him, of
his mere goodness, to propose unto us a reward, and to promise us a
recompense, when we are in no respect worthy thereof. And withal let us also
note, that when God shall have passed a thousand contractes with us, to reward
and recompense our works, it wants so much that we may say, he owes us
any thing, that he might rather accurse and detest us. For who is he among us,
which observes the law as were requisite? If we observe one article thereof,
we fail in an hundred, and when we think to fulfill that which God has
commanded us in his law, we falter therein, we traile our legs after us,
there is always such great imperfection and weakness in us: that we can
never run in such wise as we ought, and as it were requisite. We shall then
be accursed and condemned, when God shall judge us in any rigor and severity.
So then, men must not here vaunt them selves of obteining any reward which they
have merited, nor boast of their works: but rather let them know, that all
the promises which God has given in his law, import with them a condition,
and therefore should be unprofitable unto us, by reason that none discharge
them selves of their duty, except God would accept of us, and bear with us
for his mere bounty and goodness. And hereby we see what rage and madness
this is in the Papists, when they boast themselves of their merits, that it
seems them, they have to contracte and covenant with God, and they so
venturoustie upon a devilish ouerweening and boldness, make their account,
that they think God is very much bound and beholding unto them. But what
proofs have they of their satisfactions, their works, their me^^^es? And
where shall a man find those merits? O, we have done (say they this) and
that: no remedy, but we must make up our accountes with God. And behold on
the contrary side God, who requires that we serve him in all, and through
all, which we are never able to do, as we have seen heretofore, and as it
is sufficiently handled and declared in many other places. Now let all the
world examine them selves, to see, whether there may herein be found one which
has accomplished the law. But so far we shall be from finding any such, that
there is not one which may protest, that he has done the hundred part of that
which is in the law required. Therefore all must confess that they are
accursed. Yea, in this so small portion, and so little as may be, wherein men
acquit them selves, shall be always found some wickedness, and some
blottes or other. So then, GOD shall justly reject and have in detestation all
that we bring, and are able to do. Let men therefore be overwhelmed and
confounded with shame, and let them confess that they are all culpable and
guilty before God. Wherefore let us note, that this promise cannot be
accomplished, but that God bears with us, and respects not so many vices
and infirmities as are in us, but by his mercy hides and burieth them.
Therefore our works are then received and approved by God, when he respects
not what they are, but accepts them, through the virtue of the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, as good and holy. And albeit there be
always many blots and stains in us: yea, much stinking corruption, except it
should be washed away by the blood of Jesus Christ: yet he always accepts
us by the means thereof, and no otherwise. So, let us learn to boast our
selves, and glorify in the mere and only mercy of God, and not vaunt us of
any merits. And in the mean time let us not cease to be incited and stirred
up with so much greater zeal to serve him, when we see that he will allure
and win us unto him self by such mildness and gentleness. Yea Moses
shows, that whatsoever God promises unto his people, when they shall observe
his law, proceeds from this fountain, rather than from any obligation. And
this is that which he says, As God has promised to thy fathers: as if he
said, Beloved, serve God, and he shall be a good master unto you. And think
not that you have lost your time and labor when you shall have observed his
law: for you shall have a large reward, which is made ready for you. But
withal consider ye whence it proceeds: Behold the fountain (says he:)
that is, that before ye were borne and brought into this world, God has
promised your fathers to bring them into a land which flows with milk and
honey. Moses thus leading the people unto this promise which had been made
unto the Patriarchs, shows sufficiently that God makes no new promise, but
that he ratifieth and confirms that which he had said. And why? Is it that
he was bound to them which were not yet born? No: but because he had loved
their fathers, as he has above said. It is true, that Moses now shows, that
the people was partaker of such a promise, if so be they should observe the
law of God. But what? We must yet always come to this point, that men are
utterly confounded, if they will oppose themselves against GOD, alleging any
dignity or worthiness of their own, and that they shall always remain in
their condemnation, they shall find that they are all accursed. It behooves
therefore that they have their only refuge unto the mercy of GOD: and that
they know, that when they shall have forced them selves to walk according
unto his law, that God shall owe them nothing, albeit he will not leave to
accomplish that which he has promised them, even by his mere goodness and
free mercy. Lo then how this place ought to be understood. Now seeing he
in this place speaks of the land promised unto the Jews, let us note, that
at this day we ought to be by many degrees more incited and provoked to serve
GOD, seeing he has dedicated the whole earth unto himself, and will that his
name be called on throughout all the world. For the blood which our Lord
Jesus Christ has shed, has sanctified all the world, which was then as it
were in all filth and pollution. For we know there was no land but this which
GOD had reserved unto himself, and wherein he would bear rule until the
coming of his Son. But when our Lord Jesus Christ appeared, he then
obtained possession of the whole world, and his kingdom was extended from one
end unto an other, and especially now, when the Gospel has been published.
Sithence then it is so, let us diligently note, that we are at this day much
more straightly bound unto the service and worship of GOD, for as much as by
the precious blood of his Son, he has consecrated and made holy the whole
earth, to the end we may dwell and be lodged therein, and that we may live
under his kingdom. And therefore, as we will that he have us under his
safeguard and protection, so let us beware that we yield up our selves wholly
unto him. But because men are always so fickle and wavering, that (as I have
already said) no bridles are sufficient to rain them to obedience, Moses
confirms all the doctrine he has in this place pronounced, by saying: Hear
therefore, O Israel, the Lord thy GOD is one GOD. He had said before,
Hearken: he had said, Take ye heed: he had said, That they must observe the
law. But here he confirms his whole matter much more better, when he says
so expressly, That the GOD of Israel is one GOD, For by this, his meaning is
to exclude all the gods which the world forgeth, and he will show that it is
not lawful for them to conceive any thing after their own fancy, but that
only which we hold by the word of God. Therefore when the God of Israel is
called One God, it is as much as if Moses did make comparison between the God
which published his law, as before he was manifested unto his servant Abraham,
and to the other Patriarchs, and would oppose him against all the gods which
the world imagined. As God in all times has been called upon, this name has
been common among the Painims. But what? The Painims have so wandered, that
albeit every one has said, I adore and worship God: yet what was this but
their own dreams and fantasies? For when men take upon them to worship God,
when they have no knowledge of him, there is no doubt, but they worship
idols. The Turks at this day will say that they worship God, Creator of the
heavens and of the earth: but this is but an idol which they worship. And how
so? They name him Creator of the heavens and of the earth, they have no images.
It is true. But yet have they but an idol in stead of God, because they will
not receive our Lord Jesus Christ who is the lively image of God his Father.
And we know what Saint John says, Heb. 1. 3. 1, John. 2. 23.
that he which denies the Son, he denies the Father. Therefore they have
not God, but an idol. As much is to be said of the Jews. The Jews will brag
much that they have the law, and that they worship the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob: but what? They are Apostataes, they have renounced the
law of God, when they have reiceted and refused Jesus Christ, who is the soul
of the law. It is he by whom God the father will manifest and open himself
unto us: it is he in whom he will be worshipped. Psalm. 2. 12.
And again he says, John. 5. 23.
Risse the Son whom I have sent you. And again: Who so honors not the
Son, the same honors not the Father which has sent him. Let us therefore
diligently note, that Moses would in this place make comparison between the
GOD which has declared himself in his word, and all the gods which are
renowned throughout the whole world, showing that all that is beside him, is
nothing but apishnesse, and mere vanity, and lying. And why? For we cannot
worship God aright, except we have first known him. And we must always to
this purpose remember that which Jesus Christ said unto the woman of Samaria:
ye know not what ye worship. John. 4. 22.
When Jesus Christ uses this word, he does as it were spit at all those
services and worshippings which were then established. There was no nation
which vaunted not of serving God: and Jesus Christ rejects all that which men
thought to be good and holy. Ye know not (says he) what ye worship. He
shows hereby, that it is req^isite and needful there be made some manifest
declaration of God: we must not walk here at all adventures, but we must be
assured what the God is whom we serve and worship. Now seeing God must be
known of us to be rightly served and worshipped, let us consider whence this
knowledge shall come and arise. Shall it grow in our own garden, as we say?
Shall we obtain it by our own labor and industry? Shall it be lawful for
every one to think what shall seem good unto him, to say: I have known God?
No, no: but GOD must declare and show himself, he must approach and come
near unto us. And so the only mean to know GOD aright is this, that we be
taught and instructed in his word. And lo why he says, The Lord thy GOD.
For this people had received the law: and again, the covenant had been made
with their fathers, GOD had separated this flock from the rest of the whole
world. It is not then without cause, that Moses here leads the people to the
knowledge of God, to the end they estraunge and keep themselves from all the
superstitions of the Painims, that they have nothing common with the
unfaithful ones: but that they know, that whereas God has manifested himself
so familiarly unto them, they have a most certain and infallible truth. Now if
this has been said of the time of the law, it agrees much better unto us.
For albeit God has given a sufficient admonition unto the Jews, that they be
not mingled among the pollusions of the Painims in their idolatries: yet have
we at this day a much more brighter clearenesse, since the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the lively image of GOD his Father, as we have
said. And we may well agree unto that which is written in the first of Saint
John, None has seen GOD at any time: John. 1. 18.
but the Son, which has always been in the bosom of the Father, has
revealed him unto us. The ancient Fathers have had a knowledge (as we have
said:) but this knowledge is accounted as none, in respect of that which we
have at this day by the Gospel. Since the Sun of righteousness shines on us,
behold God shows him self most familiar unto us. And lo why the Prophet
Esaie, Esaie. 25. 9.
when he entreats of the redemption which was to be made in the person of the
son of God: Behold him, behold him, this is our GOD, this is our Lord,
says he. The Prophet cries out, This is, this is our God. He is not
contented to say in one word, Behold our GOD, but he speaks as if the
thing had been present, and that GOD should then appear. And how is this
said? Was not God in the midst of his people? Exodus 29. 4^.
For he said, I will dwell in the midst of you. Psalm. 132. 14.
And again, Behold my rest: Sion is the place of my habitation. And again,
he protests, that he will never depart thence, that the people is his
temple, that they are his royal priesthood. Why then is it that the Prophet
Esaie says, Behold him, behold him, says our God: This is he, this is he,
when our Lord Jesus should come into the world? This is, because God reuealeth
him self unto us in greater perfection. There remains therefore less excuse
for us, if we at this day wander, and hold not our selves to the pure truth,
but that enerie one turn after his dreams, to say, It seems me so, behold
what I find to be good. Know we, that all this is nothing, and that we must
return to that certeintie of truth which has been brought unto us by our
Lord Jesus Christ. But the world is so far from knowing of this, that it
seems all have desired to despite and anger GOD, that they have devised how
to turn their back unto him, that they have labored to reject and lay aside
all subjection, that they might have leave to remain in their enormities and
vurulie demeanours, and that their wickedness in the mean time might not be
perceived. The Jews are inexcusable, as we see how the Prophets reproach
them, that they have wittinglie abandoned and put away GOD, and that they can
not excuse them selves, as the wretched Painims, saying, That they have heard
nothing: for GOD protests, that he has not spoken in vain. But now at this
day, when GOD speaks unto us with full mouth, and that we have so perfect a
revelation in his Gospel, is not this an over great wickedness, that men yet
wander and go so astraie? Were there ever more foolish and fond superstitions,
or more outrageous and enormous than those which are at this day to be seen
in Popery? I grant, the Jews mingled them selves among the superstitions of
the Painims, that they defiled them selves over much with their silthes and
pollutions: but when all shall be well sifted and examined, we shall find that
the Papists have surmounted and exceeded them herein by many degrees: for the
word of God at this day is as it were buried among them. When mention shall be
made of faith, the articles shall be drawn from out of the forge of men, the
holy Scripture shall be of no more force, than as if it were dead, and utterly
brought to ruin. Lo how they behave them selves herein, and when question is
of the service of GOD, they wander (as we have already said) after their own
inventions, and lo, My meaning is good, will they say, and they think God
will suffer him self to be ruled as a little child, and that he will never
come to examine all the doctrine of Popery. Again, if men speak of faith, is
there any talk of the free promises of GOD? No, but they attribute all to
them selves. When they will speak of the office of Jesus Christ, they
overthrow the virtue of his death and passion, as much as in them lies. When
any question is to be handled of their salvation, then will they come in with
their free will, their merits, and satisfactions. But we ought contrariwise to
return to the mere and only grace of the holy Ghost, confessing that we
are in bondage and servitude of sin, but that we are thence delivered by the
mercy and goodness of God. And here hence comes it, that the holy scripture
calls the remission and forgiveness of sins our righteousness. We must
therefore come unto this point, and also know, that if we have failed in our
duty, we can not bring any other payment or satisfaction, than that which we
borrowe of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Of all this there is
nothing to be found in Popery: If question be of calling upon GOD, they will
make their vagaries unto their he Saints and she Saints: and Jesus Christ in
the mean time shall not be known such a one as he is, nor clothed with the
office which has been given him of God his Father. But the Papists degrade
him as sacrilegious and false traitorous villains, which seek nothing else but
to bury altogether, and toset forth to open prey all the glory and dignity
which God his Father has given him. As much may be said of all their service
and religion. We see how the Sacraments are polluted and defiled among them.
In place of the holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, there is substituted
this infernal and devilish abomination, of the Mass, (...) 24.
wherein they say, That Jesus Christ is sacrificed, as if he him self had done
nothing, as if he were not established the only and perpetual priest by God
his father. So then we see how the Papists make a mockery of the word of
God, wherein he has revealed him self, that it seems, that of set and
deliberate purpose they would deface and put out the knowledge of him which is
in the Gospel. And therefore we must more he) fully note this word, That the
Lord is God: yea, one God only. And so always and as often as this word of
God shall come in place, let us know that it is to cut off all that shall come
into our brain, all that which men shall have forged and devised, and which we
are not taught by the holy scripture: for God will be in such sort considered of
us, that we be not wrapped and entangled in the fantasies and errors of
idolaters. And in very deed, we can not have the true God, except we have him
alone, that is, that we join with him no companion: for as soon as we come in
with our little half gods, we renounce the living God. And why? For he will be
alone, as he pronounces by the Prophet Esaie in another place, I am the
everliving, says the Lord, Esaie. 42. 8.
I will not give my glory unto another. And again, we have seen before that
he names him self, A gealous God. And for what other cause, than for this, to
withdraw us from all corruptions? As S. Paul speaks in the 2. to the
Corinth. For as soon as we are turned from the simplicity of the word of God,
it is as if a woman should hearken unto a Bawd which shall come to whisper in
her ear. Low are forthwith corrupted, and so we play the wicked fornicators
against God, when we falsify the faith which we have promised him in baptism:
we reject and cast aside his law, we violate and profane all religion, when we
decline the least that may be from his pure and sincere doctrine. Let us
therefore bear in mind always and as often as mention is made of this word
(God,) that we know that God must be alone: and therefore when we shall have
accompanied him with creatures, he casts us off as Apostataes, and as people
which are not worthy to have to do with him, because we would not yield
unto him the honor which he deserves: namely, that he should be the Lord,
but shall have profaned his name by making it common unto creatures, or
communicating of it with our dreams. But withal, let us note, that it is not
enough that we reserve unto the living GOD the title of one word, but we must
take heed that whatsoever apperteineth unto him, remain and abide unto him in
his entire and perfect estate. As how? He means not only to be called God,
but to be acknowledged Almighty, to be acknowledged our Father and Savior, to
be known for him which has authority to govern us, for him in whom we ought
to repose our whole trust and confidence, for him whom we ought to invoke and
call upon. Lo, the chief and principal things we ought to think and
meditate upon, when question is of honoring one only God. I grant the
Papists will still say, That S. Michael, and S. William, and such others are
not their gods: but yet for all this they worship them: yea, their images and
pictures: although they think to escape by this shifte, that the images are
not the Saints they pray unto, but only their remembrances to represent
them, and yet is this against the express commandment of God. And again,
they know not how GOD will be worshipped, when they so mingle him among their
idols of wood and of stone, by the which they think to represent their
Saints. It is true, they use words them selves understand not, of Dulia, and
Latria, when they say they serve their moppets, that they bear reverence unto
God. For lo, what they understand by these words. But truly God is much
beholding unto them, when they declare they honor him only, and that withal
they serve their idols. Again, to call upon God, is it not an holy and
sacred thing? For this is the true service which he requires, as it is said in
the fifty Psalm. So we see, that the world over impudentlie mocketh God,
Psalm. 50. 14. 15. 23.
when men so wickedlie corrupt and deprave his whole service and worship. And
know we that this is a thing most detestable, when men so wander and lead
them selves astray, after they have had so clear and so plain a revelation of
God, and his will, as is contained in the Gospel. And with so much the greater
heedfulnesse must we rest and stay our selves on this doctrine, knowing that
our Lord will, that we hang and depend wholly on him, and that there he an
inviolable union between him and us. And this shall then be, when we shall be
withhelde simply within the borders and limits of his word, when we shall
yield no access unto the inventions of men, when we shall not leave our mind
to wander: but that after we shall have heard what is contained in the holy
Scripture, we shall be pressed and ready to say Amen thereto, not only with our
mouth, but that our faith shall be slayed and fastened on that which proceeds
from the mouth of God.

^ with acknowledgement of our faults, praying him to make us feel them better
than we have done, and that more and more we may know how far and wherein
we are bound unto him, and that we think not rashly to acquit our selves
toward him, but that we tend altogether to him, and to his service, that we
have no other study nor desire, but to observe his holy law. And seeing we
are yet so far from it, as any thing may be, seeing we falter so much and
linger in the midde way, having the only refuge to the remission of our
sins, pray we that it will please him to receive us unto mercy, and to
bear with us so far, as to continue to conduct and to govern us by his hole
spirit, albeit we deserve to be wholly rejected of him. And withal also pray
we, that it will please him so to open our eyes, that beholding the
brightness of our Lord Jesus Christ, we may be altogether ravished thereby,
and constrained to renounce the things of this world, with the iustes, and
affections of the flesh. which carry us headlong to all wickedness: in such
sort, that we have none other desire, but to humble our selves under him, to
the end that being beaten down in our selves, he may raise us up again to
himself, by his word, attending until it please him to change and
transfigure us into his own image and likeness, in the latter day. That it
will please him to grant this grace, not only to us, but unto all people and
nations of the earth, etc.

the Law. Matthew. 22. 35 One of them, a Doctor of the Law, asked him a
question, tempting him, and saying:

36 Master, which is the great commandment of the Law?

37 Jesus said to him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

38 This is the first and the great commandment:

39 And the second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self.

40 On these two commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.


God be praised.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes of the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson,
for John Harison. Anno. 1579.


