Cambium Regis: OR, THE OFFICE OF HIS MAJESTY'S EXCHANGE ROYAL. Declaring and
justifying his Majesty's Right; and the Conveniencie thereof. Published by
Authority.

printer's device of Bernard Alsop, featuring a griffon seated on a stone or
book, resting on a ball or globe with wings (McKerrow 339)

LONDON. Printed for B.F. 1628.

To the Reader.
INtending to set down in a summary way, the grounds of the Office of
Exchange, and the causes of the late reviving the execution thereof. I found it
would be necessary by way of preface to level and prepare the minds of such
who perhaps have bin attempted to be prepossessed with many untrue and
scandalous rumors touching the same, since in a thing although not new, yet by
reason of disvsage to some seeming as new, it may prevail much in prejudice of
a cause, that men have false apprehensions or conceits of that which is
propounded or done; to the end therefore that the mind freed of these, may be
placed in that even and clear aspect as may be fit, for the right
understanding and judging of what shall be represented unto it, I must from
such as may pervse this short Treatise, desire by way of postulation or request.

First,. 1.
that notwithstanding what they may have heard, they do not conceive, that the
Office, or grant thereof in the Letters Patents intends or actually restraines
the liberty of the subject in general, but that he is free, (as before the
Patent.)

1. To sell his plate vessel, or other manufactures, or other gold or silver
whatsoever, to any Goldsmith, or other person whomsoever to his best advantage.

2 That he is free to carry his gold and silver immediately to the mint there to
have the same coined, whether he be a Merchant that imports the same from
beyond the feas: Or other subject, having the same from his Mines, of his
Plate, receipts or monyes coming of his wares, or other commodities.

Nor does it restrain the Goldsmith, or other Tradesman in particular.

1. They may use their trade of Goldsmithrey, and other Trades as fully and
amply as heretofore they lawfully might or could do.

2. They may use and enjoy, all such franchises and other liberties and graunts
which they lawfully have or hold from the Charters of his Majesty or any his
Predecessors.

3. They may buy and Plate vessel, burnt silver, broken silver or other in
fashion or out of fashion, or any other manufacture to be employed in their
Trades or resold, as they might do before the Patent.

4. They may buy any gold or silver whatsoever or of whomsoever to make plate
of, or to be used in the seueall manufactures of their trades.

Secondly,. 2.
I should desire, no man should conceive of this as grounded upon the absolute
power and prerogative royal of the King, But as the premption of Bullion, or
Materials of mintage, is a right inherent and entrusted trusted to the Crown;
so always have the Kings of this Realm exercised this office by their Farmers
and Patentees as belonging to them by right and prerogative legal, A Right of
such nature, as that by which Royal mines, Treasure troue, and such like do
belong unto the Crown, And as it is not raised, so is it not intended to be
enlarged, or extended beyond the bounds and limitts set to it by the Law: or
vpheld by any other means, then the ordinary courses of Justice, free to all
in his Majesty's Courts of Judicature, to which every man justly grieved by the
Patent, or the execution thereof, is left to obtain his lawful rights and
amends.

Thirdly,. 3.
that the office may no way be taken as to savor of Monopoly; this including
a restraint of what was lawful; and a setting of a price upon a free
merchandise, at the pleasure of private persons to their own gain, in
prejudice of the public: But the office is and ought to be acquitted of both
these Challenges, and most justly: For although the metals of gold and silver
(as things many ways useful) have bin and are the marter of Trade, yet when
they are considered as Bullion, and as the materials of Coin with reference to
the Mint: In this relation, they become the sole preragatiue and right of
Princes who have power to enstampe them with their Image and superscription,
thereby giving them currancie amongst their people, and appointing them
public measures for the valuing and governing the estates and contracts of
their subjects, whereupon it has never bin lawful here, nor (in any well
governed foreign slate) was there ever permitted a promiscuous buying of
Bullion, to buy, sell or traffic gold or silver merchantwise, or to drive any
Trade upon the profit thereof, and so to come betwixt the Merchant, or other
iubject, and the Mint, but to such as were authorized and appointed by the
State hereunto: This being the full proper and adaquate subject of the Office
of Exchange, The sovereignty of the Prince and State, having been ever
esteemed faint and vain in the form and valuation of monyes; if the
materials, and the supply thereof should be at the pleasure of others; As
here it has lately been at the pleasure of some few Goldsmiths, and
accidentally brought to the Mint, when no offer of gain did withdraw their
supply. And for the price; that is always certain, though dependent upon the
Prince his standard Bullion not like other merchandise, according to more or
few buyers, plenty or scarcity, or the use or disuse thereof, or other
accidents rising or falling in price; but always having one certain and
vnchoengeable value and rate: according to the weight and finenesse thereof,
viz. That for gold and silver Bullion in foreign species or other, there be
given a like, and the same quantity of gold or silver Corned equivalent weight
for weight. The seller only abating the Coinage and price of Exchange, Both
which are to be taxed by the authority of the Prince, or laws of the State,
as in this particular they are by his Majesty's Indentures of the Mint: And of
the Exchange, And the last being likewise according to Act of Parliament
thereof made with much temper thereunto. ix. H. v. c.


Fourthly,. 4.
Nor will any I hope be much prejudiced with the murmures and complaints of
some few exchanging Goldsmiths, whose usurped and abused Trade is hereby cut
off, since (the premises considered) this will appear to all to be but the
power and practice of those few (not many more then ten persons) and their
prevailement with the rest of the company, upon false suggestions of
prejudices, neither granted nor claimed; Because it will be impossible to
assign, or show, how or wherein the true Goldsmith receives prejudice, when he
is not barred from buying, selling, or doing any thing that ever did or does
belong to their trades, or ever was used or practiced but by those few, who
leaving off their proper trade of Goldsmithrie, and contrary to their Charter,
are unduly become Exchangers, Interlopers betwixt the Merchant and the Mint,
And Intruders hereby upon his Majesty's Regalities, to the loss of his
Majesty in the profit of his Coynage, and Exchange; And general prejudice of
the Realm, by the opportunity they have had and practiced from hence, of being
the sole instruments of exportation of gold and silver to the strangers, The
sorters and colors out of all the weightiest of his Majesty's coin, which
they have transported or moulten down, occasioning hereby the great scarcity
of silver monyes, and the standing still of the Mint for silver monyes ever
since xjmo of the late King, and by both a decrease of the trade and employment
of the subject, And by all an impouerishment and destruction of the Realm.

And now presuming the indifferent and impartial will (at least) withhold his
censures, until every allegation against the office shall be upon particular
examination, cleared and resolved; I desiring, their like patience of perufall,
proceed to make manifest.

First, His Majesty's legal right thereunto.

Secondly, the causes of his Majesty's, now resuming the same and therein the
conuenience thereof, and then to touch the form of proceeding and debatements
had in bringing the same to resolution, from all which, satisfaction is humbly
presented, upon what just, weighty, and considerable reasons his Majesty has
restored to his Crown, and resumed CAMBIVM REGIS, or his Office of Exchange
Royal.

Cambium Regis.
THe right and Prerogative of Exchange of Bullion, has always been a flower
of the Crown, and part of his Majesty's ancient Revenue, A maine part of
Regalty, and mark of Sovereignty, For the power of Mintage or Coynage, being as
it were but nomen mane, an empty and vain title when the Materials as Bullion
was ministered and brought thither only at the courtesy of others. The Kings of
this Realm have therefore always enjoyed, and continued this prerogative of
Exchange, as from the utmost Extancie of Record, may appear.

Henry the first therefore made a Law, Quod nullus sit ausus cambire denarios
nisi Monetarius Regis, conioyning in one person both the offices of Exchanger:
and Master worker of his Moneys, which the excellent Kings succeeding
preserved, as a flower of the Crown, though in distinct and divided Offices,
until that about the beginning of Henry the 6. they came again to be
conjoined.

In the reign of Richard the first, Guido de Voe. had and exercised the office
of Exchange.

King John in Anno primo, for the consideration of 1700l. committed to Hugo
Cycell, Cambium totius Angliae: And in Anno 6. per Communem Consilium,
Ordinances being made an express Article was prohibiting all other to make any
exchange of money or silver, but at the Kings Exchange.

Henry the third in the Sixth year of his Reign wrote to the Seabins and men
of Ipree, That he Assensu Consilij had made proclamation, That no English man
or other should make Exchange but only at his Exchange at London and
Canterbury.

According whereunto for the sum of 5000. Marks, he farmed out his Exchange;
Anno 6. to Andrew Buckerill, Anno 9. to Euerard, Anno 35. to Bartholmew
Castilion.

The place where the Kings Exchange was kept at this time, was by Paul's, and
gave name to the street called the Old change, but in evidence the Old Exchange.

Edward the first had his Exchanger with Prohibition that none else should use
it, Gregory Rock had it anno 8. And for ease of Merchants that imported
Bullion, he caused tables of Exchanges to be set up at several places.

The Goldsmiths Charter; Anno 1. Edw: the first, makes mention that the
Goldsmiths then by their petition declared; That whereas heretofore no Merchant
English or Stranger has used to bring into this Land no manner of money
forged, but only Plate of Silver to make Esxchange with our Coin. By which of
the Goldsmiths owing showing appears. 1. That all imported Silver (which then
of right was only Plate of Silver) was to be carried to the Kings Exchange;
And neither the Goldsmiths nor the Goldsmithrie here is mentioned for Silver
imported. Secondly, it is to be obserned; That the Exchange was to be made
with his Majesty's Coin, viz. by giving current Coin presently for it.

When diverse Goldsmiths about 7. Edw: the second, intruded upon the Kings
Officers, and would buy Gold and Silver for the Mint, A Proclamation was made
to the Contrary, Commanding all sellers to go ad Cambium Regis. In his time,
anno 5. William Hansteed was Echanger, and anno 18. Roger de Frowick.

The like Prohibition was assensu Consilij by Proclamation upon pain of
imprisonment and forfeiture of all Anno xxv. Ed. the third, upon like prejudice
offered to the Kings profit then, having farmed out his Exchanges, as Anno
xxviij. to wickingham: Anno 35. to Guidon: Anno 40. to St. Iue. And Tables of
Exchanges were erected at Dover, Canterbury and other Ports of the Kingdom.

Rex per Assensum Consilij sui Ordinanvit Quod Excambiam Monetae suae tam auri
quam argenti penes ipsum remaneant vnde proclamari fecit quod nullus Ex cambium
aut venditione^ monetaefaciat clam vel palam nisi per ipsum regem ad illum
Deputatu^ sub paena imprisonamenti and Amissionis Monetae predictae. Claus de
Anno xxv.

Quod nullus Commune Cambium teneat, nec aliquod proficuum de eodem percipiat
sub paena faris facturae, monetae sic Cambiata Excepto Cambiataere Regis iuxta
formam Statuti Anno xxv. Ed: 3. Claus de An xxix. indorso. vid. similiter.
Statutes of money made at York. ix. Ed. 3. Cap. 2. Item, that no false money
be brought into our Realm or elsewhere within our power upon pain of
forfeiture of such money, Provided always, That all manner of people of what
Realm or Dominion they be of, may safely bring to the Exchange and to no
place else, Bullion, Silver in plate, vessel of Silver, and all manner money
of silver, of what value soever it be, so that it be no false money and
sterling counterfeit, and there they shall receive good and convenient Exchange.

Cap. 7. Item That the Tables of Exchange, shall be at Dover, and in other
places, where and when it shall please us, and your Counsel to make Exchanges;
And that the Wardens of such Tables, shall make such Exchanges, by the
Testimony of Controuler, which we shall put to them.

Money, Plate, or vessel, intended or purposed to be exported, or Counterfeit
sterling imported, being to be by that State, forfeited, The forfeitures were
to be delivered to the Exchanges by Indenture whereby the Wardens may be
charged. Cap 9.

Exchanges shall be ordained in good Towns, according as shall seem best to our
sovereign Lord the King, for the profit of him and his people. And that it
shall be ordained in certainty, what shall be given in Exchange for every piece of
gold. xviij. Edw. 3. It shall be lawful for every man to Exchange gold for
silver, or silver for gold, or for gold and silver gold, so that no man hold no
Exchange, nor take no profit, for making such Exchange upon pain of forfeiture
of the money so exchanged; Except the Kings Exchanger, who takes profit,
according to the Ordinance before made. Anno 25. Cap. 12.

All Merchants privy and Strangers, may safely bring within your said Realm
and lands. Plate of silver, and Billets of gold, And all other manner of gold,
or all money of Gold or silver to our Bullion or to our Exchanges which we
shall do ordain at our Staples and elsewhere. Taking there money of our Coin
of gold or silver Couenable to the value, xxvij. Ed. 3. Cap. 14.

Richard the III. continued the farm of Bullion as appears by his grant to
Roc. Fin. an 11. Ric. 2.
Salisbury and others; with Proclamation upon pain of forfeiture, that none
else should use it.

Henry the IIII. granted out the Office of Exchange, anno 1. And anno ix.
prohibited all other but his own Exchanger.

Henry the Vth granted out this Office, anno 11. to Ret. Pat. de anno 2. pars
a mem. 34.
Lodowick John; with Prohibition of all Patent. de anno 2. pars 2. m. 23. Et
om. 5. m. 1.
others: And by Indenture, anno ix. Constituted Claus. de anno ix. Dors. m. 1.
John Patesley Citizen and Goldsmith his Exchanger with several Covenants; And
for the Out-Ports, and other parts of the Realm from London; There was
Commissu directa iusticiarijs de Assisa per Totam Angliam ad Communicandum and
tractandum cum quibus Cur que legijs qui officium Cambij Mometae Regis habere
and occupare voluerit. Patent. de anno 19. part. 2. mem. 8.

Statut. ix. H. v. c. 2.

The King shall do to be ordained his Exchanges of Gold and Silver in the
City of London and elsewhere, in the Realms for the ease of his people, Which
shall be holden in open places in high Streets; And that all they which will
come to the Tower of London, there to have money new Coined, they shall have
money of new Coin, and thereof shall be delivered within Eight days
according to the true value paying the Coynage. And that they which will not
goc to the Tower but thereof be delivered at the Exchanges, shall pay for the
Exchange after the rate of Penny for the Noble, with the Seignorage and Coynage.

Cap. 4. Item, That they which shall be wardens, Surveyors, and ministers of
Exchanges out of the Tower, shall be holden and bounden to bring all their
Gold and Silver, which they shall receive by way of Exchange, or Buy, by color
of their Office unto the Tower, there to be moulten and made into Coin, in
augmentation and increase of the money for the profit of the Realm and ease of
the people, without being sold, aliened, or put to any other use.

Bartholmew Goldbeater was Exchanger by Indenture at the time of the Demise of
Hen. 5th, who Rot. Parl. an. H. vj nostr. 35.
was commanded notwithstanding the voydance of his Indenture, by the Kings
death to continue the Exercise of that office (as the Record says) to the
Profit of the King and people; and upon supplication of allowance for waste,
was allowed for Exchange Penie halfe-penie per Noble. After whose death the
said Office by Letters Patents and Indenture, was grannted unto Patent. ann. x.
pars 1. mem. 29.
William Russe Citizen and Ieweller, to have Iuxta forma^ and effectum
Indenturaru^. Anno xxiiij. Dors. Claus. de. cod. anno memb. 30.
Robert Mansfield was made Exchanger by Letters Patents and Indenture. Anno
xxvij. Claus. de codem 23. in. dors.

Vid.: stat. 1. H. vj cap. 1. and 2. H. vj. cap. 10.


Richard Tunstall. In all which Indentures, the Covenants are gr^onnded upon,
and pursue the Provisions of the Acts above mentioned of anno ix. Hen. v.
Capit. 2. and 4.

Edward the IIII. in the viij.th of his Reign, did ordain Patent. de eod. an.
pars. 3. m. 2.
William Lord Hastings, Master and worker of his money, etc. And Keeper of all
manner of Changes and Outchanges in the Tower of London, Realm of England,
town of Callis and marches of the same, to have to himself and Deputies
according to his letters Patents and Indentures. In anno xxij. Pat. de eod. an.
pars. 3. m. 8.
Bartholmew Read Citizen and Goldsmith of London, had the same office by
letters Patents and Indenture.

Richard the III. granted this Office to John Kendall his Secretary, with
Proclamation, anno 1.

And thus all the reign of Hen. the vij. Man. Cotton.
it was continued, and so along until the loose times of Henry the viij. upon
occasion of his base moneys (whereupon no constant Exchanges could be made)
made way to the Enchrochment of the Goldsmiths who (as the right worthy Sir
Robert Cotton has observed) having of late in our times cast off their proper
Trade of Gouldsmithery, are become unduly to the Kings prejudice the Masters
and Commanders hereby of the Kings Mint. And so by setting themselves in the
sovereigns dignity, bring the King to be waged and set on work by his own
subjects, Contrary to the use of the former best times in this state. And to
the practice of the wisest and grea test Princes in foreign parts. The
Exchange of Coin or emption of Bullion being almost in all neighboring states
Officium publicum, And in the power and donation of Princes none being at
liberty to exercise lestat. de Changeiur, but by faculty from the Prince, And
with Relation to his Mynts.

Statut. 4. Hen. vij. cap. 5.

No fine silver to be allayed or sold to any but to officers of Mints, Changes,
or Goldsmiths, for augmentation and amending of Coin or Plate: etc. But not to
sell to any person Silver allayed. And that no Goldsmith sell no fine silver
nor any silver allayed to any person whatsoever, nor one Goldsmith to another.

By Proclamation 5. Ed. vj. this statute of 3. Hen. vij. (which expressly
ratifies and confirms the Act. of 25. Ed. 3. orderned for Exchanges supra) is
commanded to be put in Execution.

And in the Act of 18. Eliz. 15. for reformation of abuses in Goldsmiths, her
Majesty's Mints and Changes are nominated disiunctiuely and by Proclamation of
43. Eliz. this Act of 25. Ed. 3. Concerning Exchanges is enjoined to be duyly
observed.

Note that this Act. of 25. Ed. 3. made for Exchanges, is mentioned in the
Indentures of the Kings, with their Exchangers: as an. 28. Ed. 3. Wickingham,
ix. H. v. to Patesly, x. Hen. 6. to Wilitam Rus. xxiiij. to Mansfield, xxxvj.
to Tonstall viij. Ed. 4. to M. L. Hastirgs, xxij. to Reed. In all which and in
all other Judentures of this Office the King expressly covenants to Proclaim:
That none other hold any common Exchange or take profit. This Stat. being also
Proclaimed ix. H. v. mem. 6.

By all which Acts of Parliament, Charters Proclamations cleared and
interpreted by the Letters Patents, and Indentures, and the uninterrupted
practice and exercise of that Office for many hundred of years, Is made most
evident.

1. That the Exchange or buying of Bullion belongs to his Majesty Iure
successionis, by right derived from his Ancestors Kings of England: as part of
his ancient Right and Revenue: And likewise Iure concessionis, by Grants and
Establishments of several Acts of Parliament. 2. That it is no part of the
Goldsmiths trade to buy or exchange Bullion; or lawful to any other to trade
Gold or silver Merchantwise, to make profit thereof, save only to his
Majesty's Exchanger. 3. That the Exchange was divided and severed from the
Mynt, or Bullion: And that diverse places of Exchange were both in London and
elsewhere out of the Tower.
And to conclude the point of his Majesty's legal interest in the Exchange of
Bullion, the Charter of the Goldsmiths expressly both warrants his Majesty's
Right, and shows that they had no liberty to buy aany Gold or Silver, but
with reference to be made and converted into Plate. As more particularly will
be explained in Answer to some legal points of their petition made to the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

By all which, though it does evidently appear, That the Exchange of Bullon
neither ever was, nor now is, any part or branch of the goldsmiths trade; to
which by his service and freedom he is entitled. Nevertheless it may not
seem altogether unuseful to Collect the same likewise from the points ensuing.

That this is intimated in the very name of Goldsmithrie,. 1.
importing a manufactury or handy craft: they being Auri-fabri, not
Auri-emptores, or Auri-venditores.

That by the old Orders of the Company of Goldsmiths.. 2.
It was required as a proof of his skill and sufficiency, That every one
before he was made free was to make a piece of Plate or other work called his
Masterpiece, without which he was refusable: but it was never heard they were
examined upon their skill in foreign Coins or several goodnesses of Gold or
Silver.

That within these 60.. 3.
years last past; The Goldsmith-row in Cheap or Goldsmithrie, was all
inhabited by the working-Goldsmiths, every Shop having his worke-houses
necessary for the several use of their Trades.

That the commonaltie or generality of the Company,. 4.
does neither pretend unto, nor know what belongs to the skill or cunning of
the Exchanges, nor are acquainted or practiced in the values or finenesses of
foreign Species: And as within these 30. years last past there were few or
none: So at this time there are not many more then ten persons who to any
purpose are skillful or traders in foreign Coins.

That it is lawful, for any Book-binder,. 5.
Merchants man or other person whatsoever, being free of any other Company: To
set up as an Exchanging Goldsmith; which shows that to be no part of the
Trade: And upon some remonstrances under the hands of the Commonaltie, it will
be made appear, that they have disclaymed this Exchanging mystery either to
be part of the ir trade; or the Exchangers of right to have any thing to do
in their Company.

And lastly,. 6.
if this Exchanging had been part of the Goldsmiths true and ancient Trade, it
would have bin used by them time out of mind as appertayning to their Trade;
Whereas contrariwise it most evidently appears, That many Goldsmiths in the
Reigns of several Kings did exercise this business of Exchange, and buying
and selling of Bullion, Not by reason of their trades, but by virtue of Letters
Patents from the Kings of this Realm, and that without opposition or
pretention of any other of their Company thereunto. Thus William Salisbury
Goldsmith was Exchanger, 1. Ric. 1. John Patesley ix. Hen. v. William Russe 2.
Hen. vi. Bartholmew Read, xxij. Edw. the 4. and others. By all which is
apparently showed. The exchanging of gold and silver to be no part of the
Goldsmiths trade or to belong unto them. And by consequence that by the Office
they are not restrained or debarred from any lawful benefit or use of their
Trades.

CHAP. 2. The Causes of his Majesty's now resuming the Exchange of Bullion.
Besides the more general Cause moving his Majesty to resume the Exchange of
Bullion, which was, Ad jura regni ne depereant seu per aliquorum vsurpationes
indebitas aliquatinus substrahantur quatenus just poterimus manu tenendum
substractaque and occupata si quae suerint ad Statum debitum reuocanda nec, non
ad impugnatores eorundam iurium nostrorum refraenandos, Et prout convenit juxta
eorundam demerita puniendos co studiosius nos decet operam adhiberi and
solicitius extendere manum nostram quod ad hoc vinculo iuramenti teneri
dignoscimur and astringi pluresque conspicimus iura illa pro viribus impugnare.

Regist brevium. Ad iura Regia. fol. 61.6.


to preserve the rights of his Crown and revenue, Some special Motives seem
to have been raised, from those Abuses and errors, which such of the
Goldsmiths as became Exchangers haeue practiced, whereby they have greatly
exhausted the Money of the Realm, and depraved and enfeebled the residue. And
as the Proclamation not colourably but truly speaks, These Exchangers aue
from hence grown unto that licentiousnes, That they have for diverse years
presumed for their private Lucar and gain, and daily do presume to sort and
weigh all sorts of moneys current within our Realm, to the end to Call out
all the Old and new moneys which either by not wearing or any other accident
are weightier then the rest, which weightiest and best monyes have not only
him molten down, for the making of Plate vessel and other manufactures, but
even Traded and sold to Merchant strangers and others who have transported the
same, whereby the Consumption of our Coins has bin greatly occasioned. Not
only to the scarcity of Current moneys, especially of Silver Coin, but also
to the great depravation and enfeebling of the Remainder of our Silver moneys
not exported or consumed by the abuses and practices aforesaid. And to the
Raising of the Silver even of our own Moneys to a Rate and price above our
Mynt, and above what they are truly Current for. By reason whereof no Silver
can be brought thither but to the loss of such as bring the same, Contrary to
the Laws and Policy of our Realm, and of diverse acts of Parliament, and of
late Proclamation in that case provided and published. The longer permission of
all which would not only redound to the impeachment of our Prerogative Royal:
but does directly tend to the impoverishment and destruction of our Realms.

Now that the Exchanging Goldsmiths have had by the Advantage of their
Exchanging, the Opportunity of being the maine Sorters and Cullers of the
weightiest moneys, and have sold and moulten down the same, is convinced;

1. From the Conviction of the Merchant-Strangers and others in the
Scar-chamber; The Examination of the Gold smiths, and their Books being the
maine proof against them: Since all or the greatest part they exported, was
bought of the Exchanging Goldsmith. 2 That his Majesty found this upon
Examination, as is Expressed and declared in the Proclamation of ix. King JAMES
made against Melting or Conveying out of the Kings Dominions of Gold or Silver
coined or current in the same. 3 That it is notorionsly known that it has for
this 30. years and opwards bin the usual course of Exchanging Goldsmiths, to
make their prentises and servants, every morning to run from shop to shop, to
enquire after and buy up all weighty and heavy Gold at any over price, all
which they have sold to Dutchmen and others to be transported to their Mints:
And ever since the Proclamation of the xj. of the said King (which enhansed the
gold, whereby the profit was turned upon the silver.) They have practiced and
still do practice to cull and sort out all weighty and heavy moneys which they
have sold for furnishing the Mynts of Holland, and of the East-countries:
witness the pieces of Thirteene-pence halfepenies, Old shillings of Elizabeth,
Nine-pence and fourepence halfepeny pieces being weighty moneys, whereof none
are now to be met withal. 4. That hereby they have raised the price of silver
by degrees, to 2.d per ounce above the value of the Mint, the immediate
consequence whereof has bin the standing still of the Mint for silver Moneys
ever since the xj. of King James, to the great scarcity of silver Moneys; the
decrease of trade and employment of the subject both which are moved by plenty
of money. 5. That it is notoriously known, that silver weighty moneys are by
certain persons that run up, and down to shopkeepers and others, under
pretense of Exchanging gold gathered and sorted together; And sold by the Ounce
to be moulten down to make plate off.
All which praemises considered, It is a thing of no great marvel though
Melchior wink late Myntmaster of Amsterdam, amongst many other of his services
to that state gave in a memorial of his gaining them, LX. M.l. per annum, by
melting down English Coin which gain Argues an immense sum to have bin
moulten down.

For restitution of which Right to the Crown, and to reform and stop the
further continuance of these and such like abuses, tending to the dimunition
and depraving of English Coin, and procuring the scarcity of money especially
of Silver has his Majesty been pleased to Resume and Re-establish, the Office
of his Exchange Royal.

CHAP. 3. Of the Conveniences of the Office of Exchange.
The Policy and Laws of this Realm, have always aimed at and intended The
increase and augmentation of Money; most especially that of Silver: And this
diverse ways.

1. First, by procuring the Importation of Bullion, and to this end have
enforced the Exporter of Staple Commodities, to return some proportional part
of Bullion; as 14. Edw. 3. cap. 21. Two marks silver for every Sack of Wool:
or that Wool, woolfels and Tynne should be sold for ready money. Every
Sarpler of Wool of the value of 12. Marks, to make good to the Mynt six
pound of Bullion. 2. Secondly, by preserving it as well in i'ts kind by
providing against Exportation 20. Ed. 1.9. Ed. 3.2. H. 6. Proct. 9. Iac. others.
and the melting it down to make Plate or other Manufactures of 9 Ed. 3. ca.
3.17. R. 2. ca. 2.17. Ed. 4. ca. 1.
: And if any moneys thorough time or or other practice, became vncurrant, then
the same to be converted into Money again, and not be diverted from Coin.
Ed. 1. Statut. de moneta portuum Rastall titul. money 2.
. 3. Lastly, by providing, 2. H. 6. ca. 13. 18. Eliz. cap. 15.5. Ed. 6. Tit.
Exchange Rastall 25. Ed. 3. Procl. 43. Eliz. 10. Iac. 61. and 16.
That none should give a price for Bullion above the Rate of the Mynt: For it
is not to be expected that any Bullion either of Gold or silver shall ever be
brought to the Mint, when the Owner may have a greater price, then at the Mynt,
either to be transported, or to be Converted to make Plate or other things of.
This agreeing likewise with the Policy of Spain, which though it be the
Spring and fountain from whence the greatest streams of filuer have been
derived into other parts, yet an ounce of silver there will always yield the
seller six pence or one Real more at the Mint, then to be sold to any other
for any purpose whatsoever, concurring likewise with the practice of other
States.
Plenty of Money being then the Mark or Aim by approachment whereunto, or
declination from whence the conveniencie or inconueniencie of the office of
Exchange must be judged. And these the subordinate means to obtain the same,
directed and leuelled to that end by diverse acts of Parliament. The next
Inquiry is, whether these ends may not more probably beattained by the due
exercise of the Office, Then by still permitting the promiscuous buying and
felling of Bullion, and a common Trade and Trassiquing in it, And this by way
of comparison.

1. The Goldsmiths have been found to be the sole instruments of Exportation,
and a most necessary and effectual means thereunto, without whose ministry
the weightiest or best moneys, or Bullion of gold and silver could not be got
together Procla. r. feb. 16. Iac.
to fit the opportunity of transportation, But these Exchanging Goldsmiths
being taken away, the transporters cannot be fitted, or their turns served,
and so the transportation will decrease: But the Office of his Majesty's
Exchange, is to assemble and gather together the materials of Myntage, and the
same to deliver to the Mynt, there to be coined for increase of money, and
this by the testimony 9. Ed. 3. c. 7. and 9. H. 5. c. 2.
of a Controuler of the Exchange appointed thereunto by his Marestie. 2. The
Goldsmiths culls and sorts likewise out, the weighty Moneys from time to time,
and melts them down, or sels them to be moulten down to be converted to
Plate, and for diverse other uses. The Exchanger neither Culls nor sorts, nor
will permit any such culling or sorting, but will have an eye hereunto, as well
because it occasions the overprises of Silver: as also because they hereby
continue an unlawful trading of Coin to his prejudice. 3. The Goldsmith has
hereby occasioned the price of silver to rise by degrees to 2d per ounce above
the value of the Mynt: The effect whereof has been the standing still of the
Mynt: And the raising of the price of Plate from time to time; And the culling
and melting down of his Majesty's Coin, But the Exchanger neither can nor
will do any of these, And all these abuses, proceeding only from the
Exchanging Goldsmiths will cease, when their usurped Trade shall be taken from
them, and they no longer permitted their Exchanging without which they will not
be accommodated for these practices.
Now though the auoydance of these pernicious courses, tending to the
impouerishment and destruction of the Realm, be a good and conueniencie
sufficient to persuade and maintain the resumption of this start-vp trade, and
the vsefulnes of the Office: Yet the due execution of the office, and the parts
incident thereunto will be further beneficial to the Realm.

1. 1. Importation advanced.
By public Tables to be set up by the Exchanger will be made known, the right
valuation of Foreign Coins to ours. And this will direct the merchant to sell
our commodities to the just price, which will advance the stock of the
Kingdom, and cause importation of Coin and Bullion. 2. By the true and
certain value and tate set upon all foreign Coins and Bullion, the Merchant
will drive a more certain trade then heretofore; For being sure to receive his
ready money for his Bullion at his return, and being before informed of the
true rates, this cannot. likewise but encourage and advance the Importation. 3.
The traveler inwards, or whosoever is owner of any foreign Coins in any the
out part or place of landing, having occasion of current moneys, must take the
pleasure of the buyer to his exceeding great loss, for particular men will not
deal with unknown Coins but upon certainty of exceeding gain; But the
deputies here must gine the full value, which will likewise further the
Importation.
1. 3. Exportation hindered.
The Exchanging Goldsmith being put by, by the Execution of this Office, the
instruments and means of Exportation being cut off, The Export it self will
cease, or be much diminished. 2. Moneys promiscuously current are not
Exportable, but the weighty and culled moneys: But the Exchanging Goldsmith,
the Culler and Sorter of these being cut off. The Export will likewise thus be
diminished. 3. The Exchanger and his Deputies in all the Ports will have an eye
to the execution of the Laws and Ordinances against Exportation, whose better
execution will much prevent carrying out of Bullion. 4. Forreyne Coins in the
out Ports and here, are kept and preserved to serve the occasion of the
Travailer, or Merchant outward, but bought by the Exchanger, are forthwith
cut in pieces. And cannot be exported but are Converted into his Majesty's
Coins. 5. Lightened and vncurrant Coins of Gold bought by the Goldsmith, are
either sold to be transported or moulten down, being the best moneys for
these purposes: (As those wherein the Coynage is saved) But sold to the
Exchanger, are in the presence of the seller cut in pieces, And re-conuerted
into Coin, whereby the stock of money does not decrease.
The Advancement of his Majesty's profit in the Mynt is a consequent to all: 2.
Advance his Majesty's profit in the Mint.
For all Bullion coming to the Exchanges, is by Covenant and Compulsarily
carried to the Exchanges; and this by the testimony of a Controuler appointed
to oversee the same, and to Charge the Exchanger with the Bullion bought by
him, and must not be sold or aliened to any other use; Unless his Majesty or
the State shall think fit to license some determinate quantity to be sold
upon promise to provide the like quantity again from the parts beyond the
Seas, upon the immediate contract of the Exchanger for the same. In which case
the Money of the Realm is not diminished. But the Goldsmiths carrying Bullion
to the Mynt is but accidental and at their pleasures, and only then when the
price of the Mynt exceeds the rate of any other for the same. This was the
reason why before Gold was enhansed 9. Jacob. they seldom or never carried any
to the Mynt, the Merchant giving them a greater price for the same. And ever
since that time, the profit falling upon Silver, They have not carried into the
Mynt any considerable quantity of Silver, by which the Mynt has not only
stood still for silver monyes, but by this and the exportation and melting
down the Silver monyes, there is scarce silver enough seft to drive the Trade
of the Country, to the great hinderance and decay of Trade, to the lessening
the employment and setting on work of the Subject. To omit that the remnant of
the money of Silver are so by lightning depraved. That these which Run in
promiscuous payments wants near ix.l. tail per centum of their just weight.

Besides these, we may herein further consider, That it is a point of Honor
and Justice in the State: That there should be a certain and invariable price
set upon Bullion, forreyne or other vncurrant Coins, whereby they may neither
be ouerprised to the detriment of the Commonwealth, and all such as have
occasion to use any manisacture made of them: As likewise, that the Subject be
seured, that neither his Ignorance nor necessity, should betray him to Deceit;
But that there should be ordained ser and fired to the Ignorant, as well as
the skillful, to him that is urged by his occasions, as well as to him that may
forbear; a loyal and legal price of Coin or Bullion, which can be
ascertayned no other way but by Re-erecting Cambium Regis.

But these Considerations will perhaps with some be more prevalent, when they
shall reciue full satisfaction in the clear solution of those Difficulties,
which by the Goldsmiths and others, both before his Majesty and the Lords of
the Privy Counsel, and elsewhere have been objected, and opposed to the
said Office, in charging the same with public preiudices, Which were these:

Artic. 1. Petition Goldsmiths. Object.
That the Office sought to be renewed, has been so long out of use. That the
sudden alteration will be a great hindering to the Trade and vent of Cloth,
which if it prove so, will not easily be restored though the Patent be laid
down. And therefore without good assurance of the Event inconvenient to be put
in Execution. Artic. 2. It will be a great means o hinder Importation of
Bullion. And by consequence will cause Exportation of Gold and Silver, whereby
both his Majesty will be much prejudiced in the profits of his Mynt, and trade
and conmerce much hindered. Artic. 5. By the Indenture betwixt the Kings
Majesty and the Earl, it is mentioned, that the Exchanger shall take only
for the Exchange so much as shall be agreed betwixt him and the bringer in of
Bullion. So that it be not above the rate of jd for the Noble of Gold or silver
which is a great burrhen to the Importers, and will be loss to the people in
every ounce of gold xd. which is in money in the pound weight of gold x s. And
the like prejudice will ensue in silver, whereas the Goldsmith does ordinarily
make his Exchange for 2. s. and less in the pound weight. Artic. 6. It will be
dangerous to the lives and States of Merchants that import Bullion, to be
enforced to bring it to one hand onelyl by which means their importation of
Bullion of foreign Countries may be revealed. It being in most kindomes
Capital or confiscation of goods to Export Bullion.
These are the Object ons which have bcene made against the Office as publicly
inconvenient as well by the Goldsmiths in their Petition to the Lords as others.
To which though every one from the Precedent declations many make clear
answer: And that it ought to suffice that having bin solemnly debated before
his Majesty, upon a long and full hearing they have been resolved: yet for
the general satisfaction, some part of what was answered to them may be
repeated.

To the first; That it was not imaginable how the Office could stop the vent of
Cloth: Nor could be assigned how or wherein this trade should hereby be
endangered. And his Majesty proposing to this objection, it should be declared
in Indiuiduo how or wherein this hinderance should be occafioned. Upon Nihil
dicit the objection vanished, and was discharged. And since experience has
taught that the same was but as a fancy presented to a muse, such as could be
disturbed by generalites and conclusions.

To the second. That being only general, it fell off likewise upon the same
reason, for want of their showing how or which way the execution of the Office
should either hinder the Import, or advance the export of Bullion, or decrease
his Majesty's profit in the Mint, otherwise or in other manner then as this
followed from the ensuing Articles.

Wherefore to the 5. Art. Containing the burden of the jd in the Noble to the
Importer whence (say they) he will be discouraged, is answered diverse ways.

1. The Importer being neither by the Letters Patents nor the Proclamation
restrained but at liberty to go either to the Mynt or to the Exchanges at his
election, does not pretend himself grieved or at all discouraged And for the
jd in the Noble, so long as he receives benefit and accommodation by the
Exchange, the price of the Exchange, is due of Justice Qui sentit commodum
sentire debet and onus: The benefits he receives thereby are 1. The Importers
occasion in the use and employment of ready money for paying of customs wages
and other necessaries is served: 2. He obtaines a more certain course of
trade, when by the Rates set and taxed he knows certainly what his foreign
Species will yield him instantly upon his arrival without delay or
difficulty. And since for these intents the Exchanger maintains
stocke-seruants and other incident charges, Dignus est over arius mercede sua.
Et qui sentit onus sentire debet and commodum.

Secondly, The taking of the jd per noble is not granted (though warranted by
jx. H. 5. cap. 2. (as jd ob. per noble by 1. H. 6. cap 4.) but the exceeding
thereof only restrained: And in the Extent or Latitude allowed (of 3d per pound
exchanged) The Exchanger (since the Importer is free to go to the Mynt,) must
guide himself and drive his Exchanges upon such reasonable rates and prices as
may inuit the Merchant unto him. It being certain that he will not come to
the Exchanger but go to the Mynt: unless his benefit and accommodation by the
Exchange be made answerable to the price he gives for the same.

Thirdly, His late Majesty having abated his Coynenage of gold by proclamation
4. May xmo published a valuation of foreign Coin and Bullion. And this was
made by the advice and with the godd consent of Merchants called thereunto. And
according as the same Species were by the said Merchants accepted of abroad,
Intending as is likewise expressed in the same Proclamation, that these prices
would inuit the Merchants to bring in great store of foreign Coin and
Bullion to the Mynt. With express prohibition, that none should exceed these
rates. The office notwithstanding gives greater rates for every ounce of Crown
gold or of 22. Carotts fine, which is there set at 3l. 6s. the Ounce, There is
given for it in Ingot at the Office 3l. 6s. 8d. the Ounce. And in species 3l.
6s. 6d. For Angels, and Spurrials in species 3l. 12s. the ounce though these
are one quarter of a grain worse then Standard: And so the office gets not
ijd. per xxs. exchanged. And stay often a month for the return. And since
that Proclamation, seconded by that of the 5th February 16. Iacobi, There has
bin no cause by alteration of the monyes, why the prices well liked of then
should not please now. And it is most untrue that the Goldsmiths do constantly
exchange for 2s. per pound weight of gold. For that could not return him the
use of the stock: And he must needs then be a loose by his trade: When he
does so, he makes use of the Merchants stock, and pays him only with his
own at the delivery our of the Tower: But the Goldsmiths rates are, according
to the skilfulnes or necessity of the seller, upon which he will be sure to
make his advantage, to sarr greater profit. And as to the loss supposed to the
people in general of x. s. per pound of Gold. It will easily be maintained,
that the subject in general, recemes more at the Office, then from the
Goldsmiths; besices that, neither his ignorance nor wants can there be wrought
upon: but shall certainly and at first there receive the full value of his
Coin or Bullion. Which thing how advantageous it is to the simple or
necessitous, may easily be apprehended.

And to the 6. Article; Implying matter of danger to be raised to the Importer
by discovery from the Office. Though it be grounded upon a false suppofall,
that he is constrained to carry his Bullicn into one man's hand, whereas he is
free to carry the same to the Mynt at his Election: Yet for further answer, It
is plain:

1. The Merchant is more secured by a sworn Office then by any Goldsmiths
Servant who manageth the business for his Master. And the discovery thence is
more easy as the Discouerers more, of less trust and ability and not so
readily found out; Nor can this be presumed since no Experience shows, that
ever from his Majesty's ministers when they executed this Office any danger
arrived, though at those times Penalties from foreign parts for Exportation
were as severe and strict as at this present.

2. No man can say, that a Merchant or his Factor bringing Species to the
Exchanger was the Importer; since here they may use one another name and
servants: No more then it cna be concluded, That pieces of viij. Reals, or
French Crowns, or Fistolets imported, came from Spain or France, since these
may and do come from diverse other parts where these Species are Current, and
traded as Merchandise, as in Holland, diverse parts of Italy and elsewhere.

3. No Register is to be kept of the name of the person to the danger of the
Merchant: but of the thing only for the security of his Majesty, to charge
the Exchanger to carry the same to his Majesty's mynt for increase of Coin.

The issue of all which precedent Discoure is: That since the Exchange of
Bullion is now clearly his Majesty's Right, and no part of the Goldsmiths
trade: And that the due Exercise thereof cannot be but with good likelihood of
advantages to the King and Commonwealth; as well by preventing the Abuses and
Errors aboue-mentioned, as by obtaining those benefits above likewise in part
intimated; That the true State of the question betwixt his Majesty and the
Goldsmiths is, Not that there should be shown of his Majesty's behalf,
either reasons to move his Resumption, or declarations to persuade the
Conveniences therefo; for his Matie having in Law always bin in possession
thereof And now being so de facto, It rests upon the part of such as Petition
for his Majesty's laying down, this ancient Right and Flower of the Crown;
To propound, some most just evident and necessary reasons and motives, upon
which his Majesty should be moved to remit and quiteclaime either to the
Goldsmiths in particular, or other subjects in general this so Royal and
legal prerogative.

Upon consideration whereof (being humbly presented to his Majesty) such
resolution no question will be taken as shall best stand with his Majesty's
Honor and the good of his Realms.

CHAP. 4. The proceedings and debatements had in bringing the same to
Resolution.
THe Proposition for Reviuing the Office of Exchange, was presented to the
Earl of Holland about the beginning of Summer, 1626. And a Reference was made
to Mr. Attorney and others, who reported the Legalitie, and that it was his
Majesty's Right, leaving the point of Conueniencie. About Christmas after, the
first Letters Patents and Indenture were passed, and a Proclamation according
to the usual form of such like graunts was to follow. The Lord Treasurer was
acquainted with the Proclamation, Letters Patents and Indenture; who thereupon
ordered the Officers of the Mynt should attend him therein. And they then
delivered in some exceptions to the same, partly clayming the place to be in
grant to the Warden of the Mynt, partly urging inconveniences, which because
they were the same with the first, 4.5. and sixth Article of the Goldsmiths
Petition above recited, are here omitted. During the stay of the business
here, the Goldsmiths obtained the City to join with them in Petitioning the
Counsel Table against the Office.

The Earl of Holland answered this general Petition, praying that the
Goldsmiths might in particular set down their grieuances, and the
inconveniences, whereunto a certain Answer might be made; And whereupon a
certain issue might be taken to preserve the business from confusion in the
hearing, which being Ordered, the Goldsmiths hereupon exhibited to their
Lordships, another Petition declaring at large all their Reasons against the
Patent, as well in respect of their pretense and claim to the same; as also,
what prejudice did thereby acrue to their Company in particular; And likewise,
how inconvenient the same was to the Realm. To which his Lordship answered
again; and so the Cause came to a hearing before his Majesty and some six
and twenty Lords and others of his Privy Counsel, upon Wednesday 25. April,
1627. and received Determination according to the Order hereafter following
conceived upon the same.

Wednesday the 25. April, 1627.
THis day the Kings Majesty being present in Counsel, Order of the Counsel.
the reasons presented by the Petitioners of the City, and of the Goldswiths;
as likewise, such other Exceptions as by diver, Merchants and others, then
present in persen and by (...) Counsel learned, were made against the Office
of Exchange and the Patent Indenture and Proclamation, for the Regulating and
the better Execution thereof were taken into Debate and Cor sideration. And
upon full hearing of all the said parties and their Counsel at large, and
particular Debate of all the Reasons in the said Petitions alleged, and others
then made, it appeared plainly to his Majesty and the Board; That nothing was
innovated but the right of an ancient Office, Reviued; And regusated by the
said Jndenture and Proclamation.

Nevertheless his Majesty graciously inclining to give comfort to the
Goldsmiths, in any thing properly belonging to their trade, and to free the
Merchant from any inconvenience or loss that might arise by the Patent, was
pleased, and by the advice of his Council did ordain these things following
to be thus explained and declared.

First, that they of the mystery of the Goldsmiths have free liberty to buy any
plate, or gold and silver, which in the use of their trade or mystery they
converted into made wares, or other works of, Goldmithry as fully and amply as
heretofore they might or could do, but not to by any manner of gold or silver
to fell again, or to serve to the Mynt, or which now are or have been, or
which hereafter shall be his Majesty's Coins of Gold or Silner.

Secondly, that all plate wrought, where the fashion is valuable should be left
free to be bought sold or pawned, by or to any persons whatsoever.

Thirdly, that every one of his Majesty's loving subjects should be at liberty
to carry their Bullien to the Mint, without being enforced to go to his
Majesty's Exchanges, But none are to buy Bullion Merchantwise, thereof to make
profit by carrying the same to his Majesty's Mynt, there to be coined in damage
or defraud of his Majesty's Exchange.

Fourthly, where it was alleged, that the Penie in the Noble to be paid to the
Exchanger, might occasion the higher rates of Bullion and Species, and so
hinder the Importatin thereof: It is declared that the Penny in the Noble is
not set as a rate certain, which the Exchanger is to take, but such only
which the Exchanger is not to exceed, but may take less as the Exchanger and
seller shall agree, which if they cannot, the seller is at liberty to go to
the Mynt, where nothing is to be taken but for the coynage of the said Bullion.

These explanations are to be made in the Proclamation to be published for he
execution of the said Office, and new Letters Patents are to pass, omitting
the grant of any part of forfeitures of penal Laws and Clauses of Assistaxce
touching the same.

According to this Order the Proclamation was published 25. May, next ensuing,
And the Office was opened the 25. of June next after. And yet the Goldsmiths
(notwithstanding all their reasons were particularly heard stated and debated
before his Majesty and the Board: And after again, read oner point by point,
And they and their Council were heard to whatsoever that they could say) did
(the same Progress) again petition his Majesty herein, which by his Majesty
being referred to the end of his Progress, They for that time pursued the same
no further, but since the sommons of Parliament did again petition his
Majesty upon the former pretentions and allegations, to which his Majesty was
most gracionsly pleased to give this favorable answer.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Company of
Goldsmiths.
MOst humbly showing, Petition of the Goldsmiths.
That whereas your Majesty has been lately pleased to grant a Patent for
your Majesty's sole Exchanger of Gold and silue Bullion within your Highness
Dominions, which Office having been long out of use and aboshlied, and now put
in practice, appears to be very inconvenient and prejudicial, not only to
your Majesty and the Commonwealth, and in more particular to your subjects,
for that it tends to the utter subversion and destruction of the Company of
Goldsmiths, consisting of at least 900. families of thousand of your Highness
people, for although your Majesty was graciously pleased by your Proclamation
to declare, that it was not your Highness meaning to take from your Suppliants
any thing that of right belongs unto them in their lawful trades, yet they
be restrained from buying and carrying any Bulloin at all to his Majesty's
Mynt, when all other your Subjects and strangers are left at liberty, it having
bin the practice of all ages, to inuit all to come to the Mint, yet now the
Goldsmiths are accepted and forbidden to buy any Bullion except it be old
Plate, or such as is manufacture already to make plate of, which is the
standing of the Kingdom: So that they be deprived of their maintenance and
liuelyhood by the said Office; And yet the service of your Majesty and the
commonwealth, under pretext whereof this Office was obtained, is no way
advanced, but contrariwise much hindered and impaired thereby, And whereas it
was pretended, that it should be a reformation of abuses by restraint of
Transportation, it is plain it rather incourages and make more Transporters
then have been, And therefore because it is a great detriment to your
Majesty's profit in the Mynt, and to the whole Land being a hinderance to the
bringing of treasure into the Kingdom, both which may be very plainly made
to appear by diverse reasons.

Your Suppliants most humbly beseeches, you will be pleased to take into
consideration their grieuances, and to compassionate them that they may have
the freedom of their trades formerly they have used, that they may be enabled
to do your Majesty service, as heretofore they have done, which they have
expressed by their readiness in all obedience to your Majesty upon all
occasions, And your supplyants according to their bounden duty shall pray for
your Majesty's most prosperous Reign in this world, and eternal happiness in
the world to come.

White Hall. March, 1627.
Forasmuch as this Petition of the Company of Goldsmiths contains the same
matter in effect which was heretofore taken into consideration and debated
before his Majesty and the Lords (with Counsel on both sides) and finally
Ordered and that their right is reserved unto them by the said Proclamation,
And that contrary to their suggestion they have as great liberty (by his
Majesty's mere grace and favor) to go to his Mynt, as any other his Subjects
have, but not to make a trade and gatne betwixt any other his Matesties
subjects and the Mynt, contrary to the policy of all ages, And if they are
hindered or restrained in any thing belonging of right to their Trades (without
usurpation upon his Majesty's Regalties) they are free to use the benefit of
his Majesty's Laws for relief therein, his Majesty wills that the
Petitioners trouble him no further herein without particular matter of wrong,
or new grieuance done unto them by the Execution of the said Patent, whereupon
his Majesty will take such further consideration as be fitting.


