Thirteen SERMONS OF Master John Calvin, Entreating of the Free Election of
God in Jacob, and of reprobation in Esau.

A treatise wherein every Christian may see the excellent benefits of God
toward his children, and his marvelous judgments toward the reprobate,
first published in the French tongue, and now Translated into English by John
Field, For the comfort of all Christians.

Romans 11.33. O the deepenes of the riches, both of the vvisdome and knowledge
of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his vvayes past finding out.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Man and Tobie Cook. 1579.

To the right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Earl of Bedford, one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and to the Honorable, godly, and
virtuous Lady, the Countess his wife: John Field wishes increase of
godliness and constancy by Jesus Christ for ever. AMEN.
BEcause I can not (my very good Lord and Lady, whom the Lord I say by the
profession of his glorious Gospel has made right Honorable) by any other
means testify the duty that I owe you, but in such poor sort as this is, I
most humbly beseech you to accept of it. Look not upon it as it is in it
self: but value it according to the hearty affection of the giver, who with all
duty protests his humble service toward your Honor, to the uttermost that
he shall be able for the advancement of your knowledge, increase of godliness
and spiritual gain, in the true practice of Gods blessed and holy truth, the
greatest benefit that ever God in mercy could have bestowed upon you. I am
sorry that my skill is no better, to help you forward in that so excellent a
work: but forasmuch as God accepts us according to that measure we have
received, I hope you of your Honorable courtesy, will likewise take it well,
that I show this remembrance of you in presenting such a present as he has
bestowed upon me. And this I will say: though in respect of my labor it be
homely, yet in respect of the matter it is most excellent: a work of one of the
rarest instruments who^ god has raised up, in these last times to give light
amidst our great ignorance, and to draw many to that blessed knowledge, which I
beseech God we may both thankfully accept of: and also diligently conform
ourselves with all obedience, to live according to it: that the Lord do not
either take this blessing from us, or else bring upon us severe judgments, for
abusing so excellent a treasure. I know some unthankful wretches, puffed up
with pride and a vain opinion of them selves, will hardly endure that I should
speak thus either of the woork, or of this singular instrument of God. For the
nature of men's corruption is such, and specially of such as seek to be
magnified one of another, that they tread under their feet Gods glory: and
being behind others in gifts, they powte and swell against them whose shoe
latchets they are not worthy to loose: Besides that they are so corrupt, either
being open Papists, counterfeite professors or manifest heretics, that they
ca^ abide no sincerity. Of the first sort I will not say much, because now I
mind not at large to dispute with the^, as being the open and hopeles enemies
of God (I mean the obstinate ones) who set themselves not only against his
servants, but against his holy word. For what should a man say to such, who^
nothing can please, but that they have received either from their own brains,
or else from their sottish doctors, who are destitute of al truth and god lines?
what they tell the^, be it never so silly, nay so false, they will receive with all griedines: No Legende so lying, no opinion so gross, no motive so light no
life so vilainous, as they will not accept of, maintain and defend, both with
tooth and nail, if it come from themselves and from their own polshorne
generation. But a lack it should be otherwise, if they would be content to have
all things tried by that undeceivable touchstone that god has appointed: If
the everlasting word of god which of right (proceeding from god) ought to have
his prehemi^ne^ce of perfection to judge al) did bear the bell, as also god
has appointed it should do, this matter would be soon at an end. For what
soever building should be found, either in the one or the other, that had not
his foundation therein, it should quickly vanish, and every man's work should
appear. But if men will come with preiudicate minds, to be admirers of men's
Persons, and will only look to a personal and local succession and be carried
away with the empty and bare titles of their names and professions, without
examination of that they bring, men shall easily offend both in the one and in
the other. Let all men therefore be examined, let the word of God discuss
according to her prerogative: when God speaks let all men hold their peace,
and if he teach, let all flesh be confounded. In matters of faith and religion,
let that word only be heard which is the true iustructer, having bin set down
by men as writers, yet by the holy ghost the true inditer, who came not to
suggest a piece, and so to leave an imperfect work, but to lead us into al
truth, and to teach us whatsoever was necessary for our salvation; not leaving
things doutfully to be received from hand to hand by way of tradition, but
plainly written to remain to all the sons of God as gods sufficient and
perpetual Testament. Fie upon these blasphemous mouths that will accuse God of
infidelity, of cruelty of lack of care to his Church in providing for his:
that like high traitors dare clippe and adulterate his coin, wringing the
scepter of his kingdom out of his hand, and bounding his government to some one
people, city and country, as did the Donatists: chalenging to them selves
with the old Chatarists, and new Anabaptists and such as are of the Family of
love, that they cannot err, when the most of their Popes (and specially such
as followed him that proudly to show him self Antichrist, challenged the name
of universal Bishop) were Sorcerers, Coniurers, Whoremongers and incestuous
lyuers, Heretics, Murderers, Sodomiters, covetous Harlots, and cruel
blapshemers in all their doings. I stand not to cite the places out of their
own stories, they are manifest, and all the world may know them. And as for
their Councelles they were nothing but wranglinges and repeales one of another
Laws and Canons: their customs drawn from men's errors, and therefore (as
Cyprian says) being without truth, though they were never so old, are but
old errors. And yet we leave the fountain, and go too the stinking puddles
that they have dug unto them selves: we must leave the light of God, and go
to the darkness of men: the instruction of the holy Ghost, and rest upon
these Dunces, that know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, The word
of God must be drawn in and out by them as they think good, and therefore
they speak most despightfully of it. They call it a dead letter, a nose of
Wax, a Shipmans hose, a School mistress of error, dark, hard, insufficient
of it self, and I cannot tell what. And yet as I said, if any thing come
from their Dunces, they receive it and never distrust it. The name of a
Catholic is enough to authorize unto them any thing be it never so false,
absurd, peevish and contrary to the known and express truth of God. They
cry the Church, the Church, no otherwise then crafty strumpets that will most
scolde for their honesty, when they never came where it grew. And then they
brable with us about the translation, O it is corrupted, it is not according to
the Hebrew text, and to discredit that which makes most against them: besides
that, they forbid the people the reading of it, they bear the world in
hand, that they have observed so many and so many faults, when all men of
learning and judgment know that the time wherein their errors were most
palpable and rife, all kind of good learning was worn out, the knowledge of
tongues decreased, they whom they most spited were the lighters of their
Candles before all the world. For to themselves Hebrewe letters though (as they
say) they were as big as Oaks, yet they were Pitchforkes and staples: and as
for Greek, they were so far from understanding of it, that not one amongst
a thousand could read it. I speak not of the latter times, for now good
learning being brought to light, with the knowledge of the Gospel many of them
have tinded their Candles at our lights, and many (thanks be to God) are
converted, and more should be, had not God in his justice for their wicked
Rebellion made the means fruitless, reserving them to a farther judgment.

But let us see, where they ever amended any thing they blamed. Their common
translation has bin amended by us, to which yet so obstinate they are, that
all upon pain of the black curse in their conspiracy of Trent, must be
bound only to hold them selves: when as in many places for their lives, they
are not able to make any co^struction or sense of it. But the obscurer it was,
the better liked of them, and the more to their profit: and therefore they kept
it under and forbad the reading of it, lest the light thereof should discover
their faults and filthy corruptions. And this is the principal cause that
Calvin and such notable men are so ill liked, and with such violence
condemned amongst them. But what should good men look for other of these
blind Balamites, but such condemnation? The other sort are those, that having
once tasted of the sweet doctrine of the Gospel, are yet through an
indisciplinate kind of life, being also deuoyde of true humility, carried
away from the sincerity of the truth, some slugging still in dark
ignorance, and foding them selves in their own persuasions, believing nothing
but that which they can compass, and receiving nothing but that which stands
to the lyking of their humors and graueled consciences, following like Swine
their own beastly and carnal appetites. These men would be awakened. And when
the Lord shall open their eyes, they shall see that the profession of the gospel
of God, consists not in a bare confession, they shall find that the council
of God in part reuealeth it self, by our vocation: which also is from him,
and then they shall know them selves to be effectually called, when they find
sanctification as a continual companion in them: which is approved and known
by mortifying the old Adam in us, and by quickening the inward man, in that
daily reparation that makes us as dear Children too resemble our heavenly
father. Indeed we shall come short in the perfection thereof, but he that is
perfect shall supply our wantes, both strengthening us to will and perform
what soever is good, and also perfecting in himself that which is imperfect in
us. These men would be warned not to abuse the Gospel of grace, and the glad
tidings of their everlasting salvation too their own perdition: who whilst
they speak of Christ should endeavor to know him as he is: that his bare name
deceive them not, too lull them a sleep in sin, and whilst they seek to
comfort the oppressed, should likewise take heed that they strengthen not the
wicked, to continue in their cursed security and fleshly liberty. It is very
true that in Christ we have all things, but Christ withal his riches only
belongs to his children, and to them he is applied with all his benefits,
through a true and lively faith: and he has sundry offices, to which, his
must submit themselves. They must acknowledge his kingdom to be ruled by his
word, and they must be subject to his law, who has thoroughly and continually
provided for their government. They must rest in that which he teaches,
because he is their only Prophet, their only Priest, in whose only
sacrifice the father is pacifyed and well pleased. And Christ is the mark to
whom the law leads, the end and perfection thereof, that they in him should
walk in obedience. The last sort which are as ill as the worst, I mean
either open or else close and crafty Heretics, they can as ill brook the
sincere word of God as any of the others, bleating also against his
government and discipline, because it restrayneth, corrects and bridleth
their heretical opinions and manners. They allege overmuch severity,
continually abusing his mercy, and like fantastical wretches, because they
would be left to them selves to spew out their heresies, they continually bark
against this wholesome correction and holy obedience. These fellows pick many
quarrels, making it subject to the inconstant wills of Popes and ignorant
Princes, as though it were a Shipmans hose, to be altered and changed at their
pleasure. But alack they do but catch the wind in a net: For it must needs
be that Christ's scepter bruise them, and it prevail. And specially they cannot
abide such men as this good Calvin was, because he rubbed them on the gawle,
and brake even the skull (as I may say) of their heretical corruptions. For
some of them are Arians, other some Anabaptists, and Seruetians, Dauidians and
Syluanists, Pelagians, and Freewil men, Libertines and of the Family of Love,
joining with them infinite heresies, and secretly in this security of the
Church, disperse their poison, which I fear me, will one day so break forth
when we least think of it, too the trouble of the whole Church of God, that it
will be a long time or ever it be purged and appeased. I would to God there
were none in England, I would to God they had fewer favorers, and we more
judgment and zeal too defend the sincere truth of our God, then should they
not give such evident tokens of the venim that is within them, in defending
Seruetus that Dog that has renewed all the old heresies of the Arrians,
that so much troubled the Church in time past: neither would they them selves in
their own fantasies with such impudency condemn the dear servants of God,
for procuring and calling upon the magistrate for his lawful execution against
Heretics and empoysoners of the Church. They would not make a mash and
hotchpotch of the civil and ecclesiastical state, and so iumble them
together. They would not deny the power of the magistrates sword, committed to
his ministers not in vain, but to be used in cutting off the rotton members
thereof, for the preservation of the whole body. They would not bark so like
Dogs against the everlasting predestination and election of God, the most
comfortable doctrine that can be, being the foundation of all the rest, where
it is wisely taught according to the word, and learned within that sober
compass that it is prescrybed: joining and iumping so near with Anabaptists,
the sprituall illuminate, Pelagians, and other merit mongers, who howsoever
they differ in some particular marks, yet are birds of one and the same
fether. This shall always be found true that they follow the corruptest men
of our age in all these matters. But whatsoever they say, Gods truth is of
sufficient power to overcome all their heretical blasphemies. Moses rod shall
devour their Sorcerers serpents. Dagon shall break his neck where his truth
is received. And this sun arysing shall scatter all their darkness. These
excellent instruments shall live when they shall be forgotten, unless it be in
immortal shame and opprobry. Let us not therefore be discouraged but hold fast
the truth of our good God, and with fear and reverence, let us seek after
those things he has revealed unto us. There can be no danger if we keep our
selves within the co^mpasse of the holy Scriptures. For this doctrine of Gods
eternal election and Predestination is most comfortable. O, but say they with
the old Heretics, if I be elected and predestined, what need I too avoid
evil works, they shall neither further nor hinder me: God is sure and what
need I torment and vex my self to do well and to lead a straight and a
godly life, we like not these pepered consciences! Such heretics there were
long ago that so wrote and taught that occasioned Saint Augustine too write
that excellent work of the Predestination of Gods Saints, confuting such
caytifes as these. Saint Augustine therefore annsweareth them, that this
doctrine is a most comfortable doctrine, necessary to be known, too be
published and preached to the people in his due time and place. For it is that
same everlasting and unchangeable decree of GOD, whereby he has undoubtedly
determined in the time that he him self best knows, to call his elect to the
knowledge of his truth, that his mercy and glory might be declared in them.
And this has the Scripture confirmed Romans 8. verse. 30. Whom he has
predestinate those he has called, and whom he has called those he has
justified. And again in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, we are elected
before the foundations of the world, and in the 9. to the Romans speaking of
Esau and Jacob (of whom these Sermons especially entreat) he says that one
was electted and the other rejected before they had done either good or evil.
The foundation hereof, is only the purpose of his will: not forseeing (as the
Papists say) any worthynes or unworthiness of man: but for just causes known to
himself, and in himself not in us in which without further inquiry we ought to
rest, acknowledging him to be only good, wise* and most righteous, who is and
shall be blessed and justified for ever. Now for them that are either rejected or
elected, we wade no farther to judge of the^ then may appear by the effects,
neither do we judge absolutely of them, but with condition unless upon those
peculiar lost ones of who^ God himself in his word has pronounced. Read Ephe.
1. and 1. Pet. 1. Now if any Potshard will reason with the potter, which not
resting in his will, would wade further to know the secret causes of this, we
say unto him with the Apostle: O wretched man who art thou that disputest with
God. Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? For further satisfaction in this question, I refer al Christians to the
Books that are written hereof, and namely to these excellent Sermons: M. Knox
has learnedly answered the objections of the adversaries in a Book printed
at Geneua. We have also home writers, that have dealt fully and plainly
therein, as Veron of Predestination, and M. Crowley in his book against
Cerberus, rightly so called for his barking blasphemies, against this most
comfortable and excellent doctrine: others that are learned may further
satisfy themselves, with those learned answers of M. Beza against that impure
Apostata Castalio.

And now to return to your Honors, I most humbly beseech you to acccept my
poor labors, which I offer under your Honors names to the whole Church of
God. And I beseech your honors, as God has called you to the knowledge of his
glorious Gospel, which is a token of your election, so go forward more and
more in the grouth thereof: that the Gospel being truly rooted in your hearts,
it may bring forth sanctification, the true seal of your adoption, that you
may feel his goodness in the assurance of that everlasting and blessed
inheritance. God has called you to high honor, not so much by your places and
calling amongst men (which yet is somewhat, because it is a great benefit of
God) but in that he has made you his adopted children, it is that you should
show obedience, in that he has made you heirs with his son, and Citizens
with his Saints, it is that you should look up to Heaven and have your joy
there despysing this world, and living to righteousness and true holiness. And
this will the Lord in mercy bestow upon you, thereby sealing your election,
if you separate your selves from the corruption of the world: I say not that
you should go out of the world, but that you should depart from evil, and be
followers of God as dear children, walking in love, even as he has loved you.
Beware of these two Cankers that corrupt the whole world, and is most
likely to assail Nobility, I mean Pride and Covetousness, Let them not once
be named amongst you as becomes Saints. A day will come, when the Lord
will fulfill your hope in better things then all this world can give you.
Stand fast in his truth in these slipperie days, and above all things let
his glory, and the advancement of his word, be dear and precious unto you.
In Gods matters, let his will be the rule thereof, and not your own wisdom
and affections. Examine your selves often by it, and neglect not holy
exercises. Let other Gallantes of this world, follow their foolish and fadyng
pleasures, delight you in his law, and be good examples to others. Care not
for the contempt of the world, but hold fast a good conscience that you may
be approved before GOD. The Lord Jesus bless you both, that as he has knit
you together, so you may draw on forwards in one yoke toward his kingdom,
that that may be your aim and mark in all your deeds, words, and
thoughts. Amen.

October 25. 1579. Your Honors most humble and faithful ever to command in
Christ, John Field.

Faults escaped.
Fol. Page. Line. Fault. Correction. Fol. 1. a Line 29. for Jacob, read
Isaac. 2. a line 22. for him, read them. 6. b line 5. for learn, read
bear. 7. a line 11, for the Period, a Comma. 7. b line 25. for the Period., an
interogatiue point ^. 8. a line 19. for up read out. 9. a line 5. read, and
also God spares us. 9. a line 7. at such example, put in for want thereof, we
are. etc. 9. b line 16. put out thus. 9. b line 18. at 20. years, put? point.
11. a line the last, at supplications put a full poinct. 13. a line first for
comes it into, read lives it in 16. b line 7. at Paul, put?. 16. b line
14. for farelie, read scarcely. 23. a line 23. put out not. 25. b line 16.
which will, read which will bark. 31. a line 2. for deceive in this,
read deceive us in this. 32. a line 1. for these, read those. 32. a line 5.
for which shows, read which he shows. 32. a line 9. for cerfie, read
certefie. 33. a line 20. at why: put a full poinct. 33. b line 16. for evil
disposed, read better disposed. 34. a line 30. for nor and neither, read or
either. etc. 36. a line 10. at thing, put?. 37. b line 26. at the vvrde
salvation, put in that we doubt not thereof. 42. a line 6. for Cook, read a
Cokes or Micher. 52. b line 26. with another, read with an oath. 58. a line
19. for placed me, read placed us. 77. b line 21. at required it, make a full
point. 77. a line 5 for touched, read couched. 84. b line the last. for
vvadone, read was done. 85. a line 6. for hands of Kings, read hearts of
Kings. 91. a line 14. for God, read good. 91. b line 16. for adulterers,
read adulteries. 78. a line 12. put in between spirit and that his fear and
obedience 123. b line 15. for abide, read avoyde. 128. a line 28. for
entanged, read entangled. 130. a line 21. for so rtiatifie, read sort
ratify. 135. a line handeleth us short, read holds us. 135. a line 18. for
that as but some, read but that as soon. 135. b line 21. for had in, was had
in. 140. b line 13. for do bring, read to bring. 147. b line 30. for he
will, read his will. 154. a line 12. for an, read and. 154. b line 14. for
to say, read then to say. 162. a line 1. for in blasphemy, read a
blasphemy. 175. a line 6. for that GOD, read say that GOD. 175. b line 26.
for that this, read saying that this.

The first Sermon of Mr John Calvin concerning Jacob and Esau.
Geues. Chap. 25. verse. 12. NOW these are the generations of Ismael Abraham's
son, whom Hagar, the Egyptian Sarahs handmaide bare unto Abraham, etc. To
the end of the 22. verse.


WE have here to consider the difference that Moses puts betwixt the
Children of Abraham. We have seen already that the whole stock which he had
by Keturah, dwelled in a country far off. Concerning Ismael he is separated
far enough from the land of Caanan notwithstanding he be yet as one rejected.
For it was necessary that the inheritance which was ordained to Isaac, should
remain to him. Now in the first place it is said, that Ismael had twelve
sons, the which in such sort multiplied, that of them came twelve Peoples.
In this we see that God not without cause said to his servant Abraham, Genesis
17.20.22.
that for his sake Ismael also should have a certain blessing: but that it
should be transitory and fleeting, and the principal should remain to Jacob.
But whatsoever it be: yet so it is, that God did show himself faithful and
true in his promise, the which belongs to this temporal life. If God would
that his truth and constancy should be known in these things of the
world, which slip away, and have nothing else but a figure which vanishes,
as S. Paul says: what shall it be, when the promises are of far greater
importance, as when he calls us to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven?
Think we the^ that we ca^ be frustrate of that, staying our selves upon him?
See then how we must make our profit of this place. If God will be known
firm and faithful in his word toward those which are as strangers, and which
he has shut out and rejected from his church: what will he then do toward
us which are his children, whom he has adopted, and to whom it has pleased
him to show himself nie? For if God in small things, as in the stock, and in all
other things of like sort, will have his truth known? what shall it be, when in
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, he sets out unto us the inheritance of
heaven, and declares unto us that he will be merciful unto us, and that he will
pardon our faults, that we may be reconciled to him, and that by this means we
may be the brethren and companions of Angels, under one head, to wit, our Lord
Jesus Christ? Can God there fail in his promises? Shall they be void and
without effect and execution? It is impossible. This then is that we have to
hold in this first place. And further we have next to note, that God will
manifest him self not only to us in these his benefits, which are most
great and excellent, but also in those that concern this life: and that there
is nothing so small, in which he will not have some marks of his fatherly
goodness imprinted. And for as much as he has said that he will have care to
feed us, let us wait upon him, for all that which belongs to the
maintenance of this life, and let us not think that it derogateth any whit
from his majesty, in that he will have us to call upon him for drink and for
food to feed upon. For he will that in all and through all we should have our
recourse to him: let us not the^ dout but that God (albeit our bodies be earth
and ashes, rottennes and worms meat, and as the common speech is, but
carrions, which are nothing worth) will yet notwithstanding provide for all our
corporal necessities. This is that we have to add as the second point. But
now we must here see the comparison, which Moses makes betwixt Ismael and
Isaac. Behold Ismael which is cut off, and is no more reputed among the
children of God, and yet notwithstanding we see that he prospers, and that he
has a great train. For of twelve sons which he has begotten, behold
twelve peoples that came from him. And withal of Isaac, what? Isaac married
at xl. years old: and after that his wife was barren, and that not for one
year, nor for two, but eue^ for xx. years space, he had no children. God had
said unto him: I will multiply thy seed, at the stars of heaven, and as the
sand of the sea. This was pronounced to his father Abraham: but this was of
special favor toward him. But he might have been before this time increced,
as he hoped, notwithstanding he saw that his wife was barren, and it seemed as
though godminded to mock him, and declare unto him that thing which he hoped
for, was nothing worth. When therefore he saw that his brother Ismael, who had
no root in the church, who was a stranger from all hope of salvation: when he
saw him (I say) to flourish in his seed, and it seemed that God had poured
forth all his graces upon him: and in the mean time, that he was left in his
own house all alone, and had none to succeed him: it is certain that he
might be in great perplexity, as if it had been much better for him to have
been like his brother Ismael.

This was to make him give over al, and after to be without hope, and to have
contemned God: he had fallen even to the uttermost extremity, if he had not
been holde^ in by a singular patience. Now then, we have here to behold as
in a glass, the condition of Gods Church, how it begins, and how God
vpholdeth it, and multiplyeth it, that is to say, after so strange a fashion,
that it seems at al assaies, that that same appearance which God shall have
given us, is nothing (as a man would say) but to deceive us. For (in stead that
the children of this world have a goodly show, and a man shall find the^ to
increase to the eye) the church shall be hidden under the Earth: a man shall
see the earth full replenished of unbelievers, of contemners of God and
profane people: and where shall a man find the faithful? They shall be very
thin sown and a man shall not be able to perceive them, they shall be
despised, men shall tread them almost under their feet, and men shall think
that God has no care of his Church, and that further he takes pleasure that
the wicked, should make their triumphs, and should have their brave and
pompeous shows.

Now then this is showed unto us in the persons of Isaac and of Ismael, to the
end that the strangeness of it trouble us not beyond measure, and that we
should fight constantly against all doubtings which might arise in our
imagination, as often as we do see a small number of people which worship God,
and that we see almost an infinite number of those which stubbernly set
themselves against him, and which know not what it means too bear his yoke.
Now this doctrine is very necessary for us at this day. For how does God work
in our time? For when he meant to rear up again his Gospel, at what end began
he? What people called he? And yet now, if we cast our eye upon the whole
world, we shall find in the first place, that in Asia (which is the greatest
part thereof) all is disordered and confused, and that there, there is nothing
but superstitions on the one side, and so unruly barbarousnesse on the other,
as pity it is to behold. Mark also the other part of the world, to wit,
Africa, which is in the same order. And as concerning Europa (which men call
Christendom) let a man behold that which is in Italy, in France, and other
places, and a man shall find that the Devil bears there the sway, and that
the vpholders of Antichrist, who are deadly enemies of the Church, what
profession soever they make, a man shall see them too he as the Stars of
Heaven, and as the sand of the sea: so as a man might say that there is
nothing but for their use. And in deed they are very skillful to make their
vaunt thereof: for they make a buckler of this to contemn God, and also to
harden them selves in their rebellion. They mock and deride us for this, that
we are so fevve people, and that notvvithstanding we will be holden for
the Church. But for our part we are despised and rejected: and moreover, we
are far of from approaching to this great people, which advance them selves
against us: To be short, a man would say, that we are as three grains of
Corn under a great heap of Chafe. And yet for all this it is so, that we
have this testimony of God, that he keeps us and auoweth us to be his
household servants. For it is no Church, unless it be joined to our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the head thereof. When this fails; all the rest goes to wrack
and to ruin, as Saint Paul says: Now we are united to the son of God,
through the faith of his Gospel, which is the certain and undeceivable bond.
And how shall we judge that we are the Church, seeing that we are nothing in
comparison of the unfaithful, who are puffed up by reason of their greatness,
and of all their other qualities, which they know well enough how to set out
with full mouth? But let not us be astonished for all this, seeing that God has
given us an allowaunce in the person of our father Isaac, that the Church was
as a forsaken house, and that he had no stock, and that he had not a great
number of people, and yet for all that he ceased not to hold it as an hidden
treasure: let us content our selves heerewith. And now for that which
follows, the person of Ismael ought also to be well marked: for he came out
from the house of Abraham, which at that time was the only Church in the whole
world: he bare also circumcision, as if he had been an inheritour of the
kingdom of God: yea he was the first borne, and had the swindge in the house,
yea, in so much that he mocked his brother, as we have seen all ready. Now it
is eue^ so likewise at this day concerning the Papists: for they are not
strangers from the church, but they are as bastard children. They will say also
that they have antiquity on their side, and they went before us: and we se how
they trust in their succession which they have from the Apostles (as they say:)
that at al times there have been Bishops and prelates in their church, and that
hereupon a man might certainly co^clud, that the title of the church belongs
to the^. And yet for all this they are but bastards as Ismael was, forasmuch as
they were not begote^ by the gospel as we have heard, which is the seed of
freedom: but have corrupted them selves. Behold, how we may account the^ for
Ismalites. For albeit they be great peoples, and that we in the mean time
remain as poor untimely fruits, yet let us know that our Lord Jesus Christ
has given us such an example thereof, that at this day we might not be
ashamed. This then to be short, is that we have here to remember. And
hereunto we ought also to apply that which we read in the prophets. For it is
not for once that this hapened, that the Church has been brought to a small
number, yea and that it had nothing but horrible desolation in it: as in the
time of the captivity of Babylon, what was it? For thereupon it is said: Esaias.
45.1.
by Esaias. Rejoice O barren that did not bear: break forth into joy and
rejoice, thou that did not travel with Child: For the desolate has more
Children then all the married wives: Albeit thou have been as a widow, God
shall multiply thee, and thou shall be a people, as it were by miracle, and
above the judgment and opinion of men, and when thou shall have stretched out
thy Pauilions here and there, all shall be filled and replenished.

When therefore we hear that this is spoken to the Church, let us know that
if God at this day to humble us or to punish our offenses, do diminish the
number of them that call upon him: we must not therefore quail, but rather
follow always our vocation without any astonishment at all. And further let
us note that we see (specially in the state of the church) that which is spoken
off in the 113. Psalm: Psalm. 113.9.
That God fills the houses of those that were barren before, with goodly
Children and a great offspring. Let us wait then till our Lord does his work,
and then we shall have occasion to glorify him, knowing that it is not in
vain that he has said: that Abraham's seed shall be multiplied: but that this
must come after such a sort as is incomprehensible unto us, and that the
beginnings are small, and as it were nothing. When then we shall have this
patience, it is certain that God will work in such sort, as we shall have
always whereby to be confirmed in his promises, seeing that the effect shall
show it self, yea and more then we could have thought or wished for.
Furthermore this we have to mark here in this place. But there is an other
difficulty: too wit, that although Ismael be so advanced, that he sees so
many successors as is wonderful, (for he lived an hundred, thirty and vii.
years, and had twelve sons) and might se a people already disce^ded of his
stock. Although for a time he were so lifted up, yet within a while after he
was as one taken away: For Moses in deed rehearses those children he had,
but when he speaks thereof in the holy history, they are rejected and have no
fellowship with that true stock of Abraham which was blessed: even so let us
note that it is nothing to have like authority, and to have a great show,
and goodly hue among men, and to be in reputation, namely so as men wonder at
us, yet all this is worth nothing in comparison of the durable state of the
Church.

God sets up his house in such sort, that it seems as a play of little
Children: notwithstanding the foundations are perpetual. And further he
continues his grace, in such sort; that a man may very well see, that it is
he which is the founder of his Church, which builds, finisheth, and
vpholdeth it. This plainly appears: yet the unbelievers have their
discourses and determinations: in such sort, that they are as the grass which
grows upon the house tops, like as it is said in the 129. Psalm: The corn
shall be trodden under feet, and men cast it into the earth, and it remains
there in a low place, and in the mean while, behold the grass which shall
grow very high upon the house tops: but in as much as it is nearer to the
Sun it takes no root: so that it must needs wither, in such sort that
there comes no fruit of it, as the Prophet there shows. Even so then, when
we see that the Lord keeps us in this poor and low condition, and that not
only we are despised, but as it were utterly rejected of all: let us know,
that it ought to suffice us, that we have a root in our God, to live by his
grace for ever: that we are maintained by him, and that we are as a tree
planted by the rivers side, which always shall be moystened with water to
draw out nourishment there from. Let us content our selves heerewith. And so
this comparison is not made without cause, when Moses expressly says that
Ismael begat twelve sons, which were gathered into twelve peoples, and after
that, he stays there, and so leaves them. Further he says: Behold the
generations of Isaac.

And why? it is for that his wife was barren, until that he was come to the age
of Lx. years. Behold a wonderful thing, yea but we shall find, that after God
had ratified his promise, to wit, that he should be multiplied in such sort,
as he had showed unto him, that he had not spoken in vain. For what was it to
see such a multitude of people in Egypt, as if grass had grown in the midest
of an hot burning Oven? For this was as a furnace, (as the scripture speaks)
which was the tyranny and bondage of Egypt. Behold the people as chafe, and
see the fire which is kindled in every place all about, and yet for all this
the people is not consumed, like as is showed in the figure of the Bushe, Exodus
3.2.3.4. Acts. 7.30.
which was as it were burning on a light fire, and yet the bush remained whole
and was not consumed. We see likewise how the people multiplied, being under
such oppression and anguish, that the^ was not only question of an hundred
thousand, or of three or four hundred thousand, but behold six hundred
thousand issuing out under such a captivity. And how was this possible?
Behold a miracle to ravish us in astonishment. Now then let us know, that as
God after this manner tried the faith and patience of Isaac, so in the end he
found a mean to accomplish his promise, yea beyond the reach of man. For this
came to pass after a strange fashion, and which a man would not have thought.
Let us also at this day apply this to our selves, and let us practice that
which is spoken in the 37. Psalm. If we see the wicked and the contemners of God
to be advanced as the Cedars of Libanon, let us wait: for there needs no more,
but even to turn our eyes, Psalm. 37.10.
and lo, they are razed and cut off, and one shall not see so much as the
place where they were. And why so? Because they were not planted in God. We
hear that which our Lord Jesus Christ says, Matthew. 15. Matt. 15.1*
Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted up.

So let us not envy the Children of this world, when we shall see them in
high estate, when we shall see them advanced to nobility and to dignity,
and in all other things: let us wait patiently and learn our condition
peaceably: and if the world do mock us, make no accounte of us, and disdain
us, let it suffice us notwithstanding to be esteemed before God and his
Angels. And in the mean time let us wait, till God accomplish that he has
spoken in another place, The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, Psalm.
29.12.13.
and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon: yea, after another fashion: for he
says, he shall be multiplied in the courts of the house of the Lord. When it is
said, that they shall be planted in the house of God, that is to say, they
shall be blessed of him: For, behold also wherein our continual felicity
consists, so as from age to age, we may always stand fast, as it is said
in the 112. Psalm. That inasmuch as God abides for ever one, and changes not
as does the world which waxes old and grows in corruption: but that God is
always like himself: The Prophet thereupon concludes, that the faithful shall
have their abiding: and that albeit at the first blushe a man see not that the
grace of God is showed upon them, yet in the end, it shall be known.

This therefore hitherto is that we have to learn of this place, and of this
difference which Moses puts here between the stock of Ismael, and that of
Isaac. Behold these beginnings of the church which are as a thing of nothing,
but the finishing thereof is wonderful. Now the beginnings of the children of
this world are mighty and noble, and such as astonish all men: but all comes
to nothing. And why so? Because they have no continuing in the promise of God.
This is the fountain of life: and behold how we may continue to the end:
this also is the mean to make us to be advanced above the world. For when the
question is, of our rejoicing in God, and of contenting our selves with his
fatherly goodness, that he has showed unto us, Let us not be as fools to
busy our selves about that which we now see with the eye: For these present
things of the world pass away and vanish: but let us behold that which is
invisible, as the true nature of Faith is, Heb. 11.
as the Apostle says. Now Moses adds, That Ismael dwelt over against his
brethern, or in their presence.

It is true that one has translated this to dwell, and the word imports to
fall: but it signifies to rest, to dwell, and to have a house. This then is
the true and natural meaning, that Ismael was not far off (as already we
have seen) from the children of Keturah, but that he remained a near
neighbor of the land of Canaan, which was promised to Isaac:
notvvithstanding this is true also, that he possessed not that land there, for
it was meet that he should be barred from thence. And who is it that had
driven him thence? For after the death of Abraham, it is certain, that he might
have tarried there if he would. Isaac had nothing but the Sepulcher which his
father had gotten: he was not lead thence to have any great and large
possessions: he had nothing, unless it were altogether borrowed and by the
leave of the inhabitants.

Ismael therefore might well have made his abode and neste there, if he had
listed. But he went from thence: was this to obey GOD? No, For he was full of
pride and rebellion. So he would rather have blasphemed God, when he had
thought I am here put apart, as though I were not of my fathers house.
Therefore I must stay my self in the country where I was borne. But God does
lead him thither without his knowledge, wherefore he goes thither, yea by a
secret inspiration. See how God works toward the unbelievers: he turns
them, he vvindeth them from one side to an other.

We do not see apparently that it is so: but we must by faith consider
therein a providence of GOD, and if we were very attentive therein, it is
certain that we should have proof of that which is here written and that
daily. For how is it that we are not destroyed of these mad beasts, which
compass us on every side? We see what their cruelty is, and how insatiable
they are in their covetousness: Whereupon then stays it, that we are not all
svvallovved up: but that God turns away their fury, and that he knovveth
how to direct them as seems good unto him? he vvil make them sometimes to
push one another: further he keeps them there as Lions that are enchained and
holden within Iron bars. See then how God also at this day drives and
chaseth the unbelievers, where he will without violence at least, so as
they perceive it not, even as he did that at time with Ismael. For we have
already declared, that he desired nothing more the^to overthrow and abolish
the promise of God, which was made unto Isaac, and yet for all that he goes
not about it. And why so? Because it was not permitted unto him from above,
and because God does place him there in a dwelling out of the way, saying,
Thou shall dwell near thy brethren: but howsoever it be, thou shall not
hinder, but that they shall enjoy the region which I have assigned unto them
for an inheritance. But he speaks specially of Brethren, and yet for all
that he had none but Isaac: this is to shevve that God had no regard to one
or to two, when he so shut up Ismael: but as if the people had already
inhabited the land of Canaan: the people I say, which was not yet borne, yea,
which was not borne a long time after.

This is the sum of that we have further to note here. Now heerevpon we
may be confirmed and strengthened, as often as we see the wicked and
contemners of God (who are so deadly enemies to us) to cast out their froth,
in that we know that our Lord can stay and hold them in well enough, and
that he will turn them some other way, and when it shall seem that they
are to cast and banish us out of the world that our Lord will hold them as
Captives, albeit they know not how. To be short, this that is here set out
of Ismael, we shall have trial off, so that we be patient, and call upon
God, and nothing dout, but that he has means of his own in him self to
save us, the which we at the first perceive not. But now let us come to that
which Moses recites concerning Isaac. It is true that thereof he had
already spoken some thing, but it is requisite that it be deducted more at
large. He has said, That Isaac was forty years old, when he took Rebecca
to wife, and further that she was barren. Now it is like that Ismael was
married sooner. For we have already seen that Hagar his mother had given him
wife, without mention of his age, and a man may well gather that he was then
very young. Isaac comes to the age of xl. years and might al ready be
infeebled before he entered into marriage. See then how he was kept back. Now
let us note that all this while passed not, but he often entered into
reckoning, to inquire of this promise, which was made unto him, that his seed
should be multiply-as the stars of Heaven and the sand of the sea, and all
this while he found no wife, for he durst not take one in the country. And it
is like that God showed him that he would keep her barren even til the end.
But yet when he was married, it seems that then at the least God would
bless him, and increase and augment him in his stock. But his wife is barren,
yea by the space of xx. years. If any such teptation should come unto any of
us, it is certain that the best of us should hardely resist it one day: we
lightly pass over that which is here recited by Moses. And why so? It is
because we be not exercised with many co^flicts, yea and because we shun
them, and also by reason of infirmity and rudeness. Nevertheless we ought to
make our profit of such examples, when we come to any entry or trial of our
faith, we are altogether undone. And why? Because in time and place we are
not so fenced as were necessary. Now it is said here, that for the space of xx.
years it seemed that Isaac was accursed of God, and that he was in a manner a
dead stock, and that he had no hope of having any children during the space
of xx. years. For here is not question of having children only. As when men
and women do marry, they will be glad to have children: And this is also a
token of Gods favor, but here was a special reason in Isaac. For he waited
not only for the people that should descend of him, but he waited for the
salvation of the world. See then Jesus Christ, which is after a sort in his
raines, as the Apostle says* for he uses the same manner of speech there.
Isaac saw that he was barren, and yet he had no other hope to be saved, he is
as it were a cursed creature, and as it were at the pittes brink, except he
have issue: and all this while, that God which had made promise thereof in the
person of his father, seems to mock him and leaves him there, where he must
needs languish: and that as often as he beheld his wife he might thus think
with himself, Lo a glass, wherein I see that God has rejected us, and that
he makes no account of us, and that he has turned his back toward us, that
his promise is frustrate, that it has no force or efficacy toward us.

See (I say) how Isaac had daily to bear with such assaults: and we ought
well too way all these things (as I have already said:) but forasamuch as we
do not regard to what end the holy Ghost speaks unto us of Isaac, and
because we know not how to apply that to our instruction which is here spoken
of him: see why it ought to make us lose no courage at all: but when there is
but one Blast of wind, by and by we are beaten down. And why so? for we ought
to have thought thus on this sort. Go to, how is it that Isaac has so firm
constancy, and that for the space of xx years? he quailed not, albeit, it
seemed to him that GOD had mocked him: this was because that he was patient,
and because he knew, it behooved him not to set God the time wherein he had to
perform his promise: but that he must submit himself to him and do him this
honor to know that his works are incomprehensible, and that he knows the
fit times and seasons, to perform that he has pronounced: to be short,
that it is not our part too set him a law: but that it is meet that we keep
scilence, and that we murmr not, if things fall not out according to our
appetite and desire: but that we must wait till he accomplish his own
works, yea, although we see all things contrary: Nevertheless, it
behooves that our faith prevail against all the world, even as Saint John
says in his Canonical Epistle. Now in as much as all this is nothing, and
it vanishes from before our eyes: and when we read this hystory, it is so
coldely done, that we receive no fruit by it. See, also why GOD punishes us
for our ingratitude: because we are so delicate, that as soon as there
comes, not a storm or some great Whirlewinde, but a little puff, behold
we are forthwith shaken, and in the end do fall away.

So much the rather then it behooves that we mark well that which is here
spoken: too wit, that Isaac continued to trust in GOD, although that by the
space of twenty years, it seemed that he could have no issue. Now that he
perseuered, it appears by that which Moses says.

For Isaac prayed unto the Lord for his wife, and was heard, so as his wife
conceived. When it is said, that he prayed to the Lord, we must not think
that he only waited til that time was accomplyshed: but seeing that his wife
was barren, he had his recourse to GOD, which was the only remedy. What?
seems it then that he lost his time, and that he cast his Prayers in the
Air, and that they never came too Gods ears? For a man vvoulde say so. For if
he had been heard, would not God the^ have declared by experience, that
which he had promised him? But he saw nothing of all that. Then when Isaac
had prayed one year, and twain: it is all one, as if he had spoken to a Rock
or to a wall: God making wise as though he were deaf: that is to say, he
showed not him self in any sort to have a favorable care to receive Isaacks
requests: and this continued. But when this comes unto the end of ten or
twelve years, what would a man say, but that it were better to give over? For
this is a marvelous hard and great temptation, that God should do nothing of
that that he had promised at the end of fifteen years, But although he had
put off to do it even to the twentieth year, yet nevertheless Isaac ceased
not to pray, but always continued, and his prayer was a sure seal of his
Faith. For he prayed not after the manner of the unbelievers, which ever wait
to rage against God: but he followed the rule that is given us by Saint Paaule
(although it was not yet written). And that was to join thanksgiving with our
prayers, referring our selves wholly unto God, and quietly waiting for such an
issue from him as could not yet be seen. Like as then when Isaac continued
still so to cast all his heaviness into the bosom of God, and all the care that
oppressed him, and all the sorrows, griefs and anguishes, wherein he was
enclosed: when he reposed all this in the bosom of God, this was a sure trial
of his faith.

This then is that we have to learn by his example: to wit, that we think not
that God has bound himself unto us to do all that he has spoken at the first
dash: but after that he has once spoken, he will not give any sign to
accomplish his work and we will think that all that he had promised was
nothing else (as men say,) but words and wind. It behooves then that we be
holden in, with such patience: (as also the Apostle exhorts us heretoo, Heb.
10.37.
in the tenth Chapter too the Hebrews) that from day to day, from year to
year, and all our life long, and as if nothing were, that we hold our selves
there in quiet and hold our peace before God, to the end weskirmish not, nor
make any broyle, nor plead against him, nor somon him, according as our fickle
appetites would move us. And heerevpon we have to put that in practice which
the Apostle alleges out of the Prophet Habacuc: That if he forslowe his
promise, we should wait, and it shall not linger. He there sets down two
things: he says in deed that the promise of God shall not be foreslowed:
that is to say, that it shall have a certain and undoubted execution, and in
it, season: But concerning us and our sense or feeling, he says, it shall
linger: so that we have need patiently to wait. Behold then how our faith
must be tried. For if we hope that God will show himself faithful toward
us, and that we remain firm and constant, it behooved that we be often again
and again exercised in prayers and supplications: for faith must not be idle,
to be short, if we have to live here beneath, as poor miserable wretches, and
that some must be afflicted with diseases, and others with poverty, that
every one has to endure many afflictions and miseries: that nevertheless we
go forward, and that we know, when God promises us to be our father, it is
not that he means to show it always appara^tly to the eye. He will give us in
deed so^e taste of his goodness, as much as shall be necessary, yea we shall have
therein to satisfy our selves, so that our faith be always joined thereunto: in
such sort that we shall feel, that that which he has pronounced is not to
deceive us. Psalm. 81.11.
Open thy mouth and I will fill it. But howsoever it be, it behooves that we
wait always by faith, for that which yet appears not, and which is as it
were far from us, and seems to be impossible. Again, when we shall be thus
grounded and stayed upon the truth of God, and that we shall suffer our selves
to be afflicted by many miseryes, that yet, we have that care and zeal to pray
and call upon God both morning and evening, and have our recourse unto him: for
this is our only comfort. This therefore is not a thing lightly to be passed
over, when Moses rehearses, that Isaac prayed unto god for the barennes of
his wife, and that God hard him. For on the one side we see the perseueraunce
which Isaac had in staying himself upon God, and making request unto him: on
the other side we see that God was not deaf to his requests: but this was not,
for that he showed himself at the first dashe. For a man would have said, that
Isaac was abused to run so unto God morning and evening, and that it had been
better that he had given over all: but at the end of xx. years, God came
suddenly, to the end he might show that men are too hasty and hedlong in their
desires: and here see, what is the cause that often times his name is
blasphemed, and men will accuse him for that he works not according to our
fantasy: this (say I) proceeds of impatiencie. Now we have also to note,
that Isaac knew that it was a great benefit of God, to give him issue. For
when God had pronounced, Genesis 1.28.
Increase and multiply, according as we have seen, it is to show that neither
men nor beasts could bring forth and increase, but by his power, that we should
not think that it came by adventure. If therefore Bulls, horses, and Asses
cannot engender, unless God shed out his blessing and secret power, what shall
be of men? For we are far more noble creatures, inasmuch as god has formed us
according to his own image. So that when we see that both men and beasts are
increased by generation, we must thereby call to memory that this is from the
word of God, which has issued out of his mouth, Increase and multiply, which
yet even at this day shows it self, but we must go farther: to wit, that God
keeps this blessing and liberality to himself, to the end to distribute it
as he sees good. For we se that al engender not alike: Some have no Children,
others one or two, and others again have them by dozens. So then when we see
such an inequality, it behooves is too acknowledge that it is a special
benefit of God to have children: as also it is expressly said in the Psalm,
that the fruit of the womb (for so the Scripture speaks) is a reward of
God. Psalm. 127.3.
And so we must in this behalf, have recourse unto him. And therefore those
that desire so greatly to have children, they must follow always the example
of Isaac. For they will say in deed, o I would have Children: but of thinking
upon God, there is neither mention, nor news. And forasmuch as God is
defrauded of his honor, lo, why he withdraws his hand: or rather if he give
an offspring, forasmuch as they are a profane people, he will give them
children which shall scratch out their eyes. For their children are as young
serpents, or thorns, for to prick and pierce them even to the heart. Behold
therefore what is the cause that many have no offspring to succcede them: or if
they have, it is for their farther evil: forasmuch as they have not addressed
themselves to God, to obtain all of his blessing. Let us therefore mark well,
that that which is here showed as concerning our father Isaac, is that he
seeing his wife barren, prepared himself to God knowing very well, that it was
of him that he ought to demand issue. And in deed, what will men allege
here against this blessing? If we mark that which is written in Job, that
when a child comes into the world, Job. 14.
it is as a lively image of the incomprehensible power of God, which cannot be
sufficiently esteemed. For whereof is it that an infant is ingendered, and after
it is conceived, how comes it in (...) the womb of the mother? And further,
how is it, that he comes forth? If a man mark all these things, who will
be so brutish, to say that men engender them by their own strength and
industry? Let us then hold fast this lesson: which is that they that are
married and desire offspring, that they ask it of God: and that for two
reasons. The first, because God has reserved this in his own hand, as we
have even now alleged out of the Psalm. The second is, that it is not enough
that their houses be full of children, unless that God always govern them.
For it were much better that they had no offspring at all, then to have a
perverse seed, accursed and full of mischief. So then let fathers learn (in
this behalf) to follow the example of Isaac. But let us also diligently
note, that Isaac prayed not for an offspring, only after the natural appetite
of men: But he looked up higher: that is to say, because that it behooved that
of him should proceed the salvation of the world in the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the which shall be deducted more at large hereafter.

But now let us fall down before the holy majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging our faults, and praying him that he will make us too feel them
more and more, and that it may be to humble us, and to bring us to true
repentance: and that we may be in such sort touched with fear, that we may
desire nothing but to be stripped of all our earthly affections and lusts to
the end we may be clothed with his righteousness, until that he shall
have drawn us to a full and perfect perfection. And that he will not only do
this good unto us, etc.

The second Sermon, Genesis 25. Chapter.
So that Rebecca his wife conceived.

21 And when the Children strove within her, she said, If it be so, to what
end is it? and she went to ask counsel of the Lord.

22 To whom the Lord said: There are two peoples in thy womb, and two
nations brought forth out of thy womb shall be divided, of whom one shall be
mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.


WE saw yesterday how God proved the faith of Isaac, before he gave him any
offspring, to wit, for the space of xx. years. Now to the end we should know
that he prayed not to God in vain, seeing that God heard his request, the which
te^ded to this, that God might send the savior of the world by mean of the
seed that he had promised him. Now lo, whereein it was that Isaac might
rejoice, and not after the common manner. For his wife had been barren a long
time, and he saw that she had conceived, and that God had declared that he had
not forgotten his promise, and after he knew that this was granted him,
forasmuch as he had his recourse to God. But se a new temptation, and which is
more hard and more grievous to be borne, then if his wife had remained barren.
For she conceived two children, the which strugled and strove together in her
belly. Now this was a very hydeous thing, and as it were against nature. And
see wherefore also she said, that it had been better that she had been
dead, and this was not of any impatience that she spoke thus, as if she had
felt horrible torments and sorrows that had constrained her unto it: but she
looked up higher. For she bare in her womb all the hope that might be had of
the salvation of the world. Now in the mean time she sees such a combat,
that it seems that GOD overthrows all, and that he would show therein a
sign of his wrath. To be short, the thing is detestable of it self, that
there should be such a strife and battle in the womb of a woman: and this
came not naturally, but God would now do (as we have seen) to Isaac and to
her, that all they that should come of their seed after the flesh, should not
therefore be reputed of the number of the faithful: but rather that there should
be mortal war amongst them. Now therefore when she saw (in stead of having
the salvation of the world in her womb) such a sign of God his wrath, and as
it were a devilish fight of deadly enemies of the Church, she could not know
the whole: but she perceived, that if she had conceived to have such a
combat, that this was, as if GOD had been against her, and come with a main
army, to say: Thou art unto me as a detestable creature, and I have cast thee
off and refused thee. In what case then is she, when she imagines all these
things? And so we ought not to think it strange, if in such anguishe, she
would rather have chosen too die, the^ to see so monstrous a thing, which was
altogether contrary to the order of nature. Notwithstanding it is said, that
in this so great heaviness, she left not off, to have recourse unto God. And in
very deed she obtained an answer to comfort her: not but that there was also
some grief mingled therewith, but yet God did moderate this passion, that was
so grievous unto her, and said, that she had two peoples in her womb: as if he
should have said, that this was not only for the two childrens sakes, which
she bare, but that this had a farther respect: that is to say, that they
should be divided the one from the other. And howsoever both two were the
sons of Abraham, and that it had been said unto Abraham, that in his seed
all the nations of the earth should be blessed, yet it must needs be that from
Isaac such must descend, as God should cut of from his Church, who should be
rejected, and so consequently should be the enemies of the Church of God. Now
it is very true that this might have wounded both Isaac and Rebecca with a
deadly sorrow: but yet in the mean time they see that the goodness of God was
no whit quenched and that God showed himself faithful in that he had once
pronounced. For he had said.

The elder shall serve the younger. Wherein Rebecca knew, that of her,
howsoever it should be, should come that blessed seed, which had bin
promised. See in brief the whole that is here rehearsed. But all would be
dark, if it were not declared particularly. Let us note here then, that they
that are called into the Church, do not always remain there, as we have
seen a notable example in Ismael: who was the eldest son of Abraham,
notwithstanding he was banished from the family, and it was said, that he
should not be heir. And this was not of the riches of the world, nor of
those possessions, which Abraham had. For he was rich in cattle, in gold and
silver: but he had not one foot of land. This heritage therefore, to what had
it respect? Even to the spiritual promise: that is too say, that God had
chosen the seed of Abraham, which was as much to say, as this shall be a people
that shall be dedicated to my service: and those that shall come of them, will I
receive and accept for my children, to the end I may gather them into
everlasting life. Mark then how Ismael with his birthright is cast from the
hope of life: and it remains only to Isaac. And even so is it herein,
concerning Esau and Jacob: For both these were descended of Abraham, yea they
were twins, their mother bare them in one belly: yet that one is received,
and the other rejected: one is chosen, and the other refused.

So then we see that they, who for a time have place in the church, and bear
the title of the faithful and of the children of God, may well be so accounted
before men, but they are not written in the book of life: God knows them not,
nor avouches them for his. Hereby we are admonished, not proudly to vaunt our
selves, nor to be drunken with sottish presumption, when God shall show us this
favor, to bring us into his church: but let us walk in purity, and labor to
make sure our election, and to have the testimony thereof in our hearts, by
the holy Ghost, and not to trust only to the outward title and apparaunce,
which we may pretend before the world: see what we have here too mark. And
moreover we are taught a far greater thing: and that is in the first place:
that albeit God had established his covenant with Abraham, yet notwithstanding
he would declare that this was not all, to have made offer of his grace: but
that it behooved that he choose according to his liberty, such as he thought
good, and that the rest should remain in their cursed state. And therefore S.
Paul alleges this place to apply it to the secret election of God, through
which before the foundation of the world, he chose those as seemed good unto
him. Now this is a very high and profound matter, but when it shall be farther
declared, every one may make his profit of it, so that we be attentive unto
it. And for the remnaunt, let us receive that, which the holy scripture shows
unto us, with sobriety, and let us not desire to be wiser, the^ is lawful for
us: but let us rest in that which God shall speak unto us, and moreover let us
be humble, not to reply against him, nor to bring forth our fantasies before
him, as though we would plead against God: but acknowledging that his
judgments are bottomless: let us not search farther therein, then is permitted
unto us. Now it behooves that we handle these things in such sort, that that
which at the first show seems to be dark, be made more easy to us. We have
already seen that God has chosen Abraham's sede. Now if a man would ask, why or
by whom he was brought so to do: he shall not find that Abraham was any
worthier then others: as we have already largely enough handled this matter. Lo
the^ a privilege which was given to a certain family, not flowing from any
merit, neither for that God found any thing in their persons, wherefore they
ought to be preferred: for they were no better nor more excellent then others,
but it pleased him so. Now, it is very true that this will be hard for us to
digest, if we bring in our own judgment as there are a great sort of
fantastical heads which cannot abide this doctrine: For it seems good to
them to reply against God: But what profit they thereby in the end? We have
alleged that herein we must bring with us an humility, for to reverence that
which is hidden from us. And indeed S. Paul has well showed us this by his
example. For instead of disputing the matter he cries out* o how wonderful
are the judgments of God: Behold S. Paul who was altogether amassed, he
found himself astonished, he that had been rapte up above the heavens, he
that had seen the secrets of God which was not lawful for man to utter. Saint
Paul then, who was (as a man would say) a companion of Angels, was found in
this case to meruell, and to be altogether confounded: and what shall become of
these Scullions, who have scarcely licked with the tippe of their tongue one
word of the law and Gospel, and yet nevertheless would go beyond S. Paul? And
yet men shall find this pride in very many. But for our part let us return to
that which is here showed us. O man who art thou. When therefore we will make
comparison betwixt God and us: who is God? within what compass shall we
enclose him? Shall it be within the compass of our brain? And we have
scarcely half an ounce of wit, and in mean season God, who closes his fiste,
to hold the whole world as a grain of dust (as Esaias the prophet says) and is
not comprehended neither in heaven nor in earth, who has an infinite power, an
infinite justice and wisdom, and who has incomprehensible counsayles: and yet
for all that we must come to make him subject to our foolish fantasy. And
whereto will this grow? Moreover who are we? Men, (says S. Paul.) By which
word he means, that we are nothing at all: as if he should say, must it be
that thou presume so much, as to dare to enquire of the bottomless secrets of
God, seeing thou art nothing but clay and doung? And again, what is thy
understanding? Thou art full of sin and iniquity, thou art a poor blind
one: and yet thou will that God shall make an account to thee: and will thou
conclude, that if thou find not that which he does good and reasonable, that
thou may accuse him, and must he needs hold up his hand at thy bar?
Now let us mark this admonition in the first place, and let us know that our
Lord Jesus Christ teaches us, that we cannot do amiss to hearken and open
our ears, to enquire and search after that, that it has pleased him we
should know: but let us take heed that we go not beyond it: For there is
no rage so great and outrageous, as when we will know more then God does
show us. And moreover we shall have spunne a fair thread if we apply all our
senses and all our studyes thereto: whether is it that we shall come* This
shall be always to inwrappe us so much the more in a Labyrinth, and maze
unless, we have the direction of God too show us the way.

Let us therefore keep this mean: that is to say, to hearken to that which God
does propounde unto us: and as soon as he shall once shut his mouth, let
us have all our understandings locked up and captive, and let us not enterprise
to know more, then that he shall have pronounced unto us. Now therefore see
how the stock of Abraham was chosen before all the rest of the world,
forasmuch as God so would: but this was not yet enough: For it behooves that
his free election be yet better confirmed unto us. And this is it that is here
showed unto us, in the person of two brethren. For behold Rebecca which bare
Jacob and Esau: was the one better the^ the other? S. Paul expou^ding this
place says. And they were not yet been. Romans 9.1^.
How then could they have obtained favor and grace before God for their
merits? for Jacob had done neither good not evil no more then Esau. Why then
does God make him the greater? It behooves not that we enter into any deeper
disputation of this matter, unless it be to adore with astonishment the
secret council of God, through which, those which seemed good to him are
elected, and the other rejected. See then how God would yet give greater glory
and beauty to his mercy, when he had chosen Jacob before Esau. For in deed
he might have well placed Jacob the formoste, when the Infants should coome
forth from their mothers womb. Men may well understand, that this was not by
any adventure: as it is said in the Psalm: Thou have drawn me out from my
mothers womb: And God manifests a singular power, when children come into
the world. And why then did not he permit and ordain that Jacob should have
the privilege of birthright? For this was meet since he meant to banish Esau
out of the church, and would have Jacob to remain there, and to succeed in
the place of his father Isaac and Abraham. And why does God then pull him
back, and make him inferior to his brother, as touching the law of nature, and
afterward sets him above him? In this we see that God would shut out all
glory of man, that he would that al height should be thrown down, and that men
should bring nothing of their own: to the end to say: I have attained such or
such a good thing. I have gotten it by mine own industry. We see then that
which I have already touched: that is to say, that we have here a glass,
wherein we may behold, that all they that are of the church, are not advanced
thereto by their own virtue, and that they have not obtained this favor by their
merits: but that God has chosen the^ before they were borne: See the^ briefly
what we have to hold out of this place. But now a man might here move some
dout: For Moses says expressly that this was extended to two peoples, and
that it was not only in respect of Jacob and Esau, that this struggling combat
was moved, as touching their persons: but that it was in respect of their
successors, and each others posterity. Now it is so, that many which descended
of Jacob were nevertheless rejected. For he stays upon that that is spoken
here: to wit, that the stock and offspring of Jacob was chosen and that of
Esau rejected: and yet notwithstanding a man may see, that the most part of
those that descended of Jacob, were disalowed of god, and that he pronou^ceth
them bastard children, the children of an harlot, and such as were sprung of
fornication, and that they belo^ged nothing at al unto him, and that it was a
vain thing for the^, to glory or boast of his name. Now how can these agree
together? Let us mark that god sets such a spectacle before the eyes of
Jacob and Rebecca, to show them what the condition and state of the church
should be: For God in few words testifies unto them, that his church should
com of Jacob: and not that all they which he should beget concerning the flesh
must be of the church: but it was enough that he remained there, and that God
kept him: and that Esau was driven out in time, as afterward we shall see.
This shall be better understood by that exposition which Saint Paul gives: he
takes this sentence thus: Romans 9.6.
All they which are of Jacob after the flesh, are not for all that, true
Israelites: that is to say, they are not of the people of God. For he had two
names, as we shall see hereaftet, to wit, Jacob and Israel. And that it is so,
before the children were borne, lo God, which seuereth the one from the other,
and shows that this is not one body, and that they were not united together:
but that one was reserved, and the other rejected. S. Paul therefore well
understood, that they which should be borne of Jacob, were not all elected of
God: for he sends us to the beginning, and says that the one was separated
from the other by the secret counsel of God, and that we cannot comprehend
and set forth the reason thereof: forasmuch (as I have already said) that
he keeps his liberty, in such sort that it well suffiseth that the Church
be engendered of his stock, albeit that all do not appertain unto it. We have
before declared that there was a double grace or favor in this stock of
Abraham: one was, that God had in general declared, that he would be their
father. Circumcision also was common to them all. Now circumcision was not in
vain: but it bare witness of the remission of sins and of the righteousness
that all the faithful must obtain through our Lord Jesus Christ. Lo the^
Ismael who was circumcised: as much as was on gods behalf, he received the
sacrament that might assure him that God accounted him of the number of his
children, that he was a member of Jesus Christ, that the curse which he had
drawn from Adam, was abolished: yea but this stood him in no steed at all.
As Much may be said of Esau, and of all their like: but howsoever it was, we
must not despise the benefit that he showed toward all the stock of
Abraham. As at this day when we speak of the inestimable blessing that God
has bestowed upon us, when his Gospel was preached: this same shall be spoken
unto all indifferently. Men will say that God has used a very singular mercy
toward us, in as much as he has lightened us by his word, that we should know
the way of salvation. In the mean time, we see others that wander in
darckenesse and confusion, as if God had forgotten and altogether cast them
off. Behold the Papists, albeit they be full of pride and rebellion, yet they
are tossed too and fro of Satan: so as they know neither way nor path: and in
mean time god calls us to him daily, and there is mention of his covenant,
to the end that we should know that he is always merciful unto us, and that we
may call upon him in a true certainty, not douting, but that he will be our
father. Behold then a benefit, which we ought not to esteem lightly off:
and yet there are a great many, too whom this serves not, but to
condemnation: For there is so much the more unthankfulness, if they be rebels
against God, and disdain to accept the fatherly favor that he offered unto
them. So then, behold such a favor already bestowed upon us, as that was
upon the stock of Abraham: but yet there was also a second grace, the which
must yet be restrained to these bounds: to wit, that God has chosen of this
stock, those that has seemed good unto him, as he received Isaac to him
self, and Ismael had no place in his house: he might well be accounted for a
time a member of his house: but in the end he was cut off. As Much may be said
of the children of Keturah: and behold although Esau were the first borne, yet
God shut him out. See therefore a second favor which was in Abraham's family:
that is, that God held to himself, those that he thought good. For Jacob was
as the root of this stock which sprung afterward. And farther mark for what
cause all the elect were figured in his person, and that God sets forth unto
us, that they have not that of them selves, which he through his only
goodness gives unto them, and that they cannot brag, that this was of their
own moving, that they attained to salvation: but that they were drawn to it,
yea in as much as they were chosen before the creation of the world and
consequently before their birthe. Behold, wherefore S. Paul, in this place
that we have aledged, for the more full declaration adioyneth the testimony of
Moses: I will have mercy on him on whom I will have mercy: Exodus 33.19.
and I will have compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion. It should
seem that this is a broken speech and from the purpose: but it is of great
importance: For it is as much as if GOD had said, I know whom I will
reserve, and there is no need that any come in this case too plead with me:
For this consists in my liberty. When we shall mark our common speech, this
shall not be dark at all. For if a man say, I will do that, I will do: that is
to say, I will do that which I think good to do, by this he shows, that he
will not submit him self to any person: he shows that he is neither tied nor
bound to open his counsel and purpose, in that he has to do. So God says, I
will show mercy to him, that I will show mercy: as if he should say: My
mercy depends neither upon this or that, neither must the cause be sought
in any other, nor I bound to any law: For I know what I ought to do: and in
the mean time my mercy shall have place, and I will show mercy to whom I
will show mercy: That is to say: I mark not who is worthy of it. For there is
not one: But yet I will not cease to show mercy to some, to wit, to such as
I shall have chosen. Mark then how precisely God speaks: and this is to
beat down whatsoever men can allege to shut the door against all
curiosity, and set a bar against all presumption: and that we do simply
reverence him, leaving that to him which he has reserved to himself: that is
to say, when he saves, it is of his free goodness: and when he condemns,
that we should not enterprise to bark against God, but that we shut up our
mouth: unless it be to glorify him. Now let us mark that this was spoken by
Moses when the people already multiplied, and after that God had brought the^
out of Egypt. Behold a Church descended from the race of Jacob? For from this
same barren house, and which was as it were desolate, GOD had drawn so great
a multitud therefrom, that this seemed rather to be a notorious miracle, and
that this promise was verified: that Abraham's seed should be at the stars of
Heaven. Was not this in a goodly show in respect of men? God says of this
multitude here, I will retain as many as I shall think good: I will show
mercy to whom I will show mercy, and let no man ask the reason thereof. It
is true in deed that God has reason, but it follows not therefore that we
can comprehend it, or that we must break out beyond our bounds into his
secrets. We must therefore know that in respect of us, there is no reason:
but the counsel of God ought to be unto us in all respects the rule of
righteousness, wisdom and equity. Mark therefore how the exposition of S.
Paul agrees very well to that which is here pronounced: that is to wit, that
there were two peoples in the belly of Rebecca, and that from her bowels two
nations should be divided: and this was as much as if God had testified, that
there should be such a divorce, that yet the stock of Jacob should remain
blessed: Not altogether without exception, but those whom it should please
GOD to keep to himself, as he had chosen them before the creation of the
world. See the^ the sum of that which is contained here. But before we go
any farther, let us well note that which has been said: that is to say, that
the principal thing which we have to observe, is this, that God will have the
whole praise of our salvation to be attributed to him. For what is the root
and beginning of the church? It is his election. See whereto Moses calls us,
yea according to the interpretation of S. Paul: and the text also herein is
most plain. For here (as I have said) there is not any question of any
earthly or transitory inheritance: it is of everlasting life that Abraham had
hoped for according to that he had received through the promise. Now see Jacob
an heir: and why so? was it because he put himself in the favor of God, or
for that he had purchased favor for any thing he brought? It was not so. See
then Moses text without any gloss, which shows sufficiently, that the Church
springs from the pure grace of God: and so that all the praise of our
salvation, must wholly be reserved to himself. Now, for all this, they that
would overthrow and darken this doctrine say, although that God knew no merit
in Jacob: yet he foresaw well enough that he should be such a one. Behold for
what cause they say he was chosen, and Esau rejected. To be short, inasmuch as
a great sort of those Dogs dare not openly and flatly deny the election of God,
they would that there should be a superior cause, to wit, his foreknowledge.
And what is that foreknowledge? It is that God foreseeth what manner of one
every one must be: and he choseth (say they) those whom he has foreseen
to be of a good nature and affection: and it is no marvel if he accept them
before others: For he knows the good which appears not yet, but is to
come. But such kind of men have no drop of the fear of God. For they
manifestly blaspheme against the holy ghost, who has spoken by the mouth of S.
Paul, and these mock at that which S. Paul has spoken as if it were a fable.
For if a man accept their solution, the^ has S. Paul spoken as an ignorant and
unadvised man: For he takes this reason, he found neither good nor evil,
neither in Isaac nor in Esau, nor in Jacob. Notwithstanding God chose the one
and rejected the other. But the reply shall be easy, in the opinion of these
fantastical persons. And how? It is true that there was neither good nor evil:
but there must be either good or evil, and God did so foresee it. But S. Paul
presupposes that this be true, to wit, that we are all damned, and that until
that God had chosen us, it must needs be that we should remain as Serpents
full of venim, and that there was nothing in us but matter of wrath and of the
vengeance of God, and that we are altogether confounded, and full of poison and
iniquity.

Lo Jacobs case as well as Esaus. For what shall we find in the race of Adam,
but all corruption? We are therefore infected before God: and in as much as the
root is accurssed and vicious and altogether rotten, it must needs be that
the fruits be of the same sort. So then when God shall leave us such as we
are, it must needs be that we all perish, and that there remain not one, but
that we be all lost and consumed.

To be short, this doctrine is common enough in the holy Scripture, that we are
all the children of wrath. It follows then that there was no diversity in
Esau and Jacob, and that God had not distinguished the one from the other, for
that he found or foresawe any good either in the one or other. For what could
he forese, but this corrupted mass of Adam, that brings forth no other fruit
but malediction? See therefore what he forsawe as well in the one as in the other
indifferently. It follows the^, that he had put in Jacob that which is found
in him, and that he left Esau such a one as his birth brought him forth. See
also why it is said in another place, That God has chosen us, Ephe. 1.4.
to the end that we should be holy and unblameable before him. He says not,
because God foresaw that we should be holy, he has chosen us: but contrariwise
he deriueth all our holiness and righteousness, and all the good which shall be
found in us, he deriueth it from this root: to wit, from the election of God,
to the end we should walk in his fear, that we should have some integrity in
us, that we should have some zeal and affection to do well. If this be so,
it follows then that God has foreseen nothing in us. For let us take away
election, and what shall there remain? As we have declared, we remain
altogether lost and accursed. And not without cause: For God saw nothing in us
but corruption: and it must needs be that he must dissalowe us, and renounce
us, as it is said, that he repented that he had made man. Behold then what we
may allege on our part. So then, this is too tryfling a folly to say, that God
has chosen his, according as he foresawe they should become afterward: for
it must needs be, that he put in them, that which is good, and place it there,
because he has chosen them. Mark therefore the first step whereby we must
begin: that is to say, that we nothing differ one from another, unless in
this, that God has discerned us. Mark also for what cause S. Paul
dissanulleth all the glory the which me^ may usurp: Who is it (says he) that
does discern thee? he has nothing but this word there to beat down and
dissanul all pride. And why so? For have thou any thing (says he) which is
thine own? Hereby he shows that men cannot choose their own place, to say,
I will dispose my self to do good, and God shall have pity upon me, and I
will com unto his grace, I will have a good motion, I will have this
preparation. Now S. Paul excludes all this, in saying that we are all lost,
that one with another, we must be all thrown down, and enter into the gulf
of hell, except it please God to discern us. Lo from whence all our dignity
and excellency comes: that is, for that it pleases God to lend us his hand.
Again let us hold fast this principle, and apply all this doctrine which we
have rehearsed to this purpose, how God has set forth unto us, in Jacob and
Esau, a glass to look into. Likewise let us content our selves, that these
two persons may be unto us, as two lively images, to show us that the world
in it self, is of like condition: but that one sort is called and not the
other because it has so pleased God. And specially (as I have noted) Jacob was
the you^ger, and it seemed rather that he should be subject to his brother,
according to the order of nature: notwtihsta^ding mark that he was placed in
the degree of the first borne and Esau not only was put under him, but he was
utterly rejected: For in the end he had no part nor portion in the church. This
thing shows very well unto us, that God would hold us always convicted, that
there is no question of bringing any thing before God on our part, to thrust
in our selves there, as if we had any valor and woorthynesse in us: For God is
not contrary to himself: nevertheless he would show here a certain kind of
repugnancie and contraryetie. It is he which ordained that the first borne of
the house, should be the head. Now he set down this law: and yet in the
mean time he overthrows it: but (as I have said) all this agrees very well:
For God is above his ordinary law, and yet he would change that which was
accustomed by a common rule: and he does it to the end that we should know
that it is (...) (as S. Paul also has said) neither of the willer, nor of the
ru^ner: Romans 9.16.
but only of him which shows mercy. Now when S. Paul says, that it is
neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs: he means not that we
may have some good will of our selves: as he has declared in another place:
Phil. 2.13.
For it is God which gives it: and also he means not that we can enforce
our selves but he shows that men have nothing; and therefore they can bring
nothing to God.

There is nothing then but his mercy alone. For if men had any thing to set
against it, there must be a parting of stakes, and that must be known which
is from God, and that which is from men. And then it might be said, that we
have not all from the only mercy of God: but that therein there is our good
will, our good running and our good zeal. Men might so speak: But Saint
Paul would here make frustrate, whatsoever men might bring of them selves,
and show that nothing has dominion herein, but the only mercy of GOD. It is
very true that many people will enforce them selves, yea and they allege the
example of the Jews, who were swollen as Todes with a devilish kind of pride,
thinking that God was bound as it were to them, and who would be accounted
righteous according to their works: but herein they deceive them selves, and
shall do nothing but go back in stead of going forward. When men presume
so of them selves, it is certain that they rob God of his honor. See then
these sacrilegious persons and worse then thieves, and moreover until God
shall have renewed us, whatsoever goodly show we have, it is certain, that
there is nothing in us but stinch, and we shall be as vile vermin before GOD.

So then let us not pretend that we can either will or run: but it behooves
that God find us as lost, and that he recover us from that bottomless pit,
and that he separate us from them with whom we were lost, and to whom we
were alike. For (as I have said) the condition of mankind is all one. It is
true, that the one sort, are the Children of wrath, and the other God
blesses. But from whence comes this separation, and this divorce? From
mercy. And we must not go to enquire any farther, but we must content our
selves with this word alone, in stead of all reason.

Mark then for what cause, namely the firstborn was cast out from his
place: and in the mean season Jacob who was the inferior, was set in his
place, yea, to remain the only heir. When Malachie the Prophet speaks of
this, Mala. 1.2.
he reprocheth unto the Jews their ingratitude. It is true that this was for
an outward sign, that GOD had chosen Jacob rather then Esau, for as much as
he had given the land of Canaan to be his inheritance, and that Esau was sent
far off amiddest the Mountains: but this is not the sentence whereupon the
Prophet rests: he looks unto a thing much higher.

Saint Paul also when he uses this testimony of his, seeing that GOD had
taken unto him self the stock of Jacob, he attributes all this to his mere
mercy: But the Prophet says. And Esau, was he not the brother of Jacob? As
if he should say. You are full of pride and obstinacy, yea, you burst your
selves therein, and it costs you nothing to say, o we are of the holy and
sacred stock of Abraham: we are the Church, we are the people whom God has
blessed and sanctified: yea, and from whence have you this (says he?) For was
not Esau, Jacobs brother? You see the Idumeans your brethren: and are they the
people of God? you say that they are strangers from the Church: and although
they have circumcision, yet notwithstanding God has cut the^ off. And whence
comes this (says he?) Who is it that has so separated them? If you will
go from age to age: very well, you shall find how you are the Children of
Jacob. And Esau, whose child was he I pray you? Did not he descend from
Abraham and Isaac as well as you? But here he speaks not only of the land
of Canaan: but he goes farther, and says That he loved Jacob, and hated
Esau. And this love which he bare unto Jacob, from whence proceeded it? It is
certain that Jacob could not be accepted of him (as we have said) being
considered in himself. For behold him the child of wrath, and bringing nothing
from the womb of his mother, but this horrible curse, which was cast upon all
mankind: notwithstanding God did love him. Now God loves not iniquity, he
hates sin as we know. How the^ loved he Jacob? This was for that he drew him
from that perdition, wherein he was. And why did he hate Esau? Now it is very
true that there is just cause why God should hate all mankind: For as we
have said, there is nothing in us but vice and iniquity: but yet when we will
go farther, and that we will demand, why God before he created the world,
and before the fall of Adam, why this should be, that he would hate or love?
here we must hold our selves mute and still: Here we must not lift up our
horns. For what shall we gain, when we will enter into debate and question
with God? It is certain that we shall cast stones upon our own heads, and
they will fall neither here nor there, they cannot reach unto the majesty of
God: but they shall return upon our own pates, and it must be that we be
crusshed and bruised therewith.

Behold then what we shall gain when we open our throat, to cast forth
blasphemies against God: For we shall but cast out our darts and stones into
the air: but they shall not reach unto him, it shall be rather that we be
pierced and wounded by them, and that we remain confounded in that our
rashness and ouerweening. Thus, let us content our selves with that which God
has pronounced, that is to say: that he has hated Esau and loved Jacob. Now
by this the Children of Jacob were as well convinced, that they had nothing
whereof they might glory in them selves, and that there rested nothing, but
that they made an acknowledgement unto God of such a liberal and bountiful
goodness which he had used toward them, and whereof none could find any
reason, unless in this that it so pleased him. But notwithstanding they were
full of impiety against God, and would hold this privilege: but God shows
them, that it does not belong unto them, and that if they accounted him for
their father, they must be his children. But hereby we are admonished, that
although our salvation proceed from the only grace of God, and that therein it
consists to the end: Notwithstanding it follows not, that under the
shadow hereof, we can let loose our selves to evil, and give over our
selves thereto. But there are villains and dogs that bark against God, and
there are also Hogs, which overthrow this doctrine of election, by their
loose and lewd life. For there are two sorts of people, that are enemies to
this doctrine. The one are as dogs, and the other as Hogs. The one, which
are they? they which will and come to show their teeth, and who despite God by
their wicked questions: as we see at this day in those villains who make no
scruple, to rend in pieces all the holy Scripture to corrupt, pervert, falsify
and adulterate all, so that they may darken the election of God, to wit, to
make nothing of all. And mark whereunto this te^deth, to make this doctrine
odious. For they will say, that they that thus speak, they put no more any
difference betwixt good and evil, and that God by this mean should become
unrighteous, if he should put any difference between one and an other, and
that there should be acceptaunce of persons in him. Behold then the dogs
that bark and whet their teeth against this doctrine. Now there are also Hogs
which will not despite in such sort against it, but will say, very well. If I be
elected I may do as much evil as I will: For God knows well how to keep me, and
I can never perish: and contrariwise if I be reprobate, why should I torment
my self so much to do well, seeing that I can never be saved. These then (as
I have already said) come not to spue up their contradictions, to overthrow
the truth of God: but they wallowe there, and remain in their sins as brute
beasts. But we must take heed both of the one and the other And for this
cause (as I have said) the Prophet Malachie showing to the people, that all
that he had done unto them, came of the mere and free bounty of God,
exhorts them to holiness of life. And therefore as it is said unto us, that
God is the author of our salvation, and that we can bring nothing to serve in
that matter, and that yet we must always be kept under his guard, and that
he must perfect and accomplish that which he has begun, let not this be to
the end, to let loose the bridle to our vices: but rather to keep us in his
fear.

And in very deed when S. Paul says, that these are the hidden letters, and
that it is an inco^prehensible secret, to know who be the children of God, he
adds: Whosoever calls upon the name of God, let him depart from all
iniquity. Let us mark then, that GOD would give us no occasion to do evil,
when he chose us without any regard to our merits, and that he also
maintains us by his mere goodness: but this is to the end that we should
honor him, and we should walk in so much the greater carfulness. And
therefore let us return to that we have touched: to wit, that he has chosen
us, to the end that we should be holy and without blame before his face. It
is true that he has not chosen us, for that he found us such: but when he
chose us, it was to the end we should be such. It behooves therefore that we
march thither, and that this be the Mark that we aim at all the days of our
life.

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good GOD, in
acknowledging of our faults, praying him that he will in such sort make us to
feel them, that it may be to humble us, and to draw us to true repentance,
to the end, we may renounce all our fleshly lusts and affections: and that
being so cast down in our selves, we may be enlightened by the power of his
holy spirit, to the end to serve and honor him all the time of our life: and
that by this means we may so much the more be styrred up to give our selves
wholly to him, knowing that we hold all of his mere goodness: and that this
may be to glorify his holy name, not only in mouth but in our whole life.
That not only, etc.

The third Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25.
21 Now when Rebecca had conceived.

The Children strove within her belly. And she said. If it be so, to what end
is it, or why do I live? and she went to ask council of the Lord.

22 And the Lord said unto her, there are two peoples in thy womb, and two
nations brought forth out of thy womb shall be divided, of whom one shall be
mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.


IT is a thing that much troubles men's spirits, when they see the estate of
the world so confused, that the most part do manifestly despite God, and it
seems that they have co^spired with the devil, to the end to give over them
selves to all mischief. For this is thought a thing greatly against reason,
that GOD should create men to destroy them. Wherefore then is it, that he
suffers the greatest number so to fall? If it be said that this ought to
be imputed not to God, but to those that of their own accord throw them
selves so to perdition, yet this makes no whit to the appeasing of those
troubles, that we may conceive: For could not God remedy it? Why is it then
that he does it not? They that allege a simple permission, that God lays
the bridle upon every man's neck, and that every one guides himself according
to his own free will: yet they cannot well undo this knot: to wit, why God
has not created men of another sort: and wherefore he has suffered that
they should be so weak, yea and enclyned to evil and corruption: and seeing
that he knew their infirmity, wherefore is it, that he does not help them
and provide them some remedy? This therefore is to entangle our selves in
great torments and troubles. But it behooves that we go yet farther: For it is
certain (as the Scripture declares) that there is nothing which does not
perish, saving that which God preserves through his mere goodness and free
bounty. But now, how comes it to pass, that God choseth only the tenth or
the hundredth part of men, and leaves all the rest, knowing well that they are
swallowed up in hell and lost? Wherefore does he not reach out his hand to
help them, yea why has he ordained them to destruction, as the Scripture
speaks? For mark the very words of Solomon: Behold a sentence, which
drives us from such hard questions: and many are therein entangled, as it were
among thorns: And further they thrust in themselves so far, that they are
altogether confounded. But yet there is a tentation far greater. For besides
that generality of the world, the like is seen also in the Church: that is,
that when the Gospel has been preached to a whole people, there are then many
Hypocrites, the others are rebels, others become wholly brutish, in such sort
that they profit but very little in this school, although God note all
without exception to whom he speaks. And beyond all these, a man shall find
many, who through contempt and ingratitud will shut against themselves the gate
of salvation, and will reject all the graces of God: and not only this: but
men shall find deadly enemies of the doctrine, although they be of the
household, And in very deed the prophet Esaias having said, that god would gather
his church out of the world, and that he would have so great a people as should
be wonderful, in stead of rejoicing, he afterward adds: Alas my bowels. Now
by this he shows, that when it shall seem that all must flourish and
prosper, and that God must be glorified both of great and small, and that his
banner must be displaied, to gather together the whole world, to the end that
with one accord all may serve God: then he discovers a secret mischief. For
the Prophet cries not only alas the hands, alas the legs: but he cries
out, alas my bowels, as though he would say, this mischief is so rooted in the
church, that it must be as it were mingled of so sundry sorts of men, that she
must nourish in her own belly her own enemies, as we have seen by the figure
in Rebecca. Now what is to be done therein? Every one sees that if we enter
into such fantasies, we cannot have any resolution, and the devil will thrust in
himself amongst, to the end to make us blaspheme against God, or else to put
such a bitterness into our heart, that we shall seem rather to be blocks of
wood, then reasonable creatures formed according to Gods image: as we do see the
experience thereof in many people, who do beco^e as it were mad and raging
against god, because they cannot rid themselves from difficulties and douts. It
is necessary therefore to search out a remedy. Now it is true that we cannot
exempt fully our selves from all passions, that at the first blush and as it
were with some puff we be not moved and troubled, and that our thoughts do
not wander, that we do not conceive many things at randon, and that we have
not many disputes, both on the one side and on the other: to be short, that
we be not tossed, as if there were some kind of tempest and whirlewind, which
carried us about. We can not have our spirits altogether quiet, nor so well
guyded, that they shall have no troubles. And this is declared unto us in
Rebecca, when she says.

If it be so, to what end I? or why do I live? She desires death, and yet
she is the mother of the faithful? She represents the Church. Now if this
were in her, that bare in her belly the hope of the salvation of the world:
what shall be in us? So considering that we have our minds so ready to conceive
follyes and vanities, and moreover so ready also to cast us off the hinges, and
in the end so subject to make us storm against God, so much the rather it
stands us in hand to search out the remedy. Now that is here given us in
Rebecca: For she fodes not her self in her sadness, she byteth not upon the
bridle, as many do who stick there, which seek to have no mean wherein to
content themselves, nor to make them quiet and settled: but they wander this way
and that way, and always add fantasies to fantasies, and plunge them selves
so deep in their imaginations, that the Devil afterward possesses them, and
drives them by all violence and fury against God. Rebecca does not so: But
when she felt that this was an intolerable grief unto her, she withdraws her
self unto God, she enquireth of him, and answer was given unto her by and by.
She had therefore whereupon to rest her self, when she knew that so was the
good pleasure of GOD: and when she saw what he demands: and that one of
her own children should be cut off from the Church, and the other reserved,
she knowing this, it behooves that she rest there and submit her self
thereunto: the which thing she does. For she strives not against God. Likewise
we read not that at any time after she murmured: but we see that she hearkened
unto God: and brought forth children afterward, and always she rested her
self in that which had been said unto her, and set her mind and affection
upon Jacob. And why so? Because she knew that he was ordained of God to be
the blessed seed, which she had hoped for: so as she behaved her self more
manfully in this respect, then Isaac her husband. Now this is to show us, that
when we are in any trouble, we must straightway have our recourse to God. For
our spirits are not able enough, too know these hidden things: yea we see
that in the most easyest things in the world (as seems unto us) we shall be
many times ravished and astonished. And what shall it be then, when the question
shall be of the judgments of God, which are incomprehensible, and which are of
so high and profounde matter, that the holy Ghost teaches us, in stead of
curious searching after the^, that we must adore them? shall men presume of
their reason, and of that they shall build upon their good lyking, and shall
they examine all after their own fantasy and opinion? It is certain that such
presumption shall not remain unpunished: and it is seen also. For wherefore is
it, that so many dogs at this day spue out their blasphemies against this
doctrine of predestination? It is because they vouchsafe not to enquire at the
mouth of God, but they will give sentence as their brain will bear, forsooth as
though we were fit and sufficient. So then let us follow the example of
Rebecca: that is to say, when all these questlons shall come before our eyes,
and that we shall be tormented on every side, in thinking: And how is it
possible that the most part of the world shall perish, and the rest be saved?
How comes it to pass, that one is elected and another rejected? How is it
that the greateste number go to destruction, and that there is but an handful
of people which God reserueth to him self?

When we shall be thus tormented, let us have recourse unto God: that is to
say, let us hearken to that which is showed us in the holy Scripture, let us
pray God that he will open our ears and our eyes, to the end we may
understand his will. And farther have we this? It behooves us altogether to
rest therein, and to be quiet. For there is no cause of disputing any farther,
when God has once pronounced his sentence. To be short, this is daily to show
us, that we can not ever dispose our selves, to receive the instruction of the
holy Scripture, and to seek all our wisdom there, unless we have this
modesty and humility in us, not to desire to understand or know any thing,
but that which is contained therein. We need not any revelation from heaven
at this day, as Rebecca had. It is very true that some coniectured that she
went unto some Prophet: but they were thin sown in the world then. For a man
may easily perceive that Melchezedech was dead: and that there was not any more
then Abraham and Isaac.

This then is a Dream, to think that she went to the schools of the
Prophets: but she had a revelation, as our text here shows. And our
condition at this day is not altogether like, and neither have we also such
need thereof. For then there was neither the Law nor the Gospel. At this day
we have all perfection of doctrine: For God in old time has spoken unto our
Fathers, and not in secret, nor in obscurity (as says Esaie the Prophet.)

And this was not in vain that he said, that men should seek him: as Moses
protests: Behold the way, walk in the same: I have set before you this
day, the way of salvation, and Heaven and Earth are witnesses unto me, that I
have declared unto you what you must do, to come unto everlasting life. And
afterward although God have his secrets (says he in an other place) yet
notwithstanding this, that is to say the sum of the law, is for you and for
your children: to the end that you should be taught in the way of salvation.
But besides this we have yet the Gospel, wherein our Lord Jesus Christ has
shined unto us in all fullness: For he is that son of righteousness. Seeing
therefore we have so sufficient testimonies, shall we demand that Angels
come down from Heaven, and that God will yet open unto us that is hidden from
us? But let us (as I have already said) content our selves with the holy
Scripture. And when there is any cause of inquiring after God, if we will have
him for our master, let us come to the holy Scripture: and let us remember
that which Moses says: Thou shall not say, Who is he that shall ascend above
the Clouds? Who is he that shall descend into the deapth? Who is he that
shall go over the sea? The word of the Lord is in thy heart, and in thy
mouth, says he. And seeing it is so that Moses has protested this in his
time: at this day we have less occasion to wander here and there, and to
run at all adventure to inquire after the will of God. For (as I have already
said) the Gospel contains all perfection of doctrine: and also behold the
only mean, whereby we may be thoroughly satisfied, and have our minds settled
and stayed: that is to say, that we hearken to God speaking, and show our
selves teachable, to receive that which he shall say. For it is certain, that
as he has answered to our mother Rebecca, that which he knew to be
expedient: So the Scripture likewise will not deceive in this point: for it
pronounces clearly and manifestly, that God has chosen us in Jesus Christ
before the creation of the world, according to his good pleasure, the which
he has purposed in himself. There needs no gloss: behold God speaks
after this sort, that the most rude and ignorant may know, what there is
contained therein. God then has chosen us (says S. Paul) and hereby he
shows that he has discerned us from those which perish. And mark how his
mercy toward us has the greater glory. For what let that we should not
remain in the same perdition that others did, but that God was merciful unto
us, without any defer of ours?

But the better to express all, Saint Paul says, that he did choose us in
Jesus Christ: it follows then that this is out of our persons. If we had been
chosen in our selves, God should have found some matter in us to have been
induced to love us, and to have been inclined to have called us to salvation.
But what? We are chosen without our selves: that is to say: God had no regard
to that we were or might be, but our election is founded in Jesus Christ. And
moreover, he yet gives a more ample declaration: that is, according to his
good purpose, which he had determined in himself: it is certain that all that
is according to the purpose of man, is manifestly excluded: and again when he
says in himself: this is to admonish us, that if we would know the cause
why: it is as if we would make an Anatomy of God, and go even into his heart
and sound all his secrets. And can we do thus? What ouerweening is this? So
then, when we shall suffer our selves to be taught of God, it is certain, that
he will answer us, in such sort, as shall be necessary for us, concerning that
which belongs to our salvation: and namely we shall know that which
surmounteth all man's understanding, how the one sort are elected, and the
other rejected, and why the one have no doctrine, as the Papists and other
infidels, whom God leaves as poor blind ones, and why the other are
enlightened through the Gospel. And farther, concerning those to whom the
Gospel is preached, the one receive it with obedience, and they are touched
therewith to the quick, and persevere in it to the end: and the other remain
blockish, or rather will be full of outrage, to strive against God: or else will
be fickle and give them selves over to all iniquity, throwing of the yoke,
when they shall be brought into the good way. And from whence comes this
diversity? We must come to this fou^tain that the holy scripture shows us:
that is, that the like grace has not been showed to all. So then, behold our
true wisdom that is, that we be Gods good scholars: and we shall then be
hisscholers, when we seek to know nothing, but that he knows to be good and
expedient for our salvation: and when we shall rest there, and learn to bring
into captivity all our senses, and to keep an hard hand upon them. Then (say
I) if we shall speak of the secret election of God, how he has
predestined these whom he would to salvation, and how he has cast off
others: we shall never be troubled. And why so? because we having inquired of
Gods will, we will conclude, that we must keep ourselves to that which shows
us, and to that which the scripture imports, where he has given us
sufficient testimony of that which he knows to be good for us. Finally,
there are so many testimonies of Scripture, to cerfie us of this doctrine that
it must needs be, that all they that cannot rest there, must be as it were
impoisoned of satan, and that they have co^ceued the spirit of venim, of pride
and rebellion, to the end not to be ordered under the will of god: and that, to
be short, they would despite all doctrine and instruction, and close up their
eyes against the full light, and have their ears stopped, albeit God has
spoken loud and clearly, and that they have occasion to content themselves
so much the more. To heap up all the testimonies, is not needful: but this is
sufficient that we have had a sum, yea most evident as I have already
briefly showed.

Again we have also, whereof to bless God and to comfort our selves in him,
when we know rightly to apply this doctrine as it behooves. For in stead that
these fantastical and lightbraynes, who would seem to be so subtle and
sharp in fighting against god, and against his truth, in stead that they
search how they may gainsay him, we must mark how God does satisfy us, and to
what end he directs this doctrine and to what purpose he would have it serve
us, that is to know that we are elected, and not all. For in the first place,
when we see, that we cannot receive the Gospel, unless it be by the special
gift of God, this serves to make us so much the more to magnify his goodness
toward us, and to see his just judgment against the reprobate, when he
depriueth them of this doctrine: as we see in the Papacy, that men are as
brute beasts, who err and wander through deserts, without keeping way or path.
Now concerning us, we have a sure testimony, which ought so much the more to
stir us up to esteem this singular grace toward us. And also whe^we see
some that have deaf ears, although it be daily declared unto them
familiarly, and that which is requisite for their salvation be (as I may say)
chawed unto them, they continue always in their estate: or rather they are not
a whitte touched, and they pass not to give over themselves to al
licenciousnes of life, as it were in despite of God: When we see this, it is
certain, that our Lord has so much the more bound us unto him, for that it
has pleased him to make us feel his goodness, and that we have taken such
a taste of the hope of salvation which he has propounded unto us: that we have
renounced the world and whatsoever weakness there be in us, howsoever we are
full of vices and corruption, nevertheless we hate the evil that is in us,
and we delight in that which is good. When then we have this: it is certain,
that if we be not harder then iron and steel, we ought to have all rebellion
shiuered and broken: and that we be inflamed with the love of God, and have
our mouth open to bless and praise that so excellent and magnificent grace,
which he has showed toward us. See then the mark that the scripture sets
before us. Now in the mean time, these varletes will not stick to say. O
shall God be an accepter of persons? Forsooth as if God regarded in his
election rich or poor, as if he regarded a noble man, more then a poor man,
or a wise man more then an Idiot. For mark what it is to accept persons. This
word Person in the holy scripture imports Look or countenance, as also the
Scripture uses it. But God chooses us not for our fair eyes. Who is it that
discerned thee? we alleged yesterday that of S. Paul: When God therefore
chooses these whom it pleased him, it is in his everlasting council, and in
him self: that is to say, he has his secrets which we ought to reverence,
without farther inquiry why seeing this is so, it is certain that we cannot
say, that he accepts persons. And they which so speak are doltes, besides
the malice that is in them. Now then they will say, And how is it that the one
shall be saved by faith and not the other, if all depend upon the election of
God? But yet herein they show to gross beastlynesse: For from whence
proceeds faith it self, but from the election of God? They say, o the
promises of God are general, and God calls all the world to salvation: It
follows therefore that all the world shall be saved. Yea he would that all the
world should be saved: but this is to make the reprobate inexcusable. For the
promises of God do undoubtedly co^taine our salvation: and we shall not be
deceived leaning upon them. But what? We must know from whence the faith is
which we have. For when the gospel is preached, why is it, that one sort
profit therein, and receive it with due reverence, and humility of heart, and
the other do not, but rather become worse by it? This is, forasmuch as they
which were ordained to salvation (says S. Luke speaking of the preaching of S.
Paul) they (says he) did believe. Mark S. Paul who preached: it is certain
that if ever there were dexterity in a faithful teacher, it was S. Paul that
had it: and yet, all were not good scholars: there was but one part that
receued his doctrine. Whence came this? was it of their industry? was it
because they were evil disposed? It is very true that God disposes: But that
this comes not from them, S. Luke shows and preuenteth here al men's
dotages, and says that they which were ordained to salvation believed. And
mark also wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ says: That those that his heavenly
father had given him, should not perish, but that he would keep them to the
end.

Now when he says, they which are given me of my father: he calls us to
that eternal election. He says also in an other place: Thine they were, and
thou gave them unto me. John. 17.
And wherefore is it that the one belong unto God and not the other? This is not
in respect that they are mortal men: For our nature is alike: we are all
created by one father: but the one belongs unto God, and the other are cast
off from him, because it so pleased him. He acknowledges and accepts the
one for his own: and the other although they be his creatures, nevertheless
they have no acquaintance with him: he accepts them not of his household, in
as much as he has shut them out from his election. We se then here, how faith
is a special gift of God, which proceeds not from our free will, not that we
can of our selves go forward, and that some are more able to comprehend then
others: but for that it has pleased God to reveal his secrets to those whom
he has elected. And therefore see also why it is said in Esaie: Who is he that
will believe our hearing? For Esaias Esaias. 53.
had preached of the death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ: as if he
had desplayed the banner, to declare that every one should come to be
reconcyled to God, and that poor sinners should be received to mercy, that
their satisfaction and righteousness is altogether ready, and that God desires
nothing but to be merciful to those that seek him: has Esaias preached so?
but he cries out forthwith Who will believe our hearing? And why so? For he
saw in spirit the presumption and rebellion of unbelievers, because they cannot
yield themselves to be ordered by God: but are wild and have always their mouth
open to reply against God: and forthwith they have a wa^dring fa^tasie they may
not obey. He shows that his doctrine shall not be received of the greatest
number: and adds the reason: that the arm of god, that is to say, his
strength and power is not reveled to al: he shows there that it is not in our
selves that we have neither moving, ^or entrance, nor preparation nor any thing
whatsoever it be: but that it must be God that must work therein. Now if it
be so in general: it must follow then that faith comes from this root of
the election of God. Now touching the rest when we shall have known this,
there is no question, that we should bury all that instruction which our Lord
has given us in the holy Scripture. For after that he has declared to us his
will, he exhorts us, he reprooueth us, he threateneth us. If we were as
these rennagate spirits, which say: To what purpose do you preach so much unto
us: If God have elected and chosen us unto himself, we cannot perish: and if
we be reprobate, what shall all the doctrine, that shall ever be heard avail
us? yea, but all agrees very well, when we exceed not our bounds. We have
already said, that faith comes from election. Then like as God has chosen
us, so also he calls us in time, as afterward shall be handled more at large.
For the place will serve there more fitly. But how soever it be, God is not
contrary to himself: and like as he testifies unto us, that it is by his free
mercy, that he enlighteneth us by the faith of his Gospel, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ: so will he that we walk in fear and carefulnes, that
we be touched with his threatenings, that we be gathered unto him: all this he
wills. And in deed, mark these two sentences, that men with their impudency
and rashness would ween to be contrary: and nevertheless they agree very well
one with the other. Matt. 11.
Jesus Christ says: Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will refresh you, and you shall find rest to your souls. See how we are
all bidden by the son of God, and not only two or three, but all in general:
For he says: Come all you that are heavy laden, and yet in another place he
says: No man can come unto me, except it be given him of my father. None
therefore can come unto Jesus Christ, unless he be drawn by the heavenly
father. It seems that this is contrary, yea he that would judge thereof
according to man's reason: to say, that Jesus Christ inuiteth us all unto him:
and further adds, that none can come unto him, unless the father draw him.
Very well: but (as I have already said) when God generally sets salvation
before us in Jesus Christ his only son, it is to make the reprobate so much
the more inexcusable for their unthankfulness, inasmuch as they have despised so
great a benefit: in the mean season the elect are touched, and God does not
only speak outwardly to them, but also inwardly. And see why in another place
our Lord Jesus Christ says: Whosoever has been taught of God my father, the
same shall come unto me. But, as I have said, when the Gospel is preached in the
name of God, this is as much as if he himself did speak in his own person:
and yet all come not to Jesus Christ. There are a great many that go back the
more when they have heard the Gospel: for then the devil kindles them in such
a rage, that they are more outrageous the^ ever before, and this comes to
pass, because there is a twofolde hearing: the one is preaching: For the voice
of a man will not enter into the hearts of his hearers. I speak, but it
behooves that I hear my self being taught by the spirit of God: For
otherwise the word which proceeds from my mouth, should profit me no more
then it does all others, except it be given me from above, and not out of mine
own head. Therefore the voice of man is nothing but a sound that vanishes in
the air, and notwithstanding it is the power of God to salvation to all
believers (says Saint Paul.) When then God speaks unto us, by the mouth of
men, then he adioyneth the inward grace of his holy spirit, to the end, that
the doctrine be not unprofitable, but that it may bring forth fruit. See then
how we hear the heavenly father: that is to say: when he speaks secretly
unto us by his holy spirit: and then we come unto our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark
then, the sum of that we have to learn: that is, when God declares unto us
his eternal election, and that he has given us such a testimony, that we
cannot dout thereof: when he has showed us that this is our benefit and
salvation: and so that we take not too much liberty, to wrangle against him,
and to enter into crooked and overthwart disputations, that then the whole
shall profit us. For it is certain, that this is the true rejoicing of the
faithful, to be instructed concerning this election of God. Moreover: when we
see the wicked to cast forth their cauels against God, and their slanders to
pervert all, and to bring this doctrine into hatred, let us not think it
strange: for it must needs be that they declare them selves to be reprobates.
I have said, that we must rest our selves in the everlasting council of God,
whereby he has chosen some, and cast off others. If now the reprobate come to
fight against the truth of God, it is no new thing: For they are appointed to
this, and it must needs be that they declare themselves to be such as they
are: and we must call to mind that sentence of Ose the which is put in the
end of his Book: The ways of the Lord are good and right: also The
righteous will walk in them, but the wicked shall fall therein. Now he adds
also: Who is wise that will understand this? And who is a prudent man that will
understand these things? The Prophet shows that when we speak of the
judgments of God, it behooves that we have a special wisdom to receive
them: and shall this wisdom be found in all our brains? that is far off. So
then it behooves that we have a wisdom given us by the mere mercy of God.

Now that which follows is to show us, that this is a rare and most
excellent thing, when men shall be apt to be taught and modest, and that
they shall yield to be led by God, and shall suffer them selves to be
governed by his word, when they shall receive full instruction, which shall
be unto them a good food for their souls: When this shall come to pass, it
must be acknowledged to be a rare and singular benefit of God, and must
assure us that he has blessed us. And therefore it behooves that we be armed
and prepared against all offenses, If we see that the wicked shall come to
pushe with their Horns against GOD, and to bark and show their teeth as
Mastiues, when they cannot byte, then let us practice this doctrine of the
Prophet, when he says that the ways of God are righteous, and good, yea and
the righteous shall walk in them. We shall always find this, so that we have
not a malicious and froward spirit, that may turn us from God: but let us be
quiet, and let us ask nothing, but that our Lord show us the path that we
ought to follow: when we shall be such, it is certain that we shall always
find even ground, and there shall be no question, that we should walk and
take our pleasure. Behold, I say, the joy we shall have, when we shall walk
in the Lords ways: but contrariwise it is said, that the wicked shall fall.
And where? shall it be in hell? Shall it be in the Devils way? It is said that
it shall be in the very ways of God, that all that shall be set forth unto
them of the judgments of God, of his eternal counsel, of his providence,
and of his fatherly love, he bears to his children: in all these (says he)
the wicked shall fall. So let us be in such wise established, that all the
ruins and falls which we shall see before our eyes, hinder us not from
marching always forwards in that good way which our Lord does set before us.
But it behooves us oftentimes to remember that which is here handled by
Moses? And that is, he says expressly, That the one shall be stronger then the
other, and the elder shall serve the younger.

In speaking of the stronger, it is to show us, that when Gods election is
steadfast and undoubted, and that we are vpholden by his holy spirit, we must
no longer fear: and this is a very profitable point, yea necessary. For what
is our condition? There needs not but one puff of wind to beat us down, and
there needs but a fly to dazel our eyes: and yet we are here laid open to
so many combats, as nothing more. Behold our enemies which are in number
infinite: and I speak not of those which we see with the eye, but of
spiritual enemies: For the air is full of devils, which lie in wait for us,
yea which are as roaring Lions, besides their slights. Alas what shall we be
able to do? It must needs be that we be in distress and vexation continually
and without end, and that we be as poor people stricke^ through, if we knew
not that our Lord has our salvation in his own hand, and that he will keep
it. S. Peter says that it is well kept in hope, and that faith is as it were a
capcase: but he sends us to God: and our Lord Jesus Christ has yet
declared this more plain unto us, when he says, that all that was given unto
him of his father, shall not perish. And why so? The father who has given you
(says he) unto me, is stronger then all. So then, he says that we may
rejoice in this, that God will have pity upon us until the end, and that he
will keep us: and although he suffer us to stumble, yea so as we fall, yet we
shall be recovered and vpholden by his hand. And how is it that we can trust in
this? Without election it is impossible* but when we know that the father
has committed us into the keeping of his son, we are certain, that we shall
be maintained by him unto the end: For we have his promise whereby he has
bound himself vno us, to preserve us: and farther he makes it until the last
day, until the resurrection. And forasmuch as the beginning and end of our
salvation is in him, see in whom we may rejoice our selves: That is, that in
acknowledging our weaknesses and bricklenesse, and that we are nothing, and
that we want all things: yet we may say: the Lord which has called me unto
himself, will finish his own work: as is said in the 138. Psalm. Lord thou
will not leave the work of thine own hands in the midst. So then we must
hold fast this doctrine, that the one shall be more strong: For our faith shall
remain victorious over all the world. And how? It behooves us (I say) to have
our foundation upon the election of God: that we may be so settled thereon,
that we know that our Lord being our Father, will not suffer that we
perish, seeing we are his children. Now Moses adds by and by that the
elder shall serve the younger. In this we have yet a more ample confirmation
of that which I touched even now, that is, that we must be so assured of our
salvation, although that we be weak, and that the world despise us, and we
have no greater show of strength. And why so? God would that we should for a
time be the lesser: that is to say, that we should be little and despised to
the end, that his glory might be the more known and esteemed. For if we had
greatness and glory in our selves, and dignity, it is certain that these
should be as vailes, to shadow the mere and free bounty of God: but when we
are weak in our selves, see wherein it is known, that it is he which does
all: and it must needs be that his hand be in such sort advanced, that we
come not to mingle our selves therein, and that we throw not forth our clouds
to hinder that the praise of our salvation be wholly attributed to him. Mark
then that we have here to learn, that is on the one side, although that we be
weak, that we cease not to go freely forward, knowing that our strength
consists in God: and when he does not fully show it, it is to the end that
our weakness should be an occasion to humble us. See this for one principal
point. And in very deed we should be cold, yea and quite negligent in calling
upon him, if we knew not our necessity: but when we see that we can do
nothing, then we must have our refuge to him, who can supply all our wantes:
and then we shall render unto him the sacrifice of praise which is due unto
him, after that we have been heard of him. In the mean time also we have to
note that God does not at the first dash, show to the view of the eye our
salvation: but it must be hid in appeara^ce, and that for a time we be as
castawayes, and that the wicked tread us under their feet, and that they be
in degree without comparison, more high then we: Notwithstanding let it suffice
us, that we are as a precious treasure before God. Behold also why our Lord
Jesus Christ says: Fear not my little flock, but rejoice, and be not as a
scattered and discomforted flock. And why so? Because the father delights in
thee

Mark then from whence we must have all our rejoicing: mark of whom we must
be armed, to have victory, and to triumph against all temptations. When we see
in these days the enemies of the Gospel, and the Devils supporters, to make
their bragges, and make no account of others in comparison of them selves, and
when in the mean time they despise us: and not only that, but farther account
us as most desperate creatures, as though we were unworthy (as men say) to be
eaten of Dogs. When therefore we shall see this at this day, yea, that the
greatest number shall be as poor staruelings, and that they shall have no bread
to eat, that they shall not have their ease nor their commodity: Let us
remember that, that is here spoken, that the greater shall serve the lesser.
Now this service came not to pass at the first dashe. For we shall see
afterward that Jacob came to crowch before his brother, and called him his
Lord: he trembled as a poor Lamb before him, and then gave him all his goods
as a pray. And where was this subjection of Esau? where was the superiority of
Jacob, when he submitted him self in such sort? It seems that he gives up
all: but he knows that God would not accomplish this at the first day.
Mark then why he did bear his poverty so patiently: because God would (as if
a man might say) that he should creep upon the earth, and yet this shall not
hinder, but that he should always attain to that salvation, whereunto he was
called. And why so? For God depends not upon all all these earthly things.
And which is more (as I have already said) he will that we begin here, to
humble our selves before him: following that which I alleged ere while from
the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, that so we know that our Heavenly Father
be well pleased with us, we pass not for the rest, or rather that we be
not so shaken that this do deprave us and bring us out of taste, and so hinder
us from doing good: but that we doubt not that amiddest all the troubles and
greefes that may happen unto us, we have always wherein to rejoice. For who
shall separate us from the love that God has borne us in Christ our Lord?
seeing that God has chosen us in our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he has
called us to the faith of his Gospel, and has imprinted in our hearts the
testimony of his fatherly love, we will always defy our enemies, although we
be poor and feeble, yea though we be nothing in the common opinion of men: yet
we shall not cease to be grounded upon this promise: That the greater shall
serve the less and younger. And seeing it is so, let us not desire to be
great after the world: for although that we be co^temptible and despised, yet
this hinders us not from being the heirs of the world: although we neither
have lands nor possessions, yet do all things belong unto us, and
contrariwise the wicked have an horrible and heavy accounte to make, for that
they in such sort devour Gods benefits, and rejoice so much concerning those
riches which he has given them, and yet glorify not God in them. But they
must pay full dearly for them: and as for us, although we be stripped of all
riches, that we be in opprobrie and reproach: to be short, that there is nothing
but poverty in us, yet seeing we know that he has his hand stretched out to
uphold us, we may boast our selves against all our enemies. And in the mean
time let us remember that which is said in Esaias, that we are as a precious
crown in the hand of the Lord, and as the ring of his finger, and as his
seal, and that neither Egypt nor Assyria: that is to say, the greatest
Monarchies of the world, are so highly esteemed of him as we are: not for any
value that is in us (as I have said already:) but because it has pleased him to
chose us, and to reserve us in the number of those whom he will have to him
self: and we know this, forasmuch as we see through faith and hope, that he
has drawn us from those gulfes, in which we were, to the end he might bring
us to an everlasting inheritance.

Now let us fall down before the face of our good God, in acknowledging our
offenses, praying him, that he will in such sort make us to feel them, that
it may be to spoil us of all wicked lusts and rebellions, and that we may be
so renewed, that we may ratify our vocation in living holyly and confirming
our selves wholly to his righteousness, and that he will so supporte us in our
infirmities, that he suffer us not howsoever we be compassed about with so
many enemies, that we never fail: but that he will supply all our weaknesses,
to the end that his election may declare his power even to the end, and that
we may in such sort feel the fruit thereof, that we may have wherein to
glorify him, both in life and death.

And so let us all say, o Almighty God and heavenly Father, we acknowledge
and confess in our selves as the truth is, that we are not worthy, etc.

The fourth Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25.
24 Therefore when the days of her deliverance was come, behold twins were
in her womb.

25 So he that came out first was read, and he was all over as a rough
garmente, and they called his name Esau.

26 And afterward came his brother out: and his hand held Esau by the heel:
therefore his name was called Jacob. Now Isaac was threescore years old
when Rebecca bare them.

27 And the boys grew, and Esau was a cunning hunter, and was a man of
labor: but Jacob was a simple man, and dwelled in tents.

28 And Isaac loved Esaw, for Venison was his meat, but Rebecca loved Jacob.


BEcause the election of GOD is secret in it self, it is necessary that it
show it self with the time, as God caused his works to come to perfection:
For it suffices not that God have once chosen us, and that he have marked us,
but he must also co^tinewe this to the end, and that he declare that his
election is not in vain, but that he has his strength and power to conduct us
to salvation. Now he does this after diverse sorts: For God is not bound to
keep always one course: he has his means, such as it pleases him to
appoint. Sometime he shows his election very quickly: sometime he deferreth
it for a long space: and they that think, that there is a certain seed, in
all those whom God has elected, so as men may discern them from other,
because they are enclyned to good, and have some affection to serve God: they
foully ouershoote themselves, and are also convinced by experience.

John Baptist was sanctified from the womb of his mother: but it is far
otherwise in many others. For God suffers his elect sometimes to be as
scattered sheep, and they seem as though they were altogether lost: and this
is to the end to give the greater glory to his grace. As we see now some
sign in Jacob, that God had chosen him, and rejected his brother Esau. For
Jacob held the heel of his brother, as if he had fought against him. And this
came not to pass by chance, neither was it done by nature: but God showed as
it were with the finger, that Esau was the first borne, and yet was
nevertheless put back: and Jacob, who was the inferior in his birth, should
yet in time be preferred. Mark then what we have to learn upon this place:
that is, that God will approve that which he has pronounced as we saw
yesterday: That the greater shall serve the lesser: and And this has already
been showed in the birth of two infantes. But of this example we have to
gather in general, that those whom God has chosen, he has prevented: and by
this means does ratify his counsel and decree, when his execution appears.
And so, though we can not enter so far, to know who they are that were
elected before the foundation of the world: notwithstanding our election shall be
testified unto us, so far forth as shall be necessary: For if God (as a man
would say) do keep the protocoll or original draught thereof with him
self, it follows not but that he does give us such testimony thereof, that
we may be assured that he both is and will be a father unto us to the end: and
that we should call upon him in this affiance. For it is not said here albeit
there were a vocation (as the holy scripture speaks) that is to say, that he
had declared unto Jacob that he had elected him. This will com with the time*
but it is said simply that God had showed it as it were to the eye, that the
answer which he had given to Rebecca was not in vain. Why so? the effect
appeared in this, that Jacob held the heel of his brother. But here by the
way God would show by this figure, that his elect come not to their end
without many combats. It is true that Jacob knew not what this meant, and his
age also did not suffer it: but this notwithstanding must serve to teach us,
and is set forth as it were to declare unto us, that God will have us to
fight, howsoever he has taken us into his custody, yea, though we be in
his protection and conduction, and he will have us to hope for salvation from
him, and that that which he has begun shall be accomplyshed.

Although then that all this be true, yet will he not have us sluggish: but he
will that every one of us strive to the end, that we may be led to that end
whereunto he has called us. Mark then that which we have to learn of this
which Moses rehearses, that Jacob held the heel of his brother. Now he
adds: And the elder was called Esau, and the other Jacob.

As touching the second, it is as if a man should call him Heeleholder, but of
Esau it is said, that he came from the womb of his mother altogether rough
and covered with hear, as if he had been a man already. See also from whence
he took his name.

We see then the difference betwixt these two: that is, that a man would have
said that Esau, was to be far advanced above his brother. For we see him
thoroughly fashioned, he is big, and shows great strength: To be short, he is
not as a child, but as a man. But of Jacob, there is no other thing, but the
hand that held him by the heel, and he was as a thing borne before his time:
and when they grew, he continued even so. For Esau was a Hunter, a man of
travel: (as if a man would say) nothing but strength. Of Jacob it is very true
that the name which Moses uses, is taken in good part and signifies sound
or perfect: Howbeit it was a simplicity which was opposed against all that
which was more apparaunt in Esau: and in very deed Moses adds, that he kept
the house, that he was as it were a Cook always sitting in the Ashes. Mark
then what we have to consider in Esau and Jacob.

Now this is an instruction to confirm that we have entreated off before:
That is to say, that GOD has not chosen men according to the outward show
they may have: but contrariwise, that which is accounted most excellent, he
forsakes and despises: And that which is as rejected of men, that does he
advance. We see it always: but yet there is no doubt, but the holy Ghost
meant to set forth this in the person of our father Jacob, to the end that
we should learn to beat down all foolish presumption, and should not
search in our selves, why GOD does choose us, why also he continues his grace
toward us: but that we should know that he would be gloryfied in our
littleness: and we shall have well profited, when this doctrine shall be
imprinted in our hearts.

For there is nothing that more turns us a way from God, then when we desire
to have some virtue worthy of praise: but we must be utterly spoiled thereof,
or else we shall be so puffed up, that the grace of GOD can not enter into us:
So much the more then it behooves us to lay good hold upon this which is so
necessary for us: that is to say, that when God choseth us, that this is not
(as men say) for our fair eyes. And finally, if we be despised of the world,
let us not therefore be discouraged: as we have showed, that it ought
thorowely to content us that we be accepted of God, although the world
disdain us: For we see what was in Jacob: one still sitting in the house, as if
a man would say, a Do nothing, or Idle body. It is true that he was entire, but
whence was it? Whence was this simplicity taken? did he any notable thing?
had he any reputation? he had nothing at all. But see Esau, who was as it were
above the clouds even from his birth, he was a man already, he had strength
in him self: and further, when he grew he had great industry, so that it
seemed that he was to workwonders. Very well, in this we are taught that all
comes of God. For if we should seek the cause of election in men, it is
certain that every one would give his voice to Esau without doubt. But
notwithstanding all this, God prefers Jacob: and why so? This is quite
contrary to that we imagine. So then we have to mark, that God has in such
sort dispensed his grace, that he would have men to know, that it was his
only goodness that moved him to love Jacob. Now this doctrine is well
worthy to be meditated upon, all the days of our life: and this is (as I
have said) too beat down all the ouerweening that men have in them selves,
to the end that there be nothing but the mere mercy of God that may shine
in this thing: and in the mean time let us know that the Church was always
small in her beginnings, yea, and that God, has after such sort advanced it,
that on men's parts their infirmity must appear, and that they must always
acknowledge it, to the end men submit them selves to such a condition. And
again, howsoever it be, let us know, that God will never forsake his own
woork, but will bring it to his right perfection, although it be not known of
men at the first dashe: For neither ought it to be so, neither is it
profitable. Again, if God give any sign that he have chosen us unto him
self, and that this be showed even from our infancy, we have so much the
more, wherefore to glorify God: For the more his grace is enlarged, the more
praise it deserves: but if we remain for a time as rejected, and that God
makes no semblaunce of having any regard unto us: but rather that we be as
it were forgotten, and in the end he calls us back again, when we have
for a long time gone astray: herein also shall we have a double occasion to
praise him. To be short, howsoever he work in us, it behooves that our
mouth be always open to acknowledge his goodness and mercy. There be some
which from their childehood will declare that GOD has kept them, as if he had
held them by the hand, and should bring them forth to say: These are mine,
and in deed they have a good instruction from their infancy, and further it
shall profit in them, in such sort as men shall say: Behold a seed of God.

Now these (as I have said) are deeply bound to acknowledge that God had given
them this privilege. For what have they more then others? we are altogether
corrupted in Adam. So then, when God leads them as it were by a continual
thread from their birth, even until their old age, so much the more are they
bound unto him. But there are others, who are as poor and miserable creatures:
whom men would say that God had wholly cast from him, and the one sort are
lewd and dissolute in their youth, the other sort miserable Idolaters: and
whatsoever devotion they have, yet nevertheless this is always to estraunge
them so much the more from God, and to provoke his wrath, yea sometimes they are
enemies to all truth: as we may see in the example of S. Paul, who was as an
outrageous beast shedding innocent blood, and striving for nothing more as a
ravening Wolf, then to scatter all the Churches. Again, see the Corinthians,
who were whore masters, and given to all kind of villainies, as Saint Paul
declares: And as much is said of the Romans. Ye were (says he) in times
past, both whoremongers and proud persons, and given to all oppression and
deceit, yielding al your members to evil, and to the service of sin. And a
little after he says to the Ephesians: Ye were in times past without God,
without any hope of life, ye were altogether darkness, ye were in everlasting
death.

Now when our Lord, to the end to humble us, shall suffer us for a time to
be so scattered, and then shall suddenly call us to himself: let us
acknowledge and say alas we ought not only to magnify GOD for that he has
chosen us, as we see the fruit thereof: but also because he has drawn us
from this gulf, wherein we were. And so much the more must we strive and
redeem the time past, as S* Paul speaks thereof, Ephe. 5.8.
in that we have alleged: Ye were sometimes darkness, but now you are
light in the Lord (says he) and therefore walk as Children of light. And
let us often remember that which our Lord Jesus Christ says. There are many
sheep that are not of this fold. For he spoke of the Gentiles, who were shut
out from all hope of salvation. He calls them sheep, not in respect of them
selves: For they were savage beasts: but in respect of Gods election: although
they were a scattered people, yet he says, that he would gather them together.
Therefore when it pleases God to withdraw us from dissipation wherein we have
been, let us learn to give ear to the voice of this great Pastor: not only
by giving some outward sign that we do allow it: but that it be to follow
him and obey him in all things.

Mark then what it is, that we have to learn out of this place. And farther
let us not be ashamed, when the Lord shall not give unto his faithful and to
his whole Church, such a goodly show amongst men, to the end to be had in
reputation: Let us not be ashamed of our baseness, so that he be gloryfied.
As now it seems that the Church must be trodden under feet: and we see
also how profane people and the Children of this world, make no reckoning of
those whom God has gathered to him self.

Now let us bear this patiently, after the example of our father Jacob: and
let it not trouble us, if the world (in a manner) do spyt in our face, so
that we be approved of GOD. Mark then, how every one of us have to practice
this doctrine in him self, and also in the whole body of the Church.

And again, although we be not esteemed of the world, and that few do
allow us and clap their hands at us, yet God woorketh in such sort, that
that which is most contemptible in the world, and in the outward show
thereof, is more esteemed before, God then that which has great show and
setting out before men. And herein is that acco^plyshed, which is spoken in S.
Luke. That that which is high and excellent here beneath, is not therefore
esteemed of God, but much rather is sometime an abomination unto him: as it is
certain that the virtues of Esau shall always be praised, if men were Judges:
but yet Jacobs simplicity before God and his Angels, is in greater estimation.

Let us therefore march on as our Lord Jesus has commanded us: and let it
not grieve us, though there appear not in us at the first dashe, these gifts
which God has put in us. As for example. There are many who are nothing worth
in respect of God, yet they have a goodly show, and also there be occasion
thereof. Men shall find great personages, of great estate and quality, who
shall have great valor, and be in great authority: shall be in honor and
dignity: and farther there shall be no extreme covetousness in them: to be short,
there shall appear such an honesty in them, that you would think them
Angels, and all men will extol them every where: and in the mean time there
shall be poor handycraftes men, husbandmen, and poor idiotes, who have no
opportunity to show themselves: For they shall be busied in their shop and small
household: they must travel to nurish their poor children. A man shall hear
no great fame of them, they are not eloque^t, to show forth any great wisdom:
and when a man shall hear them speak, he shall see nothing but folly,
according to the common opinion: and yet GOD has elected and chosen them. He
allows that which seems to be of no value: For albeit it seem that these
are base things, that a man sew or do some other thing, and take pain, yet
this is a service that GOD more esteems off, than we can imagine.

So then, when we know that we are nothing in outward show, let us not think
our state and condition to be the worse for it (and as I have said already)
let us not be ashamed of our infirmity: and in the mean time, let us lift up
our eyes on high, and though we lie in the ashes, let us know that as much
happened to our father Jacob before, who was a figure of all the elect of God
and of his children. Now it follows.

That Jacob was loved of his mother, and Esau of his father. And this serves
well to show that there was no such perfection in Isaac, as there ought to
have been: For he was not ignorant of that which had been spoken: That the
greater should serve the lesser: He knew full well, that so was the will of
God, that Esau the elder should yield both the place and degree of honor
unto his brother: and yet he loved Esau: it seems herein that he would
resist the counsel of GOD. And what means he herein? When he will cast his
whole love toward Esau: Yet God will reign in the end and his election
must stand fast, yea though all the world should strive against it. Lo
Isaac, who is very blockishe: yet there is more: for it seems that he is
led by a brutish affection. For why did he love Esau? Because that he brought
him Venison. He loved him therefore for his toothes sake. Behold an ancient
man: and who by reason of his age ought to have been stayed and settled: he
should no more have been led of his foolish and inconstant affections, that
for his tothes sake and licorishnes, he should have forgotten that which God
had pronounced, yea, by an unchangeable decree: that Jacob must govern, and
that he should be heir of the promise: and yet that Isaac makes no
reckoning of it. But here we see that the Jews are too to blind, vaunting
them selves in their fathers, as though the dignity which they sometimes had,
came from the holiness and virtues of men. For it is certain that Isaac,
as much as in him lay, overthrew the election of God: not that he had a will so
to do. For if a man should have asked him, how now? Will thou resist God? will thou let, that he shall not put in execution, that which he has pronounced?
will thou alter that which he has pronounced by his mouth? He would have
said. No: and his intent was not such. But howsoever it be, he is driven and
drawn that way.

So then we may not say, that Isaac went about to help the election, of God
nor set it forward: but contrariwise he hindered it. Now by this we see, that
all mouths must be shut, and that men pretend not too have had any thing in
their persons, to say that God should confirm unto them the blissings which
he had already given them. To be short, we see hereby, that like as the
election of God, is free and undeserved in his first beginning and foundation,
and in full force, so also it behooves that God show unto the end, that there
is nothing but his only mercy and that all that is said on man's behalf, do
cease and be abolished, and that this is not, either of the willer or of the
runner (as S. Paul says) Romans 9. Mark then what we have to learn. Now in
the mean time we see also the stedfastnes which is in this counsel of God,
whereby he choseth those, whom he thinks good. So we have to resolve our
selves, although the whole world should labor to overthrow our salvation, that
yet it will remain sure, so that we have our refuge always to that which has
been showed us before: that is to say, That our Lord Jesus Christ has taken
into his keeping all that the father has given him, as being his own: and
that nothing thereof shall perish, forasmuch as God is stronger then men: for
it is thither that he does lead us: The father who has given you unto me, is
stronger then all.

So the^ let us learn to stay our selves wholly upon the invincible power of
God, when there is any question of being assured that in calling upon him we
shall be heard, and that we dout not but that as he has brought us into a good
way, so he will give us perseverance: and although that we be weak and
frail, yet he will not suffer us to fall: but we shall always be led in
such sort, that he will more and more increase his power in us. We must
therefore come even thus far, namely that Jacob had not only those his
enemies which had no fear of GOD, and were irreligious, but even his own
father Isaac: yea who was then as chief in the Church: God had put him in
trust as it were with his covenant, to the end that he should be the treasorer
thereof, and despense it: and yet nevertheless he (as it should seem) was an
enemy to the election of Jacob. Wherefore if we see many contrarieties, and
that it seems our salvation must be overthrown by many means, and that we
see no issue, let us then know that God will be victorious in the end: and
whatsoever weakness be found in us, nevertheless he will not cease to
proceed, and although there be resistance and contradiction here beneath, yet
nevertheless he will overcome all, and bring it well about. But by the way,
we are here admonished by the example of Isaac, to hold our selves under the
bridle. For if this happened unto such a man as Isaac was, so excellent and of
an Angelical holiness, that he resisted God, what shall become of us in
comparison? It is certain, that we shall every day be overtaken an hundred
times, with some vain fantasy, that we shall rush against God, although we
have no such purpose. We have great need therefore to distrust our own
judgment, and to call upon God, to the end that he will govern us by his holy
spirit: otherwise (as I have said) we are as wretched strayes, and we shall go
hither and thither at all adventures. And when we ween to be very wise, there
will be nothing but folly in us, yea rebellion, although it be not with our
wills and knowledge. Mark this then for one lesson, But we must mark here
the cause which is here noted by Moses, when he says that Isaac loved
Esau: And wherefore did he love him? Because that Venison was his meat.
Therefore let us take heed that we be not led by our carnal and earthly
appetites, if we will keep our array toward God. It is true, that to eat and
drink are not condemned. For God has placed us in this world under that
condition that we should enjoy his creatures: and seeing he has ordained us to
eat and to drink, it is certain that we offend him not: when we desire to
have for our necessities, and search out also the use of those benefits, which
he has prepared for us. For it is not said without cause, that we must do al
things in his name, yea both in eating and drinking: but in that we be
corrupted, it cannot be but there will be always excess in our appetites, and
this excess makes us to forget our duties toward God: so as we are are
altogether drawn away on every side: and when we think to do our duties we
are far therefro^. But Isaac ought always to have had this before his eyes,
yea and he ought to have had it engraven in his heart, this voice should have
sounded in his ears, to wit, that the greater should serve the less: he ought
without end, and without ceasing, thus to have thought: well, forasmuch as God
will have his election to remain in Jacob, it behooves that I agree unto it.
But in the mean time his meat turns him, and draws him quit contrary. Let
us therefore be well advised (as I have already said) on our parts, to
repress our desires, yea though they be natural, and of them selves not
unlawful. But to the end that there be no excess nor intemperance: Let us be
advised (I say) to check and to tame the^, in such sort that they never turn
us away, or hinder us from ordering our selves according to the will of God.
Mark therefore briefly what we have to learn here.

But here also we see that Rebecca had an affection better guyded then her
husband. It is very true that always men shall see (or for the most part)
that if the Father love one of his Children, the moother will set her love
quite contrary: A man may see these contentions in most houses. Also it may
be that Rebecca had conceived some kind of jealousy: forasmuch as she saw
Esau preferred: and therefore she loved Jacob the better, forasmuch as he was
not so acceptable to his father, nor had no such favor: but forasmuch (as we
shall see hereafter) that she had regard unto Gods election, and that she
always held that which had been said, that Jacob must be preferred: we have
here to judge that she was not passionate and affected, as women that would
lightly set themselves against their husbands, when they see that some of their
children, shall not be so much esteemed, they will the more set their
affections upon them. But we cannot judge so of Rebecca: and why so? Because
we see (as I have already said) that she always referred her self to God, and
meant to obey that which he had pronounced. She would undoubtedly that both the
children might have been reserved in the Church: but seeing she saw the one
shut out, and that there was none but the lesser and inferior that God allowed
off, she yielded thereto. Now here we see that our Lord sometimes will
suffer those, which have the more virtues and greater gifts of the holy
Ghost, yet nevertheless to fall: and that they who were not yet so advanced
as they should outgoe them, I mean in some respect. For if we make comparison
of Isaac with Rebeca, it is certain that he having been brought up in the
house of his father, and having received so great instruction in his youth, had
generally a greater faith then Rebecca. But behold a particular action, wherein
he fails, and wherein his vice shows it self. And yet Rebecca who lately
crawled out of a den of idolatry: as we know that in her fathers house, there
was nothing but superstitions, the country was altogether corrupted: this
poor woman, although she knew not God in her youth: yet notwithstanding she
was so well taught and instructed of the holy Ghost, that she out-went her
husband. Now for this cause, they too whom God has reached out the hand
betimes, and whom he has lifted up, to be as mirrors unto others: let the^
learn always to walk with greater carfulness. And why so? For there
needs but one wrye step to make them to fall so grosely, that every one will
be ashamed of them.

And therefore let us learn, that allbeit our Lord have generally framed and
fashioned us by his holy spirit in such sort, that every one has us in
admiration, that yet in particular cases, we may offend. Therefore let us
always stand upon our watch. Moreover, they which are the most excelent, when
they shall come to fail in some point, let them not make a buckler of this,
that they have done so many good deeds, and worthy of praise: let them not
allege their valiant deeds (as they say) but let them acknowledge them
selves for such as they be, and say: Well, I perceive that God would have me to
acknowledge that I am a weak man: and farther that I should acknowledge in
general, that it is not in men to uphold themselves: for there needs but one
fault alone to cause us to be cut off from the church. And when God has cast
us of, what shall become of us? So let us learn al these things in the person
of our father Isaac, when we see that he was so blinded, and that he never
remembered, that he was as a rebel to God, in esteeming that, which God had
rejected, and despising his younger son: too whom notwithstanding God had
given this testimony: That he must rule in his house. Now in the mean time,
although that Rebecca had bin well guided in her affection, and that she had
sought to obey God: yet it could not be but there must be some quarrel between
the^: as oftentimes it falls out. And this is that which Moses says. That
Isaac loved Esau, and Rebecca loved Jacob: and when he speaks so, it is as
if he would show that there was some strife in the house, and that they
could not agree together, to say, that the husband and the wife should love
their children alike, as by nature they ought to have bin enclyned thereto: or
rather that they knew that the will of God was that they should have loved the
younger. Now we are warned in this behalf, that albeit our affections be well
grounded and tend to a good end, that notwithstanding there ^^e always
crossings which are blame worthy. As for example. I seek to follow God, and
fully to conform my self unto his will: but there are resistings, and it must
needs be that I must incur displeasure of the one, and purchase an enemy of
the other, if I discharge my duty. Likewise it is true, that the beginning
shall be good, when I shall desire too do well, and that I shall only look
unto God: but eueranon it will befall unto us, that in our good zeal we shall
be too excessive, and that we shall have carnal passions in us: To be short:
they which shall be the best guyded, and who have greatest perfection, it is very
certain that they shall yet pass measure in this place, and that they shall
show themselves men: and so much the more ought we to suspect our passions, and
albeit we see that the end be not good, yet we shall not cease to fall therein.
Again, we also have a good warning to leave all contradictions: For it is not
without cause that the scripture exhorts us so often unto this union, to be
of one mind, and of one mouth. And why so? For when we agree in such sort,
each one stirs up his neighbor, and helps to bring him unto God. But
contrariwise, when we are quarrelling in contention and strife, not only one
lets and hinders another (as it is commonly said there needs but one
restife Horse to hinder the whole teame:) but yet there is a worse matter: to
wit, that when we strive for the service of GOD, we cease not to forgette our
selves in some respects, and many things escape us, the which we would not let
slip, if we were out of strife and contention. This therefore is the matter we
have to learn. And these examples are daily seen amongst us in the church. For
the best servants of God and they that are indewed with most excellent graces,
yea and who strive for the truth, yet nevertheless cannot always so bridle
themselves, that they be not quarrelling, and show themselves men, and yet God
allows their zeal and that which they do. And why so? For because they have
a good beginning, and they have a right end: but as I have said, there is
always infirmity mingled therewith. Let us therefore (say I) always mark
this, in this example of Isaac and Rebecca. Again, we have farther to note,
that if some times we shall not agree so as we ought and as were meet and
convenient and as we ought, to bend and enforce our selves, that yet
nevertheless we must make no deuorse betwixt our selves, neither be quite
separated asunder. For although this was a notable vice, that Isaac and
Rebecca were thus divided in the love, which they bare unto their children, yet
they continued to serve God: and Isaac did never pretend to abolishe this
oracle: that is to say, this same answer which God had given, that Jacob must
govern.

Now therefore we see here how the husband and the wife are at strife, and that
in such a matter of importance, as whereupon depended the salvation of the
world. For the question is here of the eternal election of God, the question is
of the whole church of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the head thereof: and
behold some crooked controversies betwixt Isaac and his wife. Yet this
means not that Isaac meant to overthrow all: but he understood it not, and
was confounded in him self. Likewise therefore, when through ignorance and
error, it shall sometimes come to pass, that we shall be in trouble, and that
the devil shall thrust in his foot, and that we shall not be able to speak
with one and the same mouth: notwithstanding, we must always keep the
principal: that is, we must always agree in this, that we hold God for our
father: and that we know that there is no true holy unity, but in Jesus
Christ: that we hold, I say the principles of our faith: and if we cannot
comprehend all things so distinctly as were to be wished, let the ignorant
and weak be humbled, and let them not be discouraged. Likewise let them that
are more froward, bear with the weak, waiting when God will turn the^, and
take from them these opinions, wherein they are so troubled. This is that which
Saint Paul says unto the Philippians: For he shows how we ought to be
knit together, and what the knot of our concord and brotherhood is. Now
having showed, that he concludes, that therefore there should not be diversities
of opinions amongst us, and that our speeches likewise should not be diverse.
But yet (says he) If you cannot come to such pefection, and that some go as it
were halting, and cannot overtake others, which are not so quick to comprehend
all: Wait (says he) until GOD reveal it unto you. Mark then the first
thing that we have to do, that is, to agree in the pure and simple truth of
God. But forasmuch as it is not given to all at the first dash, to have
certain understanding of all points of religion: very well, if there be any
ignorance, let them reach out their hand to them who are so besotted, yea let
them take heed that they be not wilful on their parts. For sometimes, yea
most commonly a man shall see, that the blindest are boldest and rashest: and
further there will be such a wilfulness, that a man can gain nothing of them.
But S. Paul to remedy this mischief, says: Wait till God reveal it unto
you. This then is that we have to learn: but let us also remember that which
he sets down: namely, that when we shall agree in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that we respect nothing but his glory, that always we keep our course,
and if there be some little strife, that this separate us not one from
another. For it shall be enough when we have this keye, though in many other
things we be not so resolved as were necessary: yet if we be not quite
withdrawn and turned from our Lord Jesus Christ, it is enough. Besides when we
shall tend to his glory, every one shall know, yea the most forward, that
they are yet far of. What is the cause that those which are learned and
exercised in the scripture, do disdain their brethren when they see them
ignorant? It is forasmuch as it seems unto the^ that there is nothing wanting
in them selves: but if we know what it is to aspire to our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to come to the glory of his resurrection, we will say always with Saint
Paul, that we have not attained unto it. When therefore every one shall
know, that there is yet something lacking in him self, it shall do us no
hurt, and we shall not think it strange to call our brethren, although it be
a far off. Go to let us go forward. It is true that there is great
difference betwixt them that have the gift of interpreting the Scriptures, and
those that are poor and simple idiotes: they will know well that there is one
God, who is their father by our Lord Jesus Christ, but yet they cannot
expound a place of holy Scripture: and yet notwithstanding they cease not to
walk on in one and the same path: and those which are the most forward,
although they come sooner to the goal, yet they must always wait for the
other. Mark then how we have to do, according as it is showed unto us, and how
we may learn it, by the example which is here contained.

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging of our faults, praying him that he will in such sort make us
to feel them, that it may be to the end we may be displeased therewith, and
that we always may have an eye to our condition which is so miserable, to the
end to have our refuge to his mercy: and that it will please him to receive us
to mercy, and so to govern us by his holy spirit that we may be rid of all
earthly passions. And seeing there are so many vices hidden in us, that we may
take the greater pain to examine our selves, to the end always to have
recourse unto him, who is able to cleanse us: and that we may so fight,
against whatsoever thing does hinder us from dedicating our selves wholly to
his service, that in the mean time we know, that it is far of that our
conflictes do deserve to be approved of him, but so far forth as he
bears with our weakness. And also that we may have recourse unto his power,
knowing the need that we have to be succored of him: and that by this
means, we learn only to rejoice in him, and not to doubt but that as he
has once reached us the hand, he will likewise continue more and more to
strengthen us, until that we have overcome both the Devil, and all the
assaults, that he can assail us withal. That not only, etc.

The fifth Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25.
29 Now as Jacob was seething Pottage: Esau came out of the field and was
hungry.

30 Wherefore Esau said unto Jacob: Suffer me to k^eele forth of this
Pottage so red, for I am weary. Therefore every one called his name Edome.

31 But Jacob aunsweared, Sell me now thy birthright.

32 And Esau said: Behold I hasten too death: and what avails this
birthright unto me.

33 To whom Jacob said: Swear unto me this day: who swear unto him. So he
sold his birthright unto Jacob.

34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of Lentills and he did eat and
drink and rose up, and went his way, and Esau contemned his birthright.


WE said yesterday that God approves and ratifieth his election, when he
governs his Children by his holy spirit, and that he makes them to strive
up to the heavenly life, and gives them an affection to despise the world, and
to look up more high. Contrariwise, that he discovers what man's nature is,
when he lets loose the bridle to those that are reprobates, so that they
become as it were brute beasts, loking to nothing but this brickle and
transitory life. We have the confirmation of this doctrine, in the history
which Moses here recites: For on the one side he sets Esau before us, who
returning out of the feeldes from hunting, was as a famished wolf: he desires
nothing but to eat, and moreover is content to sell his birthright with another
and here he renounceth his birthright, so that he may have wherewith to fill
his belly. He then esteems the Pottage so highly, that his birthright was
nothing unto him in comparison thereof. Now let us mark (as it has already
been touched before, and as we shall see more fully) that this was not an earthly
privilege, to wit, that he should have a double portion, and that he should
be advanced in his fathers house: but it was to be the chief of the Church of
God, waiting till our Lord Jesus Christ should appear for the salvation of
the world. Now although this was a thing of such importance: yet Esau
prefers his belly, and he cares for nothing, so that he may have meat.
On the other side, Jacob although he had made ready his dinner, or his supper
(albeit it were his refection,) and that he had an appetite to eat, yet, he
chose rather to abstain and defraude him self, then to let slip the
occasion of getting the birthright. We see then that Esau was but as a beastly
man, who fought nothing but to be fed and nourished: yea and to be well
frankt. Jacob is a weak man, subject to hunger and thirst: yet he bridleth
himself, and looks up higher then too this world, and forgoeth bodyly
meat, to obtain a spiritual benefit, which was of more value then an
hundred, yea then ten thousand lives. Mark briefly what we have to learn of
this history.

Now it is very true that a man might think at the first blush, that this was
but a Childish toy. For what hurt was it in Esau, after that he had labored
and taken great pain, yea for to bring Venison unto his father, if he were
weary, if he wear an hungered and should demand to eat? It seems not that
this should be imputed unto him for a fault. And again on the other side,
some man might say, what cruelty was there in Jacob, seeing his brother in
such want, not to succor him, at the least with half of his repast? For he
should not have tarryed his brothers complainte, and till he had cried for
hunger, but rather ought frankly to have offered him of that which he had
prepared for him self. For if he had seen but a stranger too be so needy,
so weary, and so weak, he must yet have given him some refreshinge and alms.

But behold his own brother, for they were borne both in one belly: yet he
leaves him in this case, and vouchsafes not to give him one spoonefull of his
pottage. A man might say therefore that Jacob was too too discourteous. And
again. Why should he compel him to sell his birthright? For he put here
the knife as it were to his throat, and we know that bargains are always of
no force, when there shall be any violence offered: If men do any thing by
constraint, or if they promise any thing by compulsion rashly, they are not
bound to keep it. But see Esau, who was an hungered, he could do no more, he
was so far past him self, that he knows not what his birthright means.
So then, besides the cruelty of Jacob, there was to gross an oversight: and
when he barganed, what othesoeuer came between, yet this ought not in any case
to hold, by any right or reason. Well, notwithstanding all this, this is not
recited to reprove Jacob, as though he had committed any fault, or offended
either God or his brother: But contrariwise the holy Ghost gives him here
testimony, that he shows us the way how to search after Heavenly things,
and that first of all we must seek the kingdom of God, and renounce our own
desires, or else in such wise captiuate and bring them under, that they hinder
us not from looking always to the principal.

And contrariwise the example of Esau is set before us (as the Apostle
shows) to the end, We should not be profane as he was: that is to say, that
we should not be given to the earth: but that we should think that this
which is promised us, is belonging to eternal life. So then, we must not
judge of this history after our natural opinion: but we must way to what end
and purpose it is here rehearsed, to the end we may the better make our
profit of it.

Now I have already said in the first place, that God would as it were seal
his election here, in the person of Jacob: and that he has showed also in
the person of Esau, that he was of the number of those, that were cast off
from him. It is very certain that if Jacob had not been governed by the
spirit of GOD, he had been altogether like his brother Esau. But we must
see how the spirit of God was rather given unto him then unto Esau: We shall
not find this diversity, but in the only free goodness of God. So then, let
us know that Jacob was led with an holy affection, forasmuch as God had
holden him of the number and company of his Children: as also S. Paul says:
That we are the woorkmanship of God, created to good works, the which he
has prepared. He speaks not there of all men in general. It is true that
God has created us all without difference: but there is a new creation in
those, whom God reformeth, and whom he purges from their wicked lusts, to
the end that he may bring them to him self, and conform them to his
righteousness, so that they desire nothing more then to honor and serve him
purely. Mark therefore a second creation which God works in his Children.
So then, let us know that if God reach out his hand unto us, to show us the
way of salvation, if he give us courage cheerfully to march forewardes, and
strengthen us also to continue therein, that then he shows that his election
is not in vain and frivolous, but has it full effect and virtue. To conclude,
when he abandoneth us, and that we are as strayes throughout all our life, that
we forget the salvation of our souls: let us know that herein he declares
his curse upon us. And so let us learn to tremble, as often as we see men
besotted in beastlynesse, so as they know not their own state and condition,
neither to what end they were created, nor wherefore God has placed them in
the world: when we see this, it behooves us (I say) to tremble and to pray
unto God, that he will not suffer us so to be estraunged from him: but that he
will always hold us in, and keep us, and that he will imprint in our
hearts, such an assurance of the hope which he has given us, that we may
bear therein the right mark of his election, as if men spread a little wax
upon a seal, the form of the seal will remain perfect, but the wax has the
shape and image thereof. So, when our Lord engraueth his fear in our hearts
by his holy spirit, and such an obedience toward him, as his Children ought
to perform unto him, this is as if he should set upon us the seal of his
election, and as if he should truly testify that he has adopted us, and that
he is a Father unto us: For as much as we have the earnest of his free
adoption: that is to say, the holy Ghost. But now let us come to that, which is
here handled particularly. It is said:

That Esau being returned, he asked of his brother Jacob, that he would give
him of that red Pottage, and of that meat: He says it, but this was as it
were in contempt: and yet herein we see, that he was not so delicate and fine
mouthed: but he could do no more, he was so weary, that he knew not what he
did: and therefore he asks nothing but to be satisfied. And hereupon he
says: Give unto me: as if he should say: It is all one unto me, whether I
eat brown bread or white, so that I may fill my belly, admit it were but
with Acornes, it is all one unto me. A man might here find some color to
excuse Esau: and it seems that this might well have bin pardoned him. But
what? So much the more in this must we behold, that our desires how natural
and lawful soever they be, are yet nevertheless to be repressed, when there is
any question of the heavenly life: for then we must bring under every
consideration, and rather loose life an hundred times, then go out of the path
of salvation. It is not enough therefore that men abstain from those acts
that are altogether dissolute and wicked, and whereof they may be ashamed, but
yet whatsoever desire they shall have, yea permitted unto them of God, which is
not altogether condemned, yet must they tame them, when there shall be any
comparison with spiritual benefits. But hereof we shall yet entreat more
at large. In the mean time it behooves us to note this point, that Esau sought
not after great dayntyes: he saw the Pottage, whereof mention is here made,
and he asks nothing but to be satisfied therewith.

Now Jacob asks of him his birthright in payment. If he had asked it of him
through ambition, and that it had not belonged unto him, undoubtedly it had
been no bargain: on the other side, the malice which he had, could by no
means have been excused: and farther this had been to commit an outrageous
and theeuishe act, so to hold his brothers throat shut up, as to say: if thou
will not forgo unto me, all that belongs to thee, I will not give thee one
morcell to eat, rather thou shall perish. And to what extremity would this
grow? But Jacob demands nothing of Esau, but that which was before given
him. For he was taught that before the two children were borne, now already
this sentence was pronounced, that God had declared, that it must needs be
that the elder must serve the younger. Jacob then, in respect of God possessed
already through faith the birthright: It is true that that stood him in no
steed in the judgment of the world: but the question is hereof the right
title, that he knew that God had appointed him to be the first borne, and had
declared, that the birthright belonged unto him. So then, he robs not Esau
of any thing that was his, but he rather asks again that which was his
own: as if he should have said, Because thou art first come out of the
womb, thou despisest the sentence that God has given, both concerning me and
thy self: but yet that must stand which God has decreed, it can not be called
back again. For my self, I always remain in this hope, that I shall obtain,
that which was promised unto me: but for thy part, this is to the end that
thou should understand that I set more store by the service of God then by
mine own life: and therefore sell me thy birthright. We see here briefly, that
Jacob would not get the good of another by deceit or malice, neither enforce
his brother to spoil himself of that blessing which belonged unto him, but he
demands, that that which God had given him, might be approved and ratified
amongst men. Lo then the su^me of that which is spoken here. And therefore
they, who will use so great rigor, to get the substance of an other, and to
enriche them selves with the loss of their neighbors, have not whereof to
make them any buckler here: as we shall see very many, who will espy out
occasions, that if a poor man, be in any extreme necessity, it must needs
be that he be robbed. Lo then they will pray and violently grate upon him. For
the^ they will bargain with him, when they see him in this case, and o say they
(who live upon spoils, as Hawks do upon the pray) this man must pass
through my hands. Lo then a poor man who shall have but one field or one
medowe: if he be indebted or fail to find money to pay, if he come to some
Usurer, he will say unto him, lo there is no remedy I must needs sell you such
a piece, o I have no money (says he) at this time, and yet in the mean time
he will keep his money in his pursse, watching that occasion, which is as a
robery, forasmuch as he seeks the mean to deceive his neighbor. This is
commonly seen, that he that shall be pinched with any misery, he shall be eaten
even to the bones, of such as only have the means to succor those that are
in necessity. But if such wicked wretches, (as I have said) will cloak their
iniquity in the person of Jacob, it is too too vain a thing. For Jacob sucked
not another man's good unto him self, nor he sought not to enlarge him self to
the end to lessen his brother: but he remained in the possession of that which
God had given him. The birthright was his own already, in deed not according
to the order of nature, but because it so pleased God. Inasmuch therefore as he
deceived none, did wrong to no man, neither used any rigor or excess to
draw another good unto himself, we must not take any pattern and patronage
from hence of those same theeueryes and oppressions which commonly are
exercysed amongst men. And forasmuch as the question is here of a spiritual
benefit that Jacob seeks not riches, he seeks not his commodities, nor any
earthly honor, to advance himself above his brother: he forsakes all this,
this is all one to him: but he would have that which God had promised him:
that is, that though he be small in (...) world, though he be afflicted,
tormented and ^ured, and that men do him many injuries, it (...) all one unto
him, so that this inestimable treasure be reserved unto him: that is to say,
that of his race shall come the salvation of the world, and that withal he is
made of the company and fellowship of Gods children. Touching Esau his answer,
we see already that which the Apostle says, and that which we have also
alleged: that he was altogether a profane man. I haste to death, to what
purpose (says he) shall my birthright serve me. In saying that he hastes to
death, and that his birthright served him to no purpose: we see that he was
altogether dull and blockish, and that it was all one to him, so that he might
pass this present life.

And lo also what this word, Profane imports: for it is contrary to the
word Holy. And what means this word Holy? To be holy, is when we are
separated and put a part to serve God: For all the world is full of filthiness
and iniquity, as Saint Paul says. And when we shall have our conversation
here beneath after the common manner, this is to defile our selves with all
filthynesse. But to the end we may be holden for the children of God, it
behooves that we be separated even as S. Paul speaks thereof, in the first
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. It behooves that God gather us
unto himself. For if we walk among thorns, that is but to scratch us every
minute* if we go through durte and clay, that is to beray us. It behooves the^
that we be separated. But (as I have said) the word Profane is contrary and
opposite unto this. Wh^^ ^^en must we do? This is it, that a man take good
^eede to himself: yea, even to his body. For eue^ like as there are two parts
in us, to wit, the body and the soul: so the spiritual life is, when we know
whereunto God has called us, and whereunto he daily bids us: to wit, that we
should be heirs of the kingdom of heaven: See what it is to sanctify our
selves, as it is said Purify your selves, yea all you that bear the Lords
vessels. And S. Paul alleging this place says: Having therefore such
promises. That is, that God accounts us for his servants and children: Let us
take heed that we cleanze our selves from all filthiness, as well of the body
as the soul. But behold Esau, who has no care but for his belly, and that he
shows very well when he says: Behold I haste to death, and what shall this
birthright avail me?

Yea, but it was for everlasting life, it was for an heavenly inheritance: he
has no regard to all this. So then we see, that he did eat as a Dog, or
rather as a Hog that had his nose always in the swil trough, and sought for
nothing but meat. Behold then the disposition of Esau, which is declared unto
us in these words. And so the exhortation of the Apostle ought well to be
practiced of us: when he says, Let us not be profane men as Esau was: For see
what is the cause that makes us to forgo the hope of that salvation that God
has given us: when we are snared in our own sense, and in our carnal
desires, it is certain, that we are quite out of taste with that which
appertains to the salvation of our souls, that has no savor with us: so
that there is neither word of God, nor promise, nor any thing, which we do not
lightly esteem, when we are so profane.

Now then, let us take good heed, when we are provoked with some desire to
think, Go to, God has not placed (...) in this world, to perish as Asses and
horses: he has given us a soul, wherein he has engraven his own image. So
then, it behooves us always to labor and to aspire unto this heavenly
immortality, and specially to enforce our selves to fight against all our
affections, and not to be so holden here below, that we strive not always
to break and undo these cords, that hinder us, that we cannot come directly
unto God. Mark then what we have here to learn. That we be not like unto
Esau, saying: I haste to death and whereto shall my birthright serve me? What?
shall we do such dishonor unto the dignity and nobility, which God has
placed in us, forasmuch as he has given us immortal souls: that we say we are
not of this world, our place is above, and our right is above, and in the
mean while, shall we rest and be entangled here? So then, though we should
perish an hundred times, yet let us know, that God has reserved a better
life for us, and that there is our soueraign good that we ought to esteem: and
albeit that we want and have need of tra^sitorie benefits, which only serve to
maintain us here beneath, yet let us bear it patiently, and let us always
mark, if I dye, not to say I perish, or I am utterly lost and cast away: For
this is but a passage by death, to go from one life to another. We must
therefore look up thither. And this is the sum of that we have to mark
here. But howsoever it be, we see here how God has laid open the beastlynes
of Esau, and has showed that he was already forsaken of him, and was not
governed by his holy spirit: as the wisest of the world, albeit it seem they
pearce through the clouds, yet are they so dull and blockishe, that thy
regard nothing but that which is present unto them, and thereto they wholly
give them selves. We shall see therefore the wittiest and those whom men so
greatly magnify, which look to nothing but to build their houses. Now I say
not only to build goodly palaces: but also to get great revenues for their
children, to advance themselves, and to become great states, to live at ease, to
be feared and honored, and that all the world may be constrained as it were to
pass through their hands: and in the mean time: as for God, they do not much
remember him, and they are in such sort unthankful, that it were much better
to be a Hog or an Ass, than to be like unto them. And why so? A Hog has but
his natural appetites: when his belly is full he will sleep, or he will
wallowe in dunge: and he is well contented with it. But men, what desires have
they? It is certain that there can be found no greater grief to torment
them withal more cruelly than their own appetites. So then for this cause,
they are in continual vexation and torment, inasmuch as they respect nothing
but this life: and if they once dye, why with them as it seems, all is dead.
Likewise we see in all the reprobate, that they have not any taste of the
Heavenly life. And therefore we must so much the more pray unto God, that he
will open our eyes, to the end we may always see beyond these present
things, and that we may keep our selves therein, in such sort, that we be not
holden here beneath.

But Jacob contenteth not him self that Esau has simply sold him his
birthright: but he will have an oath. Esau swears: this is all one to him:
and herein we see how God threw him under his feet. For although that
hunger oppressed him so hardly, that he was constrained to renounce his
birthright, yet when he came to swear, and that the name of God was taken to
witness, and protested that God should be his judge and punish him, if he were
forsworn and disobedient, and kept not his promise: when all this was done,
and he not ignorant what his birthright was worth, it must needs be said, that
the devil had altogether blinded him. But heerby we are admonished, that when
we have once begun to starte away and to turn our backs to God, it must needs
be that so much the more we be indurate and hardened, to have no more
understanding of God then brute beasts. And when we have after a sort
renounced the inheritance of salvation, it shall come to pass that we shall
renounce it an hundred and a thousand times, yea the devil will find an hundred
means in one day, to plunge us in the gulf of perdition, whereout we shall
never be able to help our selves. Mark then what we have yet to observe upon
this place: but by the way we have to consider Jacobs abstinence. Behold an
example of true fast, and not as the Papists imagine. It is true, that fastes
are commanded unto us in the holy scripture, for diverse causes: For they serve
to tame our carnal affections: and we must so cut off our drinking and our
eating, that the temperance which God requires of us, may be as a continual
fast, for the whole time of our life: but yet it is oftentimes required, that
we should lessen our portion. And why so? To the end we may be the better
disposed to prayer. And again, when we are afflicted, there is no question
then of banqueting and making great cheer: if God threaten us, and that he
will show us some sign of his wrath (as he says by his Prophet:) I then call
you to mourning and weeping: and if we loose the raines to our desires, it is
as if we should bid him battle and despite him. Mark then how fasting
serves to humble us before God, and to make us as wretched malefactors
acknowledging that we have offended him,

Moreover, the fast whereof mention is made here, is that which causes a man
to abstain, yea from eating and drinking, if the same hinder him from serving
God, and which makes him rather to forsake his own life, then to be turned
away from Gods will. For (as we have already said) Jacob suffered as much as
his brother Esau: It is very true: that he had not trauersed and run so far
that day in the fields and woods: he had tarryed in the house after his
accustomed manner: but albeit that he had made ready his dinner: he was an
hungered and had an appetite to eat, but howsoever it was, he lyked better to
abstain, and to captiuate him self, and to renounce his dinner, and as it
were his own life, then to lose this occasion, which he had, that his
birthright might be confirmed unto him. So then, we have here to make
comparison betwixt Jacob and Esau, and to make our profit of the exhortation
which we have alleged: that is to say, that we be not profane. But contrary
wise it is said of Esau: That he did eat and drink, and rose up and went
his way.

The speech here at the first sight is simple, but it carries much with it:
For it was not enough that he had said that Esau, without any further
thinking of the matter had emptied his dish and was gone: but Moses says,
that he did eat and drink, that he took his refection wholly at his ease, and
that he was well filled, as though his birthright had been nothing unto him.
And this is the conclusion which he sets down.

That he contemned his birthright. But before we come to this, it is said
that he did eat, that he drank, and rose up, and went his way: wherein it is
showed that Esau was abashed at nothing, but he was as a Dog, that did nothing
but shake his ear, after he had eaten and drunk. Then he went his way and
pleaded not the matter against his brother, as they which repent themselves,
and are better advised, when they have done any unadvised act. They consider,
Alas what have I done? What shall become of me? How far have I ouershotte my
self? Esau thinks nothing of all this: but he leaves his brother after he
was full: he rose up, and had no care of any thing. Now therefore we have here
to behold how the Devil, when he has taken possession of a man, makes him so
senseles and blockishe, that he has no feeling of sorrow in himself, no
remorse nor scruple, although he see that he be as it were cut off and
banished from the kingdom of God, yet he is no whit moved with it. But this
which I have touched ere while is yet better expressed: that is, that always
we fall from one evil to another: and when the devil has gotten us into his
snares, he so entangleth us in them, that we can never wind out. But we must
gather this general doctrine of this history, that is, that we always think
upon that which is said by our Lord Jesus Christ: Matthew. 6.3^
That first of all we seek for the kingdom of God: and that the rest shall be
cast unto us. Now when he speaks of the kingdom of God, this is not only to
be understood of life everlasting, but this also is comprised in it. For the
kingdom of God is, that God be gloryfied in us, that he be served and
worshipped, that we be his people, as also he has mutually sanctified us: as
he has spoken thereof by his Prophet Esaie: Sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and
he will sanctify you, and will be your strength. When we shall therefore seek
that God may be honored, and that we labor to dedicate our selves to him, and
to be, as it were living sacrifices: then shall all other things be given unto
us: that is to say (as Saint Paul also has declared:) God will show himself
a father as well of our bodies as of our souls. For he says unto Timothy,
that if we walk in the fear of God, thinking more upon Heaven then upon the
earth: 1. Tim. 4.8.
We have the promises (howsoever it be) of this present life, as well as of the
life to come. It is very true that the promises belonging unto this present
life are accessories, that is, no other then that which follows and depends
thereupon: but it is so much, that if we lean upon the bounty of GOD, and
strive thither whether he has called us: that is to say, to the salvation
which he has so dearly purchased for us, by our Lord Jesus Christ: God will
not only become the father of our souls, but also of our bodies. We are
thoroughly assured of this, and ought to be resolved in it. But now (howsoever
it be) if we must be ready to renounce this present life, and all the
commodities which are here. If we must renounce our own life, by a stronger
reason we must renounce to live. Now we cannot live here without eating and
drinking: but yet it behooves that we be ready to suffer hunger and thirst,
rather then to be turned away from our calling: and not only this, but when the
question shall be of death, we must offer our lives to God, doing him this
homage, and always desiring rather a precious and blessed death before him,
then all the lives that might be imagined in this world, which he shall
accurse. Behold then the rule that is given to all Christians, and whereby they
are tried if they be the true children of God: and that is, when the world
hinders them not to serve God, but they always march on forwards by that path
which is showed them by the holy Scripture. When I say that the world lets
them not: I understand not only those wicked lusts as drunkenness, whordom,
covetousness, and such like* but also those desires that are not utterly
condemned: as eating and drinking when it shall be permitted us of God, and yet
if eating and drinking shall hinder us from serving God, then we must so
strive, that our desires may be tamed. Now this may be better understood, by
the common experience we have. There is a man which may live in delights and
pleasures, he has to eat to the full, yea of all manner of dainties and
delicates, and exquisite meats: but he must hang his conscience (as they say)
upon the rack, or rather be profaned with the wicked world. For there are a
great many conditions offered to many, which areas the intysing baits of
Satan. Thereupon they will think, o if I were in such a place, I might gather a
great deal of good, and afterward I should be in great honor, all the world
would croutch unto me: In the mean season I should have my table well
furnished, I should have wherewith to nourish me to my desire: yea and in mine
old age, when I should have gathered together my liuelode and rents, I should
be assured to live at mine ease. But I cannot attain un to it. But whereto
tends this? Even hitherto, that I cannot do this, without being in great
danger, to bring my self to great wickedness, yea and without utter estranging
my self from God: Howsoever it be, I cannot serve God purely as he has
commanded me. But if any man be temped with this, it is certain that he is
like unto Esau, if he make choice of this condition, which shall be more agreeable
to the world, and in the mean time shall forsake the means he has to serve
God, and to live in the peace and tranquillity of a good conscience. For he
considers not: I am a weak man, and have much a do to hold my self in the
fear of GOD, although, I be every day exhorted unto it: yea, and though I
do give my self wholly unto it, and enforce my self thereunto: and what shall
become of me when I shall have no word of God, that I shall not be exhorted
to do my duty, and that I shall be entangled with many businesses and
affairs of the world? If a man think not of all this, and that he make
choice of a good table, that is to say, if he rather choose an estate whereby
he may enrich him self, it is certain that he shall be resembled unto Esau.
Contrariwise, when we shall think: Go too, it is true that we shall be at our
ease, if we will forsake God, or rather depart from him, and will decline, be it
never so little from a good way. But what? The devil will by and by find new
sleights to bring us wholly to wickedness, in such sort that we shall be as a
desperate people. But let us prevent such a danger, and rather let us love
hunger and thirst, yea and to feed straightly, and not to have any great pomp
and great superfluity: Let us choose rather, I say, not to have so great an
estate, and hold our selves in sobriety, then to be rich and wealthy, and
notwithstanding to forget our selves, and to have all our joy here beneath.
When we shall so behave our selves herein: lo how we follow the example of
our father Jacob. But as I have said already, the question is not only of
forsaking our ease and commodity, but also, when need shall be, of our own
life. For if so be, we must dye to make confession of our faith, such as God
requires of us, and to glorify the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and must
pass that way: we must likewise also forsake our own life, and all that
belongs unto it: and if we do it not, we show that we know not, what it is
to have tasted of spiritual blessings: but that we have lost all taste of
them, forasmuch as the devil has made us drunken with his poisons, and has
bewitched us and made us senseless and blockish. We see here by the way how
profitable this history is unto us. For besides that we have said already, that
God has ratified his election, and has discovered that which was in Esau and
Jacob: here our father Jacob reaches out his hand unto us, and shows us
that all the pleasures of this world, ought to be nothing unto us, no not our
very nourishment, when there shall be any question: to be as poor starued
people, that we rather forsake to eat and drink, when all shall be made ready,
yea specially, when the smell shall have provoked us, that we imagine to have
the morsels already in our mouths, and to have swallowed them down, when we
shall be come so far, nevertheless, that we enter into such a combat against
our selves, that we renounce our natural inclination, and specially that which
is not utterly condemned amongst men, if it let us from coming unto God, if it
hinder us, or entangle us here beneath in any corruptions. Behold what we
ought to do. And moreover that we take good heed on the otherside, that we
be not like unto Esau, and that we allege not this, and that as many say, o
we must live. We way well have our excuses before men: but when we shall come
to render a reckoning before that great Judge, who has declared unto us, that
he will have us to set such price upon the treasure of our salvation, that
he has offered us in the Gospel, that we learn to withdraw our selves from
the world, and that all that is in it be nothing in comparison of it. But this
thing is practiced after sundry sorts and manners: For when a Christian man
shall have plenty, if he be sober in eating and drinking, and do not so gorge
himself, that he loose hoth his sense and memory, but be always disposed to
praise GOD, to execute the charge whereunto he is called, and to employ
himself to that which belongs to his estate and vocation, if a man be so
temperate, he is like unto Jacob. For he forsakes to eat and drink, not
because he uses not the benefits that God has put into his hand, but he
forsakes them, in brideling his desires, to the end not to exceed measure:
and after he always lifts up him self on high, regardyng the service of
GOD, and preferring it before any worldly thing. Again, if it be necessary
that he which was rich, should be poor: and that he had rather be poor, yea
if it were but to eat roots, if need should be, rather then to be
alienated from GOD: and that always he remain steadfast in it, saying,
forasmuch as I am an heir of the world I ought to be well contented: and
now if I endure hunger or thirste, if I bear any necessities and miseries, I
will pray unto God that he will give me patience. And this is the reason,
Phil. 4.12.
why Saint Paul also says, that he had learned, in the school of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be hungry and to be full: that is to say, when he had
enough, he left not to hold himself in: and when he had nothing he was
patient in his necessity: he had recourse to God and chose rather to have many
wants in respect of the world then to have wherewith to grow and enrich
himself, and yet to be empty of heavenly benefits.

For it is certain that Esau had his soul buried in the pottage he saw
there, he smelt them, and thereto he laid his snoute. And wherefore? Because
he had no other consideration then of this present life. Lo, his soul
which was buried therein. Now we may be compassed round about, with all
the goods of this world: but it behooves that the smell do not so allure us,
that we esteem not spiritual things far above them, and always to
prefer them. Mark then briefly, how we ought to apply this doctrine unto
our use.

And moreover let us mark well that which is spoken here, that the
wickedness of Esau was, because he made no account of his birthright. And
therefore this is a sign that we contemn the graces of GOD, and as a man
would say, cast them to the ground and tread them under our feet, when we
are so much addicted, either to this life, or to our desires: and when we can
endure and bear nothing: but will have all which is pleasant unto us after the
flesh. When then we will in such sort hold our lusts, it is certain that
we make light accounte of that heavenly inheritance. For how shall that be
esteemed of us? It shall be esteemed of us (as I have said already) when the world
shall be unto us, but as an accessory, and all that is in it, shall go as at the
tail. But the gospel and the promises which are therein contained, whereby god
testifies unto us, how he has adopted us, and likewise how he will have us to
himself: this must mount up above them, and we must be ravished in them.
And notwithstanding let us well advise our selves. For if once the Devil gain
this of us, that we become beastly in our pleasures, he will not put us in
mind for naught, we shall seek after nothing but this tra^sitory life, we shall
do nothing but run up and down like poor beasts, and have no mark whereat to
aim, as it fell out with Esau. I have said already that these words are not put
in in vain. He did eat, he drank, he rose up and went his way. And what a
company of such, and such like, do we see at this day? For they which have
their delights after the manner of the world, will esteem us for beggarly momes
and they deride our simplicity: Well, well, say they: let them have their
Gospel, and not withstanding dye for hunger, and let them be such as have not
a ragge to hang on their tail, and have nothing to champe between their
teeth, or rather let them droupe and hang their wings, and be so miserable as
none can be more: and let them rejoice in their Gospel, as much as they will,
but we in the mean time will have our swinge in this world, we will have all
our desires, and our table well garnished. And above all these conte^ners of
God, which are at this day advanced into states and dignities, it is well
known how they floute us, and bleare out their tongue, if men speak unto
them of the gospel and it seems to them, that we are as mad men, which can
not discern between good and evil. And why so? For they eat and drink they
rise up, and go their way: yea the world does so hold them, or rather Satan
has in such sort possessed them, that Heaven is nothing unto them, and they
altogether forget everlasting life. We see this, and yet it is to no purpose to
pursue it: For our Lord has set before our eyes, that this is an horrible
condemnation, when we fall into such blockishnesse, to prefer this life,
which is nothing but a shadow before that eternity, to which God has called
us. For let us put the case, that we should live an hundred years after our
death: and yet what is that? If we make comparison (as S. Paul says) with
this world, it is but a minute and a figure which passes away, and in sum,
but a moment.

Now contrariwise of what weight ought our immortality to be with us, which
is offered unto us in our Lord Jesus Christ, and whereof he has so well
certified us? And yet concerning this life, who is it that can promise us one
day? For they who are well fed, they grow therein, and there cannot be a
minute to uphold them: and specially intemperance choketh very many. And we
see that men, the more they have wherewith to do well, they kill themselves. And
yet in the mean season we cannot content our selves, but (like poor beasts)
we must seek for that which has no certainty: and in the turning of a hand
al is lost. We seek nevertheless for this, and hereunto we are given, yea
wholly adicted, insomuch that we discern not betwixt that which is permanent,
and that which flitteth away: For if we contemn that which is everlasting
whither then go we? It is certain that the most wickedst themselves will say,
that this is a madness: but after they have said it, they show that they are
strayed, and that they do not greatly pass for it.

And this is so common a vice, that it behooves that the most perfect
especially fight against it. And the Apostle not without cause handeling this
matter says: Be not profane: to the end to make us watchful: and to make
us think who we are, and that we should not be so brutish, as to rest upon
this present life. So then, let us go further, and that which is here given
us, let us apply for our help, too make us run on the more swiftly: but if
there be any thing that hinder us, yea though it were our very eye (as our
Lord Jesus Christ says) that our eye may rather be plucked out, Matthew. 5.
and we rather desire too enter into the kingdom of Heaven blind, then
having al our senses sound to go into everlasting destruction. So then to
conclude, let us rather love hunger and thirst, then to cramme and stuff our
bellies, and in the mean time not to regard everlasting life: For we must
not be so snared in these corruptible and transitory things, that we can
not always lift up our senses and affections on high, to the end, through hope
to be Citizens of the kingdom of heaven.

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging our offenses praying him that it will please him in such sort to
make us to feel them, that it may serve to make us there to open them: and
that we may learn in such sort to fight against all temptations, that if we
must endure many pouerties and miseryes in this world (howsoever it be,) that
this do not turn us to wickedness and make us to decline from the right
pathe: but that every one may here resist both him self, as also all his
desires, and all his passions: and that we may serve our GOD in such sort,
that if it will please him to prove our patience in leaving us destitute of
means, and of the commodities of this world: that we may bear all with a
quiet and peaceable courage, until we be received into this blessed
inheritance, where we shall not lack any thing what soever it be: but there
we shall have the fullness of all joy and happiness. That not only etc.

The sixth Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 26.
1 Now there was a great famine in that land, far greater then that first
famine, that was in the days of Abraham: Wherefore Isaac went unto Abimelech
the King of the Philistines into Gerar:

2 For the Lord appearing unto him had said, Go not down into Egypt, but
dwell in the land which I shall tell thee.

3 Be a stranger in this land, and I will be with thee, and bless thee: For
to thee and thy seed, I will give all these countries, that I may establish
the oath which I have sworn to Abraham thy father.

4 I will multiply thy seed that it may be infinite as the stars of Heaven,
and I will give unto thy seed all these Countries: and all the nations of the
Earth, shall repute them selves blessed in thy seed.

5 Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and observed my ordinance, my
commandments, my statutes, and my laws.


WE saw yesterday how Jacob forsook his meat for that spiritual benefit
which GOD had promised unto him: and hereby it appears that he had more care
of his soul than of his body: Here we have an example, though not altogether
like in Isaac his father, yet coming very near it. For we see how Isaac had
more regard to the spiritual inheritance, than to all that concerned this
brittle and transitory life. He was oppressed with famine: and there is no
doubt, but that it was not his ease to go into Egypt. But when he was let by
an express commandment, it was a sign, that his courage tended
thitherwardes: because his commodity likewise drew him: God staieth his
journey, and he obeys. We see then that Isaac left not only a mess of
Pottage: but he seeing that he could endure much woe for a years space,
notwithstanding he withhelde himself, and sought no refuge in Egypt: and
remained in the land of Gerar, which specially could not be altogether
exempted from poverty, which was a part of that country: For it is
impossible, when there is any famine, but that the neighbor and near places
must also feel it: It may easily be gathered, that then there was no dearth in
Egypt. So that Isaac here shows us, that although temptations be great, if
we be destitute of that which is necessary to maintain us, that yet
notwithstanding we must always hold us to the will of God, and rather forget
all our cases, and prepare our selves patiently to suffer al want and
necessity, than to seek our commodities, as it were, against the will of God.
This is the first point that we have to mark in this history. Now it is said.

There was a great famine in the land, a greater then that former that was in
the days of Abraham. For there had been two that Moses already had
rehearsed unto us. As Soon as Abraham was arrived into the land of Canaan, he
was feign to depart: and this was a very hard combat unto him, seeing that God
had showed him that land, and that he had conceived great joy, for that he
should be put in possession thereof: and now a little after he must be chased
out, and become as it were a poor vagabond, and go down into Egypt, because
he found not any succor else where. The second time he also withdrewe himself
into the land of the Philistines, which was of the very same country that was
promised unto him, and under the King of Gerar: not he of whom now mention is
made: for all called him Abimilech, which is as much to say, as My father the
king: and this was not only an honorable title, but also expressed, that kings
governed not by tyranny, and did devour up their subjects, but had a fatherly
care over them whom God had committed to their charge. When then it is said
that this famine came as the other, this is to show unto us, that altogether
like as God had proved the faith of Abraham and his constancy: so likewise he
would call his son to the like trial. For as Isaac was heir of the
promise, so also must it needs be that he succeed his father in that which was
promised to the children of God: For we must show by the effect that we so
esteem heavenly benefits, to which God has called us, that we pass through
the world, and that we fail not, howsoever we be afflicted after diverse and
sundry manners. Mark then whereto Moses has regard, when he compares these
two famines: that is, to show us that when Abraham was tempted, it was not
only for his own cause: but his son also must be like him. But by the way
we are called the sons of Abraham and of Isaac: it behooves then that our
faith be examined, as it shall seem good unto God. It is very true that we
shall be more confounded: and that is because we have not received so great a
measure of strength. Mark therefore the cause why God supporteth our
infirmity: but yet this is not to the end that our faith should be idle. So
then, we are here warned by the spirit of God, that being in this world, we
must be subject to many miseryes, and that we shall not have an earthly
paradise, to the end to have all our desires, and to be so satisfied that we
shall lack nothing: but that it shall oftentimes seem that God has forgotten
us, that he has taken the bread out of our hand, and that we shall be in such
case, as if he had condemned us to perish. When this shall come to pass, let
us not think it strange, and likewise let us not be as young Nouices: but let
every one of us think before hand of that which may come upon us, and be
prepared to suffer all things patiently. The promise is well given unto the
faithful: Although the Lions oftentimes seek their pray and find it not, and
that they rore out for hunger, yet nothing shall be wanting to the Children of
God. Mark then how he has spoken thereof, in the thirty and four Psalm.

And again in an other place: All they which fear God, shall be satisfied with
all good things. But this is not therefore spoken as though God would fat up
his own, and give them whatsoever they shall desire: but he nourishes them
after an other manner. And when he speaks of satisfying them, this means not
that he will always fill their bellyes with exquisite meats: but we must yet
have recourse to another place of the Psalm: That the poor of the Church
shall be nourished. Mark here a certain kind of contraryetie, when God
says, that he will fill those of his church with bread, and notwithstanding,
calls them poor and needy. If they be poor and needy, where is this
promise that God will fill them with bread and with all good things? But we must
reconcile that which seems to disagree, and in such sort that we always
depend upon the providence of God, to be as it were fed by him: In the mean
time if he shall suffer that we endure hunger and thirst, that we do not
therefore give over to hope, that he will be our good father to nourish us.
And this is the cause why we do pray for our daily bread.

Now this opposes it self against all those provisions, wherein the children
of the world do put their trust: for they are never stayed unless their
barnes and cellers be full, as it is said in another Psalm. And besides when
they are well fraughted, they despite God as though they were without all danger
as they think: But contrariwise, howsoever the faithful have wherewith to
nourishe themselves, yet must they every day open their mouth, as if God
should put in bread by morsels: and when they have nothing, yet always they
trust in him, and in his goodness, and hope that he can sustain them, with
one crumme of bread, when it shall so please him: or rather, albeit they see no
way how it should come, yet nevertheless, that God will find a mean to
maintain them.

When therefore it is said, that Isaac was driven out through famine, this is
as much as if God would declare unto us, that when we shall fall into poverty
and need, that we think not, that we are therefore forsaken of him, nor take
it as a sign that he hates us: or rather that we imagine not, that he
thinks no more of us: but that as our father Isaac endured hunger and
thirste constantly, and in the end tried that God always had care of him, so
we also acknowledge the like. Mark this for one special lesson. And this is
that also which is showed unto us by S. Paul in the 8. chap. to the Romans
when he says: Shall hunger be able to separate us from the love that God
bears us in Christ Jesus our Lord. Saint Paul fights there, in the name of
all the faithful, showing therein that if God should cut of our morsels, yea
and that we should be deprived of all nourishment, as if it seemed that he
would exclude us, from all the benefits that he has created in the world,
as though we were not worthy to be upon the earth: yet must we ouercom this
tentation there, and conclude, though it be in the midst of famine, that God
will be our father, and we must content our selves with this, rejoicing in
our afflictions. But in the mean while we are also exhorted by the example of
Isaac, not to be so grieved and vexed with famine, nor for other afflictions
of what sort soever they be, to the end they make us to forsake God, or turn
us out of the path wherein he has set us: For as we have seen Jacob forsook
his meat, to aspire to that spiritual inheritance, which had been promised unto
him: So now likewise we see that Isaac had no regard to that which he might
suffer in that length of time. He saw Egypt which was a good refuge,
nevertheless he was turned from it. And why so? Because God had forbiden him
to go thither. So then, when we see that Isaac was not overcome by famine,
that he obayed God and forsook not to be guided by his hand: by this we have
also to learn, when our Lord will afflict us with poverty and need, that we
look not to unlawful means to relieve our necessity. And above all, if
Satan lay before us his baits to entice us, that we rather choose to dye of
hunger (if need be) then to withdraw our selves from the conduction of God:
seeing that we cannot be nourished but by his blessings. For when we shall have
all the bread and meats in the world, it is certain that the wind shall as well
profit us for our nourishment as these, and we shall think, that we grow, and
yet in the mean time we shall not be substantially fed: For it is not bread
(as it is said in Moses) that nourishes us, but every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God. Now by this word, he does not understand the
doctrine of salvation, but that same virtue which God has spread over al his
creatures. Mark the^ what it is that nourishes us: I say not only in respect
of the soul but also in respect of this transitory life, Which seeing it is
so, let us take heed, that we be not fed by that which the devil shall set
before us, when we are in necessity: and can thou do this, and art thou able
to wind out from thence, and have thou any such help? yea if this be
contrary to the will of God, that we always remain steadfast, and that we wait
til God shall show himself pitiful toward us: as he that best knows the
mean, although it be unknown unto us. It is true that we shall have no such
revelations as our father Isaac had, God will not appear unto us from heaven:
but this ought to suffice us, that at this day the will of God is certain unto
us: for GOD has supplied that which was wanting to our old fathers, when he
appeared unto them: at this day we have the law, which is an infalible rule
unto us: we have the prophets which are expositors thereof unto us, to the end
that the shortness thereof be not obscure unto us: we have further more
perfection in the gospel. Seeing God then has reveled unto us that which is
profitable for us to know, we must not desire visions at this day, but as
often as we shall be in any perplexity or doubt, we must have recourse unto
the Scriptures: and when we shall think upon the means, let us mark whether
the same be permitted unto us, and whether God allow of them. And when we
shall find that the means which shall come into our heads, be not agreeable
to the will of God, according as it is contained in the law and in the Gospel,
that we then forsake all. Mark how we have to follow our father Isaac, yea
to overcome this temptation which is very heavy and troublesome: that is to
say, when we have nothing wherewith to be nourished and fed, but a very small
pittance. For oftentimes the unbelievers are found to have thirty times more
then is necessary for them, likewise a man shall find prodigal and dissolute
persons, that will wast and spend all the benefits of God: yea, and they will
make hauock of them. But what of the poor faithful ones? having traueled for
to maintain their life, yet scarsely do they find in the end, how to get
their bread.

When therefore we see that God will oftentimes thus prove those that are his,
let every one prepare him self thereto, and let us not be abashed, although
that our Lord do handle us with such rigor and severity: Nevertheless this
is not to defeat us of that which he has promised us, or not to hold us for
his children: and let us acknowledge that the office of feeding and nourishing
us appertains unto him, and that he will do it, although not according to our
desires and fantasy. And moreover when we see that God presses us not
thereto, that hunger should drive us as they say from door to door, let us
know that he bears so much with us, by reason of our weakness. This is the
sum of that we have to learn, concerning the example of Isaac. But here a
question mig^^ be asked. Why God permits our father Abraham to go into
Egypt, and forbids his son Isaac. But concerning this, we have to note
that God knows who we are, what our strength is, and according to this also:
he suffers us not to be temted above our strength, (as S. Paul has spoken)
calling him faithful in this behalf. God then knows that which he has put
into us, for that which is there of nature, shall always be to throw us down:
but when he has given unto us any power of his holy spirit, he knows whether
it be in little or in great portion* and according to this also he exercises
our faith and our patience, and when he sees that we are weak, he suffers
us not to be tempted so strongly. Mark then how this came to pass: and this
diversity which is here put between Abraham and Isaac, is to show that the
faithful shall not always be alike handled of God, for this reason that I have
alleged. Isaac was the successor of Abraham, he had the promise: and in this
that he was tried and examined by diverse afflictions, it is evidently seen
that God made him to pass, by one and the self same path: but notwithstanding
(as I have already said) it follows not that he had one and the like rule in
all points. For our Lord supporteth whom he will, and when he suffers men
to be more hardly entreated, by and by he likewise fortifieth and
strengthens them.

Abraham forsook not to return to the country of Canaan, after he had dwelte
in Egypt: but God also draws him out of Egypt, as if he had hild him by the
hand: For he might long time have remained there, seeing himself rich there:
but he might have been hated of the inhabitants: and therefore God draws him
from thence, he might likewise have done the like to Isaac, but we must not
set him a law. If any man reply here, could not God have given as well an
invincible constancy to Isaac, that he should not have slepte there, and could
he not have made as well him to have returned? Yes very well: but can we bind
him to that. It behooves that he govern us according to his infinite wisdom,
and not according to our foolish dreams and fantasies. Let us mark well then,
that when there is such a diversity in the tentations of the faithful: it is
because God knows what every one will be able to bear. And always let us
have recourse to this sentence of S. Paul: That we hope in him, if he examine
us, if he place us in the battle, if he try us with many greefes, that
notwithstanding he will provide for this, that we shall not be altogether
overcome or vanquished. Mark wherefore it was forbidden Isaac to go into
Egypt. Now it is said unto him.

That he should dwell in the country of Canaan, and that God will always be
with him, and that he will fulfill the oath which he had sworn unto his father
Abraham. This is to say, that he would multiply his sede as the stars of
heaven, and that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed.
Here we se why god suffered not Isaac to go into Egypt: that is, that he might
not forget the promise which had by given unto him concerning the land of
Canaan, and likewise that he should content himself therein, and altogether
rest him self there. Now if Isaac who was so excellent in the faith as we see
by all his life, and to whom the holy Ghost has given such a testimony, had
such need nevertheless to be so bridled, what shall become of us? Eue^ so we
ought not to marvel, if our Lord do oftentimes hold us as it were chained in,
and that he give us not license to roue here and there: for he knows that
this shall be to cast us to utter confusion. So in as much as we have so
slippery a memory, insomuch as there needs nothing to cause us to stray, so
as we know no more which shall be our right way: this is the cause why our Lord
gives us not so great liberty as we would. And likewise as often as we are
holden within straighter bounds than our fantasy desires, let us know that
if our Father Isaac had such need thereof, we by greater reason, who are come
nothing so near to such excellency of virtue as he, have greater need. Now
in the mean time we see that in Isaac, which ere while was declared to be
in Abraham. God says unto him, that he will give him all those countries that
he saw, and through which he walked: yea, but notwithstanding he says unto
him: Thou shalt dwell there as a stranger. Mark two things, which yet seem
contrary. For if God will give him that land for a possession, Why does he not
hasten it? Why does he suffer him so too languish?

But there is no queston of that which is past, but of that which was to come.
Thou shall dwell there: yea and the word which Moses uses, signifies to
dwell as it were in a strange country, as one that were still going. Lo
Isaac then who had a Lordship upon the earth: and yet had not one foot
thereof, but must remain there by leave, and must be subject to many troubles
and trials, which were bent toward him: and yet he had not one foot of
land, unless it were the burying place whereof mention is made before. To be
short, we have to gather here, that God would have Isaac wholly to rest upon
his word: as likewise it is the foundation, whereupon we must build all the
days of our life, yea and in death too. For if we should have all that we
desire, what should we need any more faith or hope? It behooves therefore
that the benefits which we wait for from God, that they be hidden from us,
and notwithstanding that we behold them only by faith, and that we do God
this honor, to account him sure in all that he has spoken: although he show
us not the effect and truth of his promises, which we apprehend not after
our reason and carnal feling: notwithstanding we must say, it suffiseth us
that he has spoken it, he vvil perform it: When therefore we can fetch all
our contentment from the word of God only, the^ let us assure our selves of a
right trial of all that which we proteste, that we believe in him: but if
we will always have a gage, and have all that we desire, it is certain
that the word of God shall not be esteemed of us, and we can not exercise
ourselves, sufficiently enough in this meditation. And therefore as often as we
see God to have spoken to his servant, and not to have showed them the
accomplishment and execution of his word, let us know that this is rehearsed
unto us, to the end that we should learn to call upon God, when he shall leave
us in suspe^ce, yea and that we shall fainte, and be stripped of that which
should have been in our hand: that we learn to say: O Lord seeing we have
thy promise, we shall not be frustrate in waiting for it. When God promises
Isaac to be with him, and that he will give him the rest, this likewise is too
show us, that the principallest of all benefits that we can desire, is that
God have care over us, and that he think of our necessities, and that we find
him at hand when we call upon him. For unless that we have him merciful unto
us, although he give us in all fullness and abundaunce, that we ask of him,
yet it should be nothing: but we must begin at this point: that is to say, we
must be well persuaded that God loves us, and that he is favorable unto us.
When we have attained to thisto resolve our selves, that GOD will always be
merciful unto us, and ready too succor us when need shall require, that he will
never forsake us, the^ shall we easily wait for the rest: but if we know not
that he is with us: that is too say, that he will make us feel his presence,
and in feeling it, will withdraw us from those dangers wherein we are, and
in withdrawing us, will lift us up when we shall be fallen, will lead us there,
where as there is no path, and will there give us an issue and way to escape,
where there is nothing else but confusion: If we have not (I say) attained to
this, there is no true foundation: but if we have once obtained it, we must
stay thereupon and hope for the rest. For if God love us it is certain that
he has wherewith to sucocur and help us in all, and through all, and he will do
it. And this is the cause why Moses begins at this point.

I will be with thee. And afterward he says: That he will multiply his
seed, that he will bless is, and that his seed shall be as the stars of
Heaven. It is true, that the benefits which God will bestow upon us, they
shall not always fall out to our desires, as we have declared. For oftentimes
we shall want them, to the end, we may be the more egar to pray: and also he
will try us, and show us that we have no such affiaunce in him as we ought:
and our unthankfulness many times depriueth us of that, that GOD otherwise was
ready to bestow upon us: For we are not always capable to receive that which
he offers unto us. He has an open hand, but we have a close mouth: that is
to say, we are shut up in unbelief and distrust. And therefore see the cause
why we must so oftentimes wait: but so much there is, that if we be resolved in
this point, he is with us, and we are blessed of him in that which he knows
to be expedient for us, and we shall lack nothing.

Touching this promise: That all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
Isaacks seed, this was special to him, as it was to Abraham: and this
respects our Lord Jesus Christ, as it has been expounded. For it was
necessary that Jesus Christ should be the fountain of this blessinge, the
which should flow upon all the lineage of Abraham. It is true that the
faithful which descended of him, were blessed and partakers of this promise:
but this was by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, if he had been
separated from the seed of Abraham, it is certain that he had been barraine
and dry, and that he should not have had one drop of the blessing. But at this
day, forasmuch as God would by his infinite goodness, that his only begotten
son should belong unto us, we were joined to the true natural Children of
Abraham: and howsoever we were of the nations of the earth, who were then
strayed from the Church of God, and who were altogether departed far from it,
yet at this day we are blessed as well as they. For if it were said to him I
will bless thy seed, and that God had added nothing, this had at this day been
a very slender comfort unto us: But when he says: That all the nations of
the earth should be blessed in the seed of Abraham, we are of that number.

Mark then, wherein we have specially to rejoice, knowing that after our Lord
Jesus Christ appeared unto us, this promise is to be applied unto us. It is
true, that it is oftentimes said in the holy scripture, that men shall be blessed
by men, as for example, when they shall set him before the^ for a pattern and
example: and that men will say, desiring to be blessed, o that God would do unto
me as he has done unto this man here, or unto that man there: but the
interpretation of S. Paul shows us, that that which was as well spoken to
Abraham as to Isaac, was not only to be understood in that sense: but it is
said else where, that the faithful shall be blessed in God. So it is said now,
that they shall be blessed in the seed of Abraham. But we have to search all
our good and salvation in him alone, who is the fountain thereof, as it is
said in the 36. Psalm. But because there is so great distance, and that we
cannot sore up so high, our Savior Christ has approached near unto us, and
we have the living waters in him: there wantes nothing, but that we come to
drink, as he says: Come unto me: and whosoever thirsts, let him come unto
me. For I have the living waters, and whosoever shall drink thereof, he
shall not only have to quench his thirste, but also living waters shall flow
out of his belly, yea, and fountains of living waters, that he may give
thereof unto others.

When therefore we see that God will familiarly communicate with us all his
benefits, in the person of his only begotten Son, so much the less excuse
is there, if we come not to receive part of this blessinge the which is
propounded unto us. Moreover, it is not only said that all nations of the earth
shall be blessed, but it is said, they are blessed: not for that we can compass
or attain to this blessing of our selves, or by our own power and diligence:
but it behooves that every one be blessed in Jesus Christ through faith. For
altogether like as he is presented unto us by the gospel, so likewise we must
accept him: and if we remain unbelievers, this is because we shut the door
as it were, against all his graces. Then seeing it is so, that God has
prepared all so long time before, that belongs to our salvation, and that in
the fullness of time (as Saint Paul calls it) Jesus Christ has appeared,
and has sufficiently witnessed, that he was that blessed seed, wherein we
must seek all benefits: Let us likewise come with the like readynesse of
faith, and with such zeal, that we be not shut out through our own malice and
unbelief, to the end God accomplish not that in us which is here pronounced,
that we go not to him to have the ratification of his promise: let us, I say,
take heed, that none hinder himself through his own fault and vice. Finally
it is said: That God will ratify his oath with Isaac, forasmuch as Abraham
had obeyed the voice of God, and had kept his observations, commandments,
statutes and laws.

Here the oath is yet reiterated, for the greater and more sure confirmation
of us all: For we can not give any faith unto God, unless we have stoutly
fought against distrust, to which we are so naturally inclined: and forasmuch
as we are yet so tickle as is pitiful. For this cause God swears so much the
more to assure us. But it is true (as has been showed before) that this is
worthy of great blame in us, that we should constrayne God to swear. For we
do not honor a mortal man, if we content not our selves with the simple
word that he shall speak, if we count him not for an honest man, contenting
our selves in that he shall have promised us: but when we say, I will that you
swear unto me herein. Behold this is a great sign of distrust, and will
not be well borne amongst men. But if we shall notwithstanding do that
dishonor to God, to require an oath of him besides his word, must it not
needs be, that we be too too villanouse? But if so be that God nevertheless
do in this behalf take pity upon us, although it be an intolerable vice,
that we would have him swear, farther then he has pronounced: yet herein he
does apply him self unto us. What can we demand more?

And now what excuse shall there be, when we would yet that his promises
should be assured unto us by an oath? This word then of an oath, ought to
pearce us to the very heart, as often as it offers it self before us, yea
and when there is any question of certifying us of the good will of GOD, and of
that singular love which he bears unto us, But let us come to that point
where he says: That this was for as much as Abraham obeyed the voice of God.

It should seem here that GOD attributed the accomplishment of his promises
to Abraham's virtue, and to his merits: but we have declared already that this
could not be, neither ought so to be understood, as though the obedience
which Abraham yielded to God had been the cause, why God should be bound unto
him to perform that he had spoken: For we have showed already that this was
altogether free in God. When Abraham was drawn out of the Idolatry wherein
he was (as it is declared by Joshua:) What was it that moved him too do it?

Afterward, when he kept Abraham to the end, this was not because he
obeyed him: For contrariwise he had said unto him long before I will bless
thee, I will be with thee, I will be thy large recompense: Thy seed shall be
multiplied as the stars of heaven, and in it all nations of the Earth shall
be blessed, All this was spoken to Abraham before Isaac was borne: and when
Abraham would have sacrificed his son Isaac, it was said unto him: because
thou have not spared thy only Son: but wast ready to sactifize him for the
love of me, behold I will bless thee, and this was spoken to him long before:
we see then, that that which is free in God, and that which he gives us of
his mere liberalttie, he attributes to the service which we do unto him:
not to minister unto us any matter of pride, but this is only so much the
more to provoke and stir us up with cheerfulnes and courage to serve him. Mark
then the purpose of God: It is not to the end to rob himself of the praise
which is due unto him, to the end men should usurp it: but it is because he
knew that they have need of spurs, and must have aids, and helps to serve
him, for otherwise we should be cold and dull. They therefore which seek
here for merits, and would darken the mere praise of Gods goodness to exalte
men, as though they were the cause of their own salvation, it is certain they
would overthrow all, yea and ouerrurne the purpose of God as much as lies in
them. Likewise, let us learn that when it is said, that God will establish
his covenant with Isaac, because Abraham had obayed his voice, that it was not
to note the cause why: but it was only to show that the service which Abraham
yielded unto him was acceptable to him, to the end that Isaac should follow
him and conform himself thereunto. Hereby therefore we have to stir up our
selves, as often as we feel any slownesse in our selves, and when we shall
not be so disposed as were requisite, to give our selves fully to the
obedience of God: and that we think, What? It is said that when we shall obey
him, he will accept this as a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor: and yet
notwithstanding all that we do is nothing, there is no strength in us:
nevertheless if God will honor us so, without any worthynesse of ours, must we
therefore be sluggish, and not thoroughly employ all our powers to his service,
especially according to that grace which he shall have given us, and according
to our strength? and yet without all indenting or couenaunting with him?

Mark then how the faithful ought to be provoked: and that this also is to
teach us always to continue, to walk on in fear and carfulness, when our
Lord shows us that they whom he has called, oftentimes make and show
themselves unworthy of their calling. To the end therefore that we do not
tempt him, and that we may be ready to receive that which he teaches us, mark
wherefore it is said that he rewards our services: not because we merit any
reward. For (as I have already said) we must not here reason of that which
we can do: For we can do nothing at al: and specially that which we have
done by the grace of God deserves no reward: For God can justly condemn it.
But the question is, that God accepts that which we do of his mere
liberality, to the end to make us more courageous. And every one ought to
apply this to his profit, when we feel that we are slow to do well through
our negligence and slouthe. Lo then briefly what we have to learn here.

Now when it is said that Abraham obeyed the voice of God: this is to show
us the true rule how to live well, to the end that every one frame not unto him
self devotions aparte, as we are accustomed to do: For when men will serve
God, what do they? They take liberty to live after their own device, and they
contemn whatsoever God commands. What is that, that men may call the
service of God in the papacy? That which men have divised of their own folish
brain. For when men shall have diligently gathered all their iuglings
together, which they play there, if it be said that God be well served and
honored, and yet they do nothing of all that God has commanded, and that
they do despise him: It falls out therevppon, even as he himself complayneth
thereof: to wit, that men for their traditions reiecte that which was ordained
for them.

Seeing then, that so it is that we are so inclyned too set out our own
foolish imaginations, let us learn that when the holy Scripture speaks unto
us of living well and holyly, when it speaks of the perfection which GOD
allows, that is to obey his voice: as also he shows us by his Prophet, Have
I demanded you to offer me any sacrifice?

Now it is very certain that GOD had required it? And why then does Jeremy
speak thus? It is to show us that God rests not there. Where then? That we
obey his voice says he Mark then the principal, and where we must begin,
and which also is the end, whereto we must strive and contend: that is to say,
that God has authority to rule us, and that we be his subjects. But
notwithstanding we shall find it strange, that is here spoken, that Abraham
kept the Commandments, Statutes, Ordinances, and Laws of the Lord. And
yet he had not so much as one word of all the Law in writing. For we know
how long a time there was betwixt the calling of Abraham and the law: to
wit, four hundred and thirty years. How is it then that God now says,
that Abraham kept his Commandments, statutes, ordinances and laws? This is,
as we have seen before in the 18. Chapter: for albeit he had yet nothing
written, yet notwithstanding Abraham was not ignorant of that which God should
afterward teach his people. For he had two manner of ways to govern his
people: but yet this was not for that in respect of himself he was
chaungeable. God therefore had not always one and the same way too teach the
faithful: but howsoever it was, yet the rule was one, whether it were written,
or inspired to them, whom he reserved to himself.

So, howsoever Abraham had not yet the Law written, yet he had sufficient
instruction, to know how he ought to serve GOD. This therefore is that we ought
to learn off this place.

But howsoever it be, GOD in the mean while, shows that if we be ready to
obey him, and to be subject unto him, that on his part he will never fail
us to show us the way wherein we ought to walk, and walking therein we shall
not be deceived. But if before there were ever any scripture. Abraham had
statutes, commandments, laws and ordinances: at this day by a stronger
reason, when God has declared himself so familiarly by Moses, to whom he has
further joined the Prophets, to the end they might there have a more easy
understanding of the law, and seeing he has spoken in the Gospel so clearly,
shall we doubt that he does not the office of a good master, to show us all
that is good, right and just? But what? The ingratitude of the world is such,
that it will not be subject nor brought into order under him: and this is as much
as if men would be more wise, then is permitted unto them, and would have a
wisdom by themselves, as though it had never been said: To God who is only
wise, be honor and glory. 1. Tim. 1.
When S. Paul says that God is only wise, this was not only for him, but this
was to the end that we should search for all wisdom in him. For when we
will not accept this for the only rule which he has given us, this is as if
we should say, God knew not all that was necessary for us, it must needs be
that we invent of our own brain yet some what more: and say this will be
better. And what blasphemy is this? O when we serve God after this sort, it is
as a man would say to spit in Gods face. So then let us note that when Moses
after he had spoken of the voice of God, adds his commandments, his
statutes, and his ordinances, it is to show us that God will not in any point
fail all those, who shall be his disciples, and shall come to be ordered by him,
to hearken to his voice. And in deed this is not only in this place, no nor
in that we come to allege: but as it were through out all, where our Lord
recommendeth his law unto us, and shows us that it contains all that is
necessary to lead men rightly the way to salvation. And thus much concerning
the words that are touched in this place. So then, when we will walk as it
becomes us, let us mark that there is but one only Judge, to whom we have
to render account. But what is it that this Judge demands? Not that every one
should be driven by his own fantasy, or that our good devotions should be put
in the place of his word: but that we should hearken unto the voice of our God,
and then that we should be apt to learn, to bring us in order under him: and
in steed that men imagine, that they have done wonders to bind God unto
them, by their virtues and merits, that we content our selves to be approved
before him and his Angels, although the world be not contented therewith.

But now let us fall down before the majesty of our good God, in acknowledging
of our faults, praying him that it will please him to touch us to the quick,
that we may more and more be brought both to repentance and to humility,
continually to lament before him, and to pray him, that it will please him to
cleanse us from all our vices, and to make us to walk in such integrity, that
our life may be fully framed to his righteousness, and that by this mean, his
name may be gloryfied: when he shall have all the rule over us, and that we
shall walk according as he has taught us by his word, without adding any
thing thereto of our own: and that he will in such sort supporte us in our
weaknesses, that we cease not always to continue in his holy vocation,
albeit we go not on so swiftly, and run not with such zeal and feruencie as we
ought: and that in the mean time we may be armed (howsoever it fall out) with
his power, to fight against all temptations, and never to decline out of the
good way, albeit we have many occasions thereto. And that he may not only show
us this favor, but also to all peoples and nations of the Earth etc.

The seventh Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 26.
6 Isaac therefore dwelt in Gerar:

7 And when the men of that place asked him concerning his wife, he said it is
my sister, for he feared to say, it is my wife: For (said he) I must take heed
lest the men of this place kill me for Rebecca, because she was fair.

8 Now it came to pass when he had remained there many days, that Abimilech
the king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and as he looked, Behold
Isaac played with Rebecca his wife.

9 Wherefore Abimelech called Isaac and said, surely behold she is thy wife:
how then saydest thou she is my sister? To whom Isaac said, because I said,
I must take heed lest I dye for her.

10 Then said Abimelech, what is this that thou have done unto us? It was not
far off that one of this people had not lien by her, so thou had brought
sin upon us.


WE have seen the temptation which happened to Isaac, when he was so
pressed with famine, that it enforced him too forsake the place of his
habitation: For this should at the least have been, that God should have
nourished and fed him in that country which he had assigned unto him for an
inheritance: But if he would not accomplish his promise unto him, should he
not have given him some little taste thereof? But now when famine drives him
away, this is, as if God had forsaken him there, and as though he had had no
more care of him. Isaac therefore had here a great combat to endure, seeing
he was as it were destitute of Gods favor, which is common to all: For if he
nourish the contemners of his majesty, and the wickedest of the world, making
his sun to shine upon the^, and causing the earth to bring forth fruit for
their nourishment: what should he do for them whom he has taken into his
custody, and adopted for his children? But yet see a greater temptation,
seeing Isaac was forbid to go into Egypt, and that God had showed him a
certain place of rest, and would that he should dwell there, until he might
return, and that the dearth were passed. When God then had led him thither as
if he should say, behold a corner to rest in, which I do assign thee: and
there farther, that he fears lest he should be killed for his wives sake: and
after that he was taken and reproved: mark further these tokens of the wrath of
god upon him, in such sort that he could not be but in an horrible perplexity.
Now it is very true, that he was wounderful weak, as we shall see
hereafter: but howsoever it was, the issue shows, that God was not forgetful
of him. And this is sufficient. For he will for a time keep himself secret,
in such sort that the poor faithful ones shall be as it were lost: but this is
enough, that after that he has humbled them, after that he has discovered
their infirmities, that he shows himself altogether to make them feel as it
were by effect, that all this while that it seemed to the^ that they were
quite abandoned from him, he yet in pity looked upon them. Mark then how it
came to pass with Isaac.

Now in the first place it is said that in stead of confessing that Rebecca
was his wife, he said she was his sister. We saw the like in Abraham: But
this is marvelous, that Isaac had not learned this lesson, by the experience
that was given to his father and mother: for they were both chastised for
their over great fear. And Isaac could not be ignorant of it. There is no
doubt but his father had such care (as we have seen) to teach his family,
but that he had instructed his son herein: Take heed to thy self: For I have
been tossed too and fro all my life long, the like may happen unto thee: For
God has yet set me four hundred years before we enter into the possession of
that Country: it must needs be that thou go from one side to another. But I
distrusted the protection of my God, and I have received my payment for it: yea
I was chastised for it by a profane king, that had no fear of God: a poor
blind wretch reproved me of my fault, and God made both me and thy mother
ashamed thereof, when we were so corrected there. Therefore fortify thy self.
There is no doubt, but that Isaac had received such instruction: but when he
came to receive the blows, he had lost all, and was deuoid both of reason and
council, and there is no doubt, but he had some distrust in him. For faith will
always minister unto us an invincible constancy, to attempt nothing, but that
which God allows.

Mark wherein we may know whether we be well grounded in God, and stayed
upon his promises: that is, when we shall be in any trouble, in any
perplexity, and in any danger, if we walk on always in the path which GOD
has commanded us, and do not decline therefrom, then he will guide us in all
our ways. If then we have this courage, only to repose our selves upon God,
and to hope that he will help us: then see an undoubted trial and proof of
our faith. But if we decline either on the oneside or on the other, it is very
certain that our infidelity bewraieth it self, and that we show (not having any
victory against temptations) that we are not sufficiently stayed, and that we
have (as a man would say) our straggling thoughts. For we see that Isaac fell
to a very unlawful thing, when to save his life, he cloked the truth as we
have seen.

This therefore is a token, that he had no perfect faith: but that he had
some mistrust mingled with it. But in this he is not to be excused: and yet
nevertheless he was a mirror of all holiness. So then we have al, good
occasion to hang down our eyes, and to know that when we imagine that we have
well profited in Gods School, yet we shall be far off from our mark. And
indeed it shall be a very easy matter unto us, when we are far of from all
combats, to be the valiauntest in the world: but when they shall approach to
buckle with us, then he hold us al affrayde. Thus then let us know, that
there is not one that has not need to pray daily, that God will increase his
faith, correcting the remnaunt of his unbelief. Mark this for one lesson. Now
heervpon we have one good advertisement: and that is, that when any danger
befalls us, or that we fear to fall into any evil: that this is as it were
a cloud to dazel our eyes, in such sort that we know not what will become of
us, we have no certain counsel, and the wisest are overtaken therein: Let us
not presume to be subtle and sharp and to have such promptitude, to esteem
that we shall always be strong and mighty, that we shall have light hearts,
and shall find remedies in our brain when any trouble shall come upon us, let
us keep our selves from such arrogancy: but let us rather acknowledge that
God has in himself the spirit of wisdom and of counsel, and let us run
unto him. And when we shall be as it were oppressed and that we can not at the
first resolve our selves, let us not be as those that always forge and coin
new discourses: but let us go unto God, and pray him to shine unto us in the
midst of darkness: yea and specially let us wait that we be not altogether
pressed down: but let us acknowledge the ignorance that is in us. And
forasmuch, as we have not by a great deal so much stayednes as were
requisite, let us both morning and evening pray unto God that he will guide us,
and show us what we have to do. Mark then that which we have to learn by
the example of Isaac. But here a question might be asked, whether he
committed so great a fault, seeing he lied not: For we have seen before, that
Rebecca was his Cousine. He might then say she is my sister: For the word in
that language imports as much as of my blood or kindred. There is no question
here neither of the first nor second degree. So Isaac lied not in saying that
Rebecca was his sister. And yet notwithstanding all this, he faulted, yea
indeed: For God is no Sophister, and does not stay upon a word as we have
declared before: but he regards the intent.

When therefore we shall have well painted our words, and that there shall
be some goodly color and fair show to acquit us before men, all this is
nothing: For GOD sounds the heart. And though men can find nothing too say
against our excuses, yet this proves not that GOD is content therewith. And
this which is here, is a very good and profitable admonition. For how do men
commonly jest with God? It is true, that we will confess that it belongs to
him to search into our secret thoughts, and that nothing is hidden from him:
but yet so it is, that we deal with him after the manner of men: and which is
worsse, we will altogether go beyond him, and we will bleare his eyes: and we
will ieste more boldly with him than with men. For although we have many
starting holes, which might discharge us of blame, yet so much there is that we
have some remorse, knowing other men will not judge so thereof, this man is no
beast, he may know my craft. When therefore we have thus disguised our words,
yet we shall be always in doubt, whether men be satisfied or not. But when the
matter is of God, we do nothing but wrythe our mouth, or rather mow and
snuff at God: For we are as brute beasts, yea and worse too in this point.
But so much the more ought we to learn this doctrine: that is to say, that God
cares not for all our goodly colors: for they are nothing else but breeches
of leaves, and this excused not our father Adam, that he came not out too make
his account. What must we then do? We must so acknowledge our faults in
simplicity, that we be first our own judges: and when we shall once have found
out, that there was some crooked and indirect dealing, we must acknowledge
that* it displeased God. For mark Isaacks intention, it was to hide his
marriage. It is true that the words which he uses are not such as for which
he should be called a liar: but yet for all that there was some leazing in
him. And why so? Because he would not confess his marriage: but would that
it should be unknown, and that men should not think that Rebecca was his
wife. Mark then in sum the thing we have to learn: That is, that whatsoever
words we have in our mouth, nothing can justify us, unless that our
affection be pure and right, and that we go not in any bypathes, to stray
here and there. And when Saint Paul condemns lying: he adds that every
one speak in truth to his neighbors. When we shall have proceeded thus far
herein, see how we shall be holden and reputed true before God. But if there be
any sleights or crafts, and that we endeavor to speak so, that it cannot be
understood what we say, and that it be so wrested and turned, as if our
tongue were double, in this we are already condemned for liars. This then in
su^me is that which we have to learn upon this point. Now when it is said,
That Isaac feared lest he should have been killed for his wives sake:

There is no doubt, but that he might thereby also have taken occasion, seeing
(as Abraham his father alleged) that there was no fear of God in the
country: not for that there was so outrageous Impiety, that neither good nor
evil was known there. For we see how the King of the Country spoke: but
forasmuch as the true religion ruled not there, and because there was nothing
but Idolatry, it seemed rather to Isaac that all was confused. For in deed
we shall never have a sure rule, to walk in equity and right, unless we have
the majesty of God present, and that we be holden in with that, as it were a
bridle. Now when we know not what God is, and that we have nothing but
confuse speculatio^s, albeit that we have some honesty, and though we have the
discerning of good and evil, and that we are not given to hurt, nor to commit
wrong and violence, yet so it is that there is no stayednesse in us. For (as I
have said) we cannot build upon any other foundation, to have a firm and
stable building, but upon the fear of God going before. Isaac therefore might
have some occasion to fear and to prevent danger: but in the mean while he
ought to have known, of what force God his sauegarde was, even such as it had
been before by experience declared unto him: For if he had been well advised, he
would not but have understood that God had his arm stretched out, for to have
succourd him, and that invisible manner: For he had said unto him: Fear not,
for I am with thee: I am thy very large reward. It is true that this was not
spoken expressly to him: but that which was spoken to his father, was as well
spoken him. For he was the heir of that promise.

Seeing then he waited not upon God, herein he is reproved of infidelity.
It is true that Faith lets not but that we may apprehende those dangers,
wherewith we are besette round about: For Faith serves not too make us
insensible. And this should be no virtue, to us to call upon God: unless we
were provoked, seeing that we cannot escape danger without his aid: but there
is a great difference, whether our fear be such as makes us to go out of
the right path: or rather be as a spur unto us too provoke us too go unto
God. If Isaac had thought thus with himself, It behooves that I return me
to my God: For I have no other refuge, but to have recourse too his help: he
has promised it me, yea and I have had already experience thereof in my
need. It must therefore needs be that his truth do yet declare and show it
self toward me. If Isaac had been come thus far, it is certain, that his
faith had been so much the better tried: and his fear had showed, as if he
had been strengthened in God being weak in himself: but when he is overcome
with fear, and farther takes such counsel as God condemns: therein he
frames not himself to the duty of a faithful man. When Isaac went thus,
heerin he shows he fears, in as much as he was not sufficiently given to
the word of God, and that his faith was not well resolved: but in that he
wauereth and varyeth, hereby he shows that he did not steadfastly trust in
God as he should.

But now we see Isaacks fault, we must so much the rather be warned (as we
have already said) that in all the objects which we shall have to make us
affraide, that we always do God this honor, that there is sufficient in him
too remedy it, that if we call upon him, and after that we use the means
that he has left unto us, and which he allows, without going beyond our
bounds either to the right hand or to the left. Isaac therefore did no wrong
at all to them of that country, but to God, which is much more. And moreover,
he is not wholly to be excused, seeing he conceived such a judgment of his
own head: For although there were no fear of God in that place, nor true
Religion in that country, yet so it is that true charity is not suspicious.
None had yet done him any scath or injury, ought he then at the first dashe
to have condemned them? For this cause God suffered this evil to come upon
him: and yet shows him singular mercy: For his wife might have been ravished,
as also might have come to pass to his father.

Behold a king which is of the country of Gerar, and yet God bridleth him
from doing any hurt to Isaac, yea knowing well that he had no such virtue in him
self, as was in his father Abraham, like as we have showed already: and mark
also wherefore God preuenteth him, when he had determined to go into Egypt he
withdraws him: as it were by force, and forbideth him to go out of the la^d
which he had promised him. We have showed already that God according to the
measure he has given us, does also prove us. He works therefore in all men,
as in sundry shoppes and by instruments which are not of the same power. And
so, mark Isaac who was spared for once: but also we see how pitiful and
kind the Lord was unto him, when he loosed not the bridle to King Abimilech
to do that unto him which wadone unto Abraham his father. For if we demand,
why it fell out at one time, and not at an other. It is certain that God
governed this by his wonderful counsel: For after he once loses the raines
unto men, it is certain that they pass their bounds. And it is said expressly
that he holds the hands of Kings in his hand, and that he turns them hither
and thither as he thinks good. So then it behooves us to conclude, that the
heart of the king of Gerar was holden that it desired not Rebecca: otherwise
he had been subject to that concupiscence, that poor Isaac should have been
thereby tormented even unto the uttermost and had been swallowed up with terible
distresses: but (as we have said) God who is faithful spares his own, or
tries them more to the quick, according to the power that he knows to be in
them.

Moreover when we shall be so fearful and so weak, that with much a do, we
shall be scarce able (as a man would say) to bear one filip: yet let us
trust that God will give us strength, when it shall please him to draw us out to
a more hard trial: but notwithstanding this ought not to make us careless. If
I feel my self feeble, and that I say, o, God will spare me, for, he knows
that I can bear nothing: it is certain, that I shall be punished for my
unthankfulness. And why so? So far forth as we are weak we must run unto
him, who has all power to supply our wantes. And therefore let us learn when
it is said that God will help us, and that he will give us strength to endure
all the combats, which shall be directed against us, this is to the end we
should learn to exercise our selves in prayer day by day. And therefore let us
not be sluggishe, because it is said that God stre^gtheneth his, al after as
it shall please him to draw them into trial: but let this serve to make us
always to look more nearly unto our selves: and after we know our miseryes,
that we should seek for remedy, and pray him that it would please him never
to suffer us to fall in any sort whatsoever, but that he will supporte us, or
else when he will that we shall fight more courageously, that he will give us
wherewithal that we may be armed from above, as he knows best always how to
give victory to those that trust in him, and who fight not but under his
banner. Mark then concerning the diversity we read betwixt Abraham and
Isaac. Now it is said: That the King saw Isaac sporting himself with
Rebecca his wife, and that afterward he called him, and said unto him: For a
truth that is thy wife.

By this we may see that there was a great deal more integrity at that time,
tha^ there is at this day, and that whordomes and dissolute lives were not so
common. For some men at the first dash would have set up a sinister judgment
against Isaac. It must needs be therefore, that men had more honesty, then
is to be seen in our time. And seeing there is no doubt, that Isaac getting
this reputation amongst al, that he was no villain nor whoremonger, that under
color of saying she was his sister carried a whore after him. There is no
doubt (I say) but when both he and his manner of life was known, but that
every one was persuaded, that he was an holy man, and fearing God, and that he
was not given to any such vices and enormities.

And this is a point which we ought well to mark: For there is no man that
would not be counted an honest man: and so soon as men do conceive any
evil of us: we think that they do us great wrong: and yet in the mean
while we regard not to use the mean, that should not cause us to be ill
thought of, and how to avoid that men should not charge us with blames and
faults. The mean were so to bear and order our selves, that all might have
their mouths stopped: that first of all the fear of God bear rule in us,
and next that we have our conversation with men, in love and in uprightness,
even as God has commanded us the same. If we have this, it is certain that we
shall stop up many wicked mouths. But it is very true, that the holiest and
godlyest, men can not many times let the wicked to speak evil of them: For
was not the Son of GOD himself subject unto slanders and opprobryes? Was
it not vpbraide him, that he blasphemed against GOD his father. But yet for
all this, the Scripture says not without cause, that then we stop the
mouths of the wicked, when we shun all offenses, and when we do not only
labor to abstain from evil, but also from all show of evil.

Wherefore they that have so great care of their credit and reputation, that
they cannot abide to be abased either in one respect or other, et the^ have
regard to the mean: that is to say, let them prevent that they be not justly
blamed, and herein they follow the example of Isaac. For we see that being a
stranger in a barbarous Country, where there was nothing but Idolatry:
nevertheless so it is that he is yet esteemed for a man fearing God, and that
they could not raise up an evil judgment of him. And why so? Because they
were convinced of the contrary by his good life and honesty: Let us do the
like, and it is certain, that we shall stop many slanders and many reproaches.
But yet we have further to note, that the^ there was such honesty amongst men,
that if a man sported familiarly with his wife, it was in marriage. But now a
days all is so ouerflowed, that a man must shut his eyes against the greatest
vilanyes of the world. Let a man go into Courts, o, it is certain that
therein the wickednesses are so unruly, as a man can behold nothing more. And
especially if a husband see his wife to be allured with an other man's eye, and
that some do abuse her thereby as though she were an harlot, he must set a
good countenance upon it: for if he show any sign, that he is grieved
therewith, and that he do not laugh at it, as others do, o, say they, he is
a jealous fool and a dizarde. Lo how it is in this case: For men are come
even to the heap of iniquite, in so much that they have lost all
shamefastness, because they are given to such beastly liberty, that there is
no more honesty amongst them. And I would to God this mischief were in no
place else but in these courts: But it is even a deluge or floude, which a man
shall see in all estates, yea even to the least, such iestures of
incontinencie, and dissolute wantonness, that it is pity to behold. But let
us mark how far off we be from these men which were as it were miserable
blind ones having no knowledge of God, having no law written, no nor yet any
revelation: and yet notwithstanding they had this honesty, that none ticked
nor toied over familiarly with another ma^s wife. nor had any gestures whereby
any evil might be suspected, as we see here. For truth (says he) this it thy
wife. And whereupon does he conclude it? It is because that vice was not
accustomed there: and it was not come in use nor in possession amongst men, in
such sort but that they might easily discern betwixt marriage and whoredom.

Now this teaches us so to behave our selves each toward others, that there
be no unchaste looks, no vicious gestures: but that we be in such sort pure
from all evil, that even before men we give no occasion to speak evil, nor
yet to think evil of us. It is true that he speaks here of some gesture
which was over familiar to a strange man: For it needs not that we should
be so austere, that we can not live together, without giving occasion of
evil: and yet in the mean time living in familiarity, yea and sporting our
selves with all honesty, showing that we have chaste hearts, chaste eyes, and
all our senses chaste.

But when Isaac played thus with his wife, he made some sign of a husband to
his wife: so that it might be judged either this man is a whoremonger, or else
he must needs be her husband. Now to think him a whoremonger, they could
not, because he had behaved himself honestly in the fear of God, and with the
good will of every one in the country of Gerar: he must therefore be esteemed
for her husband. But heerevpon Isaac confesses his fault: but he confesses
it alleging that he feared, lest he should have been killed. Here things
are rehearsed more briefly, then we have seen before. For Abraham was rebuked
more sharply: and likewise he makes a more long excuse thereof. I did know
(says he) that there was no fear of God in this Country. Only Isaac
says, I feared least they would kill me.

Now he shows here that although Rebecca were his sister, nevertheless seeing
that his purpose was to cloak the truth: it was to be condemned. So likewise,
when we will be very subtle for a time, let us not be so obstinate as
altogether too maintain all that we have said and done (although there be
some fault in us:) but let us frankly acknowledge it. For Isaac might have
said, yea, she is my sister. But notwithstanding that which he had said, he
adds that he was to be blamed, as also Abimilech did: For he saw just cause
to condemn Isaac, and therefore he says unto him, Wherefore haste thou
done this thing?

Now we have to note on the one side, that which was alleged before: that
is to say, that God had reproved and chastised the kings because of his
servants, albeit they were but a few in number, albeit they were as poor
wandering people in the land of Canaan. And seeing GOD maintained their quarrel,
and set himself against all the violence and evil that could be done unto
them: hereby he shows the singular favor that he did bear unto them. And
also the Prophet adds, that for this cause he says: Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

It is true that there was in Abraham and Isaac excellent virtue and
holiness: but howsoever it be, yet so it is that we at this day are also
anointed to be under the keeping of God, and we succeed to all the promises
which were given unto them. So then, though we shall be never so small a number,
and as a poor despised people, as Sheep in the throat of Wolves, yet let us
not doubt, but that GOD has wherewith to defend us, and that he will display
his power, as much as shall be necessary, yea and that against the mightiest
Kings of the world. For sometimes God has indeed suffered that those of the
meaner and common sort of people have vexed and molested his servants, as we
shall see hereafter, and that very shortly. Which what soever it be, when he
has declared that he foreseeth the war, and that he sets him self in
order against the Kings: Hereby he has showed that the life of his servants
is dear and precious unto him. Let us therefore hope the like, and we shall
not be deceived. And when we shall see the mightiest of the world to be our
enemies, and shall daily hear rumors of many tumults and troubles: let us not
doubt, but that our Lord will remedy all, and will always be our buckler to put
back al our blows, when it shall be most like that they must fall upon our
heads. Lo what we have to put in practice by the example of Isaac. And
although here God afflicted not Abimilech as before, and that he reproved him
not as he had done the king of Egypt: nevertheless he keeps him bridled,
and holds him as it were in fear: so that although Rebecca were fair, yet it
fell so out: that the king of the country desired her not, no albeit he
imagined that it had been laweful for him to have taken her to wife. Lo then on
the one side what we have to mark: on the other this, that nevertheless God
humbled Isaac and suffered not his infidelity to remain altogether
unpunished: yet the punishment is very gentle, But howsoever it was, he was
reformed. Now if nothing had happened unto Isaac, and that it had not been
perceived that Rebecca had been his wife, he had not returned from it, neither
had he ever remembered his fault which he had committed: and specially he had
pleased himself herein, because the event was good and as he would have
wished, and therefore he would have thought that God would have allowed it.
For men when their faults are not showed them, flatter and harden themselves
in them. But God woorketh our good and salvation when he makes us to feel
our sins, and corrects us in such sort, that we are even compelled to
think upon them. Mark then how it fell out herein to Isaac. It is very true
that God did bear with him very much, when he suffered nothing to be attempted
against his wife, that the very king of the country called so gently for him,
and complained to him as too his equal and compagnion. Lo a wonderful
supporte: and hereby we see that God has pity upon his, not trying them
further then they are able to bear. But whatsoever it is, yet so it is that
Isaac comes too acknowledge his sin. And who is judge thereof? even a
poor panim, an Idolater. God might rather have sent an Angel from heaven, or
else have given him some revelation to have said unto him, what do thou? But
he leaves him there: For he was not worthy too be taught so honorably,
but the blind ones must discover his evil and condemn him.

Lo then, the shame that was done unto him, too the end that he might be
the more humbled thereby, and too the end that he might learn for ever after,
better to trust in God, and no more to fall into that fault. This is that we
have to mark. And with all let us take good heed unto ourselves, and let us
not care that men reprove us: but let us take in good part all correctio^s
that God sends us by his word. For what honor does he unto us, when he
provoke us to come unto him, and when with doctrine he joins exhortations?
And after, when he sees that we are too slow, and besides that we are as it
were incorrigible, he uses more sharp reprehensions. But whatsoever it be, all
this is done in his name, that when we read in the holy Scripture, and that
we come to the Sermon, and that there he summoneth us, he is always our Judge.

And lo, also why our Lord Jesus Christ speaking of the preaching of the
Gospel says: When the holy Ghost shall come, he shall judge the world. The
spirit of God therefore exercises his jurisdiction upon us: and to what end?
It is to the end that when we have been condemned, so that we do pass
willinge condemnation, and that we be apt to learn, and that we ask
pardon, he is ready to give us. So then, seeing that GOD has done us this
honor to judge us as it were in his house, and privately by our selves: when
he shows us our faults, are not we overmuch hardened, if we do not bow
down our neck, and become apt to learn, and be ready to be reformed by
him? For if we will rebel so against him, God will suffer that we come to an
other school, and that even the wicked and unbelievers condemn us. We shall
find very many even in this case, that fret themselves and gnashe their teeth,
if a man scratch their scabbes and rub them on the gall, when they come to the
Sermon. For see their replies: was the Scripture made to spur poor people in
such sort? and is this the manner to teach, to cry out after such a fashion? It
seems that he would lighten against us. But in the end God teaches them
after another sort: that is, that his trumpet must sound, and that their
shame must be published in every place, and in the end they must go to the
school of the Gibet. And moreover when we make not our profit of the
corrections which are daily set before us, it must needs be that we be
condemned an hundred miles off, and that by good right. But if herein we
suffered alone, there were no danger: the worste is that the name of God is
blasphemed through our wickedness.

So then, let us learn by this example to become so tractable and apt to be
taught and wrought upon, that when GOD shall reprove us, we willingly suffer
our selves to be condemned of him, and that we be ashamed of our selves: to
the end that our shame and infamy be not discovered and laid open to the
whole world. Lo then what we have farther to learn of this place. But it is
said that Abimilech complaining to Isaac added.

It was not far off, that some of the people had not lien by thy wife: and
thou caused great evil to come vppen us. Concerning the first point, here
Isaac is reproved, of his inconsideration and folly. For that as much as was
in him, he laid his wife open to be defiled. And why so? We have seen
before that the husband ought to be as a veil or couerture to his wife. When
a woman shall be married, and that her husband shall live with her doing his
duty, this is to the end, she may be there as it were in sauegarde, and that
none come to deceive nor defile her. Now therefore Isaac, for the discharging
of his duty, ought to have been as a veil or couerture to his wife: that is
to say, under the name of a husband and of marriage: he ought to have let that
none should have attempted to withdraw her, whether it were to have her to
wife, or after any other manner: For marriage is as a sauegarde, (as we have
said) and God would have it honored in all ages. And although adulterers
would abandon it, as Swine and Asses: yet notwithstanding they have always
had remorse in it: and evermore even amongst he Panims, adulterers went not
unpunished. It is known that if ever any thing in this world was privileged
it was marriage: yea, and thefts and other crimes ought a great deal rather to
be borne with, then such enormities: to wit, when the covenant and company
which God has dedicated in his name, to the end it should be holy, as it were
separated from profanation, is violated.

When therefore this was violated, the Painims knew that it was so great an
abomination, that in no wise it ought to be borne with, Now therefore by the
way, Abimilech finds fault with Isaac, concerning this, that he had thus
prostituted his wife, as much as lay in him. And we are taught by this doctrine
to meet with dangers before hand, and not to tempte God by our rashness and
folly. Let us take good heed therefore how we cloak evil, and (as a man
would say) shut the door against God: so that through our rashenesse and
unadvisedness God be offended. Lo then the wisdom which we ought to have:
and therefore because we have it not, we must ask it of God. But now for the
second matter Abimilech says: Thou had made great evil to come upon us.

And how? when any of the people had committed adultery, and that he had so
offended, what grief soever it had been, he should only have deserved to be
punished: and ought then a whole country to have answered it? Now we see
here that a miserable heathen, an unbeliever, and a poor blind person, knew
that the land should be defiled by an adulterer: and that if this remained
unpunished, notwithstanding before God, lo an whole people culpable therein,
in respect of the temporal punishment. It is true that God knows how to
turn the chastisements that he sends to them that are innocent from that
fault to their profit: For if they suffer, which consented not unto the
evil, this shall not be altogether as if they had been faulty: But God
turns this to their salvation. In the mean while so it is that he never
chastises the^ without cause: if we see it not now with our eye, yet when all
those registers shall be opened, then we shall find, that God has not gone (as
they say) indirectly and awry. And when he sends general punishments upon
a whole people, for one particular fault as it seems, nevertheless he knows
well that all be not innocent therein, as it is expressly said here, and as
also Abimilech understood. For when adulter^^^ are committed, and be not
punished, lo an infection which creeps over the whole land: but shall we yet
say that a man is innocent therein, when we close our eyes, and when we suffer
all this to ouerflowe? Although a man be no judge but a private person, yet he
ought to oppose himself as much as lies in him.

Now on the otherside there is not any one, but he spreads the sail in
stead that he should let the evil: if we had the courage and zeal of God,
we would procure that he might be served and honored, as he is worthy. But
this we do not: there is a certain faintness and sluggishnesse in all. To
be short, vices never reigned, and had swaye in any Country, but both great
and small were partakers therein, by reason of their too much patience or
dissimulation or coldenesse. Mark then why God punishes sins not without
cause.

But moreover concerning adultery, we see what a miserable Heathen has
pronounced. Let us therefore be ashamed when such a great evil shall reign
in the midst of us: and let us know, that there shall need no other Judge to
condemn us, us (I say) that have been baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when we shall maintain such filthynesses and infections, seeing a
poor miserable blind Heathen, knew well what heinous enormitie there was in
such a vice. Lo then what we have to learn, that we may make our profit of
this place. And farther, let us learn to honor Marriage, seeing God has
dedicated it, and that it is a covenant which he has consecrated in his name:
that also it be maintained in his honor and dignity, and that both
Husbands and Wives dwell in such honesty one with the other, that each one
may govern their houses in peace and quietness, and that there be no
loosnesse amongst us: but that we know that we have better profited in the
School of GOD, then our Father Isaacke had done in this point, forasmuch as
he declined therein.

But now let us prostrate ourselves before the high majesty of our good God,
in acknowledging our offenses, praying him that it will please him, to make us
feel the infirmities and vices that are in us, to the end that we may be
displeased therewith, in such sort, that we may fight against them, and not to
give our selves any liberty therein: and when we have offended, that we may
be touched with such repentance, that we may return to him, and mourn for
them, until he have reformed us by his holy spirit, and have drawn us into a
good way, after that we shall have strayed from it. And that withal he would
in the mean while so supporte us in our weakness, that we never leave to be
his Children, albeit we honor him not as our father, as were meet. And that
he will not only show us this favor, but also to all peoples and nations of
the earth etc.

The eight Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 26.
11 And Abimilech commanded all his people saying, He that shall touch this
man or his wife, he shall undoubtedly dye the death.

12 Now Isaac sowing in that land, he got every year an hundred measures: so
did Iehoua bless him.

13 So did that man increase, and grow on with a continual increase, even
until he was very rich.

14 For he had great possession of flocks, and possession of droues, and so
great a family, that the Philistians inuied him*

15 And they dammed up all the Wells, which his fathers servants had dug,
in the time of his father Abraham filling them up with earth.

16 So as Abimilech said unto Isaac, Depart from us, for thou art made more
mightier then we.

17 Therefore Isaac departed from thence, and pitching his tents in the
valley of Gerar, he settled there,

18 (For Isaac had dug again the wels of water, which they had dug in
the time of Abraham his father, and which the Philistines had dammed up after
the death of Abraham: and he had given them names, according to the names which
his father had given them.)

19 And the servants of Isaac digging in the same valey, they found there a
well of living waters.

20 Now the Shepherds of Gerar, contended with Isaacks shepheardes saying:
These waters are ours: Wherefore they called the name of that well Hesek,
because they had moved strife with them of their own accord.

21 Afterward when they had dug another Well, they contended also for that.
Wherefore he called the name of that Sitnah.


WE have seen how God had pity upon Isaac, although he was worthy to
have been forsaken in the time of his necessity: For this was a singular
favor, that Rebeccaes chastity was kept: because Isaac had given it over,
and as much as was in him forsaken it, for the sauegarde of his own life. Lo a
distrust which deserved rather severe chastisement: but yet would God supporte
him, and be the protector of his wife, who otherwise was forsaken. Now it is
said here, that God stretched out his mercy farther: that is to say, that he
would have Isaac to be in safety for the time to come, and that none should
molest him either in his own person, or concerning his wife. And in very deed
it must needs be that this provision was freely given him: For it might have
been laid in his dish that he had not greatly passed that his wife had been put
to shame and reproach. And this was to cause him every day to have many
quarrels. But heerin God tries him: and yet he uses the King of the country,
to the end he might be in rest, to the end that none should come to assail him.
It is therefore ordained that none shall touch him upon pain of death. Now this
was don by special privilege according to that we have aleaged out of the
Psalm. That God for the favor he did bear to Abraham and Isaac, even
chastised Kings and rebuked peoples: but yet so much as we may gather that
Abimilech, being seized with fear, made a decree the which was very right.
And why was not this law perpetual? Because that men who have not the lively
root of the fear of God, do nothing but by force and violence, there is no
hold nor constancy in them, as we shall find oftentimes. But in as much then
as Abimilech perceived, that if Isaac were offended or that any did him any
wrong, that this should not remain unpunished, and that God would take
vengeance of it: Lo why he was thus brideled.

Now this is rehearsed unto us above all, to the end we might know, how God
has kept his own, though they have dwelt amongst wicked and cruel people, as
it were amongst savage beasts: nevertheless he has mayntained them by his
power: and this is to the end that we likewise should trust in him. For the
goodness of God, which he used toward our old fathers, is not only rehearsed
unto us, to the end that we should know that he was then pitiful toward them
which trusted in him: but that we should not doubt, that he will suffer us to be
molested at this day, so that we have our refuge unto him: and when we know
that he will be on our side, that we be also certain that he will maintain our
part, and that his protection will be enough for us, against whatsoever, men
shall be able to attempt or devise against us.

When therefore we shall have such an affiaunce, the example of Isaac which is
here rehearsed unto us, ought too serve us for an instruction, as if God should
show us his hand stretched out, to help and succor us in our need. And
specially when our enemies shall be strong and mighty, and that nothing shall be
able to let them here below, from oppressing us, then let us know that God
will not cease to put to his helping hand. For we know what he has said by
his Prophet Esaias touching his Church, that it is more precious unto him, than
all the Realms and Empires of this world.

Now admit we be never so much despised of worldlings, that we seem not
worthy too them (as a man would say) to be cast too the Dogs: Yet
howsoever it be, forasmuch as God has once declared that we are his flock,
and that he has taken us into his charge, let us assure our selves, that he
will not fail us, when we shall be assaulted of them who torment us, and to
whom it seems, that God must not touch them. But moreover Moses adds:
That Isaac sowing, he gathered an hundred measures.

That is to say, an hundred times as much as he sowed. Here a question might
be asked, seeinge Isaac had not one foot of land, how he could sow. But
some imagine that he had purchased some there: but this were against all
reason. For it must be that the fathers content them selves, with the promise
which was given them, and that they dwell in the land of promise as strangers.
And in deed, it is said soon after, that Isaac pitched his tents, to
declare that he had no certain house nor building. We see therefore that he was
a vagabonde in earth, as was his father Abraham: but he might well hyer some
land to sow therein: For he had a great family: as we saw Abraham him self
had, who gathered out of his house more then four hundredth chosen men, to
enter into battle. Isaac had not much diminished it as we see: likewise it
must be that he could not be much increased, especially dwelling in a strange
country: he had hired some farm or taken some land to sow therein: according
as we know that the ancient fathers, although God had enriched them, yet they
ceased not to give them selves to labor both they and their household. For
although they had both riches and commodities, yet they abused not those
benefits that God had so bountifully bestowed upon them, in pompes nor in
Idleness too become Kings: but to maintain always them selves in the mean
estate. Mark then briefly that we have to learn, when Isaac having hired
some possession sowed therein. And this is rehearsed of Moses because he
adds, that GOD blessed him therein, and made him so to prosper, that he
gathered in an hundred fold. But we shall find it strange in this country,
which was so hungry and as it were barren in comparison of Iudaea and Syria,
and of those Countries there aboutes: especially when he spoke of an hundred
fold, for as much as the thing may seem incredible unto us: because we esteem
that which is spoken unto us according to that we have seen.

But it is not without cause that our Lord Jesus Christ, declares this unto
us by a similitude, taken from the seed which is sown: although he spoke to
another purpose: but notwithstanding he says that when men shall sow, one part
falls into the path, and the fowls of the air devour it: another shall
fall among stones, and this shall take no root: for it has no nourishment: The
other part shall be choked among bushes and thorns: But that which falls
into good ground (says he) shall bring fruit, one thirty, the other sixty,
and the last an hundred fold.

When we come thus far (as I have said) we cannot be persuaded therein,
unless the son of God had spoken it. But the ancient fathers, who have
written of the land of Chaldaea, and especially have bin in the same place, and
know it thoroughly, they say that the ordinary increase was Lxxx. and an C. But
here because he spoke of the country of the Philistines which was fertile, but
not as Chaldaea, therefore Moises reherseth that, for a singular gift which God
gave unto Isaac, that he gathers an hundredth fold. Lo here a sign of the
blessing of God upon Isaac, yea concerning that, which belonged unto this
transitory life. For although the ancient fathers always respected the
heavenly inheritance, and bent al their affections thitherward: yet
notwithstanding being mortal men, they needed that God should give the^ some
taste of his goodness in this world. For that which S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 4.
has always place here: That the fear of God has the promises not only of
everlasting life, but also of this present life. While we are in this life God
will not give us the fulness of those blessings he promises us: For in very
deed, we would have our paradise here, and we would cast our eyes no further
but al our senses would be clean glutted, if GOD should give us in all respects
such abundance as we require, and therefore he gives us only a little taste of
his goodness, to the end to draw us on further. But what though? yet ca^ we but
in part acknowledge that God is our father not only by the testimony that we
have thereof from his mouth, but also by those blessings which he liberally
bestows upon us. And here we behold both these things, in this history
which Moses sets down: that is to say, that God blesses his own, in such
sort, that they have occasion to rejoice in him: and yet in that he deuideth
their morsels in such a portion, that they be always in mourning whilst they
are in this world, and thereby are occasioned to cast their eyes farther. For
mark our father Isaac, he prospers, he increases, and becomes mighty, so
says Moses: and he says not only that God blessed him at once: but that he
multiplied him in such sort that he always grew and waxed richer and richer.
But on the other side he adds: That the Philistines enuyed him.

We see that Isaac had such cause too rejoice in God for the prosperity
which was given unto him, that yet notwithstanding God awakened him, and mixed
his sweet meat with some sower sauce. This was a great cause of joy unto him,
when GOD did so sensibly multiply him. It was as it were a looking glass to
all the Philistines, wherein to behold what it was to serve god: yet
notwithstanding this turns to his trouble and causes him to be molested. We
see the^ how God tempereth his benefits which he bestows liberally upon his
children (I say, the temporal benefits which concern this life) that they
can never settle them selves and rest therein. But yet here further a question
might be asked, why God caused Isaac so to prosper, that the inahbitants of
the country should rise up against him. Had it not been much better for him that
he had continued in a mean estate, and had lived quiet under his tent then to
be so enriched that every one should war against him, and that they could not
abide him, fearing least he would become Lord over them, and tread them
under his feet? If GOD had kept such a mean, it seems that it had been
more profitable to Isaac. Wherefore then is it that he does multiply him, and
that this is the cause that he is pursued, yea, and that he has no water for
himself neither for his family or for his cattle? But God is so wise in
disposing all things, that if he make his servants to prosper, he shows them
that they ought to keep them selves fast unto him, and that they have occasion
to bless him. And yet notwithstanding: when he lays them open to troubles
and vexations, he turns this also to their good. So then we must mark this
for a rule, That all the graces which we receive from the hand of God in this
world, they are joined with some miseryes, and that our honey is never pure,
but always there is some vinegar mixed with it: God could well take another
course, if it had pleased him: but we must be subject unto him, and be content
with that, that he does, although that our senses and the lusts of our flesh
resist against it. And true it is that a man which were well advised, would
never seek to be rich nor wealthy: and so that he might have competent for
meat and drink and clothing: he would seek for no other state or condition.
Yet notwithstanding it pleases God to exercise one sort with poverty, and to
be bountiful toward others: and both poor and rich may be faithful, and
both two the children of God. I speak not of all in general: but we see
that there are some fearing God, who are not all of like estate, and condition:
Some of the^ have wealth enough for their maintenance, yea and that to make
them live with some credit and countenance amongst men: others some have
scarcely a morsel of bread to eat.

Now if it were in us to order this matter, we would that God should use
rather an equal and like measure: yea, but he knows wherefore, he chooses
rather such a diversity. And therefore (as I have said) it is for us to
content our selves with his pleasure. And so when it pleases him to make his
servants to prosper in such sort, that we may know for a surety that his
blessing rests in their persons, it is a testimony of his goodness: and
hereof they ought to make their profit. But when there is any sowrenes
mingled with it, they ought to think, GOD would not that I should sleep
here, nor rest my self so upon these earthly benefits, that they should
make me to forget everlasting life. It behooves therefore that the faithful
have this wisdom and consideration in them, that always they know how to make
their profit, of those benefits that God bestows upon them: and in the
mean time that they forget not the favor that he has showed unto the^?
although that they have many cares, griefs, troubles and wrongs, which shall be
done unto them by me^. And namely here both the rich and poor, are taught
their duty. When a man shall be afflicted with poverty and need, yet in the
mean time god will not suffer him to be so destitute and forsaken, but that
always he shall have some little portion, too the end he may feel that God
has care of him. And therefore when the faithful have not all that they
desire: but God leaves them there as if he forsook them: they must not
therefore murmr against him nor think that he has cast them off: but how
little so ever it be, that he has given them (yea be it never so little) they
must apply it to taste the goodness of God, so that they may call upon him as
their father, and put their trust in him, and patiently bear their condition,
which otherwise would be hard and miserable unto them. And as for the rich,
when they shall have more wealth then they have need off, if this breed them
any care, and bring some grief as the common Proverb is: He that has land,
has war at hand. If a man have but an Acre of ground, he shall either be
drawn into suit of law, or else he shall have some other trouble about it.
As for the rich (I say) when they see these things, that they cannot possess
their goods with peace and quietness, but that they shall always have some
trouble and disquietnesse withal: let them know that for all this, they must
not be distasted, and that the blessing of god always gives them courage to
trust in him: and that they be not led to unthankfulness and forgetfulness: but
that always they bless his name. And this is it that we have to note out of
this place where it is said, that, God made Isaac to prosper, and that this
was the cause that moved the inhabitants of the country to envy him, who
therefore did drive him out from amongst them. Now it is said expressly That
the king of Gerar sent unto him saying, we cannot suffer thee to tarry amongst
us, for thou art mightyer than we. Here we see more clearly that which erst I
touched: to wit, that they that are not well roted in the fear of God may do
virtuous acts: but this is as it were by blasts and they do not continue, there
is no perseverance unless it be in them whom God governs, and whom he has so
reformed by his holy spirit, that they follow on their course til they come to
the goal: yet notwithstanding eue^ the faithful them selves are not so
constaunt in well doing, but many times they tread awty and go out of the way:
but God corrects them, and when they are strayed here and there, he brings
them back into the good way. But as for them whom he has not yet regenerated
and borne anewe, and who keep their natural inclination, although it seem
oftentimes that they will do meruels, yet lo in the turning of a hand they are
changed. We see this in the king of Gerar, ere while he was as an Angel: for
when he spoke of abusing another man's wife, he said that it was to infect the
whole country, and to cause the vengeance of God to come upon great and small.
Behold, a divine sentence, it seems that God spoke by his mouth, and indeed
there is no doubt but that this confession was wrung from him both against
himself, and against all those, who esteemed this (as a man should say) for a
venial sin.

Behold then Abimilech who shows that God had even enforced him and inflamed
him with such a zeal, that he had this fault in great detestation, for he
knew that it was displeasing to God. And thereupon he caused his Proclamation
to be made, that no man should touch Isaac nor his wife, upon pain of death.
This is yet another commendable point: It seems therefore that Abimilech was
wholly become fearing GOD: but straight way after he says unto Isaac, Away,
get thee hence. He drives out Isaac: he knows that Isaac is under the
protection of God: and when he attempteth any thing against him, is it not as
it were to dispite God, and to break the sauegarde which he has set upon his
servant?

Let us learn therefore, that seeing it is so, to be so co^uersant amongst
those which have no fear of God, as that, if they be gentle and courteous for a
time unto us, and afterward be changed, that we bear it with patience, and
that we be ready too suffer injury of them, after they have don us good.
Moreover let us know that unless God have imprinted his fear in us, and
given us a lively root of it, we should never have any co^stancy or staiednes
in us. Let us pray unto him that it would please him to show unto us by effect,
that he has truly renewed us by his holy spirit: and that we have not a zeal
like unto a fire of stubble which quickly goes out: but that we may desire
always to march on forwards in his obedience and to continue therein: and
although that we sometimes slide from it, as we are very weak, notwithstanding
that we be not clean misseled and carried away from him, but that we may
follow on our course even unto the end. And so we have too beseech him from
day to day, that he will increase in us the graces of his holy spirit: for were
our desire never so good, it is certain that we should be quickly cold: and
as our nature is unconstant, we should from this day ere too morrow be
changed, were it not that God continued to govern us. This is it in su^me
that we have to mark. Now the reason that is here brought by Abimilech, is
taken from common experience: For we know that rich men despise the poor,
and he that has muck, thinks that others are not equal unto him: thereupon
is he by and by puffed up with pride and boldenes, and cruelty follows: as
it is said, Men are like unto horses, when they are well fed, they are wanton
and untamed, they kick, they bite: to be short, they will not be ridden. And
thus fares it most commonly with men. So then, when a man comes to be of
great substance and wealth, it is certain that by nature he will be bent to
advance himself, and pride will bear sway in him. And so is it expressly
said of Sodom, That when they had great abundaunce of wealth, they became
proud, and afterward followed cruelty, so that they had no pity upon their
poor neighbors to help them. And this is as it were almost an ordinary
matter.

So then, when Abimilech says unto Isaac: Thou art stronger than we: depart
therefore and get thee hence. This is because men do abuse the graces of God,
and cannot content them selves with sobriety nor modesty, when God does
advance us.

Now we know hereby, how perverse we be: for in that God shows him self
liberal toward us, it is certain that he draws near unto us, and draws
us near unto him: and this should give us an occasion to humble our selves so
much the more. For there is nothing that ought more to bring us into order, and
to do our duty, then when God shows him self on this sort unto us, and
that we walk as it were in his sight. But if we abuse his graces, and (as I
have already said) if riches engender in us both pride and presumption, and
thereupon contempt of those which are our inferiors, and afterward cruelty,
so as we torment one and moleste an other: we devour this man heeere and
that man theere, is not this to turn light into darcknesse? So then we have to
know the peruersitie which is in us, and whereunto we are not only inclined,
but also given, unless that God do withdraw us from it. Now when God
deals well with his children, it is certain that he does correct this vice in
them, that they have no lust to advance them selves, to put out their horns,
and to show forth their iolities, and to tread under their feet those which
are not equal unto them: and we have already declared, that there is always
mingled a certain cooling, to the end they should not glory and flatter them
selves too much in their felicity. Howsoever it be, it must be that he work
herein by his holy spirit, for there will never be any modesty in us, when
soever any occasion is offered unto us to advance our selves: The pille of an
Onion (as the common Proverb says) is enough to make us to forget from
whence we are, and to make us drunken with arrogancy, and too despise all
other.

But Isaac was not so given too pride and presumption: and Abimilech does him
wrong. But (as I have said) he measured it according to the common Elle,
because that the fashion of men is always to oppress the least, when they can
do it, and to take, leave according to their might to hurt.

And therefore it is that Abimilech says: Thou art more strong then we. And
hereupon we have to note that God admonishes us by this common example, to
carry our selves peaceably and modestly: when we have any occasion offered us
to make any account of our selves: that we lay it aside, and be so much the
more careful to keep our selves in our degree, yea in the basest, and in the
mean while, if it please him to bring us down and to hold us in a low and
despised condition, let us know that he does it for our good, and that it is
as a preservative medicine: and let us know, that if we were advanced to any
high place or honor, that it would be to make us stark blind. And this is it
that we have to bear away in this place. Now it is said afterward: That
Isaac came into the valley of Gerar.

He went not quite out of the country: but he went aparte, to the end not to
be any more in their sight, and to take away all occasion of malice, from all
the inhabitants of Gerar: for we know what manner of people the Philistines
were. Here we see in the first place the patience of Isaac: who not only
replied not: but to purchase peace and rest, trust up his baggage and went his
way, to pitch his tent elsewhere, and herein he has showed his humility. It
is true that he went not quite out of the country: but yet notwithstanding
he might have made some resista^ce, for to have tarried in that place, where he
had as it were taken a Farm. We have seen that his father Abraham had as it
were prepared a little army in his house: he might have therefore done the
like, and so might have withstoode the wrong which was done unto him. But he
is so far off from this, that he is as it were a Lamb: and Moses says
not, that he moved any great contention, or that he skirmished, though he
were chased from them and that wrongfully, after they had received him, and
after they had showed him some sign of courtesy: but he leaves all. So then
we are taught when we shall be oppressed, to bear our wrongs patiently, and
not to take the sword in hand, to work our revenge, when it shall seem that
we have a just cause before men. For we know what is commanded us: to wit,
to give place unto wrath: that is, to suffer that God revenge for us, and so
let us follow our father Isaac, in that that he suffered him self, to be
wickedly driven out of the country, where he had so behaved himself, that
he ought rather to have been beloved of all. For what occasion had they given
them that they should suspect any evil in him? And yet notwithstanding they
cast him out, and say that he is too strong, as though he had abused his
greatness. So this is one lesson touching this retraite of Isaac, where it is
said that he came into the valley of Gerar.

Now Moses adds another temptation, which was very hard unto him: and that
was that he had dug the wells that his father Abraham had dug in his
life time, and that he kept the same names that was given unto them. Here we
see in the first place the malice of the Philistines, although that Abraham had
lived very courteously amongst them: yea and that Abimilech this man's
predecessor, had made a league with him, and came to seek him, and Abraham in
way of homage, had given him one of the Wells that he had dug, which he had
bought again, and had presented the homage unto him as we have seen: yet
notwithstanding all this, that they came to damme up these wells. They knew
that Abraham was the servant of God and a Prophet: God had maintained his
quarrel, and they had a visible testimony thereof: for even the house of
Abimilech had been beaten, and GOD had scourged it: and therefore they might
have been moved thereby to have suffered him: and albeit they had not for a
time been well advised, seeing that Abraham had protested that he would
not do wrong nor hurt any, as he had been sworn too Abimilech: they
should have contented them selves heerewith: they had known the man to be
very loyal, and keeping his promise where he had made it: notwithstanding to
the end he should never return again, they dammed up the Wells which he had
dug: for there is no doubt, but this was done to the end to shut him out
from coming any more amongst them: For as he was a stranger, he might have
sought out a place fit for him to dwell in: as if you would say, at the
least wise I shall have Water, and again there is some pasture for my Cattle.
So then, he might have returned back again: but what do they? o when the
water shall be taken away from him, he shall be constrained to seek pasture
else where: he can never return hither again. See here a vile and
mischeuous malice: but let us know that it is Gods will, that his children
should be so molested, to prove their patience. And again, let us note that
all falls out to the confusion of the wicked, when they are so unkind
against the servants of God: For it is certain that if Abraham had, dwelt
there, the blessing of God had rested in that Country. And when it is here
rehearsed of Isaac, that he gathered in an hundredth fold so much as he sowed,
there is no doubt but that the land was fertile, and that all his neighbors
tasted of the favor of God. To be short, the children of God always give some
sweet sauoure of his mercy: and we have seen that which was said of Sodom
and Gomorrhe, that if God could only have but found one ten, the City had
not been suncke.

But see the contemners of GOD and the unfaithful, who drive out the faithful
from amongst them, and cannot abide them: and this shall always turn to their
own confusion. In the mean while God will have pity upon his own, and
howsoever they be thrust out of the world, are persecuted, and have not where
to set their foot, yet will he always find some refuge and shadow for them:
but yet we must be armed with great patience, when men are so cruel unto us,
that we can find no equity amongst them, that they are as mad beasts: yet
must we endure all this, that we may be armed with the spirit of God, which is
the spirit of lenity. For certain it is that we need nothing to make us to
cast out our poyso^: For we are so delicate and nice, that we can suffer
nothing, and we are always ready to revenge our own quarrels. We shall
therefore never be so gentle, to bear the wrongs that are done unto us,
unless that GOD govern us by his holy Spirit: but howsoever it be, the
example of the fathers is here set before us, to the end we should learn,
not to vex and disquiet our selves too much, when men torment us in any manner
of sort whatsoever.

Moreover it is said here expressly, that Isaac kept the names of the
Wells, as we have seen of Berseba, which was the Well of the oath, in as much
as Abimilech had there sworn with Abraham. Now this was to maintain
possession: For this was as much as a public instrumente or Indenture, or
rather more. Abimilech had made a league there with Abraham: Lo, a promise
made with a solemn ceremony, Abraham had acknowledged homage unto him for the
Wells: the name testifies the same. So that Isaac pretends that the
inhabitants knew, that this was a parcel of the inheritance which his father
had purchased, for him, and therefore that it was his own by law. But all this
prevails nothing, what just title so ever he had, yet notwithstanding they
cease not too quarrel against him. Thus we see, howsoever the children of God
seek nothing else, but to enjoy that which is their own, and which it is
lawful for them to use: notwithstanding they shall be thrust from it. For the
contemners of God are impudent: and what soever men allege unto them, yet
neither reason nor equity can prevail with them, and be made account off.
When we shall see the like at this day, let us not think it a new and a
strange thing. There was more simplicity in that time then, and yet
nevertheless we see that Isaac must be thrust from all that which he
pretended as justly to be his, as was possible.

Now thereupon it is said, that he gave names to these two Wells which were
taken from him, that is to say, for which he was drawn into law: that is to
say, from which he was put: For it booted him not too plead, as at this day:
but by violence he is driven out of possession. Now there is no doubt when
he gave these names of strife and brable, or contention, but that this was
done, as if he made his complaint to God, when he saw that men's ears were
deaf, and all reasons excluded: he has no other way, but this to set up a
memorial, to the end God might have pity upon him. Now therefore let us
learn, when we can gain nothing by bringing forth our titles and right to
keep that which is ours, and that which is given us: that yet notwithstanding
we leave not off to trust that in the end God* will have pity upon us. Lo
then what we have to do: That is, that as much as lies in us, we endeavor
that men may leave us in peace, and that they come not to devour us. This
shall always be lawful to the children of God: For howsoever we be
commanded to be as sheeepe amongst Wolves, yet has God permitted unto us a
peaceable defense, inasmuch as he has taken us into his hands.

We must endeavor therefore, as much as lies in us, to repel all violences,
wrongs, outrages and ryots, that shall be done unto us, and all molestations that
can be devised against us. Have we done this? If we gain nothing, and that men
be so obstinately bent to mischief, and specially if they be possessed with
such fury, that all reason be trodden under foot amongst the^, let us have
recourse unto God, and pray him that it will please him too take our cause into
his own hands: and doubt we not, when men shall become so discourteous, that
they shall deride at whatsoever we can allege, that in the end God will take
order with them. Lo then what we have to bear away of the example of Isaac,
when he named the wells. Strife, debate and contention. For this was not of
Choler, or of the Spleen: as there are very many which will revenge themselves,
and cast out some injurious word: but Isaac commended his cause too God: as
also we are exhorted by Saint Peter, that if we be envied of men and can
find no remedy at their hands, that then we wait when God will put to his
hand, as surely he will.

Now in the end it is said, that Isaac having dug a Well for which he
was not assailed, that he named it Reb^boh as if he should say, Largesses:
and specially he puts it in the plural number: and contenteth not himself
to say. Lo a Largess but he says, behold the Largesses which God has
bestowed upon us. We yet see more plainly that which I have touched before:
That is, when Isaac was in so great distress that he had no water to
drink, that men were so cruel unto him that he could not drink of the water
which he had dug by his own labor, and by the hands of his family, that
he remitteth this matter to GOD, who is the just Judge.

But contrariwise, when God had compassion upon him, and that men came no more
to torment him, and that he had water to drink for him self, and for all his
company: Oh well says he. This is God that has bestowed this upon me. He
says not o: in the end yet I have obtained my purpose, These wicked ones have
let me alone at the length: now let us take our ease? He speaks not so
simply, as a profane man would have done, but he would have a memoryall of
thanks giving unto God, as he had set up memorialls of his complaint to draw
the Lord to have mercy upon him.

Likewise his mind is, now that this benefit of God should be as it were
engraven there, and that men should speak of it, not only for three days,
but after his death: and that they should acknowledge that Well a sign of the
favor that God had showed him. And let us note this circumstance: For he
cease not to give GOD thanks with a quiet heart, though he had been a
long time afflicted. When we have endured long the like troubles, the graces
of God are wont to be darkened by that feeling of our evil: and if GOD suffer
us to languishe for a time, although afterward he reach out his hand unto us,
yet we think it is not from him: but we attribute this to fortune.

But Isaac did not so: but although he was driven out, and that he had endured
this for a long time, yet so soon as God had given him release, he blesses
his name, and says, God has enlarged me. Lo (says he) the largesses or
bounties of GOD. which I behold in this Well. But now in the end we have to
note the patience of Isaac, when we preach now a days of patience, hardly can
we get this point, that if we have to endure never so little, we be not by and
by hot and angry: and when it seems that we are very patient, yet there will
always be some grudging, unless God even at the first push comfort us: and in
the mean season, what suffer we? Surely in a manner nothing. If we endure but
a fillip, o, it is so hard as nothing can be harder: and moreover if men go
on to do us wrong, o, we suffer too much. But we are far of from this
lenity and softness, which is here showed us in our father Isaac. We will
say I cannot bear it. If any man wrong us, but the value of three halfpence,
or of some small portion of our good: o I can not endure it: this is too much.
Yea but Isaac striued for water (I say striued,) he took not a sword to
fight: but he suffered wrong: although he had dug the wells, and his father
had purchased them with his own proper good, and that the King had made him a
grant, and that he had dug them again, and taken a great deal of
travel to have water to drink, notwithstanding all this, we see his patience.
And so when God shall afflict us, and shall loose the bridle to the wicked, that
we shall be pilled and polled of them, let us yet know that we are not come to
that extremity, not to have a drop of water, and to have those elements taken
from us, which God would have common amongst men. For every man will have his
portion aparte, both of corn, and of wine, of flesh, and such like things,
and of moveable and possessions: every one will have his own: but as for
water, it is an Element which GOD has ordained for all men.

When there are Rivers, Wells and fountains in any high way: why should they
be taken away from those that are the creatures of God? But howsoever it be,
yet it fell out that our fathers were brought to such extremity. And this (as
I have already touched) serves to this purpose that we should learn to be
patient, not only to suffer some one little injury, or two or three: but
that in all respects we should be so meek and soft natured: that if it
were in a matter of life and death (as they say) we put our hope in God, that
he will show himself pitiful toward us. And therefore let us not double our
evil, let us not make of one devil two, when the wicked and ungodly persecute
us unjustly: but let us labor to soften their hearts, and to assuage the
malice which they use against us. If we do so, it is certain, that howsoever
we be for a time in extreme anguish, yet in the end God will so enlarge us,
that we shall have good cause to bless his holy name with full mouth.

their dwelling, they must be flitting and have no resting place, unless they
be lodged from day to day (as it were) by the hand of GOD, and in the mean
season, that they prepare themselves to wa^der and go from place to place,
after the example of their fathers, who learned by experience not too have
their inheritance here beneath upon earth, and confessed them selves to be
Pilgrims, as we shall see hereafter that Jacob answered Pharao. In the mean
time we may see also the malice of all those near neighbors thereaboutes: For
the Wells especially, which Abraham had bought, were taken from him after his
death, to the end that his successors and Children might have no use of them.
But it is said that Isaac yet dug a Well there: for he could not be without
water, both for the family he had, which was great, as for his Cattle: but he
went very far to seek water, until GOD restored him too that which was
wrongfully taken from him. He dwells therefore in Beer-scheba for a time
without water, unless he borrowe or buy it: but afterward he finds his
Well again, and so is at some better ease then before, and God suffers them
not that would as it were have made them to dye of thirst to use their malice
and to come to their purpose. But howsoever it be, God heard him not at the
first dashe We have then to learn here, that which was touched yesterday:
that is, that we learn to endure need, yea in the need of water, and that we
think it not strange which our fathers have tried. For it is no reason that
we should be more privileged then they. And if God spare us, that we
acknowledge his goodness in this point: and if he afflict us in any other sort,
that we be so much the more framed to patience. But yet it is said: That God
appeared unto him, the very first night that he went to Beerseba.

Here we must note that which we have handled before in the life of Abraham:
that is, that God appeared unto him, forasmuch as he had need to be aided and
comforted, by reason of his great heauinesses and troubles, which he had
suffered before. This circumstance then is worthy to be noted: and that is,
that God seeing his servant to be afflicted even to extremity, he would give
him some ease: as at this day, although we have no such visions, GOD
nevertheless cease not to show himself unto us, when he sees that we can
bear no more, and that we were like to fail unless he reach forth his
helping hand to sustain us. How often soever we are in distress, we think
that God has estranged him self from us, and we imagine that he has utterly
forgotten us. But contrariwise, when he makes us to taste his favor, in what
sort soever it be, or rather that he does strengthen us, and that we fight
valia^tly against all temptations, or rather that he delivers us from the
wrongs and vexations that are done unto us, or that he does assist us as it
were, after some visible manner: then lo his presence, and then we see that
he has care over us. So let us note, that when God appeared to Isaac, that
it must needs be that he had been in some great necessity: For this happened
not every day: and thereupon let us learn to hold our selves contented, when
God after that he has suffered us too be tormented, too be disquieted,
troubled, and molested, that in the end he shows him self to be father unto
us. And if this fall not out so soon, let us wayt upon him, as we see Isaac
did, who had not always a certain sign that GOD would assiste him: but
contrariwise he then sees him self quite destitute of all succor, and that
for a long time: and after one misery was come, behold another follows as
thick as might be: and yet notwithstanding he quailed not: And therefore let
us follow that path. And in the mean season let us mark also that one only
word which God shall speak unto us, to witness the love which he bears
unto us, will be better worth unto us, then all the goods which we can have,
yea if we had to eat and drink our fill, and that in all delicacie, though
there were no man to trouble us, though we rest on every side: To be short,
though we had all at our hearts desire: If the world went thus with us, it is
certain that we ought not to esteem so much of it, as to have this
testimony, that GOD is merciful unto us. For let us put the case, that a man
did swim in all pleasures and had all the ease in the world and wanted
nothing: yet notwithstanding, if he know not, how it stands betwixt GOD
and him, if he have no doctrine, no promise, he shall be always as it were
in doubt whether his ease will last or no: and if he become so drunken
therewith, that he think that his prosperttie shall yet continue with him,
what may it be too have after this sort all his felicity in this world? How
long indures this life?

So then all the blessings that may happen unto us, are nothing, neither can
they have any good savor, unless we be assured of the favor of GOD: but on
the other side, when it pleases God to declare unto us that he loves us, and
that we are in his protection, that we can not perish, that he holds us by
the hand, and that we are kept and guarded by him. This is it then that ought
to content us, though all the rest did fail us. So then, how soever God gave
some sign unto Isaac, that he had looked upon him in pity: this was nothing
in comparison of that which Moses rehearses now, which was that God appeared
unto him, to the end to continue his covenant toward him, and too ratify
it so much the more, and that he was altogether resolved therein, in such sort
that he was a Buckler unto him, to break all temptations. But we have here in
the first place to note, that this was a vision to prepare Isaac, to the end
that the word which must be given unto him, might be received with the greater
reverence and authority.

Now this vision was as a sign that God spoke: and this has always been very
necessary: For we know how the devil labors to seduce us by illusions and
vain fantasies. When therefore the fathers were taught, to the end they might
have a full assurance of their faith, the majesty of God manifested it self
unto them, whereof they had some infallible impression: For if the word only
had come unto them, it had been as a sound in the air without al stedinesse.
This therefore is no superfluous thing, when Moises says, that God showed and
declared him self unto Isaac: For it was necessary that Isaac should know
and be thoroughly persuaded, that the word which he heard, proceeded from
heaven, and that he might rest therein, that it was an undoubted truth, in
which he could not be abused. It is true that God is invisible, and cannot be
comprehended: and so far is it off, that we can comprehend him with the eye,
that if we do apply all our senses thereto, it is certain that we shall never
attain too his high majesty: The Essence of God therefore, in that it is
infinite, can not be seen of men, but this lets not but that he may show
him self so far forth as is expedient for us, and according to that small
measure that is in us. Thus as often as we read that God appeared unto the
ancient Fathers, this shows not that they comprehended al his essence and
majesty: For that had bin a thing impossible: Man's spirit is very rude: but he
so showed him self, as they were able too bear: that is to say, so far
forth as he saw it to be profitable for them. Yea and if God should lay open
his glory unto us, it would by and by ouerwhelme us: I say if we had a great
deal more understanding than we have, and that our spirit could comprehend an
hundred times more then it does: yet should we be so astonished at the glory
of God, that we should therein be altogether confounded. It behooves therefore
that God have regard what we are able to bear, when it pleases him too
appear unto us. And so let us mark, how the word which Moses uses here is
too be taken, that is, that Isaac, to the end that he might be more assured
of the promise which was made unto him, and that he might hold it as an
autenticall promise, and in no wise doubt but that it was god that had spoken
unto him, he had some sign and mark, whereby he felt that he could not be
deceived, that it was no fancy or some light imagination: but that God would
give him a sure hold to lean upon, that he would give him such a rest, as he
might by the virtue of the word, which shall afterward be added, fight
against whatsoever evil might happen unto him. Now it is said, that God
exhorted him, that he should not fear, and he gives him a reason why: I am
(says he) with thee, yea I, the God of Abraham thy father.

When he says, Fear not: we have expounded this already before, that God
means not too exempte those too whom he speaks, from all fear: For
howsoever the fathers were Conquerours against all the defiaunces, which could
be made against them, yet were they not insensible. Abraham was tempted: but
he was not overcome. Therefore we must remember this point, that they that
became Conquerours thorough the power of the spirit of GOD, fought
notwithstanding.

Now what strife or combat can there be, unless there be some feeling of
it? For if Abraham had not felt this in him self, See I am in danger, he
would never have called upon GOD, and he would never have had recourse unto
him: if he had not been pressed with the griefs which he endured, he would
not have made his requests and complaints unto God, to be eased and lightened
of them. So then we may not think, that God would have them to be without all
feeling too whom he has said, Fear not: but it was, too hold them so fast
unto him self, that they should not be vnmeasurably afraid as we use too
be, unless we have our rest upon God: For the least blast of wind in the
world is enough to shake us, and to make us so at our wits end, that we can
not tell which way to turn us: as it is said of Achas, that he was afraid, and
shook as a leaf of a tree: and Esaias to remedy this evil, says: Hushed, hold
thy peace before God. And this is the common style of the holy scripture. So
then mark what this word imports, where it is said, Fear not: that is to
say, howsoever we have occasion to fear, and to be astonished, yet let us
resist, and wait with patience til god shall succor us: and let not this fear
oppress us, and quite stifle us: but let us endeavor to recover our selves and
keep the right path. And albeit we be disquieted and tossed hither and
thither, let us always remain fast upon our feet, seeing we are grounded upon
the promise of God. But it is said expressly: I am with thee: to show that
when we have God on our side, this ought to suffice us, though all the world
mischieuously practice our ruin, that look how many men, so many enemies
there are: yea and that it seems that all creatures have conspired against
us, notwithstanding so that God take our part, it shall make us too overcome al
fear. And in deed we see how the Prophet David did practice this doctrine,
and Saint Paul also gives us example thereof: Psalm. 3.7.
Seeing God (says he) is for me, I will not fear though I were compassed
about with an hundred thousand men: when I shall see all the deaths in the
world, I will assure my self upon Gods shepheardes crook. Lo how he
speaks in the three and twenty Psalm, O Lord thy hook, that is to say, the
staff which thou erectest, as a shephearde, (For he takes a similitude from
the shepherd, who will have his staff or his hook too lead his sheep:)
Lord (says he) so that I may have some sign too assure me, that thou
accomptest me one of thy flock, I will walk in the shadow of death, and yet
I will comfort my self: For I will account my self enough comforted, so that
I may be grounded upon thy grace. And afterward in another place, seeing that
God is with me: I defy all those which shall come too assail me. What is
that that flesh shall do unto me, so that God take my part (says he?) He
scorneth there the weakness of men, showing that God blowing upon them, he can
overthrow them all, and bring them to nothing: and notwithstanding if he be
armed with strength from above, all the threats which the Devil shall be able to
bend against him, shall be nothing. And this is it that Saint Paul teaches us:
If God be with us, who shall be against us? Not that we shall not have many
things against us, albeit that God be the keeper of our life: but
notwithstanding we may boaste our selves against all our enemies, and against
all that the Devil shall devise against us, so that God be favorable unto us.
So, that it is not without cause that this word is couched in, to take away al
fear, when he says: I am with thee, Fear not therefore. Now altogether like
as we are taught to rest our selves upon the only goodness of God, and in
his fatherly favor: so contrariwise we have to mark, that without it, we are
always as a people that are even sowning And this also is that we have touched
erewhile: to wit, that if God do not testify unto us the love that he
bears us, though we should be in an earthly paradise, we should be in a hell:
and contrariwise, though we were in some hell, that is to say, in some gulffe,
so that we feel that God is merciful unto us, and that in the end he will
take pity upon us, and that we be assured of his aid, an hell will always
fall out too be a paradise. And this is the thing we have to observe in this
place: That when a man knows not how it stands with him in respect of God,
that is to say, he can not assure him self, that God bears a fatherly
affection unto him: he must needs tremble, and be always shaken on every
side, and have many pricks to vex and torment him, without knowing any cause
why: and that very often, he shall be in great perplexity. Lo then in what case
the unbelievers are: not that they are not bold enough, yea even to despite
God: For it seems too them that they are escaped his hand, and that if he
should thunder from heaven, that he can not touch them. The wicked then and
those that are contemners of God will in deed be so far bold in their pride:
but notwithstanding God gives them pricks within, so that they have, as a man
would say, blind assaults, that they know not from whence they come: and
nevertheless it is God that makes war against them with their own
unbelief. And this is the reward of all those, that rest not only in God, and
know not that all our safety, all our joy and felicity is to be in his
keeping. All they therefore that presume of their own strength and virtues,
all they that so occupy their minds in these earthly creatures, they must in
the end be paid home with their own foolish presumption, because they have
not given unto God that honor that belongs unto him: that is, they must find
themselves as poor sowning people. And therefore let us learn, albeit that God
give us our desires and all the pleasures that are possible to be wished for,
that we do not in such sort rest upon them, that we turn away from him:
but rather let us learn too keep our selves in that favor and testimony that
we have, that in that he has adopted us for his children, he will always
show him self a father toward us. When then we shall be thus thoroughly
persuaded, it is certain that we shall overcome all fears: but contrariwise,
when we shall imagine too be assured without the protection of God, it must
needs be that he show us what our folly and ouerweening is. And this
briefly is that we have too bear away in this place. And so let us join
these two things together as inseparable and not to be sundred: That GOD is
with us, and that we are well assured against all evil: For if he be far
from us, Alas, we are more then miserable, albeit we were in a paradise, as I
have said already: but when he is with us, though we walk in the shadow
and darkness of death, and that it seems we must perish every minute of an
hour, yet we leave not of too comfort our selves, knowing well that death
shall be turned to us into life, and that al shall fall out to our salvation.
Again, we have too note this, that he says, That he is the God of
Abraham: For by this word he calls too Isaacks remembrance all the
promises, the which he had learned of his father. If he had not been
instructed, and that Abraham had not done his duty too say unto him: My
Son, GOD has given me this privilege above all men, that he has declared
unto me and said unto me, that my stock shall be as his heritage, and that
he will bless us, and we shall be separated and sanctified from all the rest
of the world: but yet mark how it behooves us too woorship him, mark how
we must call upon him, See how we must serve him. If therefore Abraham had
not faithfully taught his son Isaac: this word should have been of no
force: I am the God of Abraham, and in deed it had imported nothing but
superstition. And so, let us mark well that by this word, God would give a
co^firmatio^ to Isaac of that which he had learned before of his father. The
Papists make a buckler of this when they will keep themselves to their
filthinesses and errors: For they have that from other fathers and ancestors
which they follow, they have not inverted it at this day: it seems therefore
unto the^, that this is enough to beat back, yea even whatsoever god himself
has showed by his word so that they follow their fathers and elders. Well, but
when god is named the God of Abraham, he presupposed this one thing, to wit,
that Abraham had a faith ruled by the doctrine, which had bin taught him. And
wherefore is it that he names not him self, the god of Nachor? And why is it
that he calls not him self the God of Their? For this had been somewhat
more. The Papists will not say, It is an hundred years since that that which
we call the service of God amongst us, was used amongst men: but they will
say: What? There is a thousand years, since the world was so governed. Lo
then them selves in possession to despite God, as seems unto them, when they
allege a thousand years.

Now then if the question were simply of Antiquity, he must have said, I am
thy god of Their and of Nachor, or rather he must have gone further, until he
had come to those that went before. But there is no question of speaking in
that sort. God had called Abraham, and Abraham was dead of late, the others
had bin a great deal more ancient: what distinction shall we make here? we
must not forge it according too our own brain: but we must look unto that
mark, whereunto God would direct Isaac: There is no doubt but this was,
because Abraham (as we have said already,) had a full certainty of faith,
that he had not an opinion only as had the rest of the world, to say, I
imagine so, I think so, but he was fully certified that God had spoken unto
him. Lo then in what respect and for what cause it is now said, I am the God of
Abraham, thy father. And so, let us well mark what fathers we ought to follow,
that we be not deceived therein. For if our fathers had been duly taught, and
that they had been framed unto the truth of God, it had now been a good help
unto our faith: For when we have guides too show us the way, this is much to
our advantage, and we ought not to despise it: but if we have had fathers who
were not the children of God, (whereupon all paternitie and parentage
depends, as Saint Paul says) then must we shut our eyes. For when God
has not his sovereign degree of being the father, and every thing be not
referred to him, then woe upon al parentages and bonds which we shall have in
this world: for they are so many nets of Satan. So, let us mark well that as
it is said in this place, that God is the God of Abraham, Isaacks father: so it
is said on the contrary by the Prophet Ezechiel: Walk not in the
righteousness of your fathers. And why so? These fathers followed not Abraha^s
steps, but departed therefrom: and therefore they were no longer worthy of so
honorable a title of fathers, forasmuch as they were not (at a very word) the
children of God. And so let us fear, least that be spoken unto us (that S.
Stephen has spoken, Act. 7.51.
) Ye uncircumcised of heart, ye have always resisted God and his holy spirit,
as did your fathers also. But if there were any ignorance or rebellion in our
fathers, let us forsake it, to the end wholly to resign up our selves too our
heavenly father: and notwithstanding, whereas the Papists cry, The fathers,
fathers, let us learn to discern, and let us not be beasts as they are, too
take our fathers from some stews: Spitle house.
as they take all those for their fathers, who have perverted and corrupted the
simplicity both of the Law and the Gospel: too wit, these Dottards and
rabble of Friars and Monks, who have been the falsifiers of the holy
Scripture. To the end therefore we be not in such wise bereued and spoiled of
our senses, let us know that our fathers must be the children of God, of whom
depends all parentage, as we have alleged out of S. Paul. Lo then
shortly what we have to learn out of this place: that is to say, that Isaac
was admonished, to acknowledge and call to his remembrance, whatsoever he had
learned before, and that this was for too confirm his faith, when GOD said,
that he had manifested him self unto his father Abraham. And now at this
day we have too put this doctrine in practice, as often as we shall have
need too assure our selves, or rather when our spirit is troubled, and we
tossed with some wavering and uncertainty, we must have our recourse
thither: That is too follow our father Abraham, to conform our selves too
follow that rule, which he has showed unto us. And why so? For we are
certain, that GOD was manifested unto him. Lo then a good direction, and
which shall not turn us out of the path of our salvation: when we shall be
conformed and fashioned too our father Abraham, who was adopted of GOD, and who
received the pledge of our salvation: that is too say, all these promises
whereupon we ought at this day to be grounded. And such account ought we
too make of all the rest of the faithful. For although they no whit appertain
unto us, concerning the flesh, yet notwithstanding we cease not too be
their children. And therefore it is not without cause that the Apostle in the
eleventh Chapter too the Hebrews sets before us, this thick cloud of
witnesses, when as he would show us, that we are very unkind, if we follow
not those, whom GOD has set forth unto us for an example. Lo (says he) a
great and thick cloud of witnesses who calls us too GOD, that would seem,
(as if a man would say) too stop up our eyes. We will be offended with a
man, when he shall seduce us, we will imagine too be excused by saying, O,
he did therein as much as I: we need no more but a small fly too make us too
turn away from the fear of God and his obedience: and notwithstanding that
GOD shall set before us so many witnesses, too prove our faith, that we ought
therewith be satisfied, yet we come not to him. And if this profit us
nothing, and we be not confirmed thereby, what is the cause thereof, but our
own unthankfulness? And so then, so often as our faith shall be weak, that we
shall have ouerthwartings of ignorance, as it were storms, let us think, And
what? has God begun but yesterday and to day to speak? Spoke he not unto
Abraham? And was not his truth certain from that time forward? and besides all the faithful which came afterward, all the holy kings and prophets, and others,
are they not so many witnesses, who^ God showed unto us? Let us therefore join
them too this holy assembly now. For how often soever the Gospel has been
preached unto us (according as the Apostle has entreated thereof) it is not
only too gather us together with all the faithful, which are living at this
day, but also into the fellowship and company of all the holy spirits, whom
GOD has taken out of this world. We are therefore at this day joined in
fellowship with all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, as often as GOD speaks
unto us. But we shall be so much the more without excuse, because we know not
how too make our profit of all this: seeing that GOD has yet revealed it
more clearly unto us, and in a more familiar sort in the person of his only
begotten Son. For he is not only named at this day the GOD of Abraham, but
also the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. In as much therefore as we have the
full and perfect revelation of whatsoever is profitable unto us for our
salvation in this lively image in whom GOD is set forth: it is certain that
we have no color, that we can allege, why we should not have such a
certainty of faith, that we should never straye hither and thither: and when
the world changes it self an hundred thousand times, yet nevertheless,
that we should remain steadfast in that we have received of God, knowing that
his truth is unchangeable. This therefore shortly is that which we have too
bear away concerning this text.

And further, let us likewise note that word of the Lord Jesus Christ, when
he says: I go too my God and to your God, to my Father and to your Father.
See the Son of God, who is the everlasting God, nevertheless to the end to
gather us unto himself, and to keep us sure there, in such sort that we should
never be seduced from that foundation which he has given unto us of his
truth, he says, that we have one God together with him, inasmuch as he is
man, and in that he is our brother: that we have the same God who is his God,
and the same father who is his father. When we hear these things, is there any
farther cause for us to doubt, or to be shaken? As there are many who will say
at this day: O, I know not what to hold: there are so many sundry opinions,
that I am confounded: and likewise I can believe nothing, I know not what to
follow. But it can not be chosen, but that such people are possessed of the
Devil, when they tread under their feet the truth of God, which is as a most
undoubted light to guide us, and to show us the way of salvation. So then,
seeing God has showed him self since Abraham and Noah, and appointed Moses
too be the conductour of his Church, and that he has knit us altogether, when
in the end he sent his only begotten Son, in whose person he has gathered
us all to him self: let us learn to keep our selves in that unity of faith
which he has given us, and let us not doubt, but that he will always auow us
for his children. Now we have to note that which God says, That he will bless
Isaac and will multiply his seed: For this serves to show that the favor
which god bears to those whom he has called to himself, is not vain nor
idle: but that it brings forth his fruit and effect in time. It is therefore
very certain, that when God shall be merciful unto us, he will give us so many
good things, as he knows to be good for us: it is true that this shall not be
according to our desire, but howsoever it be, prosperity shall always be
coupled with the favor and love of God. Now we know that he has all in his
hand, and he is no nigard, that he will not give to his children whatsoever he
knows to be meet for them. Let us learn therefore to wait for all
prosperity, and free favor of our God, when it shall please him to testify
unto us that he loves us, and that he is with us (as I have said already:) and
in the mean while notwithstanding, although that we have many adversities,
which trouble and molest us, and that they be hard and bitter unto us, yet let
us never give over to hold us fast unto his promise. And when we receive any
grace from the hand of God, let us apply the same always, to stre^gthen our
faith, and to have this undoubted persuasion, that we shall try that to be true
which is spoken here: I will be with thee, and I will bless thee. And certain it
is, that if we would consider well the benefits of God, that we daily receive
from him, and that they were valued of us as they ought, we should have always
good cause to honor him and to rejoice ourselves in him: but alack we devour
up the benefits that he bestows upon us: and in the mean while we mow at
the^ and never think upon them. And we may see, that this is the cause that we
are so given to murmr, to fret and to discontent ourselves. And why so? For
the benefits of God, ought to suffice to satisfy us in him: but (as I have
said) we despise and set light by them. And so we are not worthy to taste,
what this promise is worth: I am with thee, and will bless thee. Now it is said
a little after: That Isaac erected an altar, and that he called upon the name
of the Lord in that place.

We have seen already why altars were erected by the holy fathers, and to what
intent: but yet we must here speak somewhat of it, even as the place
requires. The altar which Isaac erected, was to this end, that he might make
profession of his faith. Thus much concerning the first point. For if we pray
unto God, we have no need to erect an altar unto him: the service of God is,
of it self, spiritual. Isaac therefore erected not an altar that he might only
invoke and call upon the name of God, or make his prayers and supplications
unto him: but to the intent that his faith might be known, and that God might
be glorified before men. For although we ought to serve God in spirit, and
inwardly in our heart: yet notwithstanding this lets not also, but that we
must give him that praise which he deserves before men, and that we protest
as much as lies in us, that we are wholly his, both body and soul.

Here therefore we are instructed, that the faithful after they have put their
trust in God, and shall have called upon him, and given unto him the praise of
all his benefits that they must yet further make a confession of their faith
before men, to the intent they may wholly (as also all is his) dedicate
themselves to him. There is also a second reason: And that is that by reason
of our slougth and slacknes, we have need every manner of way to be pricked
forwards, to the end too stir us up, to march cherefully forwards in the
service of God. How so? It is true, that when we pray unto God, he embusieth
him self with no ceremonies: and yet for all that, we bow our knees, we hold
up our hands toward heaven, and uncover our head. And why so? First of all, in
respect of men. For (as I have already said) it must needs be that we do
homage unto God with our bodies, which he has created, and which he has
appointed to his glory, and to the crown of immortality. But, howsoever it
be, forasmuch as we are slack, it behooves us that these means stand us in
steed to provoke us too have a more fervent zeal to pray unto God, and with
a more hearty affection. Lo then, why it is meet for us to have our joined
hands lifted up, too kneel upon our knees, and have our head uncovered: For
it is too show, that we present our selves before God as if we should say:
And poor wretch, who art thou? with what lowlines ought thou too come
before him, who has created and fashioned thee, and to whom thou haste to
render an account of thy whole life? And again this also, is to this end, that
we should bereave our selves of all vain fantasies, that make us to stray
here and there: and that we should wholly rest upon him. So then, the Altar
that Isaac erected, served to this purpose: to wit, that by this mean he
might be the more provoked, and have his heart so much the more inflamed to
serve God. And on the other side, he made a confession before men, to give
example to his family, and to testify that he mingled not himself with the
superstitions of the Panims: but had a pure and undefiled religion, in as much
as he was ruled by his word. And thus much concerning the Altar. And by the way
we have also to learn here this thing which was declared before, that the
prayers of the holy fathers, and the confession which they made of their faith,
was not joined with the sacrifices, for no other end but to lead the^ unto
our Lord Jesus Christ: For they were continually taught, that they could have
no access unto God, but by the favor of a mediator, who was not yet sent
into the world: but yet so it is that they rested there. But now that our Lord
Jesus Christ is come down, and that he has taken our nature upon him, and
has said unto us, That he is the light of the world, that he is the way,
John. 10
the truth, and the life, that he is our advocate to God his father, and that
through him we must have entrance into Heaven: Seeing therefore we have all
this, must we not be so much the more assured, when there is any question of
calling upon him, that we know that our requests shall be heard of him, and
the gate shall be open for us, and that we shall always find him ready and
favorable to help and succor us? Now howsoever it be let us mark, that
Altars in old time, and specially in the time of the law, were always erected
to this end, that the faithful might know that they were not worthy to pray
unto God, nor to call upon him in their own name: but that always they must
come to him by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of that
sacrifice which he must offer up to his father, for the reconciliation of the
world. And indeed we must not think that Abraham and Isaac devised Altars
according to their own fantasies: For their sacrifices were never acceptable
but through faith as the Apostle shows. Now they could never have been
grounded in Faith, unless the word of god had gone before to enlighte^ the^.
Let us know then, that Isaac offered not up a sacrifice, at all adventures, as
if he had thought, o this shall be found good: but he was taught, that he being
a wretched sinner, he must not presume to call upon the name of God, unless he
put his whole trust in him, who must be sent to make satisfaction and to purge
the sins of the world The Panims had in deed their Altars, and sacrificed,
as did the holy fathers: but they wa^ted the principal. They were wholly
occupied in the ceremony, which of it self was frivolous: because they looked
not up to that heavenly pattern, whereof mention is made in Leuiticus. So then
we have to learn, that when our father Isaac would call upon the name of god, he
had an Altar to witness that he could not be received but in the name and favor
of our lord Jesus Christ. And therefore at this day, as often as we will pray
unto God, let us learn to wash our Prays with the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ: for otherwise they shall be but profane and defiled: but when the blood
of our lord Jesus Christ shall be applied therein, certainly our Prayers shall be
pure, they shall be consecrated, in such sort, that God will accept of the^. And
when we shall call upon God, every one in the secret of his own heart, let
us labor also to draw our neighbors thereto, to the intent that he may be
gloryfied in the midst of us with one accord. And as we ought to be knit
together in one Faith, so also let us have but one mouth too protest that we
hold him for our father and Savior, and that we are wholly his.

But now we will fall down before the majesty of our good God, in the
acknowledgement of our faults, praying that it will please him, in such sort
to make us feel them, that it may be to make us to be displeased with our
selves for them, and to make us to lament before his judgment seat, to the
intent we may be absolved through his mercy: forasmuch as we should
justly be condemned by his judgment. And that it will please him to
strengthen us, so as we fainte not, whatsoever miseryes we have too suffer in
this world: but we may meditate in his word in such sort, that the only
promise which he has given unto us, to hold us for his children, may content
us, and that we may be armed therewith to the end to submit our selves to his
will peaceably to bear all afflictions, that he shall send us: and that we may
gloryfie him also in our hearts, without any faigning or hypocrisy: and that
we may labor also to show the fruits of our faith before men, and that by
this means he may be honored of all, both of small and great. And that he
will not only show us this grace, but also to all peoples and nations of the
Earth, etc.

The tenth Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 26.
26 Now Abimilech coming unto him to Gerar, with Achuzath his friend, and
Picol the Captain of his host:

27 Isaac says unto them, why came you unto me: seeing you hated me, and have
sent me away from you?

28 Who said unto him we savv for asuretie, that Jehovah was with thee,
therefore we said: Let there be an oath between us, that is, between us and
thee, Let us therefore strike a covenant with thee.

29 Ask vengeance upon thy self, if thou shall hurt us, like as we have not
touched thee, and like as we have don thee good, and have sent thee away
with peace: Do thou consent now, thou hlessed of the Lord.

30 When therefore he had made them a feast, they did eat and drink. And
rising in the morning, they swore either to other: And Isaac led them forth,
and they went from him with peace.

31 And it came to pass that the self same day, Isaacks servants coming
unto him, showed him concerning that well which they had dug, and said unto
him we have found waters.

32 And he called the same Sohibbah, therefore the name of the City is
Beer-schebah even until this day.

Chapter. 27. verse. 1. NOW when Esau was forty years old, he married a wife
named Judith the daughter of Beer the Chithite, and Basmatha the daughter of
Elon the Chithite.

2 Who were a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca.


Howsoever men living in this world are subject to many miseryes and
afflictions, yet nevertheless the most part of the evils that they endure,
proceed from them selves, every one of them being as a Woolf to his companion.
We are compassed about with sauadge beasts, who are altogether our enemies:
there is neither Heaven nor earth, nor other elements, that do not bring with
them a thousand hurts. We know not how to go upon the water, but we must be,
within half a foot of our death: There needs but one torment to swallow up a
people: The earth also has many annoyaunces, as if God had threatened us on
every side. But when we shall make comparison, there are no wild beasts, nor
heaven, nor earth, nor any thing whatsoever, which so much annoyeth men, as
each one annoyeth his neighbor. Now for this cause we ought to think it a
singular benefit of God bestowed upon us, when he gives us peace and that we
are not oppressed and wro^ged on every side, when no mischief is devised
against us, no hurt nor damage done unto us: It must needs be that the
protection of God have a hand in it, seeing that every man will always be as a
Woulfe unto his neighbors, as we have said. And this is the mark whereunto
this present story tends: For Moses would show that after God had appeared
to Isaac, he yet farther declares his favor unto him, in that the King of
Gerar came unto him, and sought his amity and frie^dship, and hereby was
Isaac honored, and specially it was unto him a great advantage, because he
might always have been in doubt, in as much as he had been greatly inuied
in the country, and had been constrained to depart from thence,
notwithstanding he had lived amongst them, in all humanity and courtesy. He
might therefore have been always in great suspense, fearing the rage of his
neighbors. But God made them to come unto him of their own accord, and not
only to show themselves friends: but they flatter him, and fear that he will
hurt them, and therefore they demand a covenant to be made between them with
a solemn oath. Now we have to note here first of all, that God has the
hearts of men in his own hand to mollify their hardness, when it pleases
him, and to abate al their rage, and to turn them to courtesy and kindness: for
certainly the king of Gerar had not changed his nature, when he came to Isaac:
and on the other side if he feared Isaac, he might have co^spired with his
subjects and neighbors, and so have set upon him altogether. On the other side,
he had given no occasion to doubt of him, in as much as Isaac had not given
him any argument of distrusting him: he rather had behaved himself in such
sort, that he plainly declared that he desired not to grieve any, no not so
much as his presence: For we have seen how he departed from their company.

It must needs be therefore that God stirred up these profane people, to cause
them to come unto Isaac, and to submit themselves, as they do with such
humility, that they entreat a poor man, a stranger, who had no great credit
amongst them, nor had any but his own family, which he kept aparte, without
giving any token of attempting any such matter. Before God had laid the bridle
in their neck, but this was to prove the patience of his servant. For when he
was denied water, and that in the end it was said unto him, that he was
stronger then they, and that he could be no longer suffered, there is no doubt
but that God then exercised him to the end he might try what patience there was
in him. And so Isaac knew, that if it had pleased God to give him peaceable
dwelling in that Country where he was, that he should not have been driven
thence: but in as much as he saw men perke up against him, he knew that it was
as a pasporte from God for him to depart.

Now on the co^ttary we must also note, that god moved them upon the sudden
to come toward Isaac, and to appease and abolish all enmities and quarrels,
which might yet be moved either on the one side or on the other. Let us mark
well then, when any outrage is done against us, and there, where, we shall have
endeavored to do pleasure and service to every one, that we shall be wonderfully
pricked and tormented, that this should be done by Gods appointment, who
wills us to strive, not in doing evil, or requiting evil for evil, but by
possessing our souls in patience, as also our Lord Jesus Christ has thereto
exhorted us. And likewise on the contrary, when we shall see men to be
favorable unto us, and to intend no evil quarrel, or ryote against us, let
us know that God has pity upon us, and that he governs his creatures, and
directs the^ to such purpose as he sees good. And likewise let us beseech
God, as often as our enemies shall use any cruelty against us, and that we can
not win them by any means, nor by any moderation that we can use, that it
will please him to put too his hand, knowing that he can turn when it shall
please him, those that are Wolves into sheep. This is, that we have to learn
first of all by this History. But it is said that Isaac at their first
coming spoke bluntly enough on this wise: Why are you come unto me? seeing you
hated me, and drove me out from amongst you?

We shall see by the sequel of the matter, that Isaac nourished no spite nor
bitterness, nor any desire of reuengement in his heart: For he was quickly
appeased: and when he vpbrayed Abimilech and all his company, that they had
hated and persecuted him: it was not in manner, of any injury, so as we are
accustomed to do. For if any spite be done unto us, or any wrong, we sharpen
our tongues to speak evil and to slander: there is nothing but hatredes,
contentions and wranglings: to be short, if we could tear them in pieces, that
have hurt us, we would willingly do it.

And this is it that Solomon says: That hatred discovers reproaches, faults
and iniuryes. When the hearts then are thus set on fire, it is not possible but
that the tongues also must ouerflowe too outrage one against the other. But
Isaac took no such course: but we have to note, that whenever we shall be
patient that this lets not, but that we use our liberty, to show them that
have faulted, the wrong that they have done unto us, and so make them to
understand their offense: to the end all may profit them.

It is true that in this case we must thoroughly examine our affection: for it is
a very hard and rare thing, that a man who shall have been provoked and
offended, that he should not be moved with some passion, and so always pursue
his own particular cause. And therefore I have said that we must enter into our
selves, and diligently mark, if we be not moved with some desire of revenge,
or taynted with some hatred or rancour: when we shall have thorowely known
this, and find our selves clear, then we may have an open mouth to show them
their offense, that shall have wronged us, not too be revenged in condemning of
them: but to the end that they flatter not them selves in their sins, as
this is a very common evil amongst men. Lo then a point which we have
diligently to mark: that is, that the patience of the faithful is not without
all touch of any passion, neither is it against this, that we frankly show
them: ye have done me wrong, and ye have offended GOD, and ye have had no
occasion to do so: and yet: that they always have special regard unto the
salvation of those, who have persecuted them, and have been their enemies. For
this that Isaac nippeth them withal, was undoubtedly as an admonition,
whereby he sought the good and salvation of them, to whom he spoke so bluntly:
For if he had dissembled it, what profit might come to him thereby? The others
would have thought it deep hypocrisy, if he had made show to have been
contented and well pleased with them, and that he had nothing but honny in his
mouth, and have said: Lo it is even so: Abimilech knowing himself to be
faulty would have thought, See, a double man and a liar. Lo what they gain
that dissemble so much, and set such a fair countenance upon it. So then,
although the Children of God be patient, and that they be always ready to
forgive all wrongs committed against them, and have not any manner of ways
ca^cred hearts against their enemies, yet they cease not oftentimes too say, See
wherein you have done me wrong: and this is to show that they walk in all
roundnes and simplicity. And this end ought always to be kept: that is to
say, when we shall be grieved, or any wrong or extortion shall be done unto
us, that yet we procure always the good of our enemies, and that the
reproves and accusations that we make unto them, be so many aduertisementes
or warninges to draw them to the right way, and to touch them: too the intent
they be not hardened and made obstinate, and that they may be better advised in
time too come, and that they fight not against God, thinking they have too do
with men: as it is very like that Isaac did here, who would likewise provide
for the time too come. For this shall be very lawful for us, when we shall have
suffered any wrong, to do as much as lies in us, to rid our selves from it. For
although our Lord Jesus Christ commands us to be ready, when we shall have
received one blow upon the one cheek to turn the other: Yet it means not
that we should go and provoke our enemies, and give them occasion to vex us.
We ought to avoid this as much as is possible for us: and by all good and loving
means we ought to stop their malice who have no fear of God in them. Isaac
then had respect to himself in this case: But it was not too the end too be
avenged, nor to render like for like: He only contented himself to have set
a bar against all those which had entreated him evil and dealte unjustly
with him before time: to the end they might be stayed, and might surcease from
such wrongs.

This briefly is that we have to learn out of this place. And this rule is
very necessary: For oftentimes when men are reconcyled one to the other, they
must be silent and then there shall need none other mean: and he yet who
shall have sustained the greatest wrong, he shall have more liberty and more
boldness too justify himself, against them that would make us believe that
the Lamb has troubled the water. Let us mark well therefore, that when any
shall have done wrong to his neighbor, if he come not to pursue his
particular quarrelles so stoutly, that he rest thereupon, that it shall be
good that each one be advertised, and that he which has done the wrong,
notwithstanding know it, confess it, and be ha^bled in it: but we see that
this greatly profited not: so far of was it that Isaac pursued not the
matter to the vttermoste, although he saw that his admonition was not
received, and that it touched not their hearts, to whom he he had spoken:
howsoever it was, he delte not spitefully against them. Notwithstanding mark
Abimilech who says: Like as we have been friendly unto thee, and have done
thee no hurt, so swear unto us that thou will at tempt nothing against us.

Abimilech not only hides the evil which he has committed, and would excuse
it: but he boasts that he has done his duty woonderful well toward Isaac:
and this is the common manner, as we have said: For there is nothing more hard
for a man then to condemn him self: although he feel him self faulty. Men
will be drawn sooner to any thing then to this lowlines, which yet
notwithstanding is a token necessarily required to true repentance. For if a
man feel that he have faulted, and have true repentance, he must needs
confess him self guilty before God, and likewise toward his neighbor, when
it shall be requisite. And therefore our Savior Christ also exhorts us, that
if we have any quarrel against our neighbors, that is too say, if we have
offended them, that rather we should leave our sacrifices at the altar, to the
end to seek agreement, tha^ to flatter our selves, and to harden our hearts,
despising those to whom wear bound. Now he speaks of that time of the
sacrifices: but that was as much as if he should have said, that we cannot
pray unto God, nor do any thing that shall be acceptable unto him, as long as we
disdain to repair the faults which we have committed. Now although God
commau^d us never so straightly to humble our selves, when we have offended,
yet can none attain unto this way: and that is here sufficiently taught us in
the person of Abimilech and of his companions. For men are so blinded both
with selfeloue, pride and arrogancy, that they can not in any case be brought
to this, to say: I have offended: for they are always ashamed to confess
their fault: and yet notwithstanding are not ashamed to be condemned before God
and his Angels: and yet when they have remorse in them selves, they must
condemn themselves in spite of their teeth. They can trimly trace out all the
ways that can be to maintain their corruption, they have their goodly
starting holes, to uphold themselves in their mischeuous cause: but when they
shall have won both great and small, whether it be through corruption or favor,
or by any other means, and all the world stand for them, yet must they in the
end come to the judgment of their own conscience which they cannot abide:
and as I have said, there they shall find themselves to have gotten nothing by all their fetches and starting holes: For maugre their beards will they nil they,
they must feel themselves guilty before God. Now when this is set before us,
it is not to the end that we should sleep in any such vice: but to the
intent, that we knowing our selves to be subject unto it, should the rather
seek for remedy. When Moises says therefore that Abimilech made as if he had
well acquitted himself toward Isaac (and we know the contrary by that which
has been rehearsed) it was not only to show that Abimilech was an hypocrite
and a double man: but it was also to set a looking glass before our eyes, to
the end we might know that there is not any one amongst us, which is not
inclyned to flatter himself, and who is not bent to boulster out an ill cause:
although he were sufficiently convinced to have offended, that yet
nevertheless pride would not suffer us to submit our selves. Lo then Moses
purpose and drifte. So then, what have we to do? that every one gage and
sound himself to the bottom to find what is in him: and after we have duly
examined our selves, we shall find that there is not any one of us that would
not hide his faults, and that would not wrong his adversary, when we have any
quarrel: and heerevpon it is that we seek out goodly colors to excuse our
selves, and starting holes and delays: and turn (as they say) black to white,
and white into black, that we might justify our selves. Seeing therefore that
we are subject to such an evil, let us fight against it. For it is not enough
for us to feel our vice, but we must forsake it, and in forsaking it, we must
yet resist it, albeit we can not altogether get the upper hand of it. And when
we shall come to put this in practice, and shall have offended this man here,
and that man there, let us not look upon men to bleare our eyes: but let every
man withdraw himself into his own secret, and say, Go to, what can I do now? It
is true that I might justly do wrong unto mine adversary: for he has offended
me thus and thus: but notwithstanding am I innocent before God and his Angels?
It is meet that I begin to judge my self. For although that I be a poor
blind wretch, yet for all that I feel in my self that I have offended, and I
cannot ly unto my self: and in the mean while will God be deceived? When I have
cunnnigly dissembled, will not he find out the least drop for all that.

So then there is no other mean to be absolved and released before God, but
this, that I condemn my self. Mark then, I say, how we ought to practice
this doctrine, and to apply it to our use and commodity. And to be short,
how oftensoeuer we offend, let us note that repentance contains in it
confession, not to go and whisper in the ear of a Priest, as was done in
the Papacy: but a confession to give glory to God, and likewise to make
amends for the fault which was committed against our neighbors. And
therefore, they who committed any wrong or outrage against another, it behooved
them to labor the amendment thereof, in humbling themselves, and howsoever it
was not to be ashamed to say, I have offended you: I pray you forgive me. For
mark also how we shall obtain favor and forgeuenes before God, and by what
means those wrongs we have done to our neighbors shall not cry out for
vengeance against us: For undoubtedly, although they to whom we have done the
wrong, content them selves, and think no more of it, yet the evil shall be
enrolled before God, and cry more loud before his majesty, then if all men
were armed and set them selves against us. So then, to the end our faults may
be blotted out and defaced before God, and that there be no cry that may hasten
the Lord to judgment against us, by reason of the offenses that we have
committed, let us learn in such sort to appease al strifes and quarrels that
every one may prevent it by humbling himself with an upright and pure
confession. This is that we have to mark upon this point. Now on the
otherside, we see as I have already touched, that Isaac had not as a man would
say, an heart puffed up, neither that nourished any manner of rancour against
such as had been his enemies: for he pursued them not, he had in deed
special cause against Abimilech and his company: For as Saint Paul says,
they which are not of the flock and body of the church, we cannot judge them,
to the end to bring them to repentance, as we may those which make profession
of Christianity, who ought out of hand (as much as lies in them) to receive
admonition of their faults. For this is the order which GOD has set
amongst al those that are his, that we should be subject to receive
admonition both from great and small.

So that there is, as it were, a mutual jurisdiction without the sword, and
without authority, if we do our duty. For every one having the word of God
in his mouth is as a Judge, to show his neighbor the faults which he has
committed. He shall be a judge in one respect and he shall suffer himself to be
judged in an other. Mark then, how we judge these that are of the household,
as S. Paul says, that is to say, such as are of our body, and of the Religion
of the faithful, and of the children of God. But those that are without,
although we condemn them, yet can not we call them so familiarly, to say, Thou
haste offended. For they have no such acquaintance with us, and there is no
such mutual right, as there is amongst the members of the body of the church.
And this is the cause why Isaac deals not so earnestly with Abimelech and
his people, as if they had bin knit together in one faith, and worshipped the
same God, and had been of one Church, and had had one and the self same order
established amongst them. It is very like that Isaac would not have passed
this over to have said unto him: What? Come you hither with your bragges,
making as though you were my good friends, and had used nothing but courtesy
toward me? And what courtesy was that to deny me water, yea and too damme
up the wells that I had dug by mine own labor and the sweat of those
that were mine? And this could bring you no loss or hinderance: and yet
through malice you have gone about to put out mine eyes: and in the end you
have driven me out and have not suffered me too dwell amongst you. And what
friendship was this? Isaac therefore might have stood too have mainteyned his
cause, if Abimelech had been capable to have received such reproof: but it was
enough for him freely to have laid open his affection. For seeing Abimelech
would not be corrected, neither had any such repentance as was requisite for
him: thereupon he leaves him. So the^, when we shall have labored to bring
those to repentance that have offended, if we see them obstinate, we can no
further press or urge them. It is true that if they be members of the Church,
we must follow them, to the end they continue not obstinate, and if they
will not endeavor too open them selves, and that we see they will not be
displeased with their faults, that yet nevertheless we hold them as vanquished.
For mark how it behooves us to handle them who are so wild and hard
hearted. My friend, now thou show thy impudency: before I well perceived
that thou wast strayed out of the right path: but now I see that thou art
altogether desperate and without hope: For thou do manifestly despite God.
And what gettest thou either in this or in that? For thine offense is well
known. And thus we may very well beat the^ down, who imagine through
toughnes and stubbernes to win their cause. But if we have to do with those,
which have no acquaintance with us, and are not our brethren, let it suffice us
too have showed them the truth in one word: For this shall be dearly enough
bought of them, if they think not better upon it to humble them selves. And
for our part when we shall be reproved for any offense, let us not wait for
any long process and such great enquestes too be convinced as it were by fine
force of many witnesses: but let us receive correction patiently as soon as it
shall be offered us, and not be like to those that throvv up an ha^dful of ashes,
to take away the clear light: let us therefore confess our faults: for this is
the only remedy, except we will resist god: and let us know that when any
warning or admonition shall be given that then God would have his grace felt
of us, and that he is careful too draw us back, to the end we should not
perish, that we should not remain obstinate, and that Satan should not take
possession of us. Let us know this, too the end we may come to repentance
and true lowliness. Now Isaac shows yet better, that he keeps no mind
of reuengement or enmity, although they had offended him: For he prepares a
banquet, and they eat and drink together. Lo here a point which we have
well too meditate upon. For this also shows, how that we must fight against
our passions, all the time of our life: so that this is as it were the A b c of
Christians, not too requite evil for evil: but contrariwise too render good
for evil, and to get the victory in this matter: the which can not enter into
our fancy. This I say, is as it were our A B C: and there is no such
perfection in us, but that we should begin here: That so soon as we desire
and have a will to serve God, it behooves that we be spoiled of all bitterness,
hatred and rancour, of all desire to revenge, not only to forgive our enemies
without procuring of their hurt: but also that we be ready too do them
good. But now who is he that discharges him self herein of the hundredth
part? But we shall find, albeit it seems that many are (as they say) petie
Angels, and have nothing but a fervent desire to serve god, and to honor him,
yea and there is nothing in the^ but love, and they are therein resolute and
settled: yet as soon as they be provoked, the poison so breaks forth and
afterward dwells so long in them, that they keep the remembrance of some
small offense, in their hearts all the time of their life. When we see
therefore that we can not be purged at the first day, nor the first year, of
this curssed affection of revenge, so much the more we must apply this
remedy, to the end we may be ordered and governed by the spirit of God: not
to remain asleep in enimities and rancours: but willingly to forgive them,
and to be thoroughly patient in all things. And so, we shall have well profited
all the time of our life, when we shall have learned, to what use this
history of Isaac is rehearsed unto us: that is, that he prepared a banquet
for his enemies, not in a ceremony, or for fashion sake only, but to show
that he was pure and clean from all malice, and that he had forgotten and
buried all the offenses, whereat they might pick any quarelles. Now it is
said a little after: That they made a Covenant together, and swear each to
other.

It is true that Isaac had the hurt, when the other demanded of him, that
he would promise and swear unto them not to wrong them nor hurt them: For
they had had sufficient proof, that they had not found him a violent man, nor
one given to do any harm. Wherefore come they then to disquiet him farther?
He might have put all this back: but he does yield something of his right: as
when we would purchase peace amongst men, we must always have this mean, not
to give it them wholly, who have done us wrong: but for all that, not too too
extremely too chalendge and hold whatsoever belongs unto us, without
yielding unto them one cru^me, (as they say) thereof. For if every man should
be so given to his own particular right, men could never be united and knit
together: and although they were, they could never cease from day to day too
have new occasions to devour and eat up one another. There is therefore but
one way to nourishe peace and concord: and that is, that no man seek that
which is his own: as also S. Paul makes mention thereof, speaking unto us of
Charity, 1. Corinthians. 13. Chapter, where he says expressly, That Charity
has this property, Not too seek her own. And further, when he exhorts us
too live peaceably, and that we should love brotherly fellowshippe, and that
none of us should give him self too ambition, nor have a desire too be more,
greater, and higher, and too have the upper hand: For the word which he
uses, means, there should be no desire of superiority or having the upper
hand. Now, as long as we shall have this desire (as I have said,) Lo as it
were a fire blowed up and kindled: there are a thousand ways which Satan will
find to set us at such discord, at war, dissension, and such contention,
that it should seem we would overthrow all. So, let us mark well, to the
end that we may dwell in friendship and brotherly concord with our
neighbors, it behooves every one that he forsake and yield of his own right,
and that every one keep not this extremity, to say, I will keep whatsoever is
mine, and will pursue it, and forgo nothing by no manner of means whatsoever.
When we shall deal thus, certainly the Devil will always find some cunning,
to kindle the fire of discord and strife of words, and in the end of war.
This therefore is that which we have to learn concerning this text. But here
by the way we see that it is lawful for the children of God to enter into
league and friendship with heathen people, and such as profess nothing but
false religion: as long as it is not to join our selves with them, not too
draw in the same yoke. For we must mark well, that admonition of Paul, who
says: Take heed that you draw not in the yoke together with unbelievers: For
he speaks this by way of comparison, as if two oxen were coupled together, to
draw in one yoke, they must one answer the other: and though they be wild
and sometimes straggle, yet being tied together by the necks with the yoke,
they must follow the same train. Saint Paul would show us, that we must
not be coupled with unbelievers, in such sort, that we be holden with their
chains, and that we be so entanged with them, that we consent unto evil,
neither in any respect too be tied therein: but only for too nourishe peace,
too stop outrages and violences, it shall always be lawful for us too enter
into league with them. Let us take heed therefore that we be separated from
all their malice, and therein that we have no acquaintance with them, and
especially that we condemn their iniquity as much as lies in us, so as we be
not so much as companions and brethren with the wicked, no not accomplices: as it
is said, specially in the 15. Psalm, that we must hare the^. But
nevertheless, to stop their rage, and to take away all occasion of hurt,
and to shut the door against them, to the end they put not in practice their
lewd enterprises, we may well meet with their evil by making league with
them, too the end they may not flow to all licentiousnes of evil, when we
shall have put such a bar first before them. Yea we see that God has showed
us this favor and grace, that we should take his name to witness, to the
end we might be assured either of other: whereby he shows, how acceptable a
thing Concord amongst men is unto him, and in what detestation he has al
quarelles, wars, wrongs, hurtes, outrages and oppressions, which men shall
do each unto other. For this is no small matter, that God gives his own name
so to be used, and as it were, pawneth it. And when a Prince must give some of
his children for hostage, he will do it with great difficulty and much a
do: but our Lord gives his own Name for hostage, when there is cause of
nourishing peace amongst us, yea and when the matter stands so, that Concord
must be had with infidells, too the end they may leave of to rage against us,
and not hurt us. Seeing then God has vouchsafed too lend his own Name too
this purpose, so much the more ought we too be bente, to seek by all the
means that can be, that men may be peaceable, and that we have no quarelles
with them, yea that we seek too appease them that are raised up: we must
(as much as lies in us) prevent them: but yet if we can not altogether
perform it, when we shall see any quarelles begun, we should endeavor too
kill it: yea by the mean that I have already spoken of: that is too say, by
forgoing our right, as much as shall be possible for us. This then is the sum
of that we have too learn. Now it is not said in this place, in what form
they swear: but we shall find afterward, that Isaac always made his oath
unto the living and everlasting God, rendering honor unto him too whom it
belonged, albeit he had to do with heathen people, who had forged idolles and
corrupted the true service of GOD through their own superstitions: yet
continued he in his own soundnes. Thereupon it is said, that his servants
being returned, (as we expounded yesterday) they said unto him: We have found
living water. And after he adds concerning Esau: That he took a wife from
among the Hethites, yea two wives: which were bitter to the souls of Isaac
and Rebecca.

Here we see on the one side, how God would comfort his servant every way:
For it was not only shevved him that he should be assured from thence forth
that none should hurt him: seeing the king himself of the country was come to
seek to him: but also he had water given him, which he might enjoy peaceably
and quietly as his own. When therefore our Lord shows this great favor
toward Isaac, let us know that he te^pteth not his above their strength, but
always sweeteneth their afflictions in such sort, that they shall not be as
it were ever oppressed and quite overthrown: and let us hope, that altogether
like as Isaac was vpholden, and that God after he had afflicted him, looked
also again unto him to give him somewhat wherewith to comfort him, so likewise
must we wait, and the^ we shall not be deceived, if we rest there, For God
knows our fraieltie, and there is no doubt but he will always give us such
taste of his mercy and favor, that we shall have good cause to bless his
name, and have no occasion to grieve our selves in such sort, that we know not
how to comfort our selves any more in him. But the principal point is, that
Esau took two wives from among the Hethites. Here we begin to see already
that Esau was not only once profane, but that he went on in that course, and
gave him self wholly thereto, as we have showed heretofore, that after he had
well filled his belly with the pottage, that Jacob his brother had prepared for
him, and when he had eaten and drunk, he went his way, and despised his
birthright. Moses also rehearses now that he took two wives from amongst
the Hethites: for if he had had any remorse within him, and that he had
esteemed the promise of the spiritual inheritance made unto his father, it is
certain, that he would have holden him self as separate from all those
people. For he knew full well, how his graundfather Abraham had behaved
himself in that point, that he had made his servant to swear solempnely, that
he should not take a wife for his son Isaac in that land of Canaan: he
knew that his mother was sought after, in a far country, in Mesopotamia,
because god would have this house as it were apart, and would not have it
mingled and mashed with those of that country. What does he therefore, when he
takes two wives of the inhabitants of Canaan, who^ God had accursed? This was
as much as if he had forsaken the promise of salvation, and as though he had
renounced, to make any more reckoning thereof the^ if it had not bin worth a
straw. Lo one testimony already how Esau made him self unworthy of his
birthright: and this came to pass because he was not governed by the spirit of
God, as also we have showed before, that God will so hold in and keep his
elect, and in such sort ratify and seal in their hearts his goodness and
fatherly adoption, that they shall soar up to him, and despise this world, to
the end they may rejoice in those spiritual benefits he has prepared for
the^: but contrariwise, he lets loose the reins to al those vvho^ he has
rejected, in such sort, that they harde^ themselves: and although this be not
done al at once at the first push, yet notwithstanding a man shall find in the
end, that there is no seed of the fear of God, nor of godliness in them. This
therefore is the thing we have to bear away upon this place. And herevppon let
us learn in such wise too behave our selves, that always we labor to sunder
our selves from them, that would dravve us too destruction: For it is without
al doubt, that if we live over familiarly with the contemners of god, they
will soon defile us: their fellowship and conversation is a deadly
pestilence. And so much the rather it behooves us to walk with carefulnes
herein, taking good heed unto our selves that we defile not our selves with
the filthinesses of this world. And let us in the mean season acknowledge,
that it is also a wonderful providence of God, that he would have Esau too
take two wives in this country: For this was too this end, that he might be
as it were cut of from the house of his father Isaac: he loved him dearly, and
although his wives vexed him, yet for all that he could not withdraw his heart
from Esau, knowing notwithstanding that God had rejected him. And herein he
resisted God, without ever thinking upon the matter: but God wrought therein
after another manner, when he saw such infirmity in his servant Isaac, he
brought to pass in the end, that he must utterly forsake his son Esau. Mark
then how god ruled al in such sort, that his church continued always in her
smalnes, as it were hidden under the earth, as though it had bin nothing there
remained no more but Jacob, as we shall see oftentimes, and Isaac was half
spent: he was three score years old, when his children were borne, and now
was Esau of the age of forty years when he took his wives: Isaac therefore
was very old. And concerning Jacob, he was also forty years old, and yet
was not married. And where then was this stock? It should seem that the Church
must quite perish, and all the promises of God be utterly abolished: but
although it were so small, that it was contemptible in men's judgments, yet we
see that God so well governed his Church, that it remained pure and sound, and
that which was profane was cut of from it: as if a house should be swept, and
the sweepings be cast out of doors. So fell it out that Esau was rejected, and
that Jacob remained alone, as also the heritage was appointed to him.

But now let us fall down before the high majesty of our good God, with
acknowledging of our faults, and praying him, that he will make us to feel
them in such sort, that it may serve too make us continually to mourn before
him, and to ask pardon thereof in such sort, that we may labor to resist it,
and more and more be withdrawn from it, until we shall be thoroughly clothed with
his righteousness. And that he will supporte us in our weaknesses, so as we
leave not of to call upon him as our father, although we fall many ways. So
let us all say, O almighty God, heavenly father, etc.

The eleventh Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27.
3 Now it came to pass when Isaac was very old, and his eyes began to be
dark that he could not see, that calling Esau his elder son, he said unto
him: My son, who said unto him, Lo here I am.

4 Then he said, Behold now, I am waxed old, and I know not the day of my
death:

5 Therefore take thy implements unto thee, I pray thee, thy bow and quiver:
and go into the fields, and hunt some venisone for me.

6 And providing some delicate dishes for me, eue^ as I love, bring them unto
me, that I may eat, and my soul may bless thee before I die.

7 (Now Rebecca heard Isaac when he spoke thus unto Esau) Esau went
therefore into the field to hunt venison which he would bring.

8 But Rebecca spoke unto Jacob her son, saying: Lo I heard thy father
speaking unto Esau thy brother, saying:

9 Bring me venison, and provide me some dainty dishes which I may eat,
afterward I will bless thee before Iehoua, before I die.


WE saw yesterday, how Esau by his marriage, showed sufficiently enough, that
he had no great care concerning that blessing which had bin promised to the
house of Abraham his father: For this was the stock which must possess the
land of Canaan. It must therefore needs be, that the people which dvvelled
there then, must be quite rooted out: and this land be wholy dedicated to the
people of God. Likewise, it must be purged from all polutions. Lo how Esau
mingleth him self amongst them, whom God had already condemned: this therefore
was a sign that he was fallen from God, for otherwise he could not have drawn
near too that people. And if he would have bin an heir of the promise, he
should have always kept him self as one listed and chained in, and not have
mingled him self, which was no other thing but to stop the course of the
grace that was promised. But as we have seen, he took wives from amongst the
Hethites. Mark then how he renounced, as much as lay in him the grace of God,
through which the whole stock of Abraham must possess the land of Canaan
for an inheritance. But there was yet a second fault: For he took two
vviues, which was contrary to the law of marriage, as we have seen. For the
sentence which God had pronounced to rest upon, was, that a man shall have an
help, and not two nor three. And further, when Eua was created, and that
she was given to Ada^, it is said, that they should be two in one flesh. Mark
then the rule which me^ ought alvvaies to keep. So then we see that Esau
even brake the bounds of al honesty, yea of nature it self, and that he was
as a beastly man in this behalf. It is true that his graundfather Abraham had
two vviues: but herein he was too be condemned.

And besides it was not his desire that provoked him thereunto: but, his wife
through overmuch haste, brought him to it. And when every thing shall be well
waied, it was an inconsiderat zeal that he had to enjoy that which God had
promised him: that is to say, that his seed should be blessed. Now he had no
children. He took therefore a second wife: but this was (as I have said,) to
pervert the order that God had established. He committed evil therein: but in
Esau what can we allege, but that he was a dissolute man, and had nothing but
vice and wickedness in him, so that he could not distinguish between marriage
and whoredom? And this is the cause that he took two wives. Now it is very
true that in this time, marriage was il kept amongst the peoples of the East:
For they were always much given to their fleshly lusts: in such sort, that
beyond that which is called poligamie (that is to say, plurality of wives,)
they committed incestes also very commonly. And this was a nation very beastly
in this point, that they made no account to profane marriage: but this custom
does not therefore excuse Esau. And so, let us mark well, that this shall be no
excuse before God, when we shall say that every man does so, and that we
have a great sort of companions: let us not think too be free thereby before
him. Notwithstanding when vices do reign in a country, and men make a law
against the^, if some neglect them, every man flattereth himself, and every
man takes for his warrant those which have led him too destruction. And (say
they) such and such do it well, and after when men come unto them, and say
too them: wherefore do you so? o see such a one did it well. But we shall all
be put in a bundle together, and God knows very well how too wryeth us up
altogether like thorns, when we shall make a cloak of their vices, who ought
when they do evil to be an example unto us, to make us fly them. But
notwithstanding all this, that Isaac is yet blinded with the love of his son
Esau: he saw him now too degenerate out of kind, because that he wallowed
(as it were) a Swine upon a dunghill, because he made a couenaunte with those
people whom God had rejected: and farther perverted the order and institution
of marriage: yet notwithstanding his father bears all this. It is said, that
the wives of Esau did as it were spur him, and that his heart was wounded
therewith: but so it is, that the love of his son did always hold him back.

Now there might well be some virtue: but this means not that every thing
was therefore praise worthy in him: no he wanted mucn in that behalf. For he
should have had his son, how old soever he had been in detestation,
forasmuch as he was so estraunged from God, and because as much as lay in him,
he had made the promise of salvation of no effect. For what might have become
of the Church, if the stock of Abraham had been joined with those people?
Isaac therefore ought to have been more touched, to see his son so
profane. And seeing he saw this beastlynesse in him, that he made no matter
of it, to have two wives: and he would have had them by dozens, if he had been
able to have kept them. When therefore he bears with these faults in his
son, it is very certain that he offended God. For unless fathers use
severity and correction when need requires, when they see their children too
be so wicked they are gilty, inasmuch as they fail in doing their duty. Our
Lord has given the^ authority over their houses and offspring. And wherefore,
unless it be to the end to keep them in awe and to restrain them, that they
may render an account, when any evil shall be committed in their family? Lo
then a fault shameful enough in Isaac: but yet he exceeds farther in
doting so upon his son Esau. It is said, that his eyes began to fail him,
forasmuch as his sight was dim: but it is certain that this foolish love
which he bare to his eldest soon blinded him, much more then his age, or the
lack of his bodily senses: For he ought to have marked (as the truth was) that
God had preferred Jacob before Esau, and yet nevertheless he resists it, as we
have seen before, when it was said that he loved Esau, and that Rebecca loved
Jacob: and this love of hers was an obedience that she yielded unto that
heavenly revelation. For GOD had pronounced this sentence before, That the
elder should serve the younger. Rebecca was a great deal better advised then
her husband. But he continues still as we may see in this place, and it
seems that he would have resisted God. It is very certain that his purpose
was not such: But he is in such wise ravished by his affection, that he forgot
himself, and had no discretion and judgment.

And hereby we may see, how we ought always too suspect our affectionate
passions. For they rush upon us always to butte against God. As a Bull chafed
pusheth with his horns, so our appetites and desires drive us, and ravish us,
in such wise, that we make war most notoriously against god, yea with out ever
thinking upon it: it never comes into our memory, This is forbidden me, God
has condemned and rejected it. We have therefore many times our senses so
encumbered, that we keep not either the way or the path. And hereof we see an
example in Isaac. For all the time of his life, he was as a looking glass of
holiness, and led as it were an Angels life, keeping himself in the fear of
god: but herein he so faulteth, that god is nothing with him. He treads under
his foot that which he had understood by his wife: that is, that now the right
of the first borne was given unto Jacob. Nevertheless he passes beyond that.
Now this is a wonderful strange thing for he was notwithstanding the minister
of god, and a prophet: and as soon as he had charge to give the blessing to him
to whom God had ordained it, yet he deals as if he had been the keeper and
appointer thereof. God had done him this honor, as if he should have said,
I will bless him whom I shall think good: but the testimony shall come out of
thy mouth. Thou shall be a messenger: especially that which thou pronouncest,
shall have authority of justice: it shall be authentic, which I will ratify
in heaven, God had done him this honor: and yet he leaves himself to be so
snared in ignorance, that he goes quite contrary, specially from his duty,
and from that which his office required. This at the first show should seem a
thing intolerable: but God, who by his wonderful counsel directed him in
such sort in this matter, that he turned darkness into light, and showed
that this was not a thing according to man's fantasy, that the inheritance of
salvation should come unto this man or too that man: but that in despite of
all men, he must have it to whom it was ordained and established to hold it,
and that it must have his effect. But because all things can not be understood
atonce, let us follow that order in rehearsing of it, which Moises uses: and
afterward we will gather in the end, the profit that this History brings
unto us. It is said that Isaac seeing himself now to draw toward his
end, forasmuch as he was transitory. He says unto his son Esau: I know not
the day of my death: And therefore go and hunt Venison that thou may provide
me meat according to my appetite, and which I love, and my soul shall bless
thee,

Isaac in saying that he knew not the day of his death, signifies, that he
saw himself to draw near to the grave already: For there is none that knows
the day of his death. God would always hold us in suspense and doubt
concerning this, too the end we might always be ready. Death (as it is said in
the common proverb) is sure to all, but the hour of death is unknown unto us:
and this is very profitable for us: for wese how men are given to their
pleasures and are merry whiles that they think to have some truses or some
release. And what should this be, if we knew certainly of the end of our
life? Every one would bend himself to all kind of evil, and God should be
despited even to the end. But when our Lord handles us short in such sort,
that from the womb of our mother we are still beseeged with death: as we see
of young infants, who die before they come into the world: so far is it off,
that we cannot live even the minute of an hour, but that as soon as we are
borne we are subject too death, as our frailty declares. For with what a
number of deseases are we compassed? And to how many dangers and hasards is
our life subject? So then, there is neither young nor old that should not say
by good right, that he knows not when he shall die but the meaning of these
words is as I have said: to wit, that Isaac knew well that he could not
continue in the world. And indeed, although young people and they which are
strong and in the flower of their age, ought too prepare themselves to forsake
the world, and every hour to dye, while they live: yet do we most fail
herein, albeit our nature warns us to give our selves no more to the world.
So that we have to gather of this drifte of Isaac, that as every man sees
himself weak and transitory, so that he draw his legs after him, where he
has lived long, that this (I say) should stir us up so much the more to
prepare our selves to dye. Now it is very true that he spoke here to no other
end, but to bless Esau: but so much this admonition imports, that when we
see death to approach, that we learn freely to yield up our selves into the
hands of God, and to glorify his name in such obedience, that we live no
longer to our selves: and after we shall have disposed of every thing in such
sort, that there be nothing that hold us or let us, from going cheerfully
forwards when we shall be called. But when he speaks of the blessing, this is
not to be understood of common prayer. For there is no dout, but that Isaac
prayed every day for his children: and it is said here: That I may bless thee
before my death. We may the^ gather that this blessing whereof Isaac speaks,
was had in special regard: and in deed (as I have said) Isaac was as it were
the warden and keeper of Gods promise: and this treasure was committed into his
charge and credit, to bless. And mark why the Apostle says, The lesser was
blessed of the greater, because it must needs be, that in this case he must
have his authority from God. This was declared more plainly in the time of the
law: For the priests were ordained, not only to teach the people, and to
offer up sacrifices: but also too bless, and the very form thereof was set
down unto them. And oftentimes when Moses speaks of this office, he sets
the Priests whom God had chosen to bless. But they do this, in respect of
their own persons, no otherwise then as figures: but this was to show that it
belonged to our Lord Jesus Christ, to be a witness unto us of the blessing of
God, and to ratify it toward us: as also he showed when he ascended into
Heaven, and that his hands were lifted up, he blessed his disciples. He
shows therefore that the truth and substance of these figures of the law,
was fulfilled in him. Now he was so, before the law was written: for God would
that Abraham should be the father of the church: and for this cause he blessed
Isaac, as if the heritage had bin resigned too him, which had been promised to
him. Isaac now must do the like: for he received not the blessing for him
self, but to the end it should always remain in his house. He must therefore
be the minister of the grace of God: as we yet see at this day, that he
communicates his benefits and spiritual gifts amongst us, by the hand of
those whom he has ordained to this purpose. Men therefore cannot forgive us our
sins, and yet nevertheless our Lord Jesus Christ uses this figure of
speking: To whom so ever you shall forgive their sins, they shall be forgiven.
Now yet for all that he has reserved this to him self as he protests in
Esaias. O Jacob it is I and none others that take away thine iniquities. Now
albeit God alone has this power to forgive sins, and too purge us from our
spots: yet nevertheless, he does this by the hand of men. We have in Baptism an
infallible token that GOD will not lay our offenses too our charge: but that we
are as righteous and clean before him: and farther we have an earnest, that
he will renew us by his holy spirit, to the end we should walk in all
purity. Now this can not be given us of men: but yet GOD makes them herein
as instruments, and all through his favor. Again, Is it in the power of any
mortal creature, too make us partakers of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ? And yet nevertheless in the supper when the bread and the wine are
distributed, it is certain that this is not a vain and empty figure, but
that all is accomplyshed, and that our Lord Jesus Christ shows him self
faithful in this: For it is he which gives it: and it were too much to
attribute it to those who are and can do nothing, to say, that they have our
Lord Jesus Christ to communicate to them which come unto them to receive a
morsel of bread, and a drop or two of wine. And in deed this is well showed
unto us, when he says: My flesh is bread from heaven. And he gives it after
two sorts: one is, that which he gave, when he offered up him self to his
father for the clensing of sins. The bread which I will give unto you (says
he) is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.

Lo then two kinds of giving: for he gave his flesh, when he offered it up
for the satisfaction of all our faults, to the end that God might be
appeased toward us, and that we might be released to become righteous. Now
the second giving is that which he makes daily. Now if it belong to Jesus
Christ to give himself unto the faithful, who receive him by faith, it
follows then that this ought not too be attributed to men, not as though they
had this power: but only that Jesus Christ surceaseth not to apply this
thereto. And thus it has been in all times: For God has evermore reserved to
himself the praise of men's salvation: but this lets not, but that these may
be instruments by whom he works. Lo then how this makes for Isaac, to
show that he must pronounce the sentence of that blessing whereunto he was
ordained. And in deed we see this in the doctrine of the Gospel: for what is
the preaching of the Gospel? It is the power of God to salvation to all
believers (says Saint Paul:) and there he speaks of that word which
proceeds from our mouth. What, the power of God? Why, it is nothing in it
self. It is true: but it pleases God to display his power by the means of
men, and would that his word should have such effect and power in the working,
that it be as it were a key to open unto us the kingdom of heaven: as also he
has compared it to the keys of the kingdom of Heaven.

So then, let us mark well that Isaac speaks not here of any common
blessing: that is to say of prayer, as when we bless one another, and when
we pray that God will show mercy to our neighbors, and that he will give them
that which he knows to be fit for them. And thus much concerning blessings.
But Isaac knew that he was ordained the minister of God to dispense that
treasure that was committed to his charge. And this is worthy to be noted, to
the end that we hate not the doctrine that is preached unto us, knowing what it
imports. These be the Anabaptists that refuse the ministry of the word, and
will be taught immediately from God.
For there are many fantastical men that refuse all inferior means, and
would without wings mount up above the clouds. And is not God, say they,
sufficient to teach us? Is it not he that gives faith? And is the holy Ghost
in the hands of men? what need have we too be preached unto? And to what end
is it to read so much? All this is superfluous: For God can sufficiently
enspire us, without having our ears so battred with the tongue. For he has all that is needful for our benefit and salvation: and he will bring it to pass.
And must men then hold him as it were bound to them? And must the power of his
spirit be mashed and mingled with those inferior means as though he were not
at liberty? Lo what these fantastical spirits say. Now they consider not that
God is not tied and bound to men, when he uses their service: for he does it
as it seems good unto him. It is true that faith ordinarily comes by
hearing, as S. Paul says: so that we can not have faith unless it be by men.
And cannot God as well do it otherwise? The question here is not of the power
of God but of his will, and of that which he has ordained. And therefore when
we shall say, And cannot God do this and that? he can do it: but seeing he
will that it be otherwise, we ought to rest there. So then, let us learn to
receive this doctrine which is daily taught us, with all reverence, knowing
that when we shall have this testimony, that our sins are forgiven us, all
is ratified in heaven: as if God himself should speak: For he will not have
us to esteem his truth according to men, who are brickle and liars and
amongst whom there is nothing but vanity: but he will have his truth esteemed
for it self sake, and for it own nature. And in the mean time, let us have
this sobriety and modesty therein, too submit our selves too the order
which he has establyshed. And thus much concerning this word of blessing.

Now here Moses begins too rehearse how Rebecca found out a subtlety
and craft to rob Esau of his blessing, and too translate it too Jacob: and
after that we have spoken of the vices of Isaac, we see the like in his wife
Rebecca: and yet nevertheless they both believed in God: notwithstanding that
it was so darkened and bewrapped, that it could hardly be discerned. That
Isaac had a true faith: and that this proceeded from a true zeal, it
appears plainly: For if he had not been thoroughly persuaded hereof in
himself, that the heritage should be given him which was promised to him, and
to his seed concerning this blessing: What had this been? Surely but a crafty
part and a thing of naught. Isaac therefore must needs be resolved, howsoever
he saw himself as it were already in the grave, his life to be spente, and
to have but a day too live: howsoever this were, yet nevertheless he always
held this sure which was said unto him: to wit, that his family should be
blessed, and that GOD had chosen him, and that this was not in vain, and that
albeit he saw not the fulfilling of these promises in this world, yet
notwithstanding that god was in heaven, and that neither he nor his should be
deceived: but yet they must wait for this. Wherefore Isaac having fought all the time of his life against all the tentatio^s which might have overthrown
him, does yet in death persevere in faith and patience, and does this honor
unto God that he does boldly trust in him. For whosoever trusts in God shall
never be confounded. Isaac had this, and this was a very excellent faith. For
see a poor wayfering man: it is said unto him, thou shalt be the heir of
this country, and yet notwithstanding he had no water to drink as we have
seen. Now notwithstanding death does threate^ him: yet knows he not when it
shall be, saving that he is altogether ready for it. And yet for all that he
despiteth both Satan and the world, and remains steadfast in this, that God
will not deceive him: and that it is al one to him whether he dye, or whether he
molder in the ground: so that the truth of God may yet continue, and have his
full virtue and power. Lo Isaac the who seeks not for the world, but
forsakes al his senses and remains steadfast: and douteth not but that god
had mercy on him and on his stock. Herein as I have said we have good cause to
praise him: and yet in the mean time he was so blinded with the love of his
son, that he fought against God, though he never once thought thereof. This
was not a manifest rebellion nor of wilful malice: but it was because he was
sluggishe and knew not his office but in part. He knows very well that God
would advance him to such a dignity, that he might be the messenger and
witness of this blessing: He knows this, and notwithstanding on the
contrary part he is deceived. He had therefore in this case a particular
Faith: he had a good zeal mingled with the affections of the flesh.

But let us come too Rebecca. Rebecca behahaued her self here with foolish
rashness: for what an attempt was it, for the blessing of God, too be
profaned through craft and lying? yea, (I say) lying so foul as nothing
cold be more. The matter was here of the salvation of the world, the
question was of having Jesus Christ whom GOD should send for a Redeemer. But
how proceeds Rebecca theerein? It is certain that a thing of such importance
ought too be handled with all fear and lowelynesse: what a thing is it then
that she comes foolishly too attempt that which seems good unto her, in so
excellent a work of GOD and which surmounteth all others? For Rebecca knowing
well that the blessing which she sought for her son Jacob imported that he
should be head of the Church during his life, and that of him should come
our Lord Jesus Christ: does notwithstanding overthrow it, that she cares
not too lie, to falsify, to pervert all: and also it seems, that she sets
out the grace of God but in a mockery and contempt: For this was too make it
too be basely esteemed, to say, that it should come bewrapped about the
neck of her son, and in the hands of skins, coulouring that he is
hairie, and seeming too rob Esau of all his ornaments: and again that she
makes her son to lie: and farther Jacob, who went to seek a Kid which she
causes to be sodde, and makes him believe that it is Venison: And after that
he had the smell of the garments of Esau: to be short it might be said that
she would have overthrown the election of God.

Lo therefore very foul faults, and yet all this proceeds from an excellent
faith, if ever there were any. This is very strange: But we may easily judge
it. Whereto then had Rebecca regard? She looued her Son Jacob, and what
should it avail him to have been blessed through deceit? For this was
neither to get him riches nor profit in respect of the world: yea which is
more she lays him open to the wrath and curse of his Father: Again she
knew Esau who was full of venom, full of fierceness, spite and wrath: and
indeed we shall see afterward, that Jacob was in danger of his life:
Rebecca knew all these things, notwithstanding she sets fire on her house,
where she might have kept her darling with her, to have been always with him,
to have administered that unto him which he might have needed in the world,
without putting him in any such danger. But what did she? she had printed
this in her heart that the birthright belonged unto Jacob, as GOD had promised
her, and so she would obey God, and esteem this birthright, although it was
nothing accounted off amongst men: as we shall afterward find, that Jacob
called Esau his Lord, that he humbled him self before him, yea, even to the
bowing of the knee.

Now although that this same birthright were worth nothing in respect of the
world, yet does Rebecca greatly esteem it. See then undoubted and sure
testimonies of a great and exquisite faith which was in her, that she would
obey God in despite both of her husband and all that he had: so that she might
execute that which God had pronounced, she passed not: And that she esteemed
these spiritual blessings more then any thing which was in the world. Lo
then the undoubted marks of her faith, she had so great zeal that she forgot
her self and regarded not any whit whatsoever mischeife might come upon it. And
why so? For as much as she conformed her self to the will of God: and forsook
her eldest son, and cast of all motherly affection: and knowing that he must
be cut off: very well says she, let him go as a rotten member for as much as
God has so ordained. We see here in Rebecca notable virtues mingled with
vices.

And hereby we are admonished too walk in fear, albeit that God give us a
singular affection to meditate upon him, notwithstanding we shall always be
in such sort bewrapped in darkness, that when we imagine to do the best
we can in the world, yet there shall be cause for us too amend when GOD shall
call us to a reckoning. And in good sooth, there is not any one which does not
prove this to be true: for although that this be our mark, too strive thither
whether God has called us, yet do we make so many false steps that it is
great pity to see: and they which run more swiftly do bring themselves in
order to God, yet for all that, they go out of the way and have many outlopes
and cross paths, and God suffers them to the end that we should not have
whereof to be proud. For if virtues them selves be faulty before God, alas
what shall those vices be which are altogether condemned? Do we labor too
do well, do we enforce our selves thereunto: yet notwithstanding we shall
offend GOD. And why so? It is because there is such infirmity in us, and we
are wrapped in ignorance: Although that GOD inlighten us, and that we see the
way well, notwithstanding, yet such clouds do oftentimes come before our
eyes, that in stead of keeping of our way, we stray either on the one side or
on the other.

Mark how faulty the virtues of the faithful are, to the end that we may
learn, only to rest our selves in the mere goodness of God, and to the end it
would please him to pardon our offenses, and also to accept that for
righteousness which he might justly condemn. How then is it that our works are
acceptable unto God? how is it that he calls sacrifices of a sweet
smelling savor, and that they are so acceptable before him, that they shall
have a reward? Alas, it is not any merit as the Papists imagine: but it is
because that God has justified that, which he might rightly reject, and
account as it were abominable. So let us mark that in the faith of Isaac,
we may behold the imperfectio^s which are in us, whiles that we live in this
world, albeit that God have renewed us in part by his holy spirit, and again
let us know that God works in such sort that the evil which is in us,
hinders not him to accomplish his work even by our mean. As for example, If
we will search till we find an Angelical perfection in a mortal man, there
shall never any be found that has it, neither was ever any found who was not
tainted with some kind of fault: and therefore the Priests which were figures
and representations of our Lord Jesus Christ, first of al asked pardon for
their offenses, although that they made intercession for the people, and were
as it were mediators, and that by their sacrifices they abolished sins: yet
notwithstanding must they begin at them selves. But now by the way if we will
seek ministers of the word, in whom there is no fault, it is certain that
we cannot find any: and it must needs be that the most excellent men be
examples unto us, of the bricklenesse and weakness of men. But now if we
will conclude: and how then shall I find my salvation by their means? For I
see yet that they are full of imperfections. But let us learn (as I have said)
in the person of Isaac that God leaves not off too accomplish his work,
although there be yet ignorance in them, who ought too lead us, who when
they distribute unto us spiritual gifts, which they have committed unto them,
and whereof GOD has made them keepers, although they be not altogyther such as
they ought too be: notwithstanding we leave not off too make our profit of
them: for God uses and orders them in such sort in this work which he will
do, that his grace is no whit hindered, because a man might find things too
be bettered in them. This therefore is the thing that we have yet too mark
upon this place. But too be short, we see that the faith of the children of
God shall oftentimes be weak and entangled, not as the papists have imagined:
for they call an entangled faith beastliness, when a man shall say, O, I
believe in my mothers god: I know not what the whole Christianity means:
But lo it is enough for me too go simply to work: and I believe as our holy
mother the Church believes: and in deed the wiser sort of Priests will
say, I believe in the god of my Chambermaide: because she believes in god who
makes Cabadges to grow after that she has planted them. See the implicit
and folded faith of the Papists, which is a very sorcerie of the Devil: but
the entangled faith of the children of GOD, is because they be holden in
ignorance. But yet notwithstanding there is some light: but what is that faith?
It is an understanding which we have of the goodness and favor of GOD, after
that he has illuminated us by his holy spirit and by his word. For faith
can not be without these two things: that is to say, without the word of God:
I say as God has set an order in his church: and after it ca^ not be without
the gift of the spirit: For the word of god should be preached unto us both
morning and evening, and we can profit nothing therein, unless God do open
our ears and enlighten us, forasmuch as we are miserable blind ones. The
Sun shall always shine upon us: but they that are blind discern not
between the day and the night, too them both are alyke. And even so is it
with us: that if GOD illuminate us not within, when he sends his holy
word, too show us the way, we should always remain as poor strayes, or
lost sheep.

So then, it behooves that our faith have light in it self: but yet I say,
that this light is compassed and entangled with great darkness: For we
behold not God face too face, and we are not capable too comprehend his
secrets: and this is sufficient that we know them in part, and that we have
some taste of that which shall be revealed unto us in perfection, then when we
shall put off our flesh, and shall be translated into that heavenly glory, to be
companions of Angels. Lo then briefly what we have to learn upon this
place, to wit, that our faith, although it be great and exquisite, yet
nevertheless it shall always have some weakness, and some imperfection and
ignorance mingled with that, which God has given us to know. Now hereof we
may gather, that when the scripture pronounces that we are justified and saved
by faith, it means not, that it is by the desert of faith: For if it were so
that our salvation were founded upon the dignity of faith, the^ must our faith
be perfect. For if our faith be weak (as I have already said) and that we have
but only a part of it, then should we have but a part of salvation: and
further it should be shaken, and we should always be wavering and in doubt.
But when it is said that we are saved by faith, it is because we accept the
mercy of god, which we ought to esteem fully sufficient for our salvation. Our
faith is imperfect: yea but when there shall be never so little a spark, yet
nevertheless shall the goodness of God supply that which is wanting: even as we
now bear this corrupt lump, not only in our bodies, but in our whole
nature. But we know that our souls go unto death, and in the mean season
where is our life? It is in us. How? In that we have received the spirit of
God, says Saint Paul in the 8. chapter to the Romans. And have we the
spirit of God in fulness? No not so: There is as it were but one spark or
drop of it: but this says he is life: and shall swallowe up all whatsoever
belongs to death in us, and shall make it of no effect. Let us mark then
that although our faith be very little, and that in respect of us we conceive
not the hundredth part of the benefits which God offreth unto us, yea and that
we do not so much as by a lick, taste his grace, yet nevertheless we must not
therefore despair too be saved thorough faith. For the matter is not as I
have said, of our estimation, or of our paising and waying it in our balance,
that is to say, if we have an excellent faith to obtain the grace of God, and
that which is necessary for our salvation: but the question only is, that when
God has declared that he will be our father, that we embrace this promise, and
stay our selves therevppon. And if there be any doubts or distrustes, that we
resist them, and that we hold fast this conclusion, O we are yet sure that
God will not disapoint us. Mark then what we have here too hold, as well by
the example of Rebecca, as by the example of Isaac. But Moses says now
expressly that Jacob refused, saying: And how shall this be? I am not hairie
as my brother is, and if my father shall find the deceyte, he will curse me.

Here we see as it seems, two great vices in Jacob: The one is, that he
feared his father more the^ God. It is true that it might so be judged thereof:
but when all shall be well marked, it is certain, that it was the fear of God
that moved him thereunto. For concerning the curse of his father, he was no
otherwise careful of it, then in this, that it was imprinted in his heart,
that his father was established to be as it were a witness of the promise
which God had given unto him. Seeing therefore that Jacob had this, it is a
sign that he rested not upon any thing from man: but that in the person of
his father he considered that which God had decreed. The other evil was, that
he doubted. Now we know that in our life if we be not well certified, we
shall not remove so much as one finger, to the end we sin not, and that God
be not offended. And why so? Obedience is more worth than sacrifice. When
therefore we shall attempt to do any thing, not knowing whether it be lawful
for us, and whether God do allow it: this is as much as if we should despite
God: so that we should not know how to eat or to drink, or to be short, to do
any thing: no not so much as to remove a mote, but that all our actions should
be condemned, and that god should have them in utter detestation: and S. Paul
also pronou^ceth it. For by this word of faith he understands certainty in
the 14. to the Romans that we be assured that that which we do is permitted of
God, and is agreeable to his word. But see Jacob who says, how shall this be?
I am not hairie as my brother is. He doubts: that therefore is a sign that
after that he has obeyed his mother, he should commit evil, and that all that
he should take in hand, should be nothing but confusion, and that god would
detest it. And surely so had it bin if he had always remained doubtful, that
whatsoever he should have done, being of sin, it should have bin to provoke the
wrath of god: but we shall see by that which follows that he was confirmed. But
the answer which his mother gives him, is: The curse be upon me.

But she was not so lean and so dry as here she is set forth unto us, but she
showed him that he was chosen of god, and that the birthright belo^ged unto
him. And in deed we shall see how he was confirmed, and that he feared no more
when he was before his father. Thus then it may easily be gathered that Jacob
was confirmed, to resolve him self and too know that the blessing which he
sought, could not be disapointed: in the mean time notwithstanding we can not
excuse him, but that he fell fowly, eue^ in the very beginning. The matter was
here of the building of his house, but Jacob doubts and sticks here, not
knowing whether it were good or evil. We see then that he had a very evil
beginning: and consequently that he had nothing in that case but confusion, had
not god helped therein. To be short, we see as well in Jacob as in Isaac and in
Rebecca, that the grace of God came not unto them, nor had any entry unto the^
by their own wisdom, nor by their good means which they inverted. Lo therefore
the defaults which are here: but god has outgone al their faults and offenses,
and wrought in such sort through his infinite mercy, that we have good
occasion to bow down our heads, and to confess that there is none but only
he upon whom all our happiness depends, and from whom it proceeds.

But now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging of our faults, and beseeching him that he will open our eyes,
that we may always more and more know them, too the end we flatter not our
selves in them: but that we may sighe and groan to obtain pardon of him: and
in the mean while that we may in such sort fight against all our carnal
desires, that in the end we may be full framed too his righteousness, from
which we are yet so far of. And that he show not this grace only unto us,
but also too all peoples and nations of the earth. etc.

The twelfth Sermon of Jacob and Esau. Genesis 27.
13 But Jacob said unto Rebecca his mother, Behold my brother Esau is a rough
hairie man, but I am glib and of a smooth skin.

14 Peradventure my father will feel me, and I shall be unto him, as a seducer:
and so I shall bring upon me a curse and not a blessing.

15 Unto whom his mother said, Thy curse be upon me my son: Only hearken
unto my voice, and go thy ways and bring it unto me.

16 Therefore departing he took it and brought it unto his mother: and his
mother took it and made daint i^ dishes, even such as his father loved.

17 Afterward Rebecca taking the most precious garments of Esau her eldest
son, which were with her at home, she put them upon Jacob her youngest son:

18 And putting upon his hands the skins of kiddes from amongst the Goats,
and upon the smooth of his neck:

19 She put the dainty dishes which she had made, with bread in the hand of
her son Jacob.

20 So he coming unto his father, said, My father: who said, Behold me, who
art thou my son?

21 Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thine eldest son, I have done as
thou have commanded me: now rising, sit down and eat of my venison, that
thy soul may bless me, etc.


WE have here to continue the purpose which was yesterdaye begone: that is,
that God directed Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob, in such sort, that
notwithstanding the faults that were in them, he leaves not of too put that
in execution which he had determined, concerning the blessing of Jacob and
rejecting Esau. And yet this is not too clear Isaac for his part, as though
he had not fowly faulted, and that the like fault had not been found in
Rebecca and in Jacob: but God passed them over. And so, we see that GOD
waits not upon men, neither depends upon them, when the matter stands,
for the perfourmaunce of his counsel. It is very true, that he will use
them too serve his turn: but he shows notwithstanding that he woorketh all
alone and of him self: and when his creatures serve him as instruments, it is
no farther then it pleases him, and not as though he were bound by any
necessity: yea and albeit that things in respect of men go quite backwarde
as it seems, yet this shows that his po, were is sufficient, so that it
needs no help from others.

Now we have said, that in this matter of Jacob it may be seen how he
fell into doubt: and this was contrary too faith. It behooves therefore that
GOD on the one side supplied this want. Concerning that, that it is said that
he should bear the curse: it is for that he knew that his father was
ordained to this, that he must ordeyne an inheritour, not only for worldly and
transitory benefits, but of the promise which belongs to the spiritual
life. He knew this: and therefore he respected not only a mortal man, but the
living God. Now touching Rebecca, she says, the Curse be upon her. We see
how she was ravished (as was yesterday handled) in such sort, that she
spoke, as it were at randon: but there is no doubt, that in the mean while
she wiste not, that this could do no hurt. It is true that she regarded not
her fault. For although she had a good ground too obey GOD, and so too
deal that his election might stand in full strength: yet notwithstanding she
ought not in the mean season, too have made such a craft too bear swaye,
wherein there was nothing but deceytes and lies. For GOD (as we have said
already) is able enough too accomplish his own work, and too bring his
own counsel too an end: he needs not too borrowe any thing of us. It is
not lawful therefore by a stronger reason, too go about too advance his
truth by ourlyes. But Rebecca does it: so that in this behalf she can not
be excused. But this example is not here set before our eyes, too the end
that we also should imagine the like: For it will fall out, that at all
assayes we shall be ready too mingle our fantasies, that our matters may
go well: and this is even as much as if we thought not God too be wise
enough, or rather as if he were not strong enough, or had not the means in
his own hand, too bring matters too a good end and issue. But in so doing,
we do (as a man would say) control GOD: too say, very well, let him
work, but after what manner? Not according too his counsel, and according
too his power and infinite puissaunce: but according too some light thing, and
we will first of all have that thing done, which we have imagined and forged
in our own brain. For we will say, I find this too be good, this will be
a very good and necessary mean. But are we so over wise? that we must
straight way enterprise this thing, and that we must put our hand too the
pie in such sort. But mark, God has not so ordained by his word. Lo then a
rashness not too be borne. And yet is this very common, and every one shall
find of this vice in his seed. But so much the rather ought we too learn
too add nothing of our own, seeing we have always this corrupt medlay
which we must either this way or that way drive out of our heads. And when
we shall so have wrought after our own guise and fashion, we shall do
nothing else, but mar and overthrow all. But if GOD do not lay such
faults too our charge, and does yet nevertheless accomplish his work:
this is not too the end we should boaste our selves therein: as oftentimes
they which have ouerreached them selves, can say, O, it is fallen out well:
yea, but this is because GOD has pardoned this folly, and that nevertheless
he leaves not too support us, albeit we were not worthy thereof. Let us
learn therefore in no wise too excuse our presumptions, when God shall make
that to prosper which we have naughtely and wickedly attempted: but so much
the rather let us magnify his mercy, when we shall see that although we
have fought against him, and have gone about as much as lay in us too forslowe
his work, that he yet has not left off too give it his course. This is
that briefly which we have too bear away concerning this place.

Now it follows after, that Jacob went too seek two kiddes, which he
brought unto his mother, that she might dress some dainty meat, such as she
knew Isaac loved. And after that she clothed Jacob with Esaus garments, and
put the skins so upon him, that it seemed he was an hairie and rough man.

But here men might judge, that this was a very childish deed, and a very
toye, forasmuch as it was a counterfayte meat, for she took of a kidde, in
steed of some venison: and after that the father had eaten and was well
filled, he blessed his son, and that this was as it were a reward for his
dinner: and again that Jacob came in a disguised habit, as if he had bin
upon a stage counterfeiting his brother Esau, under color of his garments,
and had his poule, his neck, and his hands: and in all this nothing was seen
but matter of laughter. But to the end that we should be kept in reverence, and
make our profit of this history, let us learn too look unto Gods election
whereof mention was made before: For if we have not this foundation, it is
certain that in all that Moses rehearses, we shall not find any thing that
may move us, or give us any persuasion, that this was guided and governed from
above. But when we shall be resolved, that GOD had given the birthright too
Jacob before he was borne: notwithstanding we have too note, in seeing these
things so sottishly ordered by men of an unadvised zeal, that therefore we
cease not too say: Lo God who is always unchangeable, although men through
their sturdie boldness, and foolish presumption trouble and turn all vpside
down, yet nevertheless must his counsel remain entier and perfect. This
therefore is that we have too note, too the end we may make our profit of
this history. Moreover, when it is said: That Jacob came to his father, and
said unto him: I am thy son Esau, eat and drink. Hereby we may see how men
harden themselves, when they have once attempted to do any thing of an
unadvised zeal, how they wax bolder and bolder. At the first Jacob doubted:
If I (says he) be found as a mocker before my father, he will curse me,
but by and by he cares for nothing, he speaks as boldly and franckly, as if
it should have been said, that he was sure too be in Esaus place. But
hereby we have too note, before we begin any thing, to think whether we
have allowaunce from GOD, and whether he will guide us: and too see that in
all our doing and enterprise, there be nothing but mere obedience. For if
we begin once (as they say) too break our bounds, and that we imagine
too do this and to do that, howesoeuer at the beginning we had some scruple
and did make great difficulty thereof, in the end we shall shut our eyes and
pass further: and when all the objections of the world shall come before our
eyes, yet we shall become obstinate.

Forasmuch then as men are so hardened in their foolish and rash counsels,
and that we see such a notable example thereof in our father Jacob, so much
the rather (as I have said already) must we take heed that we move not a
finger breadth, till we know whether GOD will allow that which we do, and
that we have taken counsel of his word: For then we cannot be too bold,
when we shall be subject unto him, and when there shall be no foolish
ouerweening in us too follow our own fantasy. But we can do nothing of our
selves, how small soever it be, which is not too much. And therefore (as I
have said,) let us learn too begin well, to the end, such an end may
follow as we should desire. But in this which is here contained in Moses, we
may have a figure which shall not be unfit: and that is, that although Isaac
was deceived, that Esau was not there, and that Jacob through his sleightes
obtained his blessing, yet for all this, we have here an image of that
blessing which is given unto us of GOD: For it is said in the first Chapter
of the Ephesians, That we are blessed with all heavenly graces and spiritual
gifts. And after what sort? Saint Paul adds, in Jesus Christ: For if GOD
should look upon our persons, we must be his enemies, and he must needs
deteste us by reason of sin. Seeing therefore it is so, it behooves us too
be blessed without ourselves: that is too say, in the person of our head.

And moreover, we must be clothed with the robe of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For what can we bring, but altogyther filthiness and polution? We are wholly
made in iniquity: therefore we must be as stink before GOD: but when we
are cladde with the obedience of his only Son, O then, Lo a sweet sauoure,
wherein, we are acceptable unto him. So that although (as I have said
already) in respect of men, there was nothing but confusion, (and as they
say) all was iumbled together, yet nevertheless we may apply this too our
profit. Jacob was a looking glass of the whole Church: and yet were we
blessed in his person, as he was blessed in the person of his elder brother.
For the question is not here, of finding it altogether like. If a man say that
Esau resembled not Jesus Christ: it is very true: but yet in comparison, it
needs not that every part and parcel agree together: it is sufficient, that
we see some agreement and likeness in part: as it is said, that the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be as a thief in the night. And what? will
he steal? It were a foolish thing too think thus: but it is enough that we
see, that they which are asleep in the world shall be taken upon the
sudden. So now when he speaks of the birthright of Esau, and that Isaac
represented the person of God, and that Jacob was blessed under the robe and
countenance of his brother: herein we see, that that was accomplished which
we alleged even now: to wit, that we shall be put back if we come in our own
name, and in our own person, to get favor before God: but when we shall come
there under the shadow of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the first borne
amongst all the Children of God. See how we are received. But notwithstanding
it is said: That Isaac demanded, who art thou my son? I am thy son Esau?

But herein he trusts not himself, and thought it may appear, that there
was some fraud: For he says unto him: Come near unto me, that I may feel,
whether thou be my son Esau or no.

We see here that Isaac doubted, and yet nevertheless, the blessing ceased not
in respect of god, to have his virtue and effect: as also it is said that he
blessed him in the presence of God. But it is very true that if we have our
eyes fastened upon Isaac, we shall say that this act was ill guided, and that
he deserved not to be accounted in any degree of perfection: but that God
wrought it, (as I have said) and not only when the inferior means failed,
but when they were contrary, and that it seemed, that this had been utterly to
abolish that, which was determined. But so much the rather it behooves us well
to note, that howsoever God use men in his work, and does them this honor to
serve therein as instruments, yet is there nothing on their part: and we may
say: He that planteth, and he that watreth is nothing. But here Isaac in
stead of planting and watering, did rather pluck up, and cut of the blessing
of God to make it barren and without fruit. But howsoever it was, yet was God
therein served. For whether he had planted or watered, he had done it but in
part: but he did it not wholly and as he ought: and yet in the mean season (as
I have said) the goodness of God surmounted, what soever was faulty and
vicious in his creatures. Howsoever it were, we may well say that Isaac in
douting deserved to be deprived from that state and office which was given him,
that is to say, that he had lost the grace of God, wherein the salvation of
the whole world was included. Lo the treasure which was committed unto him:
but he by his unbelief deserved too be stripped of it. But God would not so
have it. And to whom shall we attribute this? It must needs be that his mercy
be here magnified, seeing that in man there is not only not any help thereto,
nor any thing that answers unto it, but quite against it. And yet let us
note, that none was more dulled of God then he was. It is true that we saw
before, that he had dim eyes, and that he was so weak with age, that he was
as a man half dead: but yet this came not to pass naturally, that hearing
the voice of Jacob, he was so fowly deceived that he once thought not, There is
some fraud in the matter. He doubts thereof, and yet nevertheless goes on,
and albeit it were against his will, yet he blessed Jacob in stead of Esau. It
must needs be therefore that God dulled him, so that it was not of age only.
And this is that which I have said, that God guided his work so, that although
men hinder and let it and it seems to have bin, as if they should draw quite
contrary, nevertheless thend and issue was such, that it appears that God
executed that which he had pronounced, following his secret election, which was
made before the creation of the world. And so we know in all that Isaak did,
there was nothing but a kind of sottishnes, that he was so dull: he had no
understanding, he discerned nothing, nor had any judgment, and yet
notwithstanding God makes this to prevail. After what manner? How is it that
he makes the bread which we eat to be of strength to nourish us? when we
shall have well eaten and drunk and shall be refreshed and satisfied, so as he
which neither ca^ bow his arm nor his legs, shall have new strength to
travel. Shall we say that this is because the bread has any power, any life,
or any moving? But when we see that the bread gives us that which it has not,
and the corn and wine and other meats: this is to show us that God uses not
his creatures in such sort, in any work that we should occupy our selves in
that which we see with our eye: but that we should always bend to this, that
as he disposes the order of nature, and likewise guides and governs us, yea
and that against nature: that many times he will work quite contrary to
that, that is accustomed unto us, in such sort that we shall be astonished
thereat: and chiefly when the question is of our salvation. And yet must not we
imagine that we bring any thing thither for our part: but that it is God that
must accomplish all, who began it and will perform it. And moreover if he work
after a strange and unwonted manner, and that there be nothing but an outward
show of folly: let us know (as S. Paul says) that the folly of God is
greater wisdom, then all the wisdoms of the world.

Now he calls it the foolishness of God, after our opinion: because he
works in a contemptible manner, that we might be ravished therein thinking,
What is this that God will say? It seems that he iesteth and mocketh. We will
conclude thereof even so. And this is the cause why S. Paul says, that it is
folly, because men rest themselves upon their outward senses. But howsoever it
be, this surpasses all the wisdom of the world. Mark then what we have to
bear away. And when we shall well remember this lesson here, we shall not be as
a great sort of giddie heads, who take all these factes at adventure, and
thereupon mock themselves, as though all that were here rehearsed by Moses,
were nothing else as a man would say, but foolish trifling.

But when we shall have learned this which is here showed us, by S. Paul, it
is certain that we shall have another manner of sobriety, and that we shall
not give over to adore the secret of God, although at the first show he
glorify not himself: but we shall always look to the beginning and to the
end, and not to those means which may give us occasion, and engender in us
some offense, or which may swallow us up. To be short, we see that God directed
Isaac in such sort that he was altogether blind: we will not say therefore that
god gave Isaac here any sight to the end he might do that which appertained to
his office, knowing well the cause why, and knowing all the proceeding of the
matter: but he was blinded, and yet he held him as it were by the hand, and
led him as a blind man which sees nothing. And in deed we see in the Church,
something that answeareth to this, or else comes very near it: for (as it was
said yesterday) The preaching of the Gospel is the power of God to salvation to
all believers. When therefore we preach the grace of God whereby we are
reconciled, in as much as our faults are pardoned us in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that the blood which he shed for us, is the true purgation thereof, too
cleanse us: Lo then God who opens the Heavens, and calls us unto himself,
albeit the word proceed from the mouth of a man. But in the mean season, I
know not to whom this shall be available: For every one shall be a witness
of his own faith: and when I speak and have not received my part therein, woe
be upon me: and I should be more then blind: as also they have been who shall
have preached the Gospel, and shall be witnesses of the grace of God, and shall
draw poor sinners to salvation, notwithstanding there is nothing remaining
for them but condemnation. And why so? For they are as Players in whom there is
no affection nor zeal. So then, God will be served oftentimes, of a people
who are worth nothing, who are as dogs, and the very offscouring: and yet
notwithstanding they are as the ministers of his power, to draw those to
salvation, that are in the way of destruction. Moreover there are mercenaries
that preach for their belly, and have no other regard but to themselves, or
else would make themselves to be very well esteemed: and yet are these
nevertheless the instruments of God for the salvation of all believers. And
oftentimes the best, they I say, that acquit themselves most faithfully to do
their duty, to call poor sinners to salvation, to be guides and examples to
all others: these shall not yet find what God will do. And why so? They sow
the Seed and know not how God will make it profit: and oftentimes they
ween to bless, and they curse. And wherefore? Because it must needs be that
the vengeance of God be prepared for all contemners. The Gospel is preached,
to the end we might find God merciful to us al: but there are many that through
their contempt and ingratitude heap upon themselves their own damnation: For
the gospel shall be unto them a savor of death unto death, as Saint Paul says:
that is to say, a deadly savor, that only the breath shall be enough to
swallowe them up: as we see yet at this day, that God works by the ministers
of his word, that some are altogether blind, other are blind in part: For
the hyerlings of whom we have spoken, they are altogether blockishe and know
nothing: But the good and faithful Ministers, although it so be that they
know that they have their eyes dim, yet they are ignorant how God will make
their labor to profit, or in what sort: and oftentimes their purpose is quite
overthrown. This then is that we have too learn. And in the mean time, seeing
god has declared unto us that his word is the open way to the heavenly life,
and that he will ratify all that which shall be pronounced here by men in his
name: let us keep us too that and not doubt (whatsoever want shall be in us,
as well concerning him that speaks as him that hears): that yet nevertheless
when we shall receive this word by faith, and it shall be faithfully and in
truth handled unto us, we shall be partakers of this blessing. And herein we
may see the beastliness of al those false wretches of the papacy: for mark
whereupon they have founded that Idol which they have, to make a god of a morcel
of bread: they say if a Priest have no intention to consecrate, it is nothing,
and in that the bread is turned into god, it is by the inte^tio^ of him which
cosecrateth* so as they must be Idolaters in all their Masses (I speak of
their own doctrine) if they make not this condition. For what know we (say
they) whether the Priest which consecrateth, does his business as he ought, and
whether his mind be upon his kitchen or cha^bermaid: for in so doing the
bread remains bread: there is no GOD: and why so? For say they, if his
intention be not there it is nothing. But it is very true that they shevve very
well how one error draws another: for because it seems to them that there
is a change made of the bread into the substance of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for which they have invented that same charm: they add straight way the
intention: but notwithstanding we see that they know nothing of the nature of
the Sacraments. I leave now to speak of this conversion which they imagine,
and call tra^substantiation: but if he that ministers the sacrament: and has
this charge and calling, hold the people bound to his intention: what shall
this be? A wicked man that shall baptize, he may mock God, and by this means
quite make frustrate the sacrament, and after when he shall minister the
sacrament of the Supper, the poor people shall therein be mocked, who come
thither to seek a pledge of their salvation: he therein manifestly despiteth
God. To be short, they must hold the power of God, (which he most notably
sets forth in the sacraments) shut up in their fist. And what a blasphemy
is this, and how detestable? But see how far they are come. For it is certain
that in the Mass, if they had an Angel there, yet it should never cease to
be a devilish thing: but contrariwise if there were a devil in the supper which
is ministered, yet it could not let God from acco^plishing his work. We must not
look to the woorthynessse of him which gives the bread or the wine in the
supper: But God has so instructed us therein, that he has given power to the
visible sign: It is he that works by his holy spirit, so as we be not
deceived when we come thither, but shall be truly united and joined unto him.
Lo then what we have to bear away upon this place, too make our profit
thereof. But now let us come to the blessing which Isaac gave. After he had
kissed his son he says: Lo the savor of my son is at the savor of a
field which God has blessed.

Albeit we see that he was deceived: yet under the savor of this borrowed
garment, he accepts Jacob his son, as if he had been his first borne. Lo
then how the savor whereby we are accepted unto God, proceeds from him which
is the first borne in the house, to wit, from our Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover
he adds: The Lord give thee, the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the
earth, abundaunce of wheat and wine.

Here at the first show a man would judge, that this blessinge imported
nothing but that Jacob should be fat and well nourished: For Isaac mentions
not here any spiritual gifts, as we have showed before, that it was not for
any earthly commodities, nor for riches, profit or pleasures that Jacob must
be blessed: How shall these things therefore be reconciled? But we have to hold
this rule that is given us in the holy Scriptures: to wit, that the grace of
God was always clothed as it were with some figures, until that our lord Jesus
Christ came. For when the fathers would obtain pardon of their sins, they had
some beast slain, and the blood was shed: sometime the fat was burned, and the
blood was sprinkled. And could a brute beast I beseech you blotte out our
sins whereof we (...) And in this respect was the land of Canaan as a
pledge and gage unto them, that God had appointed a better inheritance for
them, then in this world. For they might have returned too the country where
they were borne, which was more fertile then this of Iudaea, as may appear.
Mark Abraham and Isaac pinched with famine and if they had looked to nothing
but to have bin nourished here upon earth, they would have forsaken that
land of promise. But they rested there. And wherefore? to enjoy it after their
death? Of necessity therefore, must they think of a more high thing then
this visible earth, and they must take it in another respect, to say, we
have here all that we can desire. But they took the land of Canaan as a
pledge that God gave them, until they should come into the possession of that
heavenly life.

So then, when we see in this blessing of Jacob, that he speaks of the deaw
of heaven, and of the fat of the earth, of abu^daunce of corn and wine, it
means not that Isaac would only pray for this, that his son might be fed
as an Hog in a sty, and that he should be fat and full here beneath: but he
followed the order that God had appointed at that time: to wit, that he did
give unto them pledges of a thing that was much more excellent. And that so it
is, Isaac adds a little after: That his son should rule over his enemies,
and that all nations should bow their knees before him.

And by what right gives he him this? Lo Isaac a poor stranger that must
hier the land where he sets up his pauilion, and must live as it were by
the favor of an other: and yet nevertheless he makes his son here a King
of kings, and all the world to come and do him homage, and that he shall
bring the whole earth into subjection. We see then very well that he troubles
not him self with earthly things: but he joins both together, to wit, he
takes earthly blessings as pleadges, to the end to bring his son further
off: and in the meanewhile he has his path right that might lead him to the
kingdom of heaven, as was promised him. Now we know that things are offered to
us in our Lord Jesus Christ, that may make us forget both honors, and all
highnesses, dignities, and nobilities of the world. This therefore is the thing
we have to mark upon this place. It is true that even at this day it must
needs be that those temporal blessings which we receive from the hand of
God, should be unto us as it were pledges of his goodness: but they are
sometimes more, sometimes less. For in respect that the ancient fathers had
not the like light as we have, and were in shadows and figures: this is the
cause why God would not so well testify his favor unto them, as he has done
unto us at this day. For in the gospel we have our lord Jesus Christ: and it is
said that we must be fashioned after his image. Now we know that he had
nothing in this world, but all kind of miseries and confusions: for we see how
he was crucified, so as it seemed that he had bin utterly forsaken of god his
father: he was in extreme distresses and anguishes. Thus then we must be
fashioned to him after another fashion the^ they were, who were so led by
figures. Further more, when we shall compare Jacob with Esau, we shall yet
better know (as we shall find afterward) that when Isaac blessed Esau,
that the blessing which he will use, will be a great deal more large and
rich, then that which he uses here toward Jacob his son: and yet
nevertheless, this was not to bless him to that heavenly life: but he says
unto him: My friend there be not two blessings, seeing that is taken from me,
it must stand, and God has blessed him whom I have blessed, forasmuch as he
has appointed me the minister thereof, it must needs be that it even so stand,
as it has been don, I have no more right in it: I must hold my self
contented to have blessed once: and yet afterward he blesses Esau
notwithstanding. And how? What, is there any contradiction? no not so: but this
is to show us, that there was not any other heavenly blessing, to say, that he
whom he blessed should be the head of the church, and that Jesus Christ should
come of his race: this was no longer in the hand of Isaac, as he confesses.
But concerning the benefits of this world, and that which might satisfy the
creatures, he gave him more abundauntly, then he did to Jacob. Now then we may
easily see, that Isaac speaking here of the deawe of Heaven, of the fat of
the earth, and of great quantity of corn and wine, he means not that his
son should trouble him self therein: but he simply sets these figures
before him, which were pledges (as I have said) to draw him further of: This
therefore is the thing that we have to mark. And withal let us note, that when
it is said that Isaac had declared: The voice is the voice of my son Jacob:
but the hand is as the hand of Esau.

That God had yet purchased this for him. It is true that all this was done
through error: but yet besides this error he had some certain knowledge: and
the Lord did in such sort advertise him of it, to the end to show that the
blessing belonged to Jacob: as also in truth it must be rescrued for him,
although this had not come to pass: that is to say, albeit Rebecca had not
used this il deceit, yet God knew full well how too hold Isaacks mouth, as
also he held the mouth of Balaam. Behold Balaam who was a liar, who was hired,
and came also to curse the people of God, if it had bin possible for him, to
the end to get gifts of Balach. But nevertheless God did so turn his tongue,
that when he thought to curse, (maugre his beard) he blessed them. But Isaac
was not as Balaam: For his purpose was not to resist GOD, nor too abolishe his
election: but he was blinded with a foolish love which he bare unto his
Son, (as we have said): and our Lord could well enough govern his tongue
when he would, to cause him to bless Jacob: but now when he imagined too
bless his son Esau, yet nevertheless does GOD draw this from his mouth,
The voice is the voice of my son Jacob. Now this was the principal and
chief of the blessing, even the voice: For Isaac gave nothing of his own:
but he was a witness of the favor of God, and as it were an Harrault to
publish it. So then, forasmuch as he found nothing of Esau but the apparel and
the touching, he must not rest himself thereupon, forasmuch as he found the
voice in Jacob. By this we may see that God would even now already allow it,
although that Isaac knew not what he did, nevertheless the blessing must be
turned to Jacob. Thus much concerning this word. Moreover for the conclusion
let us mark well when it is said, that all people shall be subject to Jacob:
that this is not to the end that he should have any earthly Empire or
dominion in this world, either he or his. It is true, that they ruled in the
land of Canaan: but howsoever it was, yet did not they bring into subjection
all nations. In the time of Solomon, it is true that God exalted his people far
and wide: but this was in a figure: for it must come unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the head both of men and angels. So then that which Moses here
rehearses of the sovereign dominion, it is certain that it can not agree,
neither to Jacob nor to his Children, nor to al their posterity, until that
we come too our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is the cause why it is expressly
said, that he should be the head of his Brethren, and that his mothers
sons should bow down before him. This was not in respect of Jacobs person:
he had but one only brother, who bowed not him self before him: but rather
made him afraid, as we shall see after: but we see the accomplishment of al
in our Lord Jesus Christ: and this was not for him self, but it was for our
good and for our salvation, that he received all power from God his father, to
the end that every knee should bow down before him: In him also it is
altogether that we are a priestly kingdom, so that we acknowledge him as our
king and our head to worship him.

But now let us cast down our selves before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging of our faults, and praying him that he will make us in such
sort to feel them, that it may be to humble us before him, and for to make us
to ask pardon of him, and also for to hate our selves, and to be displeased
with our selves in our own vices: and pray him that it would please him in
such sort to reform us, that we may grow up more and more in all holiness
and obedience of his righteousness. And that he would support us in our
weaknesses, in such sort, that he leave not to accomplish the promises that
he has made unto us, although that on our part we do not only slack them,
but seem also utterly to thrust them from us, that notwithstanding he will not
leave, to stretch out unto us a strong hand, until that we become unto the
mark which he has set before us: that is, till we be partakers of that glory
which he has purchased unto us through our Lord Jesus Christ. And that he
will not only show this grace unto us, but unto al peoples and nations of the
earth, etc.

The thirteenth Sermon of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27.
31 Isaac said, accursed be every one that shall curse thee, and blessed be
he that shall bless thee.

32 Now as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob: it came to pass I say,
that Jacob being scarce gone forth from the presence of his father Isaac that
Esau returned from his hunting.

33 Therefore he also brought unto his father delicates prepared: and he said
unto his father, let my father arise and eat of the venison of his son, that
thy soul may bless me.

34 Now Isaac says unto him, who art thou? he said, I am thy first begotten
son Esau.

35 Then Isaac trembled with a wonderful fear and said, who is that which
brought unto me venison even now, and I have eaten of all before thou came,
and whom have I blessed? also he shall be blessed.

36 Now Esau hearing the words of his father, cried out with a wonderful great
and bitter cry: and he said unto his father, bless me, my father bless me
also.

37 Who said, thy brother came through craft, and has taken away thy blessing.

38 And he said, how rightly is his name called. Jacob! for he has
supplanted me now the second time, he had taken my birthright, and lo now he
has taken my blessing also, etc.


YEsterday we stayed at this word concerning the blessing which Isaac gave
unto his son Jacob, too wit, that whosoever should bless him, should be
blessed: and whosoever should curse him, should be accursed. But it is very
certain that this was not in the hand of any mortal man: for it belongs
unto God to punish those which do any wrong to his children: and besides that,
it is forbidden us to seek revenge, it is not in our power to bring to pass
that our enemies have their reward. Now therefore it is very certain that
Isaac pronounced here the sentence of god, and that he spoke not in his own
name: but was authorized as a prophet. And indeed we have seen that this was
pronounced from the mouth of god to Abraham in the 12. chap. I will bless al
those which shall bless thee, and I will curse all those which shall curse
thee. God reserved this unto him self. But now how is it that Isaac presumes
to speak after the manner of god, unless because he knew that this inheritance
was left unto him, and so he resigneth it unto his son, to the end that after
his departure he might be the possessor thereof? We see then briefly that
Isaac speaks not in this point rashlye, although that he had many foul
faults, yet notwithstanding he was grounded upon that which God had promised
him, and he knew that this office was committed unto him. And thus he doubted
not too curse all those which should curse his stock. (...) of all ability,
or rather have no occasion to show that they are not unthankful:
nevertheless let us know that God does receive with his own hand, all that
which we have done, in supporting those which were destitute and had need. When
we have this I say, we shall have enough to content us. But if we desire that
god bless us in such sort, let us first take heed, as I have already touched,
that we be the true children of Jacob, not of the carnal race but by faith,
and that we be regenerate by the same spirit, that we may have the testimony
of our adoption imprinted in our hearts, and as it were sealed, to the end we
may have full assurance thereof: and that in this trust we may cry out unto
God. Now to the end we may do this, we have to praise the head of all, that is
to say, our Lord Jesus Christ: who as S. Paul says, is God blessed for ever,
when he spoke of his human nature, and that he was descended of the stock of
Abraham, and yet he says nevertheless that he is God blessed for ever. Now we
have to bless or praise him, not after the manner of me^, but to glorify him
as he deserves. And moreover when we pray unto God for the aduau^cement of
his kingdom, we say as that prayer is suggested unto us by the holy ghost:
blessed is he that comes in the name of God: o Lord make thy kingdom to
prosper, o Lord increase the kingdom of David. So then this is the way to make
us partakers of that which is here recited by Moses: to wit, that God bears
such special favor and singular love toward us, that not only he blesses
us: but if any do us good or evil, he accepts this as done to his own person,
and will recompense them that have pity upon us, and shall help us in our
necessity: and again he will revenge our cause: and although we be patient in
all the wrongs and outrages that men do against us, yet nevertheless he will
keep us and stretch out his arm to chastise all those who shall unjustly
oppress us. Lo then the sum of the matter, concerning that word that was
left for us. Now it is said: That Jacob was even hardly gone forth from his
father, and that scarsely he had obtained that he went about, but lo Esau
returned from hunting, and brought meat to his father, he brought it unto him
being upon his bed.

If we shall consider that which is here rehearsed by Moses, according to the
outward show, it is certain that Esau was worthy to have bin blessed. For he
diligently performed that which was enjoined him by his father: and discharged
him self of his duty. And wherefore then was he berefte of his birthright?
But see wherein we are oftentime deceued: that is, because we regard that which
we see with the eye. But God regards the right and truth, as Jeremy
says. So then, let us not think that GOD embusieth him self in the outward
hevv, which in deed is nothing: and yet notvvithstanding we are wont too
be ravished therevvith, in that we are sensual men. Too be short, that
which has the goodliest glister and shevve before men, shall oftentimes be
rejected before God, as the Paynims, they set great price upon their virtues in
the outward show which they had: but we must come further: that is too say,
we must know that God sounds the hearts and secret thoughts. So an act may
be highly and greatly praised and esteemed, and yet nevertheless shall
displease God: For if the affection shall not be right, there is nothing but
hypocrisy and a double courage in it, or else the end shall not be well
ordered. For let us put the case that a man gives him self to virtue, and yet
has this foolish arrogancy in him self, to get reputation, and that men
should clap their hands at him in the judgment of the world: he has now
already received his reward, and because he is led with ambition, it must
needs be that all that he does and takes in hand, must be rejected of God.
And why so? Humility is the foundation and root of all virtues. As long
therefore as men do seek to merit by their own virtue, it is certain, that
if they were Angels in outward appearance, yet all that proceeds from them,
is nothing else but baggage and very filth. So let us learn, that when we see
how Esau behaved him self so to the eye, and that he failed in nothing, and yet
notwithstanding that he was cast underfoot, and that God made no reckoning of
him, let us learn (I say) not to give our selves too foolish ambition to be
seen of men, and to be well thought of: but let us walk in simplicity and
uprightness before God, let us know that if the heart go not before, that all
the service that we can do unto him, shall be justly rejected. Mark shortly that
which we have to hold, concerning that which Moses has rehearsed here,
touching the obedience which Esau rendered unto his father. Now there is also
to be noted further, when we shall make comparison of him with Jacob, we shall
find that which was showed before, to wit, that Jacob was not preferred, but by
the free goodness of god of which thing there appears no reason unto us, for
lo Esau which went to hunt, who lied not, who deceived not his father, and did
not thrust in him self craftily, neither by any deceit or indirectly: he had
none of all this. But what does Jacob? he deceyueth, he lies, and deals
dissemblingly, and presents him self as it were his brother Esau: there was
nothing in him but craft and theft concerning this matter, and further, he
does greatly dishonor his father, too make him believe one thing for another.
We might well say then, that Jacob deserved too be rejected and cut of: but
nevertheless GOD would that he should have the birthright. And whereupon is this
founded unless it be upon his everlasting council which we ca^ not
comprehend? And so let us learn to humble ourselves: notwithstanding that the
reason be not declared unto us why god should rather accept Jacob the^ Esau, and
take the birthright from the greater to give it to the lesser. Albeit the^ that
we know not what moved and induced God to this, yet notwithstanding let us hold
for most certain, that he does nothing but most justly, because his will is
the rule of all righteousness: he is subject too no law, and much less to our
fantasy, to do those things that seem good unto us: but so far of is it,
that though we were able too dispute and too allege all the reasons that
possibly we could conceive, yet the only will of GOD, shall overcome all the
reasons in the world: and all that which shall enter into our brain, must of
necessity be overthrown: as it is said, that he shall always be
justified, yea albeit men condemn him. For they rather have this deuilishe
pride to murmr against that which he does, and to find somewhat to say
against it, and to bring forth their reasons: but when they shall have pratled
pedlers french as long as they can, yet shall the justice of God remain
untouched, and they which have durst rather too slander it and bark against
it, they shall remain ashamed and confounded. Lo therefore yet an other
principal point that we have too hold in this place.

Now it is said, that Isaac asked first, Who art thou? And hearing that it
is Esau, he was astonished, yea Moses further adds more, with a wonderful
fear. If Isaac had not known how much worth that blessing had bin, and that
it should be confirmed by God, if he had not known, that he being called too
the dignity and office of a Patriarch, must be a witness of the inheritance
of salvation, he had not bin so astonished: For he had done as other men used
too do. I have been deceived by my son. He had stormed and chaffed against
Jacob, yea and he would have cursed him: and he would nevertheless have
concluded, O, I will keep my right, howsoever it be, this shall no whit
prejudice me therein, and I have my authority francke and free. Lo then how
Isaac might have used him self therein, after the common manner. But he knew
that God had ordained him the minister, to cause that the inheritance of
salvation should rest in his house: and he knew that he was but an instrument
therein, and that this was not because God had resigned his office to him,
albeit he had communicated it unto him. For if God communicate his authority
too those, who^ he has established in the ministry of his word, this is not
meant that he depriueth him self of it therefore, neither that he gives over
his right therein, in any sort whatsoever. Isaac knew then, that forasmuch as
he was but an instrument of the holy ghost, that that which he had pronounced
must stand: and there is no doubt also but that it was revealed unto him. For
before he was as it were, restrained: the love which he bare to his eldest
son had so besotted him, that he had quite lost the remembrance of that which
we have seen before: For he was not ignorant of that which God had
determined, That the greater should serve the lesser. And yet nevertheless, he
is a man as it were altogether senseless and deuoyd of reason, always
addicted to his son Esau, and thought not to yield him self to be governed
by God. Now this was not of any deliberate and set rebellion, (as we have
declared before:) but it was love that blinded him, and for that he marked not
that he should simply have rested in the will of God. Lo how he ouerhastily
forgot him self* So the^, let us note that this great fear whereof Moses
speaks, was as if a man should suddenly come to awaken a man making some
alarm about him, and as if he had been seized with some astonishment, and
thought this had bin some message of death, and that his enemies had bin even
come to his bed. Lo in what case Isaac was. But here we have too note in the
first place that it is good that God awaken us very roughly, when we shall be so
sluggish, and that he come unto us every day. It is true that we will think
our selves watchful enough, when we shall hear the word of God, and will be
zealous, and it will seem that we are very wary therein: but all that we have
heard is quickly fled from us, and specially when we have contrary things
before us. If we have bin exhorted to patience, and it seem that we have bin
therein so well appointed, that there wanted nothing: let one come too trouble
us, let us receive but some little blow, incontinent we will be so enflamed
with wrath and displeasure, that we forget that which was spoken unto us.

Again, when we are exhorted too despise the riches and honors of this
world, if we be allured thereunto by our adversary the Devil, we will be
(as it were) asleep in them, and all our senses will be wholly occupied
therewith. Now if our Lord used any simple admonition, it is certain that it
is as if it were spoken to a man that were asleep. And what shall men profit
thereby? It behooves therefore that god awaken us oftentimes by force. And so as
often as God shall scourge us, and that some shall be chastised after one sort,
some after another: Let us examine that which was in us, and so we shall know
that we were for a time blockish and senseles, that we have known nothing of
that which we ought, or else that we were not so atte^tiue therein, and let us
learn by the example of our father Isaac, that seeing our Lord does stir us
up and would that we should deeply and in good earnest think upon him, and
that we should gather up all our senses, which before were wa^dring: let us
learn I say to make out profit thereof: Lo this for one lesson. But let us
mark how Isaac willingly submits him self too the will of God. I have
already said, that they that will mainteyne their reputation, will be wilful:
although they had done the greatest evil in the world, yet they will always
mainteyne it. And lo this is the cause that so many people plunge them selves
so deeply, even unto the depth of the bottomless pittes: that is, they are
ashamed too be reclaimed: they would have the renown of constancy, and they
think that if they should change, that it should be cast in their teeth,
as a great lightness and inconstancy. Lo the cause why men harden themselves
in obstinacy with boldness and presumption, too follow a thing, howsoever it
be, and take the bitt in their teeth and will in no case bow, neither too the
one side, nor too the other. Now this is a vice very common, and so much the
rather we shall be subject unto it, unless we come to that which is rehearsed
here. Lo Isaac who might have bin greatly ashamed, for that he was so
deceived and abused: a man might say, look upon this drunkarde, when he is
well whitled, and that he has eaten and drunk, he takes one for another:
and farther, a man might have said, this was a glutton, when he could not
discern between kid and venison: and again, it might have bin said: What?
when he blessed his youngest son in steed of his eldest: being so deceived,
and because he did this through error and theft: weeneth he that this shall be
auaylable before god? Isaac therefore might have had many respects, to have
bin obstinate in his fact. But he forgets all, and knows that forasmuch
as it was so ordained of God, that Jacob should be blessed, that it must
remain, and no change must be made therein. We are then briefly taught that
as often as we shall do any act unadvisedly, which pleases not God, or else
if we shall exceed our bounds, and go beyond our calling, howsoever it be,
that we always turn the bridle, as soon as we shall be warned, and that
we follow not the matter, because this is manifestly too despite GOD. But
especially we have to consider, although Isaac were carried with an evil
affection, and although he forgate that which had been pronounced by GOD,
that faith was not utterly quenched in him, albeit it was choked. This
argument was handled yesterdaye more at large: yet ought it by the way too be
further thought upon. For what moved Isaac too say, I have blessed thy
brother, albeit he obtained it by deceit, shall he remain blessed yet? What
lesson learneth he? It must needs be that he knew this before. Now he
knew it: but as I have said already, the light of his faith was as a coal of
fire that had been raked under the ashes: one should have seen nothing
thereof, but let them remove a few of the ashes, and then lo the sparks
appear by and by, and afterward the fire shows it self. Even so was it in
Isaac: and this is not written only for his person, but too the end we
should gather a general doctrine thereof: For oftentimes the like shall fall
out and come to pass with us, to wit, that when we shall much loose the
bridle to our vanities, that one shall be ravished with ambition, another shall
be kindled too covetousness, to heap up goods, another shall have some
foolish appetite: too be short, another shall be drawn away and estraunged
from GOD, by some manner of mean: then lo our faith which is (as it were)
dead. Now God suffers it not to be altogether abolished: For when the word
takes lively root in us, it is an incorruptible seed. It can not then be
quite rooted out: but howsoever it be, it can not be said that there was not
one spark or drop of faith, in such sort that we be so cold, that we
think no more of GOD, that the world has quite overcome us. When therefore
any do so wander, that they think only but on their lusts, a man would
say that faith were quite dead. Now this may well be in appearance: but
notwithstanding God yet reserueth some hidden seed: as we have said, that the
fire may well be choked, and yet not altogyther quenched, when it shall be
raked up under the ashes. For all our affections, the riches, honors and
pleasures of the world, are as ashes too choke up this light of God, which
ought to guide and lead us. But our Lord having pity upon us, brings too
pass, that a little after we acknowledge our faults: and whereas we were so
cold, yea as it were altogether frozen, we begin to wax warm, in a good
zeal, and to return unto him.

Lo then, how GOD accomplisheth that in his faithful, which we read here of
our father Isaac. But this is not spoken too the end we should therefore
tempte God, as though it were permitted unto us too suffer our selves in such
sort too be carried astraye by the Devil, that our faith might be (as it
were) asleep in our hearts and souls: For it will not always fall out, that
God will awake those which are asleep, and call them again which are
estraunged from him. Let us learn therefore to walk in fear and
carfulness: and specially when we shall find men so dull, that they shall be
as it were altogether blockish, and that their faith shall be as it were dead in
them: let us learn too fear so much the more. What holiness was there in
David? And yet nevertheless we see that he was for a time, as a man quite
desparate. Afterward, having committed such an abominable fault, to have
ravished the wife of another, and to have caused her husband wickedly to be
slain with such vilanous treachery, that he deserved to be thrown out from
amongst men: after all this, we may see, what manner of Prophet soever he had
been, what fear of God soever he had in him before: to be short, albeit he
were a mirror of Angelical perfection, we see that he was as an Ox or an
Hog, he knew nothing, he had no remorse, it seems that God had given him
up into a reprobate sense, and had stricken him with a spirit of
blockishnesse: yea and when the Prophet comes unto him alleging this
comparison, and speaking unto him of a neighbor, that through violence had
oppressed a poor man: o he knew well to condemn others, and in the mean
while thought nothing of himself, till that the Prophet said unto him: It is
of thee, it is of thee that I do speak. Until that the Prophet Nathan said
unto him. It is thou murderer that have done such a deed: until that he
came to give him a blow with a clubbe, as it were a chafed Bull, he continues
blockish in it: and forasmuch as the Devil had won him so far, that he was
as it were drunken yea altogether bewitched, it must needs be that God even
thunder against him.

When therefore we see such like examples as this which is here rehearsed
unto us by Moses, that Isaac the chief of the Church, is as it were blind
herein, until that God had revealed it by force: so much the more (as I have
said) it behooves us to take good heed to walk in fear and carfulness:
and in the mean while let us learn when GOD gives us such pushes and
spurs, to make us return unto him, whereas we were before as it were
insensible, and have gotten through long custom such a strong savor: When god
gives us the grace (I say) to call back ourselves unto him, that we be moved as
becomes us, and that it be not to wipe our mouth after we have said in one
word, that we have faulted, as there are many: but that we follow that which
is here taught us by Moses that Isaac was afraid. And how? very greatly,
yea wonderfully. For it is impossible, that we should come to repentance,
unless we have a heaviness that must torment us and we be as it were in hell,
to feel our wretchedness, and be therein confounded. Until so much be
wrought in us, that we be come thither, it is certain that there shall be no
repentance in us. This teaches how we must practice this doctrine: to
wit, That when our Lord shall have touched us, that on our parts we be as
it were wounded to the bottom of our heart, and that we be so astonished, that
we return no more to our slothfulness and negligence, wherewith we were for a
time overwhelmed.

Now Isaac yet shows his faith better in saying, He shall be blessed: For
he knew that God had ordained him to this office, and that he spoke not in
his own name: For the sentence of God cannot be called back: it behooves
therefore that he keep him there. So we have farther to gather of this place
that we have already touched: that Isaac here passed not his bound, although
he had failed through ignorance, and been deceived in the person, yet he
always kept a good principle: to wit, that he had executed that which GOD
had committed to his charge: and that therefore this must remain concluded,
and have his effect. Now this is said for our instruction: For we know that
at this day our Lord would have the remission of our sins too be showed
forth by the mouth of men, he would assure us of the inheritance of
everlasting salvation, and also would have his adoption too be declared unto
us. Now we must needs have whereupon too resolve our selves: For if we
have not full assurance of our salvation, and if we cannot call upon GOD, it
is as much as too shut the gate of Paradise against us. But in the mean
while, Lo a man which speaks and says, that he will pardon our sins,
and yet he is a sinner him self. Again, he promises us the Heavenly life:
and (...) brittlenes. Lo then that which we have to learn upon these words, He
that has been blessed shall be blessed. And how so? Had Isaac that Privilege
therein, to say that that which he had pronounced should stand? After he had
eaten and drunk, and further being a poor blind man, being so blockish that
he knew not what he did: being so dull that hearing the voice of his son
Jacob, he suffers him self to be led as a poor beast: and yet nevertheless
says, It shall stand? Yea but acknowledging his fault, he is confounded, and
nevertheless he continues: For he knew whereto God had establyshed him, and
thereupon he gives glory to God, and quite casts down him self from his
own understanding, knowing well that he had nothing of his own. And so, let
us learn that Isaac so ordered himself, and in such sort ressted upon the word
of God, that he altogether renounced his affections wherewith he was before time
carried away. In the mean season we have here a good rule concerning our
selves, whereby we are warned that when we shall be taught, although this be done
by the mean of mortal men who are sent unto us, that God does accept us and
account us for his own, that this ought to suffice us, and that we may despise
Satan and all temptations, and all things that may come in our brain to shake
our faith. And thereupon it is said, That Esau cried out, yea by yelling and
roaring, and that he howled as it were a wild beast, and that he desired
notwithstanding to be blessed: and that his father said unto him: Lo it must
needs be that the first blessing hold: and that then he despiteth his
brother Jacob, and said: It was right that he was so named. For we have
declared before that Jacobs name was drawn from a heel, as if a man should
have called him Heeleholder: and this was forasmuch as he held the heel of
his brother, when he should come forth of the womb. Now says he, he has
given me a blow with his heel. As if a man should say, when a beast
rusheth upon him, that he has stricken him with his heel. Now Esau applies
this to his brother: He has suppla^ted metwise now (says he). And this word
also comes of Tripping, when a man gives one secretly a blow with his
foot, and makes one to fall. He says then, that he has already tript him
twice with his heel. The first time when he took away his birthright, and now
when he took away his blessing. Now here we have to note in the first place,
that which the Apostle shows us, to wit, that albeit Esau wept and mourned,
notwithstanding he obtained no place of repentance: for he came thereto over
late. And this is according to the exhortation which we have made heretofore.
It is said that we must not be profane as Esau was, that we must not be given
to the earth, nor to all that which concerns our bodies and this tra^sitory
life, in such sort that we should forget the heavenly life. And why so? for
(says he) they which profane themselves, and defile themselves in their
filthy desires they may cry: but they shall find no place repentance, forasmuch
as the gate shall be shut against them. Now it is true that this at the
first show might be thought strange: For it is said As often, and at what
time soever a sinner shall mourn and ask pardon, that GOD will be ready
always to receive him too mercy, which return unto him. Lo the promise is
general.

So then, how is it that the Apostle says, that we shall not find place of
repentance, if we come too late: For there needs nothing but too mourn?
But this shall be easily to be understood, when we shall have distinguished
between the cries of the faithful and of the unbelievers. Both the one and
the other shall indeed cry unto God: but in diverse sorts: for the faithful
shall be touched with true repentance, when they cry and when they mourn: It
is said likewise that David roared, and that his throat was as it were hoarse.
Lo then the cries which the children of God throw forth: as it is said that
he himself brayed like a Lion. And a little after we hear what Ezechias
says, that his speech failed him, and that he groned in him self as swallows,
and that he could speak no more: that he was so hoarse, that he knew not
how to speak one word, distinctly pronounced: that he was as it were
altogether quite thrown down.

We see then that the faithful have had this affection: but in the mean time
they had repentance, which touched them to the quick for their faults: as it
must needs be that they displease them selves therein, and humble themselves
before GOD: and after this they conceived some hope to obtain pardon. Now the
unbelievers they will bray enough, but in the mean while they leave not off to
have their hearts hardened: tears trickle down from their eyes, but in the
mean while they leave not off to be proud and rebellious against God: they
have in deed some horror of his judgments, but this is but too set them
selves in despite against him: for they never go so far as to hate their
offenses, and too be displeased with them: Lo how it was with Esau. And
therefore we have to gather that without repentance, these cries shall be
rejected of GOD, and shall never come unto him. And when the Apostle speaks
of repentance, it is not that he means that Esau had repentance: but he
means, that he obtained not mercy, and that God was not merciful to him.

And so let us take good heed unto our selves, and let us deteste this
blasphemy which the Devil sows in the world, That there needs no more but
one good sighe. For lo those merry Greeks, when they shall be exhorted to
return from their wickednesses: o I must yet a good while use it: and God is
a good fellow: Lo yet another blasphemy as detestable, whereat eue^ the very
stones should cleave. And further, God is merciful. It seems to them that
under the name of mercy they should hold God bound unto them: but it shall be
dearly sold them. Yea lo they come so far that they say, O there needs
nothing in the end but one good bulk, and one good sighe. Yea but who is that
which shall give it? have we it in our fist? must not God work therein? When
a man shall fall, albeit he have hurt himself, he may well recover him self:
but if he have broken his neck, can he recover him self afterward? Now
before GOD all our faults are deadly: and which is more, it is too put us and
deliver us into the hands of Satan. And can a man rise up, when his neck
shall be broken? as I have already said.

Now it is certain, that as often as we offend GOD, it is as if we brake
our neck, as much as lies in us. And so, can we restore life too our selves
after we have lost it? Lo then, what ought to stir us up to walk in
carfulness, and not to tarry til the gate be shut against us: but let us
hearken to all the warnings that have bin given us: and when God shall knock,
let us open unto him. And moreover we have too hold that which is spoken unto
us by the Prophet Isaie: Seek the Lord whilst he may be found: Call upon
him when he is ready to hear. It is true that the time makes no great
matter, that we should take any great advantage of it: but yet we must
understand for conclusion, that this place of Isaye was fulfilled when the
Gospel was preached, as S. Paul declares in the second to the Corinthians,
Lo the acceptable days, lo the time of salvation. And likewise we must well
mark the similitude, which is alleged unto us by our Lord Jesus Christ that
we let not the occasion slip: but when God bids us that we come unto him,
let us come unto him, yea hasting our selves, and let us not draw our legs
to come slowly, least our unthankfulness in the end seclude us, and that the
gate be shut against us. Let us take good heed, I say to al these
exhortations, and so let us make our profit of them, that having found place
of repentance before God, we may, after we have bewailed our faults, have our
mouth open to rejoice in him, and too praise his holy name, for that he shall
have been merciful unto us.

But now let us throw down our selves before the majesty of our good GOD,
in acknowledging our faults, praying him that he will in such sort make us
too feel them, that it be not too keep us long in them, nor to slugge or
flatter our selves in them: but in such sort too return unto our judge, that
asking mercy in him we may there find it in him: and that it be not only to
the end that he enter not into account with us, to impute unto us our
iniquities and offenses: but that by his holy spirit he will purge us, and that
we may be more and more reformed: and that he awaken us, that we be not
obstinate in our faults: but that we think upon all the corrections whereby
he would draw us from the evil way, wherein we have strayed, and that we
make such profit of all the aduertisementes which he gives us, that we be
not ashamed to be condemned of him, to the end to obtain mercy. That not
only he will show this favor unto us, but too all peoples and nations of
the Earth, etc.

The end of these xiii. Sermons concerning Jacob and Esau.
Romans 9. O man who art thou that pleadest against God? shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it, why haste thou made me thus?


An Answer to certain slanders and blasphemies, wherewith certain evil
disposed persons have gone about to bring the doctrine of Gods everlasting
Predestination into hatred.
Dearly beloved brethren we must not be amassed if the article of the
everlasting predestination of God, be so assaulted and fought against by
Satan's mayntainers, seeing it is the foundation of our salvation, and also
serves for the better magnifying of the free goodness of God toward us. On
the other side those Dogs which bark against it thinking to have a good and
favorable cause are therein more hardye: as in very truth there is nothing
more contrary to man's understanding, then to place the cause of our salvation
in the good will of God, in saying, that it belongs to him alone to choose us:
without finding of any thing in us wherefore he should choose us: and after
he has chosen us, to give us faith through which we should be justified. But
what? In as much as he is not bound to the person, it is good reason that he be
left in his mere liberty to give grace unto whom he will, and to leave the
rest in his perdition. But I defer my self to entreat more largely of this
matter, because you may have large discourse thereof in those Books which are
imprinted: which ought too content you. Concerning the writing which was
scatered about, to abolish this article of our faith, in very truth it
deserves no answer: being on the one side so full of ignorance and beastlines,
that every one ought easily to judge thereof: and on the other side so full of
impudency, that it is a wonder how these troublecoasts and shameless deceivers,
abusing so vilainously the holy Scriptures should be hearkened unto:
notwithstanding because I have understood that there are yet some simple and
weak ones that are trobled therewith, I therefore thought good to take the pain
to show the^ that will show themselves teachable: how they ought to resolve
themselves, to the end they might be no more deceived by these deceivers.

In the first place, he that has made that writing, were it Sebastian
Chastalio or some such like: to show that God has created all the world to be
saved, he alleges that he labors to draw unto him all that went astray:
the which I confess in respect of the doctrine of faith and repentance, the
which he propounds to all in general: be it to draw his elect unto him, or
to make other inexcusable. God then calls every one to repentance and
promises all those that return unto him, too receive them to mercy. But this
means not that he touches to the quick by his holy spirit, al those to whom
he speaks: as it is said by Isay in the 53. chapter. His arm is not revealed
to al those that hear. To which agrees the sentence of our lord Jesus Christ
None can come unto me, except my father draw him. And the holy scripture
shows throughout, that conversion is a special gift of God. And in deed
the place of Ezechiel, whereof this troublecoast makes his buckler, very well
confirms my saying. For the Prophet having said, that God wll not the death
of a sinner, adds, but rather will that he return and live. Whereby he
signifies that God bids and exhorts all which are gone astray too return
to the right way. But not that in deed he leads them all to himself by the
power of his spirit. The which he promises not, but to a certain number,
which appears as well in the 31. chapter of Jeremy, as in the 37. of Ezechiel
and in the 11. and throughout the whole scripture.

The second reason of this writing is, that all men are created too the
image of GOD, the which he says not to have been abolished but only
subjected to evil. As though it behooued man at adventure to believe his simple
saying. But contrariwyse the Scripture shows, that albeit there remain yet
some trace of the image of God in us, yet that the whole is disfigured, so as
reason is blind, and the heart perverse: wherefore by nature we are wholly
accursed. We see therefore at the least, that by the will and decree of God, we
have bin al subject to everlasting da^natio^ through the fall of one man.
Concerning that which this troublecoaste adds, that if we believe, we are
delivered through Christ by the power of the gospel, and of the holy ghost:
that serves for nothing, but to confirm our doctrine. For it behooves that we
always come thither, that none believe, unless those which are ordained to
salvation Acts 13. and all the scripture is full thereof. Wherefore this is as
much, as if he should say, that the elect of God are delivered from that common
damnation through faith.

The third article contains an horrible blasphemy that if God have created
men to dampne them, his will and the Devils is all one. They that speak so,
show plainly enough that they are altogether mockers of God, and despysers of
all religion. It pleased God that Job should be robbed and spoiled: to be
short, all that is there attributed to the Devil, and to those thieves and
robbers, it is said plainly, that it came not too pass but by the good
pleasure of GOD. Must we therefore conclude that Gods will and the Devils are
all one? But they that know that the judgments of God are bottomless, and
shall have once known their own weakness, will adore them with all
reverence and humility and know well too put a difference, although that GOD
wills the same thing that the devil does, yet that this is indeed in diverse
respects. And so, that he deserves always to be acknowledged righteous,
although that his counsel be incomprehensible unto us.

Afterward too abolishe the Election of GOD, seeming as though he would
confess it, he answers that God has not cteated nor predestined any man
not to believe, seeing he calls every one. Wherein he showed that he never
yet learned the ABC of Christians, seeing he knows not how to distinguish
between the outward preaching, which is done by the mouth of men, and the
secret calling of God whereby he touches the hearts within. Now when it is
commanded in the last of Mark, to preach the Gospel too all, this imports
not that God therefore works in all by the power of his spirit: and when it is
said in the second Chapter of the first too Timothy, that God would all men to
be saved, the solution is added by and by, that come too the knowledge of his
truth. Wherefore then is it, that he him self would not at that present time,
that the gospel should be preached to all? so far of is it that he has
enlightened all the world in the faith. It is marvelous that this shameless
forhead, is not ashamed too allege for him self the 10. to the Romans, where
the text expressly sets forth that all believe not the Gospel, because that
Isay says, that the arm of the Lord is not revealed to all. Also the 6. chap.
of S. John where Jesus Christ expressly pronounces, that all that are given
him of his father come unto him. And touching that, that he says, that all
shall be taught of God: it is a special promise made to the Church: as also the
Lord Jesus Christ was a faithful expositour thereof, saying: He therefore that
has heard and learned of my father, shall come unto me. Whereby he shows,
that all are not inwardly called. According as a little after also he
confirms the same. Therefore I have said unto you, that none can come unto
me, unless it be given him from God my father. Notwithstanding this Rustic
imagines he has well escaped, having spoken a word of predestination, without
making any semblance of the text so expressly set forth, where it is said,
that God will have mercy, upon him on who^ he will have mercy, and that our
salvation is of the same mercy: and not of the willer nor of the runner, and
that before the two twinne^ were borne, when they had neither done good nor
evil: to the end the purpose of his election might stand sure, he had chosen
the one, and rejected the other. Also when we believe that this proceeds of
that, that God has chosen us: Thereupon it follows, that the rest of the
world remains blind. But because it would be to long to allege all,
consider those places which are gathered in a little book that our brother
master Beza has made thereof, and you shall be fully satisfied therein.

To show that the hardening of Pharao, proceeded not of God, he alleges that
which is said in the third and fourth of Exodus I have commanded thee, to let my
people depart and thou would not. But it follows not thereupon, that God
had not ordained Pharao to be glorified in his obstinacy and hardness, as he
protests, Exodus 9. chapter. And Saint Paul alleges it in this sense in
the 9. chapter to the Romans. This therefore is sottishly concluded of this
impudent fellow, that our will is the first and chief cause of evil. I
confess in deed, that it is the near cause, and the true root of our
condemnation. But too the end a man may grant him, he alleges the
authority of Amerbachius, who is a lawier, and as skillful a Divine, as a
Poticarie is a good butcher.

Concerning Melancthon, if this Rustike rested not him self upon him, as he
protests, but upon the Gospel, how proves he by the Gospel, that God
has not ordained of his creatures? Touching that he imputes unto us, that we
put a fatal necessity as the Stoikes do, it is a very vilanous slander:
For the Stoikes, they made god him self subject to such necessities, making a
net of obscure causes, wherein God was entangled. But we set the Lord and
master in full liberty, attributing the sovereign Empire too his providence,
too dispose of all things. Concerning that this Clown babbleth of Free will,
it is sufficiently rejected throughout the whole Scripture. For Freedom and
bondage are contraries. Now, that we are the servants, yea the slaves of
sin, there needs not that we aledge one place alone, seeing the whole
Scripture are full thereof.

Notwithstanding, too give some color too his error, he alleges that
Jerusalem would not receive the grace of God, yea as though this proved Free
will, too choose good or evil. You shall find throughout all my books, how
I have taught, that we must not seek the cause of our perdition any where
else but in our selves, and in our perverse will. But it follovveth not, that
it is in us too change our will, which is altogether given too evil.

You shall also find that I have taught that which this troublecoast sets
down here to put out the whole light: to wit, that our will is the cause or
mean to come to salvation. Wherfote it needs not to allege that Abraham
believed God, and that it was imputed unto him for righteousness. For in very
truth it must needs be that a man must accept the grace of God. But the
question is of knowing what is the first cause. And this is the power of the
holy ghost, through which we are drawn to the obedience of god, according as he
has chosen and adopted us for his children before the foundation of the world.
Now in this behalf this vile dog shows sufficiently enough, that he makes
no account of the holy scripture, the which as much as lies in him, he would
abolish or tread under his feet. For in going about to declare how Abraham was
saved by his will, he says that this was of that will which God had put in man
creating him after his own image. Whereby he utterly abolisheth the whole
grace of the holy ghost: and goes beyond not only the Papists, but also some
of the Paynims, in this impiety. For the Papists keep such a measure in
magnifying their Freewill, that they confess, being corrupted and depraved,
we can do nothing, if God through his spirit and supernatural grace, do not
help, drive and direct us. But concerning the holy scripture, it shows us,
that we shall always be rebels against God, until that he shall have changed
and renewed us. And lo why Moses said to the people, Deutero. 29. that God
had not yet given them an understanding heart, and seeing eyes. And therefore to
the end he might be obeyed, he says, that he would give them a new heart,
taking away that stony heart. Jeremy in the 31: Ezechiel in the 11. and 37:
and S. Paul in the 2. to the Philipp. that God gives both too will and to
perform. And in the first of S. John it is said, that they which believe, are
not of the will of flesh nor blood: but renewed of god. And S. Luke speaking of
the woman, shows well, how all are drawn unto faith: to wit, that God opens
the heart, to the end his word may be understood. Now it is certain that
these things are not spoken of the common order of nature. And yet this villain
dares allege that which S. Paul says in the 3. Chap. to Titus, that God
has saved us not according to our works, but according to his mercy: to
infer upon that, that we have Free will, but not so constant. Now when S.
Paul speaks in the 3. to the Roma. of the will of man, such as it is by
nature, he decyfreth plainly enough, that there is nothing but peruersitie and
malice: as also in the 8. chap. he says, that al our thoughts are enmities to
God. Mark the^ how this agrees with that which this ttoublecoast chatteth,
saying that God renews us, after that we have consented to his calling. And
he is not ashamed to allege to the same purpose the 5. to the Ephesia^s, where
he speaks thereof as of the fables of Marlin: but contrariwise he says in the
same epistle: When you were dead in your sins, and the captives of Satan, and
that ye were the children of wrath as others, God has quickened you, etc. And
in the first chap. he shows well, that faith and regeneration proceeded from
no other thing, then Free election. And in deed, it must needs be that God
accomplish in us that which he has spoken by his prophet Esaie, in the 66.
chap. I appeared unto them, which sought me not. And lo why John Baptiste,
reproouing the rudenes and hardness of his disciples, says in the 3. chap. of
S. John. No man can receive any thing, unless it be given him from heaven. And
which is worst, this troubler is not ashamed also to bring this place, that God
gives both to will and to perform, to make us believe, that the grace of God
follows our good will: howsoever it be that S. Paul in that place without
leaving any thing too men, would attribute the whole praise of our salvation to
God: as he says in the first chap. that he which has begone the good work
of salvation, will finish it. Wherein it must be, that he make the grace of
god to come after the tail of Frewil.

Now afterward this troublecoast takes great pain to prove, that there is a
will in man, as though any man had ever denied it. But he should show, that
that will is Free too choose good and evil. Now how proves he it? by the 7.
chap. to the Romans, that this place can not be wrested. But herein men may
easily judge, how his mind is froward and perverse, seeing that S. Paul
declares there, although his will labored and striued too good, inasmuch as
it was regenerated by the spirit of God, yet oftentimes he went but hopping
upon one foot. He alleges a little after the 7. of the 1. Epistle to the
Corin. where he speaks of a man's will, that has a daughter to marie. Here is
good stuff to found Freewill. Concerning the 30. of Deuter. where it is said:
I set before you this day life and death, choose you: S. Paul in the 10. to
the Roma. gives a sufficient solutio^: that is, that Moises presupposes that
God puts his word in the heart. And lo why it is said, that this ought to
be laid to the gospel. Concerning that of Ecclesiast. which notwithstanding is
Apocripha, there he speaks but of the outward doctrine, but the inward grace
is a thing apart and by it self. That which is soil fauouredly iumbled
together by this troublecoast, that under the shadow that Jesus Christ calls
al those that are heavy loade^, he concludes that grace is given equally to
all. But he makes no rekoning that Jesus Christ after he had preached more
excellently then al creatures, says by and by, that his father must draw the^
to believe in him.

In the end going about to salve that place of S. Paul where it is said, that
if a potter make vessels of earth as he sees good, this shows that God
disposes of his creatures: I pray you mark well, the goodly solutions that he
gives: that God rauisheth by miracles, or diseases both one and other as
seems good unto him. As if S. Paul spoke not expressly there, that God
according to his unchangeable purpose, either chose or rejected men, before
they were borne, or before they had done either good or evil: too show that it
is neither of the willer nor of the runner, but of his mercy, that his elect
are saved. Such premises are worthy such a conclusion as he makes, let us
draw near unto God, and consent unto him, and he will draw near unto us. As
though the first approaching were not, that he should seek us out, whilst
that we are far from him. It is true that God oftentimes uses this speech,
Return unto me, and I will come unto you: but this is to show what is our
duty and not what our power is.

Praise be unto God.
FINIS.
Jmprinted at London by Thomas Dawson dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree, For Tobie Cook, and Thomas Man.

1579.


