A PROGnostication for this year M. D. xlvi, written by the expert docter of
Astronomy and Physic Archilles. P Gasser. L

Dominators are Mars and Luna.

Prognostication
THE FIRST Chapter entreats generally of the course of the planetes and
what weather shall be this year.
THIS YEAR (AS well for that ye more part of ye planetes in each figure of
heaven at lodged in watery signs or figures, as for that the Moon, ladi of ye
firmament or whole world in ye said signs shall not have the comen and
accustomed power) shall be moist with heat of the air and foul as concerning
the ceason.

SPRYNG time namely, of which the moon shall be lady with the aid of Mars and
Iuppiter, shall be cold and moist with much wyndes and foul wether. SOMER
unto whom Mars and Mercury equally shall govern, shall keep temperate fayrenes,
but yet often shall brust forth with sou^dy thunderous wyndes. HERVEST ceaso^,
whom Mercury with the help of Saturn and Venus shall govern, shall be wyndye,
clowdy and so^what rayny, but all together / variable and diverse in heat.
VVINTER which by Venus with thayd of Mars shall be ruled, shall be very cold,
with rain and snow. Finally, these ar ye dangerous and suspecte days of this
whole year.iiii.ix.xx. and.xxix. of March, the.vii.xv.xxii.xxiii. and xxix, of
April. the.x.xvii. and xxx. of May, the.ii.xvii.xxiii, and xxviii. of July,
the first and.xix of September the.xx. and.xxvi. of October,

Of the particular ceaso^s of every Month in the year.
January,
THE full Moon the second day the.iiii. hour xxiii. minute after none,
temperate as touchi^g any great cold, but on the morrow snowy wyndes shall fall,
and even so it shall come to pass on the.v, day, wherein the moon shall be
joined unto the clowdy sterre that is in the head of Sagittary, and Venus at ye
euening-tyde before the Son sets with ARCTVR ye Wago^ keeper, a ster so
named, and is so called because he follows the wagon that is called
Charlemaynes wayne of the up landish, but of some, the Bear, because they move
about the Pole, as the Bear about the stake: and of the learned, both he and
the wagon are named BOETES because they move slowly as Oxen do. The Poets
feign that he was Jupiters son, and nominate ARCADES. but he is called
ARCTVRVS for that he is girded round about with the Northern sterres. The syxt
day when Mars ryseth or springs up with the heart of ye SCORPION (an other
name of a sterre) before none, and the Son shall be entered in to ye house of
Saturn, the air shall be troubled with rain, paradue^ture until the next
day that the moon close in the night with HYADES.

THE first quarter shall be the.ix. day vii hour before none, and the cold shall
not be much aswaged. The ix. day, whylest the Son shall spring with the
Dolphi^ or Porpose it shall snow. The.xiii. day, Mars risyng with ARCTVR and
SATVRNE set even over against the Moon, shall cause a cloudy sky, The xiiii.
day, when Venus sets with FOMAHAND in the twylight, it shall snow. THE full
moan shall be on the xvii. day at one of the clock xvi mi, before none, when
Venus with the cloudy sterre, that is in the head of SAGITTARI before the Son,
and Mercury after the son shall arise with ALGOL moist winds shall blow, And
ye xix day when Mercury in the morning after the Son shall spring with the
Gottes tail, and Mars in the night shall be in a quartyle aspecte with the Moon, it shall either snow or rain, and so shall co^tinew the next day because
of ye openi^g of ye gate between Saturn and the Moon, and on the xxi. day,
because the Son shall set with FOMAHAND, it shall peradventure endure. On the
xxiiii day, when Iuppiter before the Son in ye euenyng, shall be overwhelmed with
ye Croune of ARIADNES and after that the Son self likewise shall set with the
Egle, the frost somewhat shall be relented or thawed

THE last quarter of the Moon shall be the xxv. day at v. of the clock after
none. On ye.xxvii day whilst Mars shall rise ere the Son shine with ALKAYR,
that is with the Egle or flyeng VVLTVRE) and the Moon shall be coupled with the
same Mars at none, and afterward in ye night shall be coupled with Saturn: and
further Venus in the twylyght shall set with the Southern Croune, clouds and
wyndes shall be raised. The xxxi. day, whiles the Son shall spring with the head
of MEDVSAE Mars shall ascend with ye head of SERPENTARY in the day, and in the
night, the moon shall be joined with the Gotes tail the air shall be troubled.

February
THE new moan shall be kyndled in a pyttie degree on the first day of February at
ii. of the clock.xlviii mi. before noone, in which day also the Son shall settle
with the Gotes tail. Also on the second day when Mercury about none shall be
joined with the Moon, and shall set at night after the Son with FIDICVLA the
little stryng: Likewise on the third dai, cold, with moist wi^des shall begin to
hurt. The v day, wha^ Venus with the shulder of PEGASE shall spring in the
morning, and in the night the two unfortunate sterres shall couple in ye same
East part of heaven, the aier shall be troublesome. The first quar, happens on the
vii. day, the viii hour after none, with which light, the same Moan a little
before Noone shall be joined with PLEIADES the.vii. Sterres, and Mars before the
Son shall set with ARCTVR, more hoate or warm rain. The ix. day, clowdy.
The xii. day when Venus shall be covered or set with FOMAHAND before the Son,
the Moon after the Son set, shall draw nyghe the Rack and the little
Asses: Also on the xiii. day, whiles the Son shall be joined unto the cloudy
sterre that is in the beginning of the shedyng or powri^g out of the waterer or
in ye figure Aquarius, and at night shall be set with thuttermost Ster of
ERIDANI, snow and storms shall trouble the air. THE full Moan the v, day,
the.vii. hour. the.lv. mi. after none, wi^dy with moist and unstable wether. On
the xvii. day, rain or snow shall fall, namely, when Venus in theueni^g before
the going down of the Son, shall join with the Egle and the Gotes tail. On
the xix day, peradventure the same tempest or wether shall endure, because that
Jupiter with the head of ANDROMEDE, in the day time, shall be long before the
Son, and Venus with the head of ALGOLE in like manner, a little before the Son
ascend or rise. THE last quarter shall be the.xxiii, day at.viii. of the clock
before Noone, in a pity degree, on which day, Mars, before ye day spring, with
a cloudy ster, that is in the head of Sagittary the Shoter, and also with the
Snout of the little horse, shall rise, and the Moon not long after, with the
same clowdy ster in the shoters head, shall hold a Synod or Counsel, that is,
she shall be joined with the same sterre, as men be joined in counsels, which
shall cause troublous wyndes, and shall continue till the next day. On the xxv
day ye cold shall be rele^ted, as well because that the Son shall be set under or
joined with the cloudy ster, as also because that the Son in the same evening
shall go down or set with the tail of the Whalle fish. On the xxviii day, it
shall either rain or snow.

March.
ON THE first day of March Venus, entering into the sign of Pisces, shall
cause moystnes. THE new Moon EMBOLISMAL that is, the superfluous Moan, shall
appear on the second day, and xii. min. after the poyncte of the Moon,
temperate, as touching cold and here, but yet somewhat wyndy, and enclyned to
moystture. On the third day, when Venus shall couple with the sterre NEBVLOSE,
and that the sterre called PORT APERTIO, be between ye Son and Saturn, tha^
shall it be cold wether, or perchance hoar or white frostes, and so it shall
continue the next day, because the Son sets with the Sterre, called the
shoulder of ye wynged or flie^g horse On the vii. day, because Venus shall join
with FOMAHAND (which is the last ster in the sign Aquarius) before myd day, and
the Son with the womb or belly of PEGASE, at Noone shall spring or asce^d. and
the Moon shall join with HYADES, and at the last, the Son shall set with the belly
of the Whale fysh: therefore the air shall be somewhat moist. THE first quarter
shall be on the ix. day, x. hour before myd day. variable or cloudy wether. On
the x, days, for the euenes of the day and night in the spring time. And on the
xi. day, for the setting of Venus with the harp before the Son, there shall still
out hot or sowli rayn The xix day, ye air shall be troubled i^ like manner. THE
full, EMBOLIS MAL or od Moan, shall be on ye vii day one of the clock xxxii mi.
after None, not only in a puteall or pity degree of both ye lyghtes, that is
of both Son and Moon: but also on the same day the Moon, or it be mid day
shall join with the Vyneyard keeper: unstable tempests shall be pro longed even
unto the next day following, wherein Mars both sets with ARIADNES his Crown,
and the eue^ing has a iiii. coruerd aspect unto DIANA, that is the Moon, shall
cause Northern wyndes to blow. On the xx. day it shall be rayn and perchance
the next.iii. days following, because the Son shall settle with MARKEB (that is
with the shoulder of the great horse) and with the belly of the whale fish,
except in some places, the Sterre, called PORT ADPERTIO shall bring a hoar or
white froste.

THE last quar, shall happen in a vaporous or smoky degree on the xxv. day,
vii. hour before None, and Mars also shall spring in ye morni^g with ye head of
ANDROMEDE and therefore, troblesome and moist, or else snowy wether shall
appear. On the xxx. day, rain and wynd shall blow.

THE new Moan, shall be renewed on the xxxi day of March.ix. hour xi. mi. after
Noone, with clear and fair wether, perchance with new thunders.

April,
ABOUT the second day of April the Son going down wiih ALPHERAT (that is
with the ster of the shyn of PEGASAE or great horse) ye aier shall be very
trobleous. On the.v. day, the ster PORT ADPERTIO, being between Saturn (...)
the next day following, may bring among our mountains more troublesome wyndes.
On the xxviii. day in the dawni^g of the day Venus is joined with ALGOLE, and
with in a little after Mercury with ACARNER before the Son shall ascend up into
the mids of heaven and at the last, Mercury being with RIGOLE, not long before
the Son shall set, we may look for a trobelous wether, and perchance snow
On the xxix. day, for as much as Venus and PLIADES in the morning spring,
shall go before the Son, and CILLENIVM shall be coupled with PHEBVS, therefore
ye shall have hot wyndes and hurtful to the ears and eyes, which are to be
feared and dred. THE new Moan, the last day ar.vi. of ye clock xvi, mi. before
Noone, and likewise the going together of the Moon with VIRGILIE that is the
vii sterres. and the ioyni^g of Mars with a Fyxt clowdy sterre: and finally the
joining of the Soon with MAIA (one of the.vii, Systers among the vii. sterres,
betoken winds.

May.
ABOVTE ye first day of May, Mercury shall spring ymediately after the Su^ne,
and shall shine under the son beams with FOMAHAND, and Venus also burned at
night shall be drouned under ye HORISON (out of our sight) with RIGILE before ye
Son: Again on the next day in the morning the Sun shall be lifted up with
FOMAHAND and the same shall attain and possess the mids of heaven with
PLEIADES at none, and Mercury also shall be joined with the same heap or figure
of sterres. Furthermore, on the.iii. day Mercuri with PLEIADES and the girdle
of ORION shall descend or go down in ye euenyng after the Su^ne, under ye line
that endith our sight: and to these on the.iiii. day the aforesaid messenger
of gods (Mercury) with the Dog shall mete a little after the sun set,
which betoken lightnynges and hayl, and peradventure snow upon the mountains,
according to the expectation of our commune people. On ye.vi. day Venus shall
rise with FOMAHAND before the sun, and with PLEIADES a little before noone.

THE first quarter of the Moon the.vii. day at.vii. of the clock after noone,
and the couplyng of Venus with VIRGILLIE the vii. sterres, shall bring in
diverse fliyng fires by night, The.ix. day shall be cloudy and thunderous, for
the su^ne shall set at night both with the eye of Taurus (the bulle) and with
the ster SIRIA. On the, x. day it shall rayn very much, for both ADPERTIO
PORTAE, ye opening of the gate, and the moon after none shall be joined with
PROTRIGERE, and venus at even a little before the su^ne going down with PLEIADES
and with ORIONS girdle shall go under. On the.ii. day Mercurius in following the
sun shall assende with HYADES and Venus under ye beams in going before the
sun shall set with ALHABOR the great dog Again, on the.xii. day Venus shall
be overwhelmed with ALDEBARAM (the bulls eye,) and Mercurius shall rise with
the goat. On the.xiii. day Mercurius shall rise with ALDEBARAM (the bulls
eye) after the sun, and the sun shall spring up with SVCCVLI the pigges. On
the.xiiii. day also Mercurius shall settle with the hedde of ALGOL after the
sun going down, therefore, for the space of.iiii. days they shall give and
bring in by times partly showers partly thu^der.

THE full Moon of May the xv. day, v. of the clock.lvi. minutes after noone
shall be made windy and sumwhat moysty. The.xvii. and.xviii day shall be mixed
with reign and thunder, when Marcury in the break of the day shall assende
with the right shulder of ORION and at ye twilyght with the same sterre both
the sun and Venus shall set together, but not without hayle. On the.xx. day
Phoebus, the sun rysyng in ye morning with HIADES, and after him Mercury with
PROCYON, the little dog, which we call CANICVLA of who^ the days that are
called the CANICVLAR days take their name, at night going away shall cause
moist wyndes to blow.

THE last quarter of the Moon shall be on the.xxii. day at.vii. of the clock
after noone, it shall rain. The xxiii. day Venus under the sun shall spring
with the bulls eye, and ascend with the goat: and therefore the clouds
gathered together shall cast out thunder and lightnyng, so that the next day,
what for the rysyng of the Sun with the bulls eye and for the ascending of
Venus the tempest shall scarsely cease. On the.xxvi. day, the air shall be metly
temperate, except the Sun with RIGILE at noone, and after him Mercury with
the great dog, exaltyng, and Venus at night following the sun setting with
the head of ALGOLE, and at the last Saturnus going backewarde both on this day
and on the next day dessendyng with the Waggandriuer not much after the sun
set, shall suddenly send forth rain and hayle,. On the.xxvii. day the sun
setting with GORGONS head and Mars asce^dyng in the night with FOMAHAND, shall
cause thunder.

THE new Moan shall be in a puteall or pity degree. On the.xxix. day of this
present month of May at.iiii. of the clock.x. minute, after noone, wherein at
night Mercuri also shall set after the Sun with bright HIDRIA or water
pott, and it shall be temperate heat, sumwhat cloudye and wyndye. Also the.xxx.
and.xxxi. day because Mercuri shall assende with the right shoulder of ORION in
the morning before the sun, therefore ye shall have rain,

June.
ABOVTE the.ii. day of June, whylest the Moon early in the morning shall go
unto ye rack under the yerth, and in the evening whilst AD PERCIO PORTAE is
between Saturn and the sun, hayle is to be looked for, but in the tops of
mountains snow. On the v. day Mercury foloyng the sun shall rise with
RIGYL, and when Venus the following maid of the sun at night shall goo under
the earth with ALGOMAISA, it shall thunder,

THE first quarter of the Moon, shall be the.vi. day not much before noone, in
so much, as Mars shall set with VVEGA, therefore a wyndy and moist tempest shall
take place, which on the next day Venus under entryng the sign Cancer the
Crabbe, shall more increase. On the ix. day, when Mars with the Sotherne
Croune early in the morning and Venus sprynging after the sun with the sterre
of the first hedde, of the twine, which twine is called Gemini the sign.
Also, on ye.x. day the sun departing away with the little dog shall cause
small wyndes and thunder. The standing or steiyng of the sun (that is when he
is at the highest and can go no hier) in Summer shall be on the.xii. day.
The.xiii. day shall be cloudye with lightnyng.

THE full moon shall be the.xiiii day, at.ii. of the clock.xxx. minutes before
noone, wherein the sun shall assend in the morning with the head of the first
twine, and the moon shall be joined with the cloudy sterre in the top of the
hedde of the shoter or of the sign Sagittarye about noone, the wether shall
be unstable with variable tempests. On the.xv day Venus shall spryng up after
ye sun with the hedde of the latter twine. On the xvi. day the same Venus
late after the su^ne shall set with the bright water pot. On the.xvii day
Venus again shall spring after the sun with the right shoulder of ORION,
and the Moon shall go together with the goats tail, which shall cause much
lightnyng and sumwhere hail: which tempest even on the next day, the sun
rysyng with ORIONS left shulder, and amounting with the great dog, joined unto
him only in length, afterward the Moon appliyng unto ye cloudye sterre of the
water powered out of ye waterer, at after noone shall augment with moist thunder.

THE last quarter shall be the xx. day the.xi. of the clock after none wyndye.
On the.xxii. day, the sun with the hedde of the hinder twine, and furthwyth
after Venus with RIGILLE asce^dyng shall mix thunder with heat, except the
couplyng of Venus and Mercury on the morrow send furthe rain. On the.xxiiii.
day in the morning, ye sun springyng with ORIONS right shulder, and at even
the Moon coupled with HIADES, Likewise on the.xxv. day, the sun setting with
ALPHARD, ye bright water pott, shall power out many thundry showers. On
ye.xxvii. day Mercury going backward rising in the morning with RIGILE, shall
succeed the sun, and afterward again shall clyme into the heart of heaven
with ALGOMEISA.

THE new Moon shall be on the xxviii. day at.iii. of the clock.xxiiii minutes
before noone, and shall bring forth whote wyndes, but not very much healthsum,
nor yet without moystnes. On the.xxx. day, the su^ne going under the east with
RIGIL and after in the mids of heaven, with ALGOMAISA shall cause heat a little
to abate.

July.
ON the first day of July, Venus joined with the rack, shall set with it after
the sun, and it shall thunder. On the.iii. day Mars setting between day and
night with MARKEB, ye shulder of the great horse and Jupiter in ye sign Aquari
or waterer set over against Venus in a streighte line deuidyng the circle in
the mids, shall bring in rain until the next day, wherein Venus shall rise up
after the sun with the little hog and the Moon shall go beyond the Grape
gatherer at after noone.

THE first quarter of the Moon shall be on the.vi. day before none, at iiii. of
the clock: in which the CANICVLER or dog days begin and the heat shall be
doubled with lightning On the.x. day the dark heaven shall yield mortal
diseases. On the.xii. day Venus assending in the day with ye little dog shall
raise up whote wind and thunder.

THE full Moan the.xiii. day at.i. of the clock.xxvi. minu. after none. On
the.xiiii. day whylest the sun entryng the Lion, shall spring with the rack
and the Moon at night shall be copled with the Goats tail. On ye xv. and.xvi.
day, when Phoebus the Sun shall rise with the little dog sterre in the
morning, and at even shall go done with the rack and hedde of the first twine,
PRODROMI the aforerunners shall bring thunder and lightning, and parauenture a
great hayl shall fall. The.xviii. day when fair Venus with the pryncely sterre
of the Lion shall set after the Sun, heat shall be doubled.

THE last quarter of the Moon the.xx. day, at.iiii. of the clock before
noone, in which day also Mercurye before the Sun shall assende with RIGOLE and
shall amount with the great Bear, and at last the same Venus shall goo under
the heart of heaven with RIGOLE therefore a varyable tempest shall rise, and
perauenture it shall rain aboundauntly, unto which on the next day Venus
rysyng in the break of day with RIGOLE and also the Moon coming with the
vii. sterres, shall be contrary. On the xxii. day, the heat shall sumwhat
abate. On the.xxv. day the Sun assendyng in the morning with the Dog, from
which day, the dog days have their name. Also on the xxvi. day Venus in
the morning entryng the Virgin (or sign of the Virgyn) and the Moon at night
coming to the rack, shall bring forth moist winds and thunder.

THE new Moon shall be in a puteal or pity degree on the.xxvii. dai of this
present month, at.iiii. of the clock.xl. minutes, after noone, and it shall be
whote, and inclyned to thunder and east or southeast wind. On the xxviii. day
Venus shall assend in the morning before the sun with the bright water pot,
and that the Son self shall clyme ye same bright water pot at myd day, and
thereto Mercurius shall go down before the su^ne set with HERCULES head On
the.xxix. day about noone, the openyng of the gate shall be betwixt the backward
going of Jupiter and Mercury, and at night Mercurye shall set with the little
asses, and the rack. On the.xxx. day Mercury in the morning before the sun
with the rack, and afterward the sun self shall rise with the vttermoste
sterre of ERIDANVS, and afterward Mercury shall clyme into the heart of heaven
before noone again with the little asses, at last the same Mercury shall set
before the su^ne at night with APPOLLIVS head, wherefore worse tempests shall be in
great valleis, but on the mounteines in every place sharper shall arise.

August.
ABOVTE the.iii. day of August, whylest Venus shall rise after the sun with
the lions tail, a cloudy sky shall appear.

THE first quarter of the Moon shall be the.iiii. day, at eight of the clock,
after none, in a misty or smokie degree, and shall be whote and windy. On
the.vi. day in the morning Mercury spryngyng with ye great dog, and the
sun walking with the princelye sterre of the lion shall make or cause a
thundry and windy tempest with clouds. On ye.ix. day it shall reign, and
likewise on the x. day: wherein Venus in the break of the day clymeth with the
lions tail, and sets before the sun with the heart of the same image of
the lion.

THE full Moon shall be the.xi. day at.ix. of the clock.xxxv. minutes, after
noone and the air shall wax cold and moist. On the.xii. day, Mercury, not
only in the morning shall spryng before the Sun with RIGVLLE, but also with
the same REGVLLE shall pass under themiddes of heaven, and the Moon joined with
the cloudye sterres, shall get and procure wynd. On the.xiiii. day it shall
thunder and lyghten, and the Dog time shall finysshe or end. On the.xvi.
day in the morning when the Sun assendyng the line ending the sight, with
the brighte sterre of the water pot shall bring temperatenes.

THE last quarter shall be the.xviii. day about noone, and shall reyse up
unstable wyndes. On the.xxi. day Venus shall spryng up after the Sun, with
the Waggan driuer. On the.xxii. day Venus joined unto PROTRIGETER, and contrary
or even again Mars shall make an openyng of the gate, and shall bring forth
rain.

THE new Moan shall be the.xxvi day. the.viii. hour and.iiii. minutes before
noone, in which day Venus after the Su^ne shall spring with the Northren
crown, wherefore the air shall give awyndye moisture with much thunder. On
the.xxvii. day late in the euenyng Venus shall set with the virgins ear of
corn On the.xxviii. day before noone, the Moon shall be joined in the length of
the ZODIAC with ye P^EVINDEMIATOR or the Grapegatherer. The heat of Summer shall
begin to be wythdrawne by rain, and that forbecause Venus setting both with
the tail and back of the Lion after the Sun, she shall not rise and auaunce
again in the end of August without snow among the mountains.

September.
THE ADPERTIO PORTAE or openyng of the gate between Saturn and the Sun being
on the first day of September not far from noone, and when Venus shall
follow not much after with AZIMECH or the Virgyns ear of corn, the air
shall begin too be changed into harvest showers.

THE first quarter of the Moon shall be the.iii. day at.x. of the clock before
none. On which day also Mercury with the Waggandriuer, and Venus shall spryng
after the sun with the virgins ear of corn: noisome and cloudy winds shall
blow On the.vi. day Mercury assendyng the line that ends the sight with
ARIADNES croune, and the.vii. day the Moon about noone joined with the
goats tail shall give rain. On the.ix. day in the morning with PROTRIGETER,
and further, almost.ii. hours after Venus with the harp: also at the last
that slow siccle bearer Saturn with the swifte Egle, not without storms
shall spryng.

THE full Moan the.x, day at v. of the clock.xlix. mi. before None, in the
beginni^g hoar frostes, but immediately following shall be wind with unstable
moystnesse: for both Venus on the same day shall pass with the cloudye
sterre, and Mercury long after the Son. setting with the Virgens ear of
cornie shall give them selfs to behold Cupido. On the, xii. and.xiii,
likewise, for as much as the Heruest euenesse of day and night shall be, and
Mercury ^hal spring after the Son with the Virgyns ear of corn, and Venus
shall go under the mids of heaven with the Wago^ driuer. Also on the, xiiii.
day whylest the Moon before none shall draw nygh unto the.vii. sterres, the
air shall be troubeled. THE last quarter shall be about midnyght on the.xvi. day,
on which day, the Son risyng in the morning with the tempestious sterre of the
Wagon driuer if not rain, yet peradventure it shall give a white hoared frost
or snow. On the.xviii. day, Mercurius risyng after the Son VVEGA the flieng
VVLTER. And on the ix. day the Moon early in the morning coupled with the
Rack: and farthermore Venus spryngyng after the Sun with the bright sterres
of the balaunce and auaunsing, joined bodily with the more Sothren balance,
shall cause moist winds and cloudy. On the.xxiii. day, in the morning, the
Son shall rise with the Northern croune, and after Noone Marcury shall clymbe
the mids of heaven with the Wag^n driuer: Likewise on the xxiiii. day the
Moon before Noone shall come to the Grape gatherer, and at night the Son
shall set with the Vyrgins care of corn, from whence moist clouds shall
take place. THE new moon the.xxv. day at.i. of the clock.x. mi. before None,
shall be variable and unstable with thunder in some places. On the.xxviii. day
in the morning the Son with the Raven and after him Marcury shall rise with
ye bright sterres of the B^la^ce, Again, on ye.xxix. day Venus shall mount with
ARIADNES croune, and the Son shall set with the back and tail of the
Lion, and ar the last on the.xxx. day, the Son ascending the heart of heaven
with the Virgyns ear of corn, shall cause a cloudy sky.

October.
THE first day of October, Venus with the heart of the Scorpion shall scasely go
down in the eueni^g after the Son without troublesome wyndes.

THE first quarter of the Moon shall be the.xxii. day at.xi. of ye clock at after
Noone, on which day the Son in the morning shall spring with the Virgins
ear of corn, and some cold rain shall soon follow. The.v. day shall be cloudy,
The.vii. day a white frost shall prepayre the gatheryng in of the Grapes.

The full Moon the nynth day at ii, of the clock. the liii. minute after
noone, and Venus shall ascend the mids of heaven with ANTER therefore look
for cold Wyndes and somewhat moisty on the morrow and next day after: as well
because in the one, the Son in the morni^g shall spring with the little
Stryng, as in the other in the very moment or point as it were of Noone, the
Moon shall be put under the seven Sterres.

On the xiii. day, as Venus in the break of the day shall swym with the Arow
and the Scorpions heart, and Saturn shall be set contrary too the Moon by a
strayte line a little before noone: even so on the.xiiii. day the Son ascending
up with the Wago^ driuer shall cause cloudi or snowi wether. THE last quarter
shall be the, xvi. day at.iii of the clock after none, on which day the Moon,
not far from the West corner, about the same time of Noone going to the Rack
shall cause moist wyndes. On the.xx. day, Mercury going backward shall spring
with the most clear and bright sterres of ye Balaunce and joined unto the Son
shall give a white hored frost, which on the xxi. day following because that the
Son in the morning with the a fore said bright sterres of the Balaunce and
after him Venus shall spring with the Egle: and again at after Noone the Moon
shall be joined with PROTRYGETER: and last of all the Son shall settle with ye
more south Bowl of ye Balaunce, wherefore the cold shall scace cease.

THE new Moan shall be ye.xxiiii day at.vii. of the clock and the vii mi. after
Noone, windy and moist, and peradventure it shall be more truly said to be snow.
On the, xxvii, day Saturnus shall begin late to set with the Wagon driuer. On
the xxviii, day, the Moon opening the gate unto Saturn first in a windy
sign, afterward joined to Venus in a pytte degree before Noone: again the same
Venus going down in the night with the Wagon dryuer shall over turn from above
thick clouds or snow, On the.xxxi. day the clouds shall be carried with great
wyndes, namely, because the Son shall spring with the head of OPHIVCHVS the
Serpent holder, and is hercules, for whylest he held a serpent with his hand,
he was by Jupiter tanslated among the sterres.

November.
THE first quarter of the Moon shall be the first day at.x. of the clok before
none and shall continue until ye next day whylest the son auau^seth with the
bright northern croune, and a little after the Moon shall be joined with the
cloudy sterre that is in the beginni^g of ye Water sheder of the Waterer, and
therefore it shall be cold and wyndy. The.iiii. day, the air shall be unquiet and
troublous. On the.v day whylest Venus shall rise in the break of the day with
the cloudy ster that is in the Shoters head and auau^ce with the falling Vulture
or Gripe, and the Son joined with the little cloudy sterre in the Scorpion,
only sets at night with the heart of the same constellatio^, at ye last the
clouds shall bring forth and deliver snow.

THE full Moon shall be the.viii day at one of ye clock.xvii. mi. before noone in
a pytty degree, and for that ye Moan shall take her counsel with the vii. sterres
and after following with HIADES, it shall rain: These HIADES ar.v. Sterres situate
in the Bulls head, and ar so called among the Bretians, of Hio, to rayn, for
as often as they either spring or set, it raineth: but of the Latinistes they at
named SVCCVLI, Pigs, because Swyne delight to wallowe in myer that comes of
rain,

On the.x. day Mercurius springing before the Son with the bryghtest sterres
of the Balaunce, and the Moon beholding Saturn set in a contrary spoke or
line, sygnifyeth a white hored frost or snow. THE last quar. shall be ye, xv,
day, x. of the clock before noone, moist and wyndy, The, xvii. it shall snow.
ye, xviii. day the son shall spring with ANTARE and Venus shall auaunce with the
flyeng Gripe. the, ix, dai Venus sets with ye tallyng Gripe after ye son.
the, xx, the Son in the morning ascends with the Harrow, and Jupiter shall
cover with the Swan or sygnettes tail between day and night, The.xxi. day
Mercury at night goes away with ANTER before ye Son, wherefore al these.iiii,
days either shall be darkened with clouds, or else unquiet wyndes shall have
pre-eminence.

THE new Moon the, xxiii. day scace half an hour before Noone shall send
forth cold wind, and in many places moist for the space almost of two days.
On the.xxvii, day clouds, and peradventure snow shall step (...), The.xxix,
day the son ascends in the morning with the Egle, and Mercury shall clymbe
the mids of heaven with ARCTVR before ye Son, not without whyrle wyndes. THE
first quarter shall be the.xxx. day at.vii. of the clock after Noone with cold
and wind,

December,
ABOUT the first day why lest Mercury shall ascend with ARCTVR early before the
Son risyng, and as the Son self shall be covered with the Serpent holders
head, the air shall be troublesome, which shall continue until the next day.
The.iiii. day it shall snow. The.v day whylest the Son shall rise with the
half of the Dolphin in the morni^g and at night shall go away to rest with the
Wagon driuer. On the vi. day when Venus shall go down in the night after the
Son set with the uttermost ster of the Shede water, than look for moist
wyndes.

THE full Moon the.vii, day at one of the clock.xliii. min. after none: on
which day because Mercury also shall spring with the Egle in the morning, snowy
wyndes shall rise: and shall wax bygger on the next day because of Saturn
joining with the Son. On the tenth day, the Moon shall be joined to the Rack
in the morning, and Venus after that shall come to the spring with the head of
MEDVSA.

On the.xi. day, ye same Venus shall set with the Egle and the Gotes tail in
the night, On the.xii. day whylest VVYNTER shall spring and the Semewes days,
Mars shall asce^d the line that ends our sight about None, with the.vii.
Sterres and Mercury at night shall descend the same time with the Wagondriuer,
and shall cause snowy rain.

THE last quarter shall be the.xv day at.vii. of the clock before none
unsteadfast wether: for on the same day the Son shall rise with the cloudy
sterre of the Shoters head, and after with the falling Gripe shall ascend ^h^
heart of Heaven, The, xix. day, the Son and Mercury shall couple before Noone
in a pity degree, and Jupiter shall begin to set late with the uttermost
sterre of the Shede water, for these causes snow shall be looked for. THE new
moon the.xxiii, day at, iiii, of ye clock.xvii, mi. before noone shall cause a
thaw partly with wind and partly with moisture. The.xxiiii. day shall be
cloudy and also snowy. The, xxviii day Venus applyeng unto the cloudy sterre of
the Shed water again shall give snow or clouds.

THE first quarter of the Moon shall be the.xxx, day at.ii. of the clok after
noone, on which day the Son shall auaunce in the mids with the Egle and the
strew, and at even shall set with the northern crown, therefore they betoken
snow and rayn until the next day wherein Venus is auaunsed with the Shed
water.

Of general significations of the Elements. Of the Lord of the year, and of
certain Conjunctions.
ALTHOUGH this year of M.D.xlvi. be not blemysshed with any Eclippes neither of
Son nor Moon, yet Mars sygnifyer of the comen and vulgar people and lord of
the year, and here unto also the ascendent of the revolution of the world,
shall cause in all this year the people to be unstable and inconstant. Also
though they bring heaviness and fears every where, yet most of all in the Est
part, not without the great hynderau^ce or undoing of many, and also the loss
and destruction of many catel. Furthermore, the same Mars in the said
reuolutio^, set over against the Moon: betokens corruption of ye air, fire
flye^g by night, a blasyng Sterre, sundry diseases, and finally the consumyng
by fire of Vyllages and Cities, with infinite disceytfulnes. wherefore, let al
those people that are subject to Capricorn think these things spoken unto them.
But the coniunctio^ of ye said Mars with Saturn On the v day of February in the
second house of heaven, not risen, but to rise, signifies destruction of
goods, Sub^taunce, Houses and household stuff: and signifies also the
ingrate disobedience of servants and laborers: And that the rich and great
men shall be had in no estimation among their servants, and yet many of their
servants shall be promoted by them: and also the soldiers proudly shall disdayn
to obey the order and co^maundme^te of their Capitaynes. In like manner as
Ragelus teaches, the Congregation or Counsel of Mars with Jupiter which they
shall celebrate or sole^pnely keep, The.vii. day of April in the morning in
the.xi. house of heaven betokens many euels: as ye darth and death of beasts,
theft, prisonmentes and battayles chiefly unto the subjects of Aquarius, Also
Venus placed with Mercuri in ye same sign of heaven, signifies lack of
substance, the vnco^ly deeds of men stynking delytes with women: and that not
a few secrets shall be disclosed, letters shall be opened: wherefore whatsoever
thou do, do it prude^tly and wisely and behold the end.

Of plenty and scarcytie of grain, of the luck of things springi^g of the
earth.
THE estate of the Fruit of the earth shall be indifferent good (god so willing)
but Mars much thretneth hurt unto trees, and so shall yield a wauerynge estate of
all grain: But for all that, for the habitation of ye Moon in the figure
coniunctional and for the application of her, a little after the same
conjunction to a quadrate aspecte of Saturn, the price of necessary food
shall rather diminish then encreace: wha^ at the first the part of
plentifulnes of the whole year shall fall in the.xii. house and in the tryne or
three cornered aspect of Mercury. But what shall not the execrable gredines of
gold or money and the curssed swetenes of lucre and usury defyle and break? Now
I will tell you by course the particular luck of every thing, as our URANIA
has been accustomed, that is as our heavenly Figure has been accustomed to be
declared. URANIA is one of the, ix. Muses. and is by interpretation CELESTIS
Heavenly.

Great Bestes and fat shall die Gottes and small Beasts shall be of little
valor. Butter and milk shall be plentiful and not dear, but it shall be thyn and
watery.

Rysse, Wheat, Rye, and other more plesau^t Graynes, in growyng men may bewail
the blastyng, and in the market usury. Secale, Barley, Otes and such like, shall
grow more fortunate, and in price more cheap. Millium panicum, Myrica, shall
have them selfs after a waueryng sort, as well in growyng as in coming to the
market.

Cicer, Pease. Le^tes shall increase in differently. Apples, Pears, Peaches,
Plummes and Cheryes, for the perel that shall fall in the degree of their part,
they shall be skant Hasell nuttes and Wallnuttes likewise shall be scarce and
dear. Beans, Rapes, Onions and Cabyges shall habound greatly.

Hemp and Flax shall spring much, but yield little, and therefore shall be dear.

Honny shall be of indifferent prices, yet very plentyfull, howbeit it shall be
watery.

Wine shall be indifferently priced but the Grapes to come shall be unfortunate in
increase, because the hoar frostes shall hurt them.

Of Metalles.
MARS in an erthy sign betokens generally corruption of the Mines, yet
nevertheless Gold in spring time shall be enha^ced in price and the vain of it
shall be less desired.

In Somer it shall be of diverse prices, but it shall not enryche the workers
thereof.

In Heruest the price of it shall begin to be less, and the laborers of it
ar promised perelles. In Winter likewise it shall fall in price and it shall be
dygged out very vnpure. Silver in spring time shall possess the best state,
and it shallbe as well profitable unto the work men as precious unto the
occupiers. In Somer contrary wise it shall give busynes both to the Merchauntes
and Myners.. In Heruest it shall ascend again in byeng. In Winter it shall be
indifferently prised every where. Quick Silver in Spring time shall be
perylouse in gettyng and of little value in estimation. In Somer it shall be
worse and less plenty than in estimation.

In Heruest it shall be of a good state and dear. In Winter it shall not be
equal unto the sweat and expenses. Tynne in Spring time shall be equally draune
out, that is with out either loss or gain to the buyers or sellers. In Somer
it shall be of a good state and much preassed for to be bought.

In heruest it shall be more habundaunt, but of little price. In Winter worst of
all.

Iron, steel, and bri^estone, In spryng time shall be of an honest rate and not
dear. In summer likewise: In heruest as they shall be made derer so shall they
have a worse state, or more vnpure. In winter they shall be pure, but of little
estimation.

Copper and brass in spryngtime shall deminyshe in price, but let the
laborers in the Mines beware perrel, namely the falling down of it. In Somer
it shall increase worse both in Mines and merket, And like wise in heruest
season. In winter ceason it shall be of more value.

Lead in spryngtyme shall be of the purest condition and dear, but not
profitable to the workmen. In somer, as well the goodness as the price shall be
deminished In heruest yet still it shall fall in price, and shall bring diseases
too the laborers in it.

In winter again it shall be better in quality, but the price thereof shall not
be inhaunced.

Of pestilences and iminent sicknesses.
THE assendent in the figure of the revolution, and Mars lord of the year,
threaten evil the health of men, specially the quadrangale of the bulle, and
also the crooked aspect of Saturn to the Moon a little after the conjunction of
the Lights the Moon going before, threaten pestilence, but yet neither
universal nor great. But surely the.vi. house shall give many diseases, whote
and sharp to the which, as well the lord of the year, as the clyppyng or
joining together of the unfortunate Planetes shall puruay sudden and unlooked
for death of men in strong and lusty age.

The diseases of Mars shall increase or be of most strength and power. In the
spryng time, as are pestilence, fevers or agues, continual tertians, CAVSON or
most whot burning ague bredde of pure collar in veins nighe unto the heart,
and differs from a tertian, that is also engendered in the veins, but yet far
from the heart, VARIOLAE which is a disease that children and young men have
often, but old men very seldom. Erisipilas which is also called IGNISSACER
the holy fire, of some S. Antonies fire, and as Galyn says, it is a swelling
that comes of a whote and thyn blood, and is sumtyme myxed with coler,
brustyng out of blod. The iau^dish, whot impostemes, madness, scabines of the
preuities, and reins, with the griefs and pains of the eyes.

In Somer season partly whoter diseases of the hedde, and pestilence, hedde
aches, partly pains of the shinnes with Saturnyn, or diseses of Saturn, as
the leprosy, ECTICA or consumption, MELANCHOLIA or madness. THENESMVS which is a
continual desire too exonerate or too ease the womb that may neither be
deferred nor escaped: and when any thing is voided it shall be very little and
that most commenlye blood, the fystule, the cancre, and STRVMAE, which are
heard impostumes, sumtimes coming in the neck, and sumtyme under the
armehooles, and sumtyme about the preuie parts, and differ from Glandule in
matter only, for GLANDVLE comes of phlegm and STRVMAE of Melancolye.

Harvest season shall be stained very much with the peines or grefes of the feet
and thighs, palsy, quakynges, ytche, and with imflamation of the eyes.

The Winter shall be noyfull, with rotten fevers, falling sickness defnes, and
with diseases of ye guts, of DIAPHRAGMA which is a little synnowe skin
ioynyng to the maw, and with infirmities of the belly and with phlegm.

Of peace and war
THE warrier and wrothful Mars Lord of this year shall send forth in violence of
anger and ragyng wodnes every where unto the CAPRINISTES or subjects to the
sign of the Goat, and to the whole quadrangle of it, all vexacions and
trobles, so that little rest shall be left them, but they shall steadefastlye
look for all artillery and weapens, war, robbery, diminishing of people,
manslaughter, and killyng: which mischief above all thing the coniunctio^ of
the same Mars with Saturn shall sharpen and move unto mankind with fyerse
sword, as Hispale^ce writes. And as the great slaughter falling in the.xii.
house of heaven, which is of imprisonment and emnities, shall raise up every
where vehement and cruel assaults, and fraudulent and subtyl batelles: so
shall, the great Eclipes of the Sun in the sign of the waterer that was in
the year. M. CCCCC. xliiii. stir up no small perturbation or hurly burlye at
the beginning of this our year, and so shall take his leave of them for ever.
The great hurtes and sedicions of the commen people, are too be feared in the
Southpart of ye world. After Glocauien, when Mars shall be myxed with the Sun,
in a sharp aspecte which shall fall about the beginning of May and
September.

Of the particular fortunes of men as well in prosperity as inaduersitie.
ALTHOUGH it be impossible to the Astronomer to show before the particular
natures of all inseparable things, and to discuss the secret and hidden
operations and influences of all the sterres even too the uttermost point,
(which thing Ptolomy knew,) yet is it manifest that diverse of those things
which yerly we do mark and entitle, and that we either promise or threaten in
our simple Astrologicall Prognostications, not at all adventures but by the
order and course of ye heuens mercked and studied upon before, do chance
after. And therefore according to the accustomed manner we will set forth clearly
and plainly unto you as nigh as we can, as well the fortune of such people as are
under the zodiac or.xii. signs, as also to declare by order the disposicion of
the planetes. Therefore whatsoever mortal man either now borne or to be borne
shall perceive how to count the conuersions or reuolutions of their years and
birthe figures of their ascendentes in any one day of the days under
specified and noted. They if they cannot wisely avoid nor patiently suffer and
bear the evil fortune, dangerous life or displesures of body iminent and at
hand, let the^ call unto GOD that he of his great mercy, will either take them
shortly away, or else of his favorable goodness to mittigate and aswage the^.

The unfortunate and unlucky days in ye birthes and reuolutions of Men, for
the year of our lord. M.D.xlvi.
THE.iii. day of January. the.v and.xiiii. of Februari. The.iiii. xx. and.xxx.
of March, The.vii. and xxx, of April. the.iii. x. xvii and.xxx. of May.
The.ii. and.xvii. of June. The ix. xxii. and.xxv. of Auguste. The.i. ii. x.
and.xviii. of September. The xxv. and.x vii. of October. The.viii xiii.
and.xxiiii. of December.

And contrary wise, better chance shall happen to them that either now are
begotten, or shall have ye time of their revolution unto their age passed in
any of the days following: for these luckye days not only led a right
blessed life, but also shall be preserved, heped up and filled with riches and
dignity.

The fortunate and luckye days in birthes and reuolucions of Men for this
year be these.
THE xxix. day of January. The ix. xi. and.xxviii. of March, The xxii. of
April. The.xviii. of May, The.xxiii. of June. The.xvii. and xxxiii. of August.
The.x. of September. The, v. of October, The.xv. and xxviii. of November, and
the.ii. day of December.

Of the subjects of the vii. planetes.
THE black swart persons subject to Saturn as the Jews, the Mores, solitarye
persons, aged persons, Husband men, Masons, Shomakers, Porters, and
Bryckemakers, Glouers, Corriers, Beryers of dead coarses, Dunge fermers and
clensers of Masers, and al workers of such gross works.

In spring time shall be troubled with diseases in their fere Also they shall
find great unfaithfulness in their servants. And further, the said
Saturnistes shall be gredy and desirefull of the riches that rich persons have.
In summer they shall suffer loss and hinderaunce. In heruest ceason, they
shall be obscure in their religion, and wrapped in many couenauntes and bands,
but let them beware of cold diseases of the vttter parts of their body.

In winter they shall be in their best state and condition, for they shall
behold, with an unwilling eye, the death deserved of the unfaithful and the
power of the subjects of the Sun^^.

The roase coulered persons subject to Jupiter, as Patriarchs, Cardinals,
Bishops, Judges, Officialles, Councellers, and all other learned and wise
men, for their approved wysedomes, shall be had in much estimation and honor.

The hye coulered persons and other subject to Mars, as Turks, Tartarians,
Soldiers of al sorts and nations, Capitaines of war, Sargeauntes,
Phisicians, Chirurgyans, Alchamistes, Yrone smythes Turme^tours, Hangeme^,
Butchers, Thefes, and whosoever chiefly delyght in fire and Yrone. In
spryngtyme if they be not diseased in the shoulders and legs, they shall go
in message or journey, they shall war and shall purchase and get great profyt of
the VENERIANS. In summer they shall use secret matters and many of them shall be
occupied in Marriages and Marchaundyse, In heruest let them bewar lest their
pride and glory begin to fail. In winter they shall get both the favor of the
IOVISTES and VENERIANS, and their fortune shall be increased, and they shall be
pregnant and of quick wits to al thing be gunne or taken in hand: but let
them beware of diseases in the head.

The beautiful persons and goodly visages, and al other of their properties
subject to the Sun, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, Lords Knights and
Gentilme^. In spring time, through the envy of the Saturnians or subjects to
Saturn, which are the Turckes, they shall be disquieted. The summer shall be
suspect to them, yet shall they reign in large benefits and great renoume. In
heruest they shall be pleasant and joyous: but the winter shall be suspet to them.

The deintie children of Venus with other subject unto her as Sarasyns,
Gentiles, al Musicians, singyng men, Minstrels, Plaiers, workers of precious
stone, Brotherers, Steiners, and Diers, Taylers, Lovers, young Damsels, single
Women, and al Womenkind. In spring time they shall wander from place to place,
and shall be as it were wanton but yet they shall profit by the Mercians. In
summer they shall be hyndered of the Solaria^s, and also they shall lament the
injuries and wrongs of the Saturnians: they shall be made glad, and delighted by
their friends. In heruest they shall profyt and wax rich, and not without some
favor of ye Iouists, they shall give dylige^ce to have children. In winter they
shall prosper through the favor of fryndes, and such things as they look not
for, they shall obteyn preuely by the aid of the Mercians: let remyng women
keep them selves warely in spryng time and harvest. Such as are subject to
Mercury as Merchants, Scrybes, Poets Astronymers, Geometricians,
Philosophers, Southsaiers, studientes of Arts Printers, Paynters, and
Poticaries. In spryngtime they shall be heavy, idle, and rechles, of evil
condition and altogether going back. In somer they shall be given clerly unto
godly wisdom and holy matters, without pomp. In hervest they shall multiply
in substance and other necessaryes. In winter they being grieved with sorrow of
the Lunarians subjects to the Moon, and shut or closed up, may not dispute in
their arts: but howsoever it shall be they shall be helped by the Saturnians

The white suns of the Moon and all her other subjects, as inferior persons
and common people, housewyfes, or Matrons, Weme^ that govern, Chaferers,
Millers, Bathkepers, Mariners, Fyshers, Idell goers about, Carriers,
messe^gers, and al ye delights in water, In spryng time they shall prosper,
but they shall be afraid of wyles and guyles of the Saturnia^s, and the open
mischifes and evil doing of the Mercians In somer they shall be sick of body
and not strong in other matters, to which as well the Saturnians as Solistes shall
do their cure. Heruest shall be indifferent to them, but they shall receive hurt
by Marriages. In winter they shall fall into hinderaunce of substance, and hatred
of the Saturnians, in their promotions.

The sons of the.xii. signs of the zodiac.
THOSE that be borne under Aries. In spryngtime shall optain frendshyp of the
Iouistes and Saturnians, but of the Mercians hate and they shall be disposed to
pastime, and pleasures, but they shall be troubled with diseases. In somer death
and losses shall noye them. In heruest they shall find fryndes and helpers,
but the Mercurians shall be adversaries and enemies to them.

In winter they shall suffer hurt by wounds, and other diseases: and among
many frendshyppes, they shall perceive many lies. The infortunat and evil days
unto them shall be from the.xvii. of Februarye to the beginning of April, from
the.xi. of July, to the.ii. of September, and again, from the.xvii. of
November until the end of the year.

They that be borne under Taurus. In spring time shall be disposed to Marriages
and other business and they shall obtain the favor of many, but not without
conte^cions. In somer they shall receive promotions both for their wisdom and
honest behauoure. In heruest they shall get fryndship of the Lunistes, benefits
of ye Iouians, and good report: but howsoever it be the Venerians shall be
moved against the^. Winter, shall be displeasaunt and dangerous to the^. They
shall look for evil fortune the first.iii. days of January, and from the.i.
day of Apryl until the xiiii. of May.

They that are borne under Gemini. In spryngtyme shall be vexed or greuyd with
the malice of the Saturnians, and shall receive hurt. In somer they shall be
vexed in their offices and promotions on all sides. In Heruest heaviness,
slanders, enemies and prisonmentes shall vex them every where. In winter they
shall prospere in their iourneies, and shall study and delight in godly
exercises. The whole year shall be unfortunate and full of perell unto the^ by
the ste^re of Saturn, but let the^ take heed to them selfs and to theirs from
the.iiii. of January till ye.xvii of Februarye. Also, from the.xv. of May, till
the.x. of July. Fynallye, from the.iiii. of September till the xvi. of November.

They that are borne under Ca^cer Springtime and winter they shall trauail. They
shall be very studious and desireous of good learning, but they shall have the
Mercians enemies to the^. In somer they shall have loving fellows and friends,
chefly the Venerians, and they shall prospere. In heruest likewise they shall be
in good condition, yet let them observe the time as it is said in Aries.

They that are borne under Leo In spryngtyme shall make an end of great
iourneis, and shall procure things to Gods honor, and many of them shall
increase in riches. In somer again, they shall be afraid of enemies, lest they
should be put from their dignities. In Heruest they being gredy of riches shall
enter into bands, and shall be bus^ in matters of their friends. In Winter they
shall prospere very well, except the Iouistes, Venerians and Mercuria^s
entermedle with them. But let them be wise and circumspect in the times that
are mentioned in the Bull.

They that are borne under Virgo the Virgyn, In spring time shall flourish, if the
Saturnians hinder them not. Somer shall be noisome and inco^modious to them. In
Heruest also they shall suffer disco^modities in the inheritance of their
predecessors: But Wi^ter shall be somewhat more favorable to them: howbeit they
shall have like Iuditial days all this year, as has the subjects of Gemini.

They that be borne under Libra the Balaunce, in spring time shall be sometime
merry and so^time heavy, both among their enmies and fre^des in differently. In
Summer they shall be full of news, and at diverse contencions with their
brethern. In Harvest they shall be disposed to wisdom and given to delycatnes and
apt to generation by the help of the Saturnians. In Winter, they being
compassed with enemies in marcial affairs, shall behave them selves
politickly. Yet notwithstanding let them fere the days yt ar set in Aries.

They that be borne under Scorpio, the Scorpion. In Spring time shall prospere.
In Somer they shall be seruisable unto their Parents and nygh kynsfolke, and
obedient to the Law of their Country.

In Heruest they shall be merry and given to the plesures of the flesh and other
pastymes, by the favor of the Venerians. In Winter they being enriched with the
goods of the Lunistes and Mercurians shall not pass upon lernyng. Let them
walk circumspectly in those times which are had in suspicio^ in Taurus the Bull.

They that are borne under Sagittarius, the Shoter, shall this year suffer
displeasures of the Saturnians: but the Dragons tail in this Sign signifies
ye suppression of some great Personages, In Spring time they shall profit
little. In Somer they shall suffer loss of their inheritance: but they shall
get the good wylles of the come^ people. In Heruest they being grieved with
sycknesses and found trespassers and offenders shall hardly escape the cruelty
of Mars. In Winter they shall gladly obey unto Laws: But let them be
circumspecte in iorneyeng, and above all that they take heed of the suspect
days mentioned before in Gemini.

They that be borne under Capricorn the Goat, In Spring time while they
contend and fall out with their neybours and brethern, shall suffer loss of
their goods by the Marcians. In Somer, their children and heirs and al their
other joys shall be contrary to them: and so shall it be also both to the
Mercurians and Marcians. In Heruest, they geui^g them selfs to marriages and
merchau^dises shall purchase the displeasure of the Mercuria^s. In Winter they
hating the Marcia^s shall not let to talk freely i^ matters of lerni^g. They shall
have very evil fortune in those evil and suspect days that are expressed in
Aries, They that be borne under Aquarius the Waterer: In Springtyme they shall
led their lives amongst their neybours indifferently. In somer they shall be
helthfull. In Heruest they shall go from place to place for the death of the
Venerians and Lunistes. Winter shall be good to ye fathers and i^heritours of ye
country, yet the power of ye lunists shall repugne them. Let the^ beware the
judicial dais rehearsed in ye Bull. They that be born under Pisces the Fysshes.
In Spring time they shall prove ye fortune of the country But the Saturnistes
shall malign them. In Somer they shall fere war. In heruest they shall prosper
except the Marcians and Saturnistes hinder them. Winter shall be indifferent to
them. But let them take heed to the contrary days mentioned before in Gemini,
the Twynnes.

Under what quadrangle of the Zodiach signs every Region and City is situate
The first Quadrangle
ARIES the Ram has as Ptolome writes these Regions and Cities, Coclosyre,
Palestin, Britayne, hye France, Braccate, Garmany, Basterny. And after the
minds of late writers, The land of Pole the lesser, The duchye of Burgundy,
Silesy the hyer, Sweu^land. And of Cities, Neaples, Florence, Capua, Ferrarie,
Vincenty, Verone, Parganye, Imola, Pauye, Brunswicke, Traiect Lyndoa,
Parcyuncle, Vinestrace. Cracouy, Marselies, Ceaser augustus, Cancer the crab
has as Ptolome says, Numidi. Afryk, Bythimi, Phrigia, Colche, Carthage. After
the later writers, the kyngdme of France, the kingdom of Scotland, the
kingdom of Granate, ye earldome of Burgundy, Prussy, Hollande, Seland. And of
Cites. Constantynople, Thunes, Venice, Myllayn, Geneue, Lukes, Pisas, Lubeck,
Treuerne, Maideburge, Gorlityne, Berne, York, Saint Andrews, etc.

Libra the balaunce has by Ptolomies saying, Bactrian, Caspy, Serim,
Thebaideoasin, and Troglodit. After the later writers, Acthiope, Turkey,
Austrige: Elsary Sundgauye, Leuonye, Sebandye, and Delphynate. And of Cytyes,
Cayltye, Land, Suesse, Placentyne, Argentine Vienne of Austrige, Franckford,
Mensch, Spires, Hal^, of Suene, Hailprun, W^n^in, Landshute, Frysynge,
Mospachye, F^ldkyrchy, of Rhery, Arelate, and Lushborne.

Capricornus the Got has, by Ptolomy Indy. Arian, Gedrosye, Macydon, Illyre
Tracy. After the later writers, Bossne, Albani, Bulgari, Greece, Lithuani,
Massoni, Saroni, Churius, Hessi, Marcas, and Bra^de^burgh a prote of Stiri. And
of Cites Anconi, Fauant, Torton, Foroli, August, Vindelice, Co^stance, Iuliac,
Cleuoni, Beige, Gaunte, Machlin. Vilue, Oxforde, and the Isles Orchadas,

The second Quadrangle.
Taurus the Bull has as Ptolomy says Parthy, Mede, Persyde, the Isles
Ciclades, Ciprese, the sea costs of the lesser Asia. After later writters,
Pole the greter white Russy, Campany, Rhete, Helvece, Francon, Lutheringe,
Hyreland, and a part of the Suetes. And of Cities, Bononi Senas, Mantua,
Tar^myte, Parme, Panorme, ^hurege, Lucerne, Herbipolym, Metime, Bryxin the
chief city of Histri.

Leo the Lion has by Ptolemy, Phenyce, Calde, Orchin, Italy, Galli, Togate,
Sycile, Apule. After the later writers Boheme kingdom, part of Turcky, Aemyle,
Sabine. And of Cities, Damasco, Rome, Rauenne, Syracuse, Perusy, Cremone,
Prage, Vlme, Confluence, Lince, Kremse.

Scorpius the Scorpion has by Ptolomy, Matagonite, Commagei. Cappadoce, Syrie,
Jury, Idumea, Mauritane, and Getule. By the later writers, Nortuege, Suetye in
the west, Cathalone, Baueyre the hyer, and Foroiule. And of Cities Trapezonte,
Algere, Aquile, Padwey, Vrbane Pistore, Camerne, Brixye, Tarusre, Messane,
Gedan, Lypsye, Monace, Aichstade, Vienne, Allobroge, Valence in Hyspane.

Aquarius the Waterer has after Ptolomy, Oxiane, Sogdirne, Araby the stony
Azanse, Aethyope, and Sarmace. After the later writers, great Tartery, Danye,
red Russy, Amaroby, ye south part of Suece, Walache, Pedesmount, Westphale,
Moselaunce people. And of Cities, Alkayr or Memphym, Ironemounte, Pisaure,
Tridente, Hamburgh, Breme, Saltzeburge, Ingoldstand and a little part of
Bauere.

The third Quadrangle.
Gemini the Twynne has by Ptolomy Hyrcany Armenye Margiane Cyrenaice province
Merinarice, Aegipte the lower. After the later writers the kingdom of England,
Sardine, Brabant, Wirtemberge duchy, Flandres, and Lumberdy, And of Cities,
Viterby, Cesene, Taurine, Regye, Vercel, Norinbergh, Louen, Magu^ce Bamberge,
Bruges in Flaundres, Villace Kitzinge, Hassforde, London, and Corduba.

Virgo the Virgin has by Ptolomy Mesopotamy, Babylon, Assyria, Greece Achaie
and Crete. And after the later writrs Cicile, ^reace, Athens duchy, Carenteane,
Sylete the lower, Athesane proui^ce a part of Rhene, Rhodes. And of Cities,
great Alexander, Jerusalem, Corinth Papy, ^red, Cumas, Brunduse, Vratislaue,
Erdford, Basil, Haidelberge, Dagni Paris, Lions, and Tholos.

Sagittarius the shoter has by Ptholome, Araby the lucky, Thirhene, Celtica
Spain. By ye later writers Portugal Hu^garye. Denmark, Norwaye, Sclauone,
Mysna. And of Cities Volaterre, Muti^, Colyn, Aggrippe, Stutgard, Rotenburge
Tubare, Indeburge, Bude, Gaschone, Narbon, Auinion, and Tolete.

Pisces the Fishes have after Ptolomy Phazam, Nazamonite, Garama^tice, Lyde
Cilice, and Pamphile. And by ye later writers Calabr^, Norway. And of Cities,
Pare^ce R^ynsbourgh, Worms, Rawane, Compostella, and Hyspalim.

LONDINI Ex officina Richardi Graftoni clarissimo Principi Edouardo ^
Typographia

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


